The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 598,
June 18, 1887, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 598, June 18, 1887

Author: Various

Release Date: March 22, 2004 [EBook #11662]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPL. 598 ***




Produced by by Don Kretz, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
DP Team





[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 598




NEW YORK, JUNE 18, 1887

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XXIII, No. 598.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.


       *       *       *       *       *


TABLE OF CONTENTS.

I.    BOTANY.--The Brazil Nut.--The botanical position, appearance,
      etc., and general features of the tree and plant.--1 illustration.


II.   DECORATIVE ART.--Decoration.--The study of ornaments.--By
      Miss MARIE R. GARESCHE.--The principles of ornament and
      relations between nature and art; ancient and mediaeval art
      contrasted.--1 illustration.


III.  ELECTRICITY.--Electric Registering Apparatus for Meteorological
      Instruments.--Grime's telemareograph described; an apparatus
      giving distant registrations of tidal phenomena.--2 illustrations.

      The Montaud Accumulator.--Full account of construction and
      power of this recent battery.--4 illustrations.


IV.   ENGINEERING.--Belt Joints.--A new cement, the "Hercules
      glue," and its adaptation for cementing belt joints.


V.    MINERALOGY.--Precious Stones of the United States.--A review
      of Mr. G.F. KUNZ'S recent report on this subject.


VI.   MISCELLANEOUS.--A Clinical Lesson at "La Salpetriere."--A
      portraiture picture by M. ANDRE BROUILLET, of a clinic.--2
      illustrations.

      Inauguration of the statue of Denis Papin.--The statue to Papin
      erected in Paris by popular subscription.--1 illustration.

      The Action of the Magnet in Hypnosis.--The nullity of the action
      of the magnet disclosed.

      To Find the Day of the Week for any Year.--A new method devised
      by Lewis Carroll.


VII.  NAVAL ENGINEERING.--Some Recent High Speed Twin
      Screws.--By E.A. LINNINGTON.--An important paper on the subject
      of screw propulsion.--6 illustrations.

      The Havre Maritime Exhibition.--Notes on the recently opened
      exhibition of ships and naval appliances at Havre.--1 illustration.

      The New German Corvette Greif.--A recent addition to the German
      fleet illustrated and described.--1 illustration.

      The Steamship Great Eastern.--A plea for the mammoth
      steamer.--Probabilities of her future usefulness.

      Twin Screw Torpedo Boat.--The new sea-going vessel built by
      Yarrow & Co. for the Italian government.--Her extraordinary
      speed.


VIII. ORDNANCE.--Our Coast Defenses.--An interesting summary
      by Gen. H.L. ABBOTT of our means for defending our coasts.

      The New Krupp Guns.--The dimensions of the largest guns in
      the world, now in process of construction at Essen.--2 illustrations.


IX.   PHYSICS.--Colors of Thin Plates.--Report of a recent lecture by
      Lord Rayleigh.


X.    TECHNOLOGY.--Recent Advances in Sewing Machines.--By
      JOHN W. URQUHART.--A recent lecture before the Society of
      Arts of London, giving an exhaustive review of the subject.--15
      illustrations.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HAVRE MARITIME EXHIBITION.


The Havre Maritime Exhibition opened on the 7th of May.

Will this exhibition awaken general interest, or will it prove a local
affair simply? This is a secret of the weeks that are to follow.

Should nothing chance to discourage the general interest that surrounds
Havre, to dampen the enthusiasm of the public, or to act to the prejudice
of the exhibitors, whose very evident desire is to show nothing but
remarkable products in every line, the International Maritime Exhibition
will prove a great success.

[Illustration: THE INTERNATIONAL MARINE EXHIBITION AT HAVRE.--THE
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE.]

The people of Havre have two points of comparison that more particularly
concern themselves: Their Maritime Exhibition of 1868, which, as far as
exhibition goes, was a complete success, is the first. The financial
results of it were not brilliant, but that was due to certain reasons upon
which it is not necessary to dwell. On the contrary, the Rouen Exhibition
of 1884 proved profitable.

The Havre Exhibition, under able management, can have only a like good
fortune. It must be said that the people of Havre would be deeply
humiliated should it prove otherwise.

A very appropriate location was selected for the Exhibition, in the busiest
quarter of the center of the city. Its circumference embraces one of the
finest docks of the port--the Commerce Dock, thus named because it could
not be finished (in 1827) except by the financial co-operation of the
shipowners and merchants of the city. For the purposes of the Exhibition,
this dock is now temporarily closed to navigation.

In the various structures, wood has been exclusively employed. The main
building, which alone has a monumental character, is Arabic in style, and
is situated in the center of Gambetta Place, over Paris Street, which here
becomes a tunnel. Two facades overlook the ends of this tunnel. A third
facade, which is much longer, fronts Commerce Dock.

The edifice is surmounted by a spherical cupola that serves as a base to a
semaphore provided with masts and rigging. On each side of the sphere there
are two pendent beacons. Wide glazed bays open in the external facades, and
allow the eye to wander to the south through Paris Street as far as to the
outer port, to the summits of Floride, and to see beyond this point the bay
of La Seine, Honfleur, and the coast of Grace. To the north, the most
limited view has for perspective the City Hall, its garden, and the
charming coast of Ingonville.

The principal facade, that which fronts Commerce Dock, from which it is
separated solely by a garden laid out on Mature Place, is the most
attractive and most ornamented. Here are located the restaurants, the
cafes, the music pavilion, and a few other light structures.

Internally, this portion of the Exhibition comprises a vast entertainment
hall, brilliantly and artistically decorated with tympans representing the
three principal ports of commerce--Havre, Bordeaux, and Marseilles--and
with pictures by the best marine painters. It is lighted by an immense
stained glass window which fronts Commerce Dock and the garden, and which
lets in a flood of soft light.

The galleries to the right and left, over Paris Street, are reserved for
the exhibitions of the ministers of state and of the large public
departments, and for models, specimens, plans, and drawings of war and
merchant vessels, and of pleasure boats, and for plans of port, roadstead,
and river works.

Two endless galleries run to the north and south of Commerce Dock, parallel
with Orleans Wharf on the one hand and Lamblardie Wharf on the other.

The northern gallery is connected by a foot bridge with the annex of
Commerce Place, where is located the colonial exhibition, the center of
which is occupied by a Cambodian pavilion, in which are brought together
the products of Indo-China and Algeria. For half of their extent, the two
galleries are separated from the dock by a promenade provided with seats
and covered with a roof. On this promenade, it became necessary to make
room for certain belated exhibitors whose products are not affected by the
open air.

In Commerce Dock are to be seen, floating, specimens of every ancient and
modern naval construction, French and foreign, among which are the state
convette Favorite and an English three-master converted into a cafe boat.
We find here, too, the giant and prehistoric oak of the Rhine, on board of
the Drysphore.

Commerce Dock is divided into two parts by a foot bridge, which allows the
visitors to pass from one side to the other without being compelled to
tiresomely retrace their steps.

The main entrance to the Exhibition is opposite the portico of the theater,
on Gambetta Place. A second entrance is found on Commerce Place in the
colonies annex. The others, near the center, are on Orleans Wharf, opposite
Edward Larue Street, and on Lamblardie Wharf, opposite Hospital Street and
opposite Saint Louis Street.

The garden of the Exhibition and the galleries that surround it are
illuminated at night by the electric light.--_L'Illustration._

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR COAST DEFENSES.


General H.L. Abbott delivered a lecture before the Academy of Sciences in
New York, on the evening of March 21, a summary of which is given by the
_Herald_ as follows:

According to General Abbott, the country needs for its coast defenses:

    Heavy guns;
    Armor-clad casemates;
    Disappearing gun carriages in earthworks;
    Heavy mortars;
    Submarine mines or fixed torpedoes; and
    Fish torpedoes.

The lecturer said that this nation may be attacked in four ways: First, by
fleet and army combined, as in our revolutionary war; second, by blockading
the entrances to all our ports; third, by bombardment of our seaport cities
from a long distance; fourth, by a fleet forcing its way into our harbors,
and making a direct attack or levying tribute on our people.

The first is not now greatly to be feared. We are too distant from great
powers, and too strong on land.

The second should be met by the navy, and is, therefore, outside a
discussion of coast defenses.

The third is not probable, though it may be possible. The extreme range of
10 miles for heavy guns cannot be obtained from shipboard, and as an
elevation of only 15 deg. or 16 deg. can be given, not over 5 to 6 miles range is
attainable.

The fourth is the one which is possible, probable, even certain--if we have
war before we have better defenses.

The race between guns and armor began about thirty years ago, and there has
been more development in ships and guns in that time than in the two
hundred preceding years. The jump has been from the 7 in. rifle as the
largest piece to the 110 ton Armstrong; in armor, from 41/2 in. of iron to
the Inflexible with 22 in. of steel plating. The new Armstrong gun of 110
tons, tried only recently, with 850 pounds of powder and an 1,800 pound
shot can pierce all the targets, and so far guns have the victory over
armor. This gun developed 57,000 foot tons of energy, and will probably
reach 62,000. Imagine the Egyptian needle in Central Park, shod on its apex
with hard steel, dropped point downward from the height of Trinity steeple;
it weighs 225 tons, and it would strike with just about the effect of one
of the 110 ton gun's projectiles. Two of these guns are ready for the
ironclad Benbow, and the Italians have several equally powerful of 119 tons
from Herr Krupp. The most powerful gun in the United States, the 15 in. or
the 12 in. rifle, has a muzzle energy of 3,800 foot tons.

Ships like the Inflexible are the most powerful afloat. A steel water-tight
deck extends across the ship, and she has 135 water-tight compartments. Her
guns and engines amidships have a protection of 24 in. of armor, and
amidships she has a citadel carrying two revolving turrets, each containing
two 80 ton guns. Her turret armor is 18 in. thick. She can make 14 knots,
and she has cost $3,500,000. But she has a low freeboard, and the guns,
therefore, get no plunging fire.

The French ship Meta has her heaviest guns mounted _en barbette_, high
above the water line, giving a splendid plunging fire.

Either of these ships could enter any of our harbors and hold us at her
mercy.

The entrance to the harbor of Alexandria, Egypt, is about 5 miles across.
At the time of the bombardment the protecting fortifications were situated
at the east end, in the center, and at the west end. On the west there were
mounted 20 modern guns of great size and power, and there were 7 others at
the east end.

Although the Egyptians fought bravely, they did very little harm to the
English fleet, while on the second day the defense was silenced altogether.
Following the bombardment--as in Paris--came the reign of mob law, doing
more harm than the shells had done; and it is a possibility that every such
bombardment would be followed by such an overthrow--at least temporary--of
all forms of law and order.

The ships that had silenced the Alexandria batteries--which had 27 heavy
guns more than we have--could reach our coasts in 10 or 12 days, and we
would have nothing to meet them.

Armor-clad casemates are beginning to take the place of masonry. A
tremendous thickness of masonry is built up to the very embrasures for the
guns in the steel-clad turrets. This (the Gruson) system has been adopted
by Belgium, Holland, Germany, Austria, and Italy.

In 1882 England had 434 heavy modern guns behind armored shore batteries;
besides these at home, she had 92 in her colonies, of which 13 were in
Halifax and 11 in Bermuda--for our express benefit.

What we have are brick and stone casemates and earthworks. A sample granite
casemate, with iron-lined embrasure, was built at Fortress Monroe, and 8
shots were fired at it from a 12 in. rifle converted from an old 15 in.
smooth bore. This gun develops only 3,800 foot tons of energy--a mere
nothing compared with the 62,000 foot tons of the English and German 110
ton guns.

General Abbott showed most conclusive proof of the worthlessness of masonry
forts in pictures showing the effect of the shots. The massive 8 feet
thickness of granite was pierced and battered till it looked like a ruin.
Not a man inside would have been left alive.

He also showed a "disappearing" gun in an earthwork, the gun recoiling
below the level of the parapet and being run up to a firing position by a
counterweight. In 1878 Congress stopped all appropriations for defenses,
and nothing had been done since.

General Abbott said that we needed submarine mines or fixed torpedoes,
which should be thickly interspersed about the channel and be exploded by
an electric battery on shore. To prevent these torpedoes from being
exploded by the enemy, the surface over them should be covered by plenty of
guns. Heavy guns and mortars were needed to resist attacks by heavy
iron-clads. Movable torpedoes were valuable, but only as an auxiliary--a
very minor auxiliary--compared with submarine mines. We should be cautious
not to infer that torpedoes made a satisfactory defense alone, as they must
be protected by large and small guns, and they form only a part of the
chain of general defenses.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE STEAMSHIP GREAT EASTERN.

[Footnote: See Engraving in SUPPLEMENT NO. 584.]


The history of the Great Eastern is full of surprises. It is always that
which is most unlikely to happen to her which occurs. Not long since we
recorded her sale by auction in Liverpool for L26,000. It was stated that
her purchasers were going to fit her out for the Australian trade, and that
she would at once be sent from Dublin to Glasgow to be fitted with new
engines and boilers, and to undergo thorough renovation. Lord Ravensworth,
in his address to the Institution of Naval Architects, spoke recently of
the bright future before her in that Australian trade for which she was
specially built. Yet at this moment the Great Eastern is lying in her old
berth in the Sloyne at Liverpool, and unless something else at present
quite unforeseen takes place, she will once more play the undignified part
of a floating music hall. It seems that although she was certainly sold, as
we have stated, the transaction was not completed. Her owners then cast
about for the next highest bidder, who at once took her. He is, we
understand, a Manchester cotton spinner, and he paid L25,500 for her. It is
no secret that Messrs. Lewis made a considerable sum out of the ship last
year, and the knowledge of this fact has no doubt induced her present owner
to follow their example. The ship left Dublin on Sunday, April 3, under her
own steam and in tow of two Liverpool tugs, the Brilliant Star and the
Wrestler, and arrived in the Mersey without accident on Monday, after a
passage of only thirteen hours. Mr. Reeves, formerly her chief officer, has
been made captain. Mr. Jackson is still chief engineer. We cannot at
present explain the fact that she went more than twice as fast as she has
done recently, her engines making as many as 36 revolutions a minute, save
on the assumption that while lying at Dublin much of the enormous growth of
seaweed on her bottom died off, as will sometimes happen as a result of
change of water. Her engines and boilers, too, have had a good overhaul by
Mr. Jackson, and this may account in part for this improvement. It is much
to be regretted that the scheme of using the ship for her legitimate
purpose has not been carried out. It is not, however, yet too late. The
Great Eastern was not a success in Dublin, for one reason, that a beer and
spirit license could not be obtained for her. It is said that notice has
been given at the Birkenhead police court that any application for a
license of a similar kind will be opposed. Whether the ship will be as
popular a resort without as she was with a license, we cannot pretend to
say; and we may add that all our predilections are against her degradation
to the status of a floating music hall. The greater her failure as such,
the greater the chance of her being put to a better use; and it may help to
that desirable end if we say here something concerning the way in which she
could be rendered a commercial success as a trader.

It may be taken as proved that the present value of the ship is about
L26,000. Mr. De Mattos gave, we understand, L27,000 for her, and he bought
