Project Gutenberg's The Voyages of Doctor Dolittle, by Hugh Lofting

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Voyages of Doctor Dolittle

Author: Hugh Lofting

Posting Date: September 17, 2008 [EBook #1154]
Release Date: January, 1998

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VOYAGES OF DOCTOR DOLITTLE ***




Produced by Charles Keller for Tina





THE VOYAGES OF DOCTOR DOLITTLE

By Hugh Lofting



                            To
                             Colin
                              and
                               Elizabeth



CONTENTS

     PART ONE
          PROLOGUE
     I    THE COBBLER'S SON
     II   I HEAR OF THE GREAT NATURALIST
     III  THE DOCTOR'S HOME
     IV   THE WIFF-WAFF
     V    POLYNESIA
     VI   THE WOUNDED SQUIRREL
     VII  SHELLFISH TALK
     VIII ARE YOU A GOOD NOTICER?
     IX   THE GARDEN OF DREAMS
     X    THE PRIVATE ZOO
     XI   MY SCHOOLMASTER, POLYNESIA
     XII  MY GREAT IDEA
     XIII A TRAVELER ARRIVES
     XIV  CHEE-CHEE'S VOYAGE
     XV   I BECOME A DOCTOR'S ASSISTANT

     PART TWO
     I    THE CREW OF "THE CURLEW"
     II   LUKE THE HERMIT
     III  JIP AND THE SECRET
     IV   BOB
     V    MENDOZA
     VI   THE JUDGE'S DOG
     VII  THE END OF THE MYSTERY
     VIII THREE CHEERS
     IX   THE PURPLE BIRD-OF-PARADISE
     X    LONG ARROW, THE SON OF GOLDEN ARROW
     XI   BLIND TRAVEL
     XII  DESTINY AND DESTINATION

     PART THREE
     I    THE THIRD MAN
     II   GOOD-BYE!
     III  OUR TROUBLES BEGIN
     IV   OUR TROUBLES CONTINUE
     V    POLYNESIA HAS A PLAN
     VI   THE BED-MAKER OF MONTEVERDE
     VII  THE DOCTOR'S WAGER
     VIII THE GREAT BULLFIGHT
     IX   WE DEPART IN A HURRY

     PART FOUR
     I    SHELLFISH LANGUAGES AGAIN
     II   THE FIDGIT'S STORY
     III  BAD WEATHER
     IV   WRECKED!
     V    LAND!
     VI   THE JABIZRI
     VII  HAWK'S-HEAD MOUNTAIN

     PART FIVE
     I    A GREAT MOMENT
     II   "THE MEN OF THE MOVING, LAND"
     III  FIRE
     IV   WHAT MAKES AN ISLAND FLOAT
     V    WAR!
     VI   GENERAL POLYNESIA
     VII  THE PEACE OF THE PARROTS
     VIII THE HANGING STONE
     IX   THE ELECTION
     X   THE CORONATION OF KING JONG

     PART SIX
     I    NEW POPSIPETEL
     II   THOUGHTS OF HOME
     III  THE RED MAN'S SCIENCE
     IV   THE SEA-SERPENT
     V    THE SHELLFISH RIDDLE SOLVED AT LAST
     VI   THE LAST CABINET MEETING
     VII  THE DOCTOR'S DECISION




THE VOYAGES OF DOCTOR DOLITTLE




PROLOGUE


ALL that I have written so far about Doctor Dolittle I heard long after
it happened from those who had known him--indeed a great deal of it took
place before I was born. But I now come to set down that part of the
great man's life which I myself saw and took part in.

Many years ago the Doctor gave me permission to do this. But we were
both of us so busy then voyaging around the world, having adventures and
filling note-books full of natural history that I never seemed to get
time to sit down and write of our doings.

Now of course, when I am quite an old man, my memory isn't so good
any more. But whenever I am in doubt and have to hesitate and think, I
always ask Polynesia, the parrot.

That wonderful bird (she is now nearly two hundred and fifty years old)
sits on the top of my desk, usually humming sailor songs to herself,
while I write this book. And, as every one who ever met her knows,
Polynesia's memory is the most marvelous memory in the world. If there
is any happening I am not quite sure of, she is always able to put
me right, to tell me exactly how it took place, who was there and
everything about it. In fact sometimes I almost think I ought to say
that this book was written by Polynesia instead of me.

Very well then, I will begin. And first of all I must tell you something
about myself and how I came to meet the Doctor.




PART I




THE FIRST CHAPTER. THE COBBLER'S SON

MY name was Tommy Stubbins, son of Jacob Stubbins, the cobbler of
Puddleby-on-the-Marsh; and I was nine and a half years old. At that time
Puddleby was only quite a small town. A river ran through the middle
of it; and over this river there was a very old stone bridge, called
Kingsbridge, which led you from the market-place on one side to the
churchyard on the other.

Sailing-ships came up this river from the sea and anchored near the
bridge. I used to go down and watch the sailors unloading the ships upon
the river-wall. The sailors sang strange songs as they pulled upon
the ropes; and I learned these songs by heart. And I would sit on the
river-wall with my feet dangling over the water and sing with the men,
pretending to myself that I too was a sailor.

For I longed always to sail away with those brave ships when they turned
their backs on Puddleby Church and went creeping down the river again,
across the wide lonely marshes to the sea. I longed to go with them out
into the world to seek my fortune in foreign lands--Africa, India, China
and Peru! When they got round the bend in the river and the water was
hidden from view, you could still see their huge brown sails towering
over the roofs of the town, moving onward slowly--like some gentle
giants that walked among the houses without noise. What strange things
would they have seen, I wondered, when next they came back to anchor
at Kingsbridge! And, dreaming of the lands I had never seen, I'd sit on
there, watching till they were out of sight.

Three great friends I had in Puddleby in those days. One was Joe, the
mussel-man, who lived in a tiny hut by the edge of the water under the
bridge. This old man was simply marvelous at making things. I never
saw a man so clever with his hands. He used to mend my toy ships for me
which I sailed upon the river; he built windmills out of packing-cases
and barrel-staves; and he could make the most wonderful kites from old
umbrellas.

Joe would sometimes take me in his mussel-boat, and when the tide was
running out we would paddle down the river as far as the edge of the sea
to get mussels and lobsters to sell. And out there on the cold lonely
marshes we would see wild geese flying, and curlews and redshanks and
many other kinds of seabirds that live among the samfire and the
long grass of the great salt fen. And as we crept up the river in
the evening, when the tide had turned, we would see the lights on
Kingsbridge twinkle in the dusk, reminding us of tea-time and warm
fires.

Another friend I had was Matthew Mugg, the cat's-meat-man. He was a
funny old person with a bad squint. He looked rather awful but he was
really quite nice to talk to. He knew everybody in Puddleby; and he knew
all the dogs and all the cats. In those times being a cat's-meat-man was
a regular business. And you could see one nearly any day going through
the streets with a wooden tray full of pieces of meat stuck on skewers
crying, "Meat! M-E-A-T!" People paid him to give this meat to their cats
and dogs instead of feeding them on dog-biscuits or the scraps from the
table.

I enjoyed going round with old Matthew and seeing the cats and dogs come
running to the garden-gates whenever they heard his call. Sometimes he
let me give the meat to the animals myself; and I thought this was great
fun. He knew a lot about dogs and he would tell me the names of the
different kinds as we went through the town. He had several dogs of his
own; one, a whippet, was a very fast runner, and Matthew used to win
prizes with her at the Saturday coursing races; another, a terrier,
was a fine ratter. The cat's-meat-man used to make a business of
rat-catching for the millers and farmers as well as his other trade of
selling cat's-meat.

My third great friend was Luke the Hermit. But of him I will tell you
more later on.

I did not go to school; because my father was not rich enough to send
me. But I was extremely fond of animals. So I used to spend my time
collecting birds' eggs and butterflies, fishing in the river, rambling
through the countryside after blackberries and mushrooms and helping the
mussel-man mend his nets.

Yes, it was a very pleasant life I lived in those days long ago--though
of course I did not think so then. I was nine and a half years old; and,
like all boys, I wanted to grow up--not knowing how well off I was with
no cares and nothing to worry me. Always I longed for the time when I
should be allowed to leave my father's house, to take passage in one of
those brave ships, to sail down the river through the misty marshes to
the sea--out into the world to seek my fortune.




THE SECOND CHAPTER. I HEAR OF THE GREAT NATURALIST

ONE early morning in the Springtime, when I was wandering among the
hills at the back of the town, I happened to come upon a hawk with a
squirrel in its claws. It was standing on a rock and the squirrel was
fighting very hard for its life. The hawk was so frightened when I came
upon it suddenly like this, that it dropped the poor creature and flew
away. I picked the squirrel up and found that two of its legs were badly
hurt. So I carried it in my arms back to the town.

When I came to the bridge I went into the musselman's hut and asked him
if he could do anything for it. Joe put on his spectacles and examined
it carefully. Then he shook his head.

"Yon crittur's got a broken leg," he said--"and another badly cut an'
all. I can mend you your boats, Tom, but I haven't the tools nor the
learning to make a broken squirrel seaworthy. This is a job for a
surgeon--and for a right smart one an' all. There be only one man I know
who could save yon crittur's life. And that's John Dolittle."

"Who is John Dolittle?" I asked. "Is he a vet?"

"No," said the mussel-man. "He's no vet. Doctor Dolittle is a
nacheralist."

"What's a nacheralist?"

"A nacheralist," said Joe, putting away his glasses and starting to
fill his pipe, "is a man who knows all about animals and butterflies and
plants and rocks an' all. John Dolittle is a very great nacheralist. I'm
surprised you never heard of him--and you daft over animals. He knows
a whole lot about shellfish--that I know from my own knowledge. He's
a quiet man and don't talk much; but there's folks who do say he's the
greatest nacheralist in the world."

"Where does he live?" I asked.

"Over on the Oxenthorpe Road, t'other side the town. Don't know just
which house it is, but 'most anyone 'cross there could tell you, I
reckon. Go and see him. He's a great man."

So I thanked the mussel-man, took up my squirrel again and started oft
towards the Oxenthorpe Road.

The first thing I heard as I came into the marketplace was some one
calling "Meat! M-E-A-T!"

"There's Matthew Mugg," I said to myself. "He'll know where this Doctor
lives. Matthew knows everyone."

So I hurried across the market-place and caught him up.

"Matthew," I said, "do you know Doctor Dolittle?"

"Do I know John Dolittle!" said he. "Well, I should think I do! I know
him as well as I know my own wife--better, I sometimes think. He's a
great man--a very great man."

"Can you show me where he lives?" I asked. "I want to take this squirrel
to him. It has a broken leg."

"Certainly," said the cat's-meat-man. "I'll be going right by his house
directly. Come along and I'll show you."

So off we went together.

"Oh, I've known John Dolittle for years and years," said Matthew as we
made our way out of the market-place. "But I'm pretty sure he ain't home
just now. He's away on a voyage. But he's liable to be back any day.
I'll show you his house and then you'll know where to find him."

All the way down the Oxenthorpe Road Matthew hardly stopped talking
about his great friend, Doctor John Dolittle--"M. D." He talked so much
that he forgot all about calling out "Meat!" until we both suddenly
noticed that we had a whole procession of dogs following us patiently.

"Where did the Doctor go to on this voyage?" I asked as Matthew handed
round the meat to them.

"I couldn't tell you," he answered. "Nobody never knows where he goes,
nor when he's going, nor when he's coming back. He lives all alone
except for his pets. He's made some great voyages and some wonderful
discoveries. Last time he came back he told me he'd found a tribe of
Red Indians in the Pacific Ocean--lived on two islands, they did. The
husbands lived on one island and the wives lived on the other. Sensible
people, some of them savages. They only met once a year, when the
husbands came over to visit the wives for a great feast--Christmas-time,
most likely. Yes, he's a wonderful man is the Doctor. And as for
animals, well, there ain't no one knows as much about 'em as what he
does."

"How did he get to know so much about animals?" I asked.

The cat's-meat-man stopped and leant down to whisper in my ear.

"HE TALKS THEIR LANGUAGE," he said in a hoarse, mysterious voice.

"The animals' language?" I cried.

"Why certainly," said Matthew. "All animals have some kind of a
language. Some sorts talk more than others; some only speak in
sign-language, like deaf-and-dumb. But the Doctor, he understands them
all--birds as well as animals. We keep it a secret though, him and me,
because folks only laugh at you when you speak of it. Why, he can
even write animal-language. He reads aloud to his pets. He's wrote
history-books in monkey-talk, poetry in canary language and comic songs
for magpies to sing. It's a fact. He's now busy learning the language
of the shellfish. But he says it's hard work--and he has caught some
terrible colds, holding his head under water so much. He's a great man."

"He certainly must be," I said. "I do wish he were home so I could meet
him."

"Well, there's his house, look," said the cat's, meat-man--"that little
one at the bend in the road there--the one high up--like it was sitting
on the wall above the street."

We were now come beyond the edge of the town. And the house that Matthew
pointed out was quite a small one standing by itself. There seemed to be
a big garden around it; and this garden was much higher than the road,
so you had to go up a flight of steps in the wall before you reached the
front gate at the top. I could see that there were many fine fruit trees
in the garden, for their branches hung down over the wall in places. But
the wall was so high I could not see anything else.

When we reached the house Matthew went up the steps to the front gate
and I followed him. I thought he was going to go into the garden; but
the gate was locked. A dog came running down from the house; and he took
several pieces of meat which the cat's-meat-man pushed through the bars
of the gate, and some paper bags full of corn and bran, I noticed that
this dog did not stop to eat the meat, as any ordinary dog would have
done, but he took all the things back to the house and disappeared. He
had a curious wide collar round his neck which looked as though it were
made of brass or something. Then we came away.

"The Doctor isn't back yet," said Matthew, "or the gate wouldn't be
locked."

"What were all those things in paper-bags you gave the dog?" I asked.

"Oh, those were provisions," said Matthew--"things for the animals to
eat. The Doctor's house is simply full of pets. I give the things to
the dog, while the Doctor's away, and the dog gives them to the other
animals."

"And what was that curious collar he was wearing round his neck?"

"That's a solid gold dog-collar," said Matthew. "It was given to him
when he was with the Doctor on one of his voyages long ago. He saved a
man's life."

"How long has the Doctor had him?" I asked.

"Oh, a long time. Jip's getting pretty old now. That's why the Doctor
doesn't take him on his voyages any more. He leaves him behind to take
care of the house. Every Monday and Thursday I bring the food to the
gate here and give it him through the bars. He never lets any one come
inside the garden while the Doctor's away--not even me, though he knows
me well. But you'll always be able to tell if the Doctor's back or
not--because if he is, the gate will surely be open."

So I went off home to my father's house and put my squirrel to bed in
an old wooden box full of straw. And there I nursed him myself and took
care of him as best I could till the time should come when the Doctor
would return. And every day I went to the little house with the big
garden on the edge of the town and tried the gate to see if it were
locked. Sometimes the dog, Jip, would come down to the gate to meet me.
But though he always wagged his tail and seemed glad to see me, he never
let me come inside the garden.




THE THIRD CHAPTER. THE DOCTOR'S HOME

ONE Monday afternoon towards the end of April my father asked me to take
some shoes which he had mended to a house on the other side of the town.
They were for a Colonel Bellowes who was very particular.

I found the house and rang the bell at the front door. The Colonel
opened it, stuck out a very red face and said, "Go round to the
tradesmen's entrance--go to the back door." Then he slammed the door
shut.

I felt inclined to throw the shoes into the middle of his flower-bed.
But I thought my father might be angry, so I didn't. I went round to the
back door, and there the Colonel's wife met me and took the shoes from
