The Project Gutenberg EBook of McGuffey's First Eclectic Reader, Revised
Edition, by William Holmes McGuffey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: McGuffey's First Eclectic Reader, Revised Edition

Author: William Holmes McGuffey

Release Date: June 29, 2005 [EBook #14640]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MCGUFFEY'S FIRST READER ***




Produced by Don Kostuch





[Transcriber's Notes:

Welcome to the schoolroom of 1900. The moral tone is plain. "She is kind
to the old blind man."

The exercises are still suitable, and perhaps more helpful than some
contemporary alternatives. Much is left to the teacher. Explanations given
in the text are enough to get started teaching a child to read and write.
Counting in Roman numerals is included as a bonus in the form of lesson
numbers.

Each lesson begins with vocabulary words, followed by the description of a
picture (if any) related to the lesson's reading exercise. The lesson then
consists of printed text for reading and sometimes script (handwriting)
for reading or copying.

Don Kostuch
]



ECLECTIC EDUCATIONAL SERIES.

MCGUFFEY'S [Registered]

First

ECLECTIC READER

Revised Edition


McGuffey Edition and Colophon are Trademarks of

JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.
NEW YORK - CHICHESTER - WEINHEIM - BRISBANE - SINGAPORE - TORONTO

SUGGESTIONS TO TEACHERS.

This First Reader may be used in teaching reading by any of the methods in
common use; but it is especially adapted to the Phonic Method, the Word
Method, or a combination of the two.

I. Phonic Method.--First teach the elementary sounds and their
representative, the letters marked with diacriticals, as they occur in the
lessons; then, the formation of words by the combination of these sounds.
For instance, teach the pupil to identify the characters a, o, n, d, g, r,
and th, in Lesson I, as the representatives of certain elementary sounds;
then teach him to form the words at the head of the lesson, then other
words, as nag, on, and, etc. Pursue a similar course in teaching the
succeeding lessons. Having read a few lessons in this manner, begin to
teach the names of the letters and the spelling of words, and require the
groups, "a man," "the man," "a pen," to be read as a good reader would
pronounce single words.

II.  When one of the letters in the combinations ou or ow, is marked in
the words at the head of the reading exercises, the other is silent. If
neither is marked, the two letters represent a diphthong. All other
unmarked vowels in the vocabularies, when in combination, are silent
letters. In slate or blackboard work, the silent letters may be canceled.

III. Word Method.--Teach the pupil to identify at sight the words placed
at the head of the reading exercises, and to read these exercises without
hesitation. Having read a few lessons, begin to teach the names of the
letters and the spelling of words.

IV. Word Method and Phonic Method Combined.--Teach the pupil to identify
words and read sentences, as above. Having read a few lessons in this
manner, begin to use the Phonic Method, combining it with the Word Method,
by first teaching the words in each lesson as words; then the elementary
sounds, the names of the letters, and spelling.

V. Teach the pupil to use script letters in writing, when teaching the
names of the letters and the spelling of words.


Copyright, 1879, by Van Antwerp, Bragg & Co.
Copyright, 1896, by American Book Company.
Copyright, 1907 and 1920, by H.H. Vail.

EP486



Preface

In presenting McGuffey's Revised First Reader to the public, attention is
invited to the following features:

1. Words of only two or three letters are used in the first lessons.
Longer and more difficult ones are gradually introduced as the pupil gains
aptness in the mastery of words.

2. A proper gradation has been carefully preserved. All new words are
placed at the head of each lesson, to be learned before the lesson is
read. Their number in the early lessons is very small, thus making the
first steps easy. All words in these vocabularies are used in the text
immediately following.

3. Carefully engraved script exercises are introduced for a double
purpose. These should be used to teach the reading of script; and may also
serve as copies in slate work.

4. The illustrations have been designed and engraved specially for the
lessons in which they occur. Many of the engravings will serve admirably
as the basis for oral lessons in language.

5. The type is large, strong, and distinct.

The credit for this revision is almost wholly due to the  friends of
McGuffey's Readers,--eminent teachers and scholars, who have contributed
suggestions and criticisms gained from their daily work in the schoolroom.

Cincinnati, June, 1879.

                                                                     (iii)



THE ALPHABET.

A    a      N   n
B    b      O   o
C    c      P   p
D    d      Q   q
E    e      R   r
F    f      S   s
G    g      T   t
H    h      U   u
I    i      V   v
J    j      W   w
K    k      X   x
L    l      Y   y
M    m      Z   z



[Illustration:

Script Alphabet

A  B  C  D  E  F  G
H  I  J  K  L  M  N
O  P  Q  R  S  Y  U
V  W  X  Y  Z

a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  i
j  k  l  m  n  o  p  q
r  s  t  u  v  w  x  y  z

SCRIPT FIGURES

1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  0
]


[Illustration: Dog]



McGuffey's FIRST READER.



LESSON I.

dog   the   ran

a   o    n   d   g   r   th


[Illustration: Running dog.]


The dog.

The dog ran.



LESSON II.

cat    mat    is    on

c    t    i    m    s


[Illustration: Cat]


The cat.        The mat.

Is the cat on the mat?

