The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Voyage to Arcturus, by David Lindsay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Voyage to Arcturus

Author: David Lindsay

Posting Date: September 17, 2008 [EBook #1329]
Release Date: May, 1998
[Last updated: June 28, 2012]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VOYAGE TO ARCTURUS ***




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





A VOYAGE TO ARCTURUS.

By David Lindsay


Contents:

     1   The Seance
     2   In the Street
     3   Starkness
     4   The Voice
     5   The Night of Departure
     6   Joiwind
     7   Panawe
     8   The Lusion Plain
     9   Oceaxe
     10  Tydomin
     11  On Disscourn
     12  Spadevil
     13  The Wombflash Forest
     14  Polecrab
     15  Swaylone's Island
     16  Leehallfae
     17  Corpang
     18  Haunte
     19  Sullenbode
     20  Barey
     21  Muspel




Chapter 1. THE SEANCE

On a march evening, at eight o'clock, Backhouse, the medium--a
fast-rising star in the psychic world--was ushered into the study
at Prolands, the Hampstead residence of Montague Faull. The room was
illuminated only by the light of a blazing fire. The host, eying him
with indolent curiosity, got up, and the usual conventional greetings
were exchanged. Having indicated an easy chair before the fire to his
guest, the South American merchant sank back again into his own. The
electric light was switched on. Faull's prominent, clear-cut features,
metallic-looking skin, and general air of bored impassiveness, did not
seem greatly to impress the medium, who was accustomed to regard men
from a special angle. Backhouse, on the contrary, was a novelty to the
merchant. As he tranquilly studied him through half closed lids and the
smoke of a cigar, he wondered how this little, thickset person with the
pointed beard contrived to remain so fresh and sane in appearance, in
view of the morbid nature of his occupation.

"Do you smoke?" drawled Faull, by way of starting the Conversation. "No?
Then will you take a drink?"

"Not at present, I thank you."

A pause.

"Everything is satisfactory? The materialisation will take place?"

"I see no reason to doubt it."

"That's good, for I would not like my guests to be disappointed. I have
your check written out in my pocket."

"Afterward will do quite well."

"Nine o'clock was the time specified, I believe?"

"I fancy so."

The conversation continued to flag. Faull sprawled in his chair, and
remained apathetic.

"Would you care to hear what arrangements I have made?"

"I am unaware that any are necessary, beyond chairs for your guests."

"I mean the decoration of the seance room, the music, and so forth."

Backhouse stared at his host. "But this is not a theatrical
performance."

"That's correct. Perhaps I ought to explain.... There will be ladies
present, and ladies, you know, are aesthetically inclined."

"In that case I have no objection. I only hope they will enjoy the
performance to the end."

He spoke rather dryly.

"Well, that's all right, then," said Faull. Flicking his cigar into the
fire, he got up and helped himself to whisky.

"Will you come and see the room?"

"Thank you, no. I prefer to have nothing to do with it till the time
arrives."

"Then let's go to see my sister, Mrs. Jameson, who is in the drawing
room. She sometimes does me the kindness to act as my hostess, as I am
unmarried."

"I will be delighted," said Backhouse coldly.

They found the lady alone, sitting by the open pianoforte in a pensive
attitude. She had been playing Scriabin and was overcome. The medium
took in her small, tight, patrician features and porcelain-like hands,
and wondered how Faull came by such a sister. She received him bravely,
with just a shade of quiet emotion. He was used to such receptions at
the hands of the sex, and knew well how to respond to them.

"What amazes me," she half whispered, after ten minutes of graceful,
hollow conversation, "is, if you must know it, not so much the
manifestation itself--though that will surely be wonderful--as
your assurance that it will take place. Tell me the grounds of your
confidence."

"I dream with open eyes," he answered, looking around at the door, "and
others see my dreams. That is all."

"But that's beautiful," responded Mrs. Jameson. She smiled rather
absently, for the first guest had just entered.

It was Kent-Smith, the ex-magistrate, celebrated for his shrewd judicial
humour, which, however, he had the good sense not to attempt to carry
into private life. Although well on the wrong side of seventy, his eyes
were still disconcertingly bright. With the selective skill of an old
man, he immediately settled himself in the most comfortable of many
comfortable chairs.

"So we are to see wonders tonight?"

"Fresh material for your autobiography," remarked Faull.

"Ah, you should not have mentioned my unfortunate book. An old public
servant is merely amusing himself in his retirement, Mr. Backhouse. You
have no cause for alarm--I have studied in the school of discretion."

"I am not alarmed. There can be no possible objection to your publishing
whatever you please."

"You are most kind," said the old man, with a cunning smile.

"Trent is not coming tonight," remarked Mrs. Jameson, throwing a curious
little glance at her brother.

"I never thought he would. It's not in his line."

"Mrs. Trent, you must understand," she went on, addressing the
ex-magistrate, "has placed us all under a debt of gratitude. She has
decorated the old lounge hall upstairs most beautifully, and has secured
the services of the sweetest little orchestra."

"But this is Roman magnificence."

"Backhouse thinks the spirits should be treated with more deference,"
laughed Faull.

"Surely, Mr. Backhouse--a poetic environment..."

"Pardon me. I am a simple man, and always prefer to reduce things to
elemental simplicity. I raise no opposition, but I express my opinion.
Nature is one thing, and art is another."

"And I am not sure that I don't agree with you," said the ex-magistrate.
"An occasion like this ought to be simple, to guard against the
possibility of deception--if you will forgive my bluntness, Mr.
Backhouse."

"We shall sit in full light," replied Backhouse, "and every opportunity
will be given to all to inspect the room. I shall also ask you to submit
me to a personal examination."

A rather embarrassed silence followed. It was broken by the arrival of
two more guests, who entered together. These were Prior, the prosperous
City coffee importer, and Lang, the stockjobber, well known in his own
circle as an amateur prestidigitator. Backhouse was slightly acquainted
with the latter. Prior, perfuming the room with the faint odour of wine
and tobacco smoke, tried to introduce an atmosphere of joviality into
the proceedings. Finding that no one seconded his efforts, however, he
shortly subsided and fell to examining the water colours on the walls.
Lang, tall, thin, and growing bald, said little, but stared at Backhouse
a good deal.

Coffee, liqueurs, and cigarettes were now brought in. Everyone partook,
except Lang and the medium. At the same moment, Professor Halbert was
announced. He was the eminent psychologist, the author and lecturer
on crime, insanity, genius, and so forth, considered in their mental
aspects. His presence at such a gathering somewhat mystified the other
guests, but all felt as if the object of their meeting had immediately
acquired additional solemnity. He was small, meagre-looking, and mild
in manner, but was probably the most stubborn-brained of all that mixed
company. Completely ignoring the medium, he at once sat down beside
Kent-Smith, with whom he began to exchange remarks.

At a few minutes past the appointed hour Mrs. Trent entered,
unannounced. She was a woman of about twenty-eight. She had a white,
demure, saintlike face, smooth black hair, and lips so crimson and full
that they seemed to be bursting with blood. Her tall, graceful body was
most expensively attired. Kisses were exchanged between her and Mrs.
Jameson. She bowed to the rest of the assembly, and stole a half glance
and a smile at Faull. The latter gave her a queer look, and Backhouse,
who lost nothing, saw the concealed barbarian in the complacent gleam
of his eye. She refused the refreshment that was offered her, and Faull
proposed that, as everyone had now arrived, they should adjourn to the
lounge hall.

Mrs. Trent held up a slender palm. "Did you, or did you not, give me
carte blanche, Montague?"

"Of course I did," said Faull, laughing. "But what's the matter?"

"Perhaps I have been rather presumptuous. I don't know. I have invited
a couple of friends to join us. No, no one knows them.... The two most
extraordinary individuals you ever saw. And mediums, I am sure."

"It sounds very mysterious. Who are these conspirators?"

"At least tell us their names, you provoking girl," put in Mrs. Jameson.

"One rejoices in the name of Maskull, and the other in that of
Nightspore. That's nearly all that I know about them, so don't overwhelm
me with, any more questions."

"But where did you pick them up? You must have picked them up
somewhere."

"But this is a cross-examination. Have I sinned again convention? I
swear I will tell you not another word about them. They will be here
directly, and then I will deliver them to your tender mercy."

"I don't know them," said Faull, "and nobody else seems to, but, of
course, we will all be very pleased to have them.... Shall we wait, or
what?"

"I said nine, and it's past that now. It's quite possible they may not
turn up after all.... Anyway, don't wait."

"I would prefer to start at once," said Backhouse.

The lounge, a lofty room, forty feet long by twenty wide, had been
divided for the occasion into two equal parts by a heavy brocade curtain
drawn across the middle. The far end was thus concealed. The nearer half
had been converted into an auditorium by a crescent of armchairs. There
was no other furniture. A large fire was burning halfway along the wall,
between the chairbacks and the door. The room was brilliantly lighted by
electric bracket lamps. A sumptuous carpet covered the floor.

Having settled his guests in their seats, Faull stepped up to the
curtain and flung it aside. A replica, or nearly so, of the Drury Lane
presentation of the temple scene in The Magic Flute was then exposed to
view: the gloomy, massive architecture of the interior, the glowing sky
above it in the background, and, silhouetted against the latter, the
gigantic seated statue of the Pharaoh. A fantastically carved wooden
couch lay before the pedestal of the statue. Near the curtain, obliquely
placed to the auditorium, was a plain oak armchair, for the use of the
medium.

Many of those present felt privately that the setting was quite
inappropriate to the occasion and savoured rather unpleasantly
of ostentation. Backhouse in particular seemed put out. The usual
compliments, however, were showered on Mrs. Trent as the deviser of
so remarkable a theatre. Faull invited his friends to step forward and
examine the apartment as minutely as they might desire. Prior and
Lang were the only ones to accept. The former wandered about among the
pasteboard scenery, whistling to himself and occasionally tapping a part
of it with his knuckles. Lang, who was in his element, ignored the rest
of his party and commenced a patient, systematic search, on his own
account, for secret apparatus. Faull and Mrs. Trent stood in a corner
of the temple, talking together in low tones; while Mrs. Jameson,
pretending to hold Backhouse in conversation, watched them as only a
deeply interested woman knows how to watch.

Lang, to his own disgust, having failed to find anything of a suspicious
nature, the medium now requested that his own clothing should be
searched.

"All these precautions are quite needless and beside the matter in
hand, as you will immediately see for yourselves. My reputation demands,
however, that other people who are not present would not be able to say
afterward that trickery has been resorted to."

To Lang again fell the ungrateful task of investigating pockets and
sleeves. Within a few minutes he expressed himself satisfied that
nothing mechanical was in Backhouse's possession. The guests reseated
themselves. Faull ordered two more chairs to be brought for Mrs. Trent's
friends, who, however, had not yet arrived. He then pressed an electric
bell, and took his own seat.

The signal was for the hidden orchestra to begin playing. A murmur of
surprise passed through the audience as, without previous warning, the
beautiful and solemn strains of Mozart's "temple" music pulsated through
the air. The expectation of everyone was raised, while, beneath her
pallor and composure, it could be seen that Mrs. Trent was deeply moved.
It was evident that aesthetically she was by far the most important
person present. Faull watched her, with his face sunk on his chest,
sprawling as usual.

Backhouse stood up, with one hand on the back of his chair, and began
speaking. The music instantly sank to pianissimo, and remained so for as
long as he was on his legs.

"Ladies and gentlemen, you are about to witness a materialisation. That
means you will see something appear in space that was not previously
there. At first it will appear as a vaporous form, but finally it will
be a solid body, which anyone present may feel and handle--and, for
example, shake hands with. For this body will be in the human shape.
It will be a real man or woman--which, I can't say--but a man or
woman without known antecedents. If, however, you demand from me an
explanation of the origin of this materialised form--where it comes
from, whence the atoms and molecules composing its tissues are
derived--I am unable to satisfy you. I am about to produce the
phenomenon; if anyone can explain it to me afterward, I shall be very
grateful.... That is all I have to say."

He resumed his seat, half turning his back on the assembly, and paused
for a moment before beginning his task.

It was precisely at this minute that the manservant opened the door
and announced in a subdued but distinct voice: "Mr. Maskull, Mr.
Nightspore."

Everyone turned round. Faull rose to welcome the late arrivals.
Backhouse also stood up, and stared hard at them.

The two strangers remained standing by the door, which was closed
quietly behind them. They seemed to be waiting for the mild sensation
caused by their appearance to subside before advancing into the room.
Maskull was a kind of giant, but of broader and more robust physique
than most giants. He wore a full beard. His features were thick and
heavy, coarsely modelled, like those of a wooden carving; but his eyes,
small and black, sparkled with the fires of intelligence and audacity.
His hair was short, black, and bristling. Nightspore was of middle
height, but so tough-looking that he appeared to be trained out of all
human frailties and susceptibilities. His hairless face seemed consumed
by an intense spiritual hunger, and his eyes were wild and distant. Both
men were dressed in tweeds.

Before any words were spoken, a loud and terrible crash of falling
masonry caused the assembled party to start up from their chairs in
consternation. It sounded as if the entire upper part of the building
had collapsed. Faull sprang to the door, and called to the servant to
say what was happening. The man had to be questioned twice before he
gathered what was required of him. He said he had heard nothing. In
obedience to his master's order, he went upstairs. Nothing, however, was
amiss there, neither had the maids heard anything.

In the meantime Backhouse, who almost alone of those assembled had
preserved his sangfroid, went straight up to Nightspore, who stood
gnawing his nails.

"Perhaps you can explain it, sir?"

"It was supernatural," said Nightspore, in a harsh, muffled voice,
turning away from his questioner.

"I guessed so. It is a familiar phenomenon, but I have never heard it so
loud."

He then went among the guests, reassuring them. By degrees they settled
down, but it was observable that their former easy and good-humoured
interest in the proceedings was now changed to strained watchfulness.
Maskull and Nightspore took the places allotted to them. Mrs. Trent
kept stealing uneasy glances at them. Throughout the entire incident,
Mozart's hymn continued to be played. The orchestra also had heard
nothing.

Backhouse now entered on his task. It was one that began to be familiar
to him, and he had no anxiety about the result. It was not possible
to effect the materialisation by mere concentration of will, or the
exercise of any faculty; otherwise many people could have done what he
had engaged himself to do. His nature was phenomenal--the dividing
wall between himself and the spiritual world was broken in many places.
Through the gaps in his mind the inhabitants of the invisible, when he
summoned them, passed for a moment timidly and awfully into the solid,
coloured universe.... He could not say how it was brought about.... The
experience was a rough one for the body, and many such struggles would
lead to insanity and early death. That is why Backhouse was stern
and abrupt in his manner. The coarse, clumsy suspicion of some of the
witnesses, the frivolous aestheticism of others, were equally obnoxious
to his grim, bursting heart; but he was obliged to live, and, to pay his
way, must put up with these impertinences.

He sat down facing the wooden couch. His eyes remained open but seemed
to look inward. His cheeks paled, and he became noticeably thinner. The
spectators almost forgot to breathe. The more sensitive among them began
to feel, or imagine, strange presences all around them. Maskull's
