The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Infant's Delight: Poetry, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Infant's Delight: Poetry

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: February 2, 2004 [EBook #10912]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INFANT'S DELIGHT: POETRY ***




Produced by Afra Ullah and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




THE INFANT'S DELIGHT



[Illustration: THE MISTLETOE-SELLERS.]


[Illustration: THE DEAD ROBIN.]

[Illustration]



BLIND MAN'S BUFF.

When the win-ter winds are blow-ing,
  And we ga-ther glad and gay,
Where the fire its light is throw-ing,
  For a mer-ry game at play,
There is none that to my know-ing,--
  And I've play-ed at games enough,--
Makes us laugh, and sets us glow-ing
  Like a game at Blind-man's Buff.




THE DEAD ROBIN.

All through the win-ter, long and cold,
  Dear Minnie ev-ery morn-ing fed
The little spar-rows, pert and bold,
  And ro-bins, with their breasts so red.

She lov-ed to see the lit-tle birds
  Come flut-ter-ing to the win-dow pane,
In answer to the gen-tle words
  With which she scat-ter-ed crumbs and grain.

One ro-bin, bol-der than the rest,
  Would perch up-on her fin-ger fair,
And this of all she lov-ed the best,
  And daily fed with ten-der-est care.

But one sad morn, when Minnie came,
  Her pre-ci-ous lit-tle pet she found,
Not hop-ping, when she call-ed his name,
  But ly-ing dead up-on the ground.




ALL THINGS OBEY GOD.

"He saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth."

God's works are very great, but still
  His hands do not ap-pear:
Though hea-ven and earth o-bey His will,
  His voice we can-not hear.

And yet we know that it is He
  Who moves and governs all,
Who stills the rag-ing of the sea,
  And makes the showers to fall.

Alike in mer-cy He be-stows
  The sun-shine and the rain;
That which is best for us He knows,
  And we must not com-plain,

Whe-ther He makes His winds to blow,
  And gives His tem-pests birth,
Or sends His frost, or bids the snow--
  "Be thou up-on the earth."



[Illustration: HE SAITH TO THE SNOW: BE THOU ON THE EARTH. JOB 37.6]

[Illustration: SNOW-BALL-ING.]




SNOW-BALL-ING.

See these mer-ry ones at play,
On this snowy New Year's Day:
How they run, and jump, and throw
Hand-fuls of the soft, white snow.
You should hear them laugh and shout
As they fling the snow about!
'Tis by Frank and Gus alone
That the balls are chief-ly thrown,
While their cou-sins make and bring
Other balls for them to fling.
Ka-tie is pre-par-ing thus,
Quite a store of balls for Gus;
But her mer-ry sis-ter May
From her task has run a-way,
All that heavy lump of snow,
At her cou-sin Gus to throw.
E-dith is not very bold,
And at first she fear-ed the cold;
Now at last you see her run
Down the steps to join the fun.




THE SICK DOLL.


Oh! is there any cause to fear
  That dol-ly will be very ill?
To cure my lit-tle dar-ling here,
  Pray, doc-tor, use your ut-most skill.

And dol-ly, if you would get well,
  Hold out your arm, that Dr. Gray
May feel your tiny pulse, and tell
  What best will take the pain a-way.

And do not say: "I will not touch
  That nas-ty phy-sic, nor the pill."
If lit-tle dolls will eat too much,
  They must not won-der if they're ill.

If your mam-ma ate too much cake,
  She would be very poor-ly too,
And nas-ty phy-sic have to take;
  And, lit-tle dol-ly, so must you.



[Illustration: Those who the South-ern O-cean cross,
Meet with the wide-wing-ed Al-ba-tross.]

[Illustration: In ri-vers near the hot E-qua-tor,
Lives the huge, sca-ly Al-li-ga-tor.]

[Illustration: In north-ern snows, the Po-lar Bear,
'Mid glit-ter-ing ice-bergs makes his lair.]

[Illustration: In shel-ter-ed nooks, by ri-ver-sides,
The strange-ly-beard-ed Bar-bel hides.]

[Illustration: THE SICK DOLL.]

[Illustration: LITTLE ROSE'S VALENTINE.]

[Illustration]



NEL-LY'S PET LAMB.


This lit-tle Lamb was brought to Nell
  The day its old ewe mo-ther died,
And, now it knows and loves her well,
  It will not go from Nel-ly's side.
