The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Uses of Astronomy, by Edward Everett


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Uses of Astronomy
       An Oration Delivered at Albany on the 28th of July, 1856


Author: Edward Everett



Release Date: July 6, 2005  [eBook #16227]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE USES OF ASTRONOMY***


E-text prepared by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Peter Barozzi, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net/) from page images generously made available by the
Making of America Collection of the Digital & Multimedia Center, Michigan
State University Libraries (http://digital.lib.msu.edu/)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through the
      Digital & Multimedia Center, Michigan State University
      Libraries. See
      http://www.hti.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=moa;idno=AAN1277.0001.001




                          THE USES OF ASTRONOMY.


                               AN ORATION


             Delivered at Albany, on the 28th of July, 1856

                                   BY

                             EDWARD EVERETT,


                                 ON THE

               OCCASION OF THE INAUGURATION OF THE DUDLEY
                        ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY,


                                 WITH A

                   CONDENSED REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS,

                          AND AN ACCOUNT OF THE

              DEDICATION OF NEW YORK STATE GEOLOGICAL HALL.


                               NEW YORK:
                      PUBLISHED BY ROSS & TOUSEY,
                           103 NASSAU STREET.
                                 1856.




                          A NOTE EXPLANATORY.

     The undersigned ventures to put forth this report of Mr.
     EVERETT'S Oration, in connection with a condensed account of the
     Inauguration of the Dudley Observatory, and the Dedication of the
     New State Geological Hall, at Albany,--in the hope that the
     demand which has exhausted the newspaper editions, may exhaust
     this as speedily as possible; not that he is particularly
     tenacious of a reward for his own slight labors, but because he
     believes that the extensive circulation of the record of the two
     events so interesting and important to the cause of Science will
     exercise a beneficial influence upon the public mind. The effort
     of the distinguished Statesman who has invested Astronomy with
     new beauties, is the latest and one of the most brilliant of his
     compositions, and is already wholly out of print, though scarcely
     a month has elapsed since the date of its delivery. The account
     of the proceedings at Albany during the Ceremonies of
     Inauguration is necessarily brief, but accurate, and is
     respectfully submitted to the consideration of the reader.

                                                    A. MAVERICK.
     NEW YORK, _October 1, 1856._




                    TWO NEW INSTITUTIONS OF SCIENCE;

                                  AND

              THE SCENES WHICH ATTENDED THEIR CHRISTENING.


In the month of August last, two events took place in the city of
Albany, which have more than an ephemeral interest. They occurred in
close connection with the proceedings of a Scientific Convention, and
the memory of them deserves to be cherished as a recollection of the
easy way in which Science may be popularized and be rendered so
generally acceptable that the people will cry, like Oliver Twist, for
more. It is the purpose of this small publication to embody, in a form
more durable than that of the daily newspaper, the record of proceedings
which have so near a relation to the progress of scientific research. A
marked feature in the ceremonies was the magnificent Oration of the Hon.
EDWARD EVERETT, inaugurating the Dudley Observatory of Albany; and it is
believed that the reissue of that speech in its present form will be
acceptable to the admirers of that distinguished gentleman, not less
than to the lovers of Science, who hung with delight upon his words.


                 THE DEDICATION OF THE GEOLOGICAL HALL.

On Wednesday, August 27, 1856, the State Geological Hall of New York was
dedicated with appropriate ceremonies. For the purpose of affording
accommodation to the immense crowds of people who, it was confidently
anticipated, would throng to this demonstration and that of the
succeeding day, at which Mr. EVERETT spoke, a capacious Tent was
arranged with care in the center of Academy Park, on Capitol Hill; and
under its shelter the ceremonies of the inauguration of both
institutions were conducted without accident or confusion; attended on
the first day by fully three thousand persons, and on the second by a
number which may be safely computed at from five to seven thousand.

The announcement that Hon. WM. H. SEWARD would be present at the
dedication of the Geological Hall, excited great interest among the
citizens; but the hope of his appearance proved fallacious. His place
was occupied by seven picked men of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, one of whom (Prof. HENRY) declared his inability
to compute the problem why seven men of science were to be considered
equal to one statesman. The result justified the selections of the
committee, and although the Senator was not present, the seven
Commoners of Science made the occasion a most notable one by the flow of
wit, elegance of phrase, solidity and cogency of argument, and rare
discernment of natural truths, with which their discourse was garnished.

The members of the American Association marched in procession to the
Tent, from their place of meeting in the State Capitol. On the stage
were assembled many distinguished gentlemen, and in the audience were
hundreds of ladies. GOV. CLARK and Ex-Governors HUNT and SEYMOUR, of New
York, Sir WM. LOGAN, of Canada, Hon. GEORGE BANCROFT, and others as well
known as these, were among the number present. The tent was profusely
decorated. Small banners in tri-color were distributed over the entire
area covered by the stage, and adorned the wings. The following
inscriptions were placed over the front of the rostrum,--that in honor
of "_The Press_" occupying a central position:

                GEOLOGY.                  THE PRESS.
                METEOROLOGY.              MINERALOGY.
                METALLURGY.               ETHNOLOGY.
                              ASTRONOMY.

The following were arranged in various positions on the right and left:

                CHEMISTRY.                TELEGRAPH.
                PHYSIOLOGY.               LETTERS.
                CONCHOLOGY.               HYDROLOGY.
                PALAEONTOLOGY.            ZOOLOGY.
                MICROSCOPY.               ICHTHYOLOGY.
                ART.                      MANUFACTURES.
                STEAM.                    AGRICULTURE.
                COMMERCE.                 PHYSICS.
                SCIENCE.                  ANATOMY.
                NAVIGATION.               BOTANY.

The proceedings of the day were opened with prayer by Rev. GEO. W.
BETHUNE, D.D., of Brooklyn.

Hon. GARRIT Y. LANSING, of Albany, then introduced Professor LOUIS
AGASSIZ, of Cambridge, Mass., who was the first of the "seven men of
science" to entertain his audience, always with the aid of the
inevitable black-board, without which the excellent Professor would be
as much at a loss as a chemist without a laboratory. Professor AGASSIZ
spoke for an hour, giving his views of a new theory of animal
development. He began by saying:--

     We are here to inaugurate the Geological Hall, which has grown
     out of the geological survey of the State. To make the occasion
     memorable, a distinguished statesman of your own State, and Mr.
     FRANK C. GRAY, were expected to be present and address you. The
     pressure of public duties has detained Mr. SEWARD, and severe
     sickness has detained Mr. GRAY. I deeply lament that the occasion
     is lost to you to hear my friend Mr. GRAY, who is a devotee to
     science, and as warm-hearted a friend as ever I knew. Night
     before last I was requested to assist in taking their place--I,
     who am the most unfit of men for the post. I never made a speech.
     I have addressed learned bodies, but I lack that liberty of
     speech--the ability to present in finished style, and with that
     rich imagery which characterize the words of the orator, the
     thoughts fitting to such an occasion as this. He would limit
     himself, he continued, to presenting some motives why the
     community should patronize science, and foster such institutions
     as this. We scientific men regard this as an occasion of the
     highest interest, and thus do not hesitate to give the sanction
     of the highest learned body of the country as an indorsement of
     the liberality of this State. The geological survey of New York
     has given to the world a new nomenclature. No geologist can,
     hereafter, describe the several strata of the earth without
     referring to it. Its results, as recorded in your published
     volumes, are treasured in the most valuable libraries of the
     world. They have made this city famous; and now, when the
     scientific geologist lands on your shore, his first question is,
     "Which is the way to Albany? I want to see your fossils." But
     Paleontology is only one branch of the subject, and many others
     your survey has equally fostered.

     He next proceeded to show that organized beings were organized
     with reference to a plan, which the relations between different
     animals, and between different plants, and between animals and
     plants, everywhere exhibit;--drew sections of the body of a fish,
     and of the bird, and of man, and pointed out that in each there
     was the same central back-bone, the cavity above and the ribbed
     cavity below the flesh on each side, and the skin over
     all--showing that the maker of each possessed the same
     thought--followed the same plan of structure. And upon that plan
     He had made all the kinds of quadrupeds, 2,000 in number, all the
     kinds of birds, 7,000 in number, all of the reptiles, 2,000 to
     3,000 in number, all the fish, 10,000 to 12,000 in number. All
     their forms may be derived as different expressions of the same
     formula. There are only four of these great types; or, said he,
     may I not call them the four tunes on which Divinity has played
     the harmonies that have peopled, in living and beautiful reality,
     the whole world?


                 PROFESSOR HITCHCOCK ON REMINISCENCES.

ERASTUS C. BENEDICT, Esq. of New York, introduced Prof. HITCHCOCK, of
Amherst, as a gentleman whose name was very familiar, who had laid
aside, voluntarily, the charge of one of the largest colleges in New
England, but who could never lay aside the honors he had earned in the
