The Project Gutenberg EBook of Recreations in Astronomy, by Henry Warren

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Recreations in Astronomy
       With Directions for Practical Experiments and Telescopic Work

Author: Henry Warren

Release Date: April 14, 2005 [EBook #15620]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECREATIONS IN ASTRONOMY ***




Produced by Robert J. Hall.




[Page ii]
[Illustration: THE CONSTELLATIONS OF ORION AND TAURUS.

NOTES.--Star a in Taurus is red, has eight metals; moves east (page
227). At o above tip of right horn is the Crab Nebula (page 219).
In Orion, a is variable, has five metals; recedes 22 miles per
second. b, d, e, x, r, etc., are double stars, the component parts
of various colors and magnitudes (page 212, note). l and i are
triple; s, octuple; th, multiple, surrounded by a fine Nebula (page
218).]




[Page iii]
RECREATIONS IN ASTRONOMY

WITH

_DIRECTIONS FOR PRACTICAL EXPERIMENTS AND TELESCOPIC WORK_


BY

HENRY WHITE WARREN, D.D.

AUTHOR OF "SIGHTS AND INSIGHTS; OR, KNOWLEDGE BY TRAVEL," ETC.


WITH EIGHTY-THREE ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAPS OF STARS



[Page v]
[Greek:
  TAEI PSUCHAEI
  TAEI AGAPAETAEI
  ASTRAPOUSAEI
  KAI
  ISAGGEDOI]




[Page vii]
PREFACE.

All sciences are making an advance, but Astronomy is moving at the
double-quick. Since the principles of this science were settled
by Copernicus, four hundred years ago, it has never had to beat
a retreat. It is rewritten not to correct material errors, but
to incorporate new discoveries.

Once Astronomy treated mostly of tides, seasons, and telescopic
aspects of the planets; now these are only primary matters. Once
it considered stars as mere fixed points of light; now it studies
them as suns, determines their age, size, color, movements, chemical
constitution, and the revolution of their planets. Once it considered
space as empty; now it knows that every cubic inch of it quivers with
greater intensity of force than that which is visible in Niagara.
Every inch of surface that can be conceived of between suns is more
wave-tossed than the ocean in a storm.

The invention of the telescope constituted one era in Astronomy;
its perfection in our day, another; and the discoveries of the
spectroscope a third--no less important than either of the others.

While nearly all men are prevented from practical experimentation
in these high realms of knowledge, few [Page viii] have so little
leisure as to be debarred from intelligently enjoying the results
of the investigations of others.

This book has been written not only to reveal some of the highest
achievements of the human mind, but also to let the heavens declare
the glory of the Divine Mind. In the author's judgment, there is no
gulf that separates science and religion, nor any conflict where
they stand together. And it is fervently hoped that anyone who
comes to a better knowledge of God's works through reading this
book, may thereby come to a more intimate knowledge of the Worker.

I take great pleasure in acknowledging my indebtedness to J. M.
Van Vleck, LL.D., of the U.S. Nautical Almanac staff, and Professor
of Astronomy at the Wesleyan University, for inspecting some of the
more important chapters; to Dr. S. S. White, of Philadelphia, for
telescopic advantages; to Professor Henry Draper, for furnishing,
in advance of publication, a photograph of the sun's corona in 1878;
and to the excellent work on "Popular Astronomy," by Professor
Simon Newcomb, LL.D., Professor U. S. Naval Observatory, for some
of the most recent information, and for the use of the unequalled
engravings of Jupiter, Saturn, and the great nebula of Orion.




[Page ix]
CONTENTS.

  CHAP.
    I. CREATIVE PROCESSES
   II. CREATIVE PROGRESS
        Constitution of Light
        Chemistry of Suns revealed by Light
        Creative Force of Light
  III. ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS
        The Telescope
        The Reflecting Telescope
        The Spectroscope
   IV. CELESTIAL MEASUREMENTS
        Celestial Movements
        How to Measure
    V. THE SUN
        What the Sun does for us
   VI. THE PLANETS, AS SEEN FROM SPACE
        The Outlook from the Earth
  VII. SHOOTING-STARS, METEORS, AND COMETS
        Aerolites
        Comets
        Famous Comets
        Of what do Comets consist?
        Will Comets strike the Earth?
 VIII. THE PLANETS AS INDIVIDUALS
        Vulcan
        Mercury
        Venus
        The Earth
        The Aurora Borealis
[Page x]
        The Delicate Balance of Forces
        Tides
        The Moon
        Telescopic Appearance
        Eclipses
        Mars
        Satellites of Mars
        Asteroids
        Jupiter
        Satellites of Jupiter
        Saturn
        Rings of Saturn
        Satellites of Saturn
        Uranus
        Neptune
   IX. THE NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS.
    X. THE STELLAR SYSTEM
        The Open Page of the Heavens
        Equatorial Constellations
        Characteristics of the Stars
        Number
        Double and Multiple Stars
        Colored Stars
        Clusters of Stars
        Nebulae
        Variable Stars
        Temporary, New, and Lost Stars
        Movements of Stars
   XI. THE WORLDS AND THE WORD
  XII. THE ULTIMATE FORCE
 SUMMARY OF LATEST DISCOVERIES AND CONCLUSIONS
 SOME ELEMENTS OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM
 EXPLANATION OF ASTRONOMICAL SYMBOLS
        Signs of the Zodiac
        Other Abbreviations Used in the Almanac
        Greek Alphabet Used Indicating the Stars
 CHAUTAUQUA OUTLINE FOR STUDENTS
 GLOSSARY OF ASTRONOMICAL TERMS AND INDEX




[Page xi]
ILLUSTRATIONS

FIG.
     The Constellations of Orion and Taurus
  1. An Orbit resulting from Attraction and Projection
  2. The Moon's Orbit about the Earth
  3. Changes of Orbit by Mutual Attraction
  4. Velocity of Light measured by Jupiter's Satellites
  5. Velocity of Light measured by Fizeau's Toothed Wheel
  6. White Light resolved into Colors
  7. Showing amount of Light received by Different Planets
  8. Measuring Intensities of Lights
  9. Reflection and Diffusion of Light
 10. Manifold Reflections
 11. Refraction by Water
 12. Atmospherical Reflection
 13. Refracting Telescope
 14. Reflecting Telescope
 15. The Cambridge Equatorial Refractor
 16. The new Reflecting Telescope at Paris
 17. Spectroscope, with Battery of Prisms
 18. Spectra of Glowing Hydrogen and of the Sun
 19. Illustrating Arcs and Angles
 20. Measuring Objects by observing Angles
 21. Mural Circle
 22. Scale to measure Hundredths of an Inch
 23. Spider-lines to determine Star Transits
 24. Illustrating Triangulation
[Page xii]
 25. Measuring Distance to an Inaccessible Object
 26. Measuring Elevation of an Inaccessible Object
 27. Illustrating Parallax
 28. Illustrating Stellar Parallax
 29. Mode of Ascertaining Longitude
 30. Relative Size of Sun, as seen from Different Planets
 31. Zodiacal Light
 32. Corona of the Sun in 1858--Brazil
 33. Corona of the Sun in 1878--Colorado
 34. Solar Prominences of Flaming Hydrogen
 35. Changes in Solar Cavities during Rotation
 36. Solar Spot
 37. Holding Telescope to see the Sun-spots
 38. Orbits and Comparative Sizes of the Planets
 39. Orbit of Earth, illustrating Seasons
 40. Inclination of Planes of Planetary Orbits
 41. Inclination of Orbits of Earth and Venus
 42. Showing the Sun's Movement among the Stars
 43. Passage of the Sun by Star Regulus
 44. Apparent Path of Jupiter among the Stars
 45. Illustrating Position of Planets
 46. Apparent Movements of an Inferior Planet
 47. Apparent Movements of a Superior Planet
 47_a_. A Swarm of Meteors meeting the Earth
 48. Explosion of a Bolide
 49. Flight of Bolides
 50. The Santa Rosa Aerolite
 51. Orbit of November Meteors and the Comet of 1866
 52. Aspects of Remarkable Comets
 53. Phases and Apparent Dimensions of Venus
 54. The Earth and Moon in Space
 55. Aurora as Waving Curtains
 56. Tide resulting from Centrifugal Motion
 57. Lunar Landscape
[Page xiii]
 58. Telescopic View of the Moon
 59. Illumination of Lunar Craters and Peaks
 60. Lunar Crater "Copernicus"
 61. Eclipses: Shadows of Earth and Moon
 62. Apparent Sizes of Mars, seen from the Earth
 63. Jupiter
 64. Various Positions of Jupiter's Satellites
 65. View of Saturn and his Rings
 66. Perturbations of Uranus
 67. Map: Circumpolar Constellations
 68. Map of Constellations on the Meridian in December
 69. Map of Constellations on the Meridian in January
 70. Map of Constellations on the Meridian in April
 71. Map of Constellations on the Meridian in June
 72. Map of Constellations on the Meridian in September
 73. Map of Constellations on the Meridian in November
 74. Southern Circumpolar Constellations
 75. Aspects of Double Stars
 76. Sprayed Star Cluster below ae in Hercules
 77. Globular Star Cluster in the Centaur
 78. Great Nebula about th Orionis
 79. The Crab Nebula above z Tauri
 80. The Ring Nebula in Lyra
 81. Showing Place of Ring Nebula
 82. The Horizontal Pendulum

  COLORED PLATE REPRESENTING VARIOUS SPECTA
  MAPS TO FIND THE STARS




[Page 1]
I.

CREATIVE PROCESSES.

    "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the
  earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the
  deep."--_Genesis_ i. 1, 2.

[Page 2]
 "Not to the domes, where crumbling arch and column
    Attest the feebleness of mortal hand,
  But to that fane, most catholic and solemn,
    Which God hath planned,--
  To that cathedral, boundless as our wonder,
    Whose quenchless lamps the sun and stars supply;
  Its choir the winds and waves, its organ thunder,
    Its dome the sky."    H. W. LONGFELLOW.

 "The heavens are a point from the pen of His perfection;
  The world is a rose-bud from the bower of His beauty;
  The sun is a spark from the light of His wisdom;
  And the sky a bubble on the sea of His power."
    SIR W. JONES.


[Page 3]
RECREATIONS IN ASTRONOMY.

       *       *       *       *       *

I.

_CREATIVE PROCESSES._

During all the ages there has been one bright and glittering page
of loftiest wisdom unrolled before the eye of man. That this page
may be read in every part, man's whole world turns him before it.
This motion apparently changes the eternally stable stars into a
moving panorama, but it is only so in appearance. The sky is a
vast, immovable dial-plate of "that clock whose pendulum ticks
ages instead of seconds," and whose time is eternity. The moon
moves among the illuminated figures, traversing the dial quickly,
like a second-hand, once a month. The sun, like a minute-hand, goes
over the dial once a year. Various planets stand for hour-hands,
moving over the dial in various periods reaching up to one hundred
and sixty-four years; while the earth, like a ship of exploration,
sails the infinite azure, bearing the observers to different points
where they may investigate the infinite problems of this mighty
machinery.

This dial not only shows present movements, but it keeps the history
of uncounted ages past ready to be [Page 4] read backward in proper
order; and it has glorious volumes of prophecy, revealing the
far-off future to any man who is able to look thereon, break the
seals, and read the record. Glowing stars are the alphabet of this
lofty page. They combine to form words. Meteors, rainbows, auroras,
shifting groups of stars, make pictures vast and significant as the
armies, angels, and falling stars in the Revelation of St.
John--changing and progressive pictures of infinite wisdom and
power.

Men have not yet advanced as far as those who saw the pictures John
describes, and hence the panorama is not understood. That continuous
speech that day after day uttereth is not heard; the knowledge that
night after night showeth is not seen; and the invisible things
of God from the creation of the world, even his eternal power and
Godhead, clearly discoverable from things that are made, are not
apprehended.

The greatest triumphs of men's minds have been in astronomy--and
ever must be. We have not learned its alphabet yet. We read only
easy lessons, with as many mistakes as happy guesses. But in time we
shall know all the letters, become familiar with the combinations,
be apt at their interpretation, and will read with facility the
lessons of wisdom and power that are written on the earth, blazoned
in the skies, and pictured by the flowers below and the rainbows
above.

In order to know how worlds move and develop, we must create them;
we must go back to their beginning, give their endowment of forces,
and study the laws of their unfolding. This we can easily do by that
faculty wherein man is likest his Father, a creative imagination.
God creates and embodies; we create, but [Page 5] it remains in
thought only. But the creation is as bright, strong, clear,
enduring, and real, as if it were embodied. Every one of us would
make worlds enough to crush us, if we could embody as well as
create. Our ambition would outrun our wisdom. Let us come into the
high and ecstatic frame of mind which Shakspeare calls frenzy, in
the exigencies of his verse, when

 "The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
  Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
  And, as imagination bodies forth
  The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
  Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
  A local habitation and a name."
