The Project Gutenberg eBook, Rip Foster in Ride the Gray Planet, by Harold
Leland Goodwin


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Rip Foster in Ride the Gray Planet


Author: Harold Leland Goodwin



Release Date: April 10, 2006  [eBook #18139]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIP FOSTER IN RIDE THE GRAY
PLANET***


E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



A Golden Griffon Space Adventure

RIP FOSTER IN RIDE THE GRAY PLANET

by

BLAKE SAVAGE







Golden Press New York
Golden Griffon TM of Western Publishing Company, Inc.
Copyright 1952 by Western Publishing Company, Inc.
All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.
Published by Golden Press, New York, N.Y.
First Golden Griffon Printing, 1969





TABLE OF CONTENTS

   CHAPTER ONE: Spacebound

   CHAPTER TWO: Rake That Radiation!

   CHAPTER THREE: Capture and Drive!

   CHAPTER FOUR: Find the Needle!

   CHAPTER FIVE: The Gray World

   CHAPTER SIX: Rip's Planet

   CHAPTER SEVEN: Earthbound!

   CHAPTER EIGHT: Duck--or Die!

   CHAPTER NINE: Repel Invaders!

   CHAPTER TEN: Get the Scorpion!

   CHAPTER ELEVEN: Hard Words

   CHAPTER TWELVE: Mercury Transit

   CHAPTER THIRTEEN: Peril!

   CHAPTER FOURTEEN: Between Two Fires

   CHAPTER FIFTEEN: The Rocketeers

   CHAPTER SIXTEEN: Ride the Planet!

   CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: Visitors!

   CHAPTER EIGHTEEN: Courtesy--With Claws

   CHAPTER NINETEEN: Spacefall

   CHAPTER TWENTY: On the Platform




CHAPTER ONE

Spacebound


A thousand miles above Earth's surface the great space platform sped
from daylight into darkness. Once every two hours it circled the earth
completely, spinning along through space like a mighty wheel of steel and
plastic.

Through a telescope on Earth the platform looked to be a lifeless, lonely
disk, but within it, hundreds of spacemen and Planeteers went about their
work.

In a ready room at the outer edge of the platform, a Planeteer officer
faced a dozen slim, black-clad young men who wore the single golden
orbits of lieutenants. This was a graduating class, already commissioned,
having a final informal get-together.

The officer, who wore the three-orbit insignia of a major, was lean and
trim. His short-cropped hair covered his head like a gray fur skull cap.
One cheek was marked with the crisp whiteness of an old radiation burn.

"Stand easy," he ordered briskly. "The general instructions of the
Special Order Squadrons say that it's my duty as senior officer to make a
farewell speech. I intend to make a speech if it kills me--and you, too."

The dozen new officers facing him broke into grins. Maj. Joe Barris had
been their friend, teacher, and senior officer during six long years of
training on the space platform. He could no more make a formal speech
than he could breathe high vacuum, and they all knew it.

Lt. Richard Ingalls Peter Foster, whose initials had given him the
nickname "Rip," asked, "Why don't you sing for us instead, Joe?"

Major Barris fixed Rip with a cold eye. "Foster, three orbital turns,
then front and center."

Rip obediently spun around three times, then walked forward and stood at
attention, trying to conceal his grin.

"Foster, what does SOS mean?"

"Special Order Squadrons, sir."

"Right. And what else does it mean?"

"It means 'Help!' sir."

"Right. And what else does it mean?"

"Superman or simp, sir."

This was a ceremony in which questions and answers never changed. It was
supposed to make Planeteer cadets and junior officers feel properly
humble, but it didn't work. By tradition, the Planeteers were the
cockiest gang that ever blasted through high vacuum.

Major Barris shook his head sadly. "You admit you're a simp, Foster. The
rest of you are simps, too, but you don't believe it. You've finished six
years on the platform. You've made a few little trips out into space.
You've landed on the moon a couple of times. So now you think you're
seasoned space spooks. Well, you're not. You're simps!"

Rip stopped grinning. He had heard this before. It was part of the
routine. But he sensed that this time Joe Barris wasn't kidding.

The major absently rubbed the radiation scar on his cheek as he looked
them over. They were like twelve chicks out of the same nest. They were
about the same size, a compact five feet eleven inches, 175 pounds. They
wore belted, loose black tunics over full trousers which gathered into
white cruiser boots. The comfortable uniforms concealed any slight
differences in build. All twelve were lean of face, with hair cropped to
the regulation half inch. Rip was the only redhead among them.

"Sit down," Barris commanded. "Here's my speech."

The twelve seated themselves on plastic stools. Major Barris remained
standing.

"Well," he began soberly, "you are now officers of the Special Order
Squadrons. You're Planeteers. You are lieutenants by order of the Space
Council, Federation of Free Governments. And--space protect you!--to
yourselves you're supermen. But never forget this: To ordinary spacemen,
you're just plain simps. You're trouble in a black tunic. They have about
as much use for you as they have for leaks in their air locks. Some of
the spacemen have been high-vacking for twenty years or more, and they're
tough. They're as nasty as a Callistan _teekal_. They like to eat
Planeteer junior officers for breakfast."

Lt. Felipe "Flip" Villa asked, "With salt, Joe?"

Major Barris sighed. "No use trying to tell you space chicks anything.
You're lieutenants now, and a lieutenant has the thickest skull of any
rank, no matter what service he belongs to."

Rip realized that Barris had not been joking, no matter how flippant his
speech. "Go ahead," he urged. "Finish what you were going to say."

"Okay. I'll make it short. Then you can catch the Terra rocket and take
your eight weeks' Earth leave. You won't really know what I'm talking
about until you've batted around space for a while. All I have to say
adds up to one thing. You won't like it, because it doesn't sound
scientific. That doesn't mean it isn't good science, because it is. Just
remember this: When you're in a jam, trust your hunch and not your head."

The twelve stared at him, openmouthed. For six years they had been taught
to rely on scientific methods. Now their best instructor and senior
officer was telling them just the opposite!

Rip started to object, but then he caught a glimmer of meaning. He stuck
out his hand. "Thanks, Joe. I hope we'll meet again."

Barris grinned. "We will, Rip. I'll ask for you as a platoon commander
when they assign me to cleaning up the goopies on Ganymede." This was the
major's idea of the worst Planeteer job in the solar system.

The group shook hands all around; then the young officers broke for the
door on the run. The Terra rocket was blasting off in five minutes, and
they were to be on it.

Rip joined Flip Villa, and they jumped on the high-speed track that would
whisk them to Valve Two on the other side of the platform. Their gear was
already loaded. They had only to take seats on the rocket, and their six
years on the space platform would be at an end.

"I wonder what it will be like to get back to high gravity," Rip mused.
The centrifugal force of the spinning platform acted as artificial
gravity, but it was considerably less than Earth's.

"We probably won't be able to walk straight until we get our Earth legs
back," Flip answered. "I wish I could stay in Colorado with you instead
of going back to Mexico City, Rip. We could have a lot of fun in eight
weeks."

Rip nodded. "Tough luck, Flip. But anyway, we have the same assignment."

Both Planeteers had been assigned to Special Order Squadron Four, which
was attached to the cruiser _Bolide_. The cruiser was in high space,
beyond the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, doing comet research.

They got off the track at Valve Two and stepped through into the rocket's
interior. Two seats just ahead of the fins were vacant, and they slid
into them. Rip looked through the thick port beside him and saw the
distinctive blue glow of a nuclear drive cruiser sliding toward the
platform.

"Wave your eye stalks at that job," Flip said admiringly. "Wonder what
it's doing here."

The space platform was a refueling depot, where conventional chemical
fuel rockets topped off their tanks before flaming for space. The newer
nuclear drive cruisers had no need to stop. Their atomic piles needed new
neutron sources only once every few years, and they carried thousands of
tons of methane, compressed into solid form, for their reaction mass.

The voice horn in the rocket cabin sounded. "The SCN _Scorpius_ is
passing Valve Two, landing at Valve Eight."

"I thought that ship was with Squadron One on Mercury," Rip recalled.
"Wonder why they pulled it back here."

Flip had no chance to reply, because the chief rocket officer took up his
station at the valve and began to call the roll. Rip answered to his
name.

The rocket officer finished the roll, then announced: "Buttoning up in
twenty seconds. Blast off in forty-five. Don't bother with acceleration
harness. We'll fall free, with just enough flame going for control, after
ten seconds of retrothrust to de-orbit."

The ten-second-warning bell sounded, and, before the bell had ceased, the
voice horn blasted. "Get it! Foster, R.I.P., Lieutenant. Report to the
platform commander. Show an exhaust!"

Rip leaped to his feet. "Hold on, Flip. I'll see what the old man wants
and be right back."

"Get flaming," the rocket officer called. "Show an exhaust, like the man
said. This bucket leaves on time, and we're sealing the port."

Rip hesitated. The rocket would leave without him!

Flip said urgently, "You better ram it, Rip."

He knew he had no choice. "Tell my folks I'll make the next rocket," he
called, and ran. He leaped through the valve, jumped for the high-speed
track, and was whisked around the rim of the space platform.

He ran a hand through his short red hair, a gesture of bewilderment. His
records had cleared. So far as he knew, all his papers were in order, and
he had his next assignment. He couldn't figure why the platform commander
would want to see him. But the horn had called, "Show an exhaust!" which
meant to get there in a hurry.

He jumped off the track at the main crossrun and hurried toward the
center of the platform. In a moment he was at the commander's door,
waiting to be identified.

The door swung open, and a junior officer in the blue tunic and trousers
of a spaceman motioned him to the inner room. "Go in, Lieutenant."

"Thank you." He hurried into the commander's room and stood at attention.

Commander Jennsen, the Norwegian spaceman who had commanded the platform
since before Rip's arrival as a raw cadet, was dictating into his command
relay circuit. As he spoke, printed copies were being received in the
platform personnel office, at Special Order Squadron headquarters on
Earth, aboard the cruiser _Bolide_ in high space, and aboard the newly
landed cruiser _Scorpius_.

Rip listened, spellbound.

"Foster, R.I.P., Lieutenant, SOS. Serial seven-nine-four-three. Assigned
SOS Four. Change orders, effective this date-time. Cancel Earth leave.
Subject officer will report to commander, SCN _Scorpius_, with detachment
of nine men. Senior noncommissioned officer and second in command, Koa,
A.P., Sergeant Major, SOS. Serial two-nine-four-one. Commander of
_Scorpius_ will transport detachment to coordinates given in basic
cruiser astro-course; deliver orders to detachment en route. Take
required steps for maximum security. This is Federation priority A,
Space Council security procedures."

Rip swallowed hard. The highest possible priority, given by the
Federation itself, had canceled his leave. Not only that, but the cruiser
to which he was assigned was instructed to follow Space Council security
procedures, which meant that the job, whatever it was, was more urgent
than secret!

Commander Jennsen looked up and saw Rip waiting. He snapped, "Did you get
all of that?"

"Y-Yes, sir."

"You'll get written copies on the cruiser. Now flame out of here. Collect
