The Project Gutenberg EBook of Treachery in Outer Space, by 
Carey Rockwell and Louis Glanzman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Treachery in Outer Space

Author: Carey Rockwell and Louis Glanzman

Release Date: July 8, 2006 [EBook #18786]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TREACHERY IN OUTER SPACE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Joseph R. Hauser and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





TREACHERY IN OUTER SPACE



THE TOM CORBETT
SPACE CADET STORIES

By Carey Rockwell


STAND BY FOR MARS!
DANGER IN DEEP SPACE
ON THE TRAIL OF THE SPACE PIRATES
THE SPACE PIONEERS
THE REVOLT ON VENUS
TREACHERY IN OUTER SPACE
SABOTAGE IN SPACE
THE ROBOT ROCKET



[Illustration]


A TOM CORBETT Space Cadet Adventure



TREACHERY IN
OUTER SPACE


By CAREY ROCKWELL

WILLY LEY _Technical Adviser_




GROSSET & DUNLAP Publishers New York




COPYRIGHT, 1954, BY
ROCKHILL RADIO

[TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:
EXTENSIVE RESEARCH SHOWS NO EVIDENCE
OF REQUIRED COPYRIGHT RENEWAL]

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


ILLUSTRATIONS BY LOUIS GLANZMAN





PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




ILLUSTRATIONS


_Frontispiece_

"Great galaxy! There must be a hundred ships!"                27

The giant Venusian held up the oil-smeared test tube          63

"Yeow!" bawled Astro. "Thanks, sir. Thanks a million!"       102

Tom got down on his knees and felt around for an opening     131

"Look!" Strong cried. "It's Brett's ship!"                   151

It would be a rough ride, but at least he was hidden         165

Slowly and cautiously he began climbing                      181

"Proceed to quadrant five and seize the _Space Knight_!"     196





TREACHERY IN OUTER SPACE




CHAPTER I


"All right, you blasted Earthworms! _Stand to!_"

Three frightened cadet candidates for Space Academy stiffened their
backs and stood at rigid attention as Astro faced them, a furious scowl
on his rugged features. Behind him, Tom Corbett and Roger Manning
lounged on the dormitory bunks, watching their unit mate blast the
freshman cadets and trying to keep from laughing. It wasn't long ago
that they had gone through the terrifying experience of being hazed by
stern upperclassmen and they knew how the three pink-cheeked boys in
front of them felt.

"So," bawled Astro, "you want to blast off, do you?"

Neither of the three boys answered.

"Speak when you're spoken to, Mister!" snapped Roger at the boy in the
middle.

"Answer the question!" barked Tom, finding it difficult to maintain his
role of stern disciplinarian.

"Y-y-yes, sir," finally came a mumbled reply.

"What's your name? And don't say 'sir' to me!" roared Astro.

"Coglin, sir," gulped the boy.

"Don't say 'SIR'!"

"Yes, sir--er--I mean, O.K.," stuttered Coglin.

"And don't say O.K., either," Roger chimed in.

"Yes ... all right ... fine." The boy's face was flushed with
desperation.

Astro stepped forward, his chin jutting out. "For your information," he
bawled, "the correct manner of address is 'Very well.'"

"Very well," stammered Coglin.

Astro shook his head and turned back to Tom and Roger. "Have you ever
seen a greater display of audacity and sheer gall?" he demanded. "The
nerve of these three infants assuming that they could ever become Space
Cadets!"

Tom and Roger laughed, not at the three Earthworms, but at Astro's
sudden eloquence. The giant Venusian cadet usually limited his comments
to a gruff Yes or No, or at most, a garbled sentence full of a veteran
spaceman's oaths. Then, resuming his stern expression, Roger faced the
three boys.

"Sound off! Quick!" he demanded.

"Coglin, John."

"Spears, Albert."

"Duke, Phineas."

"You call those _names_?" Roger snorted incredulously. "Which of you
ground crawlers is radar officer?"

"I am, very well," replied Spears.

The blond-haired cadet stared at him in amazement.

"Very well, what?" he demanded.

"You said that's the correct form of address," replied Spears doggedly.

Roger turned to Tom. "Well, thump my rockets," he exclaimed, "I didn't
know they made them that dumb any more!"

"Who is the command cadet?" asked Tom, suppressing a grin.

"I am, very well," replied Duke.

"How fast is fast?"

"Fast is as fast must be, without being either supersonic or turgid.
Fast is necessarily that amount of speed that will not be the most nor
the least, yet will be sufficient unto the demands of fast ..." Duke
quoted directly from the _Earthworm Manual_, a book that was not
prescribed learning in the Academy, but woe unto the Earthworm who did
not know it by heart when questioned by a cadet upperclassman.

"What is a blip on a radar, Mister?" demanded Roger of Spears.

"A blip is never a slip. It is constant with the eye of the beholder,
and constant with the constant that is always--" Spears faltered, his
face flushing with embarrassment.

"Always what?" hounded Roger.

"I--I don't know," stammered the fledgling helplessly.

"_You don't know?_" yelled Roger. He looked at Tom and Astro, shaking
his head. "He doesn't know." The two cadets frowned at the quivering boy
and Roger faced him again. "For your information, Mr. Spears," he said
at his sarcastic best, "there are five words remaining in that sentence.
And for each word, you will spend one hour cleaning this room. Is that
clear?"

Spears could only nod his head.

"And for your further information," continued Roger, "the remaining
words are 'constantly alert to constant dangers'! Does that help you,
Mister?"

"Yes, Cadet Manning," gulped Spears. "You are very kind to give me this
information. And it will be a great honor to clean your room."

Astro stepped forward to take his turn. He towered over the remaining
cadet candidate and glowered at the thoroughly frightened boy. "So," he
roared, "I guess this means you're going to handle the power deck in one
of our space buckets, eh?"

"Yes, very well," came the quavering, high-pitched reply.

"Give me the correction of thrust when you are underway in a forward
motion and you receive orders from the control deck for immediate
reversal."

Coglin closed his eyes, took a deep breath, and the words poured from
his lips. "To go forward is to overtake space, and to go sternward is to
retake space already overtaken. To correct thrust, I would figure in the
beginning of my flight how much space I intended to take and how much I
would retake, and since overtake and retake are both additional
quotients that have not been divided, I will add them together and
arrive at a correction." The cadet candidate stopped abruptly, gasping
for breath.

Secretly disappointed at the accuracy of the reply, Astro grunted and
turned to Tom and Roger. "Any questions before they blast off on their
solo hop?" he growled.

The two cadets shook their heads and Roger quickly lined three chairs in
a row. Tom addressed the frightened boys solemnly. "This is your
spaceship. The first chair is the command deck; second, radar deck;
third, power deck. Take your stations and stand by to blast off."

Spears, Coglin, and Duke jumped into the chairs and Tom walked around
them eying them coldly. "Now, Misters," he said, "you are to blast off,
make a complete circle of the Earth, and return to the Academy spaceport
for a touchdown. Is that clearly understood?"

"All clear," chorused the boys.

"Stand by to raise ship!" bawled Tom.

"Power deck, check in!" snapped Duke from the first chair. "Radar deck,
check in!"

"Just one moment, Mister," interrupted Roger. "When you issue an order
over the intercom, I want to see you pick up that mike. I want to see
all the motions. It's up to you, Misters, to make us believe that you
are blasting off!"

"Very well," replied Duke with a nervous glance back at his unit mates.

"Carry on!" roared Tom.

Then, as Tom, Roger, and Astro sprawled on their bunks, grinning openly,
the three Earthworm cadets began their simulated flight through space.
Going through the movements of operating the complicated equipment of a
spaceship, they pushed, pulled, jerked, snapped on imaginary switches,
read unseen meters and gauges, and slammed around in their chairs to
simulate acceleration reaction. The three cadets of the _Polaris_ unit
could no longer restrain themselves and broke into loud laughter at the
antics of the aspirants. Finally, when they had landed their imaginary
ship again, the Earthworms were pounded on the back heartily.

"Welcome to Space Academy!" said Tom with a grin. "That was as smooth a
ride as I've ever had."

"Yeah," agreed Astro, pumping Coglin's hand. "You handled those reactors
and atomic motors like a regular old space buster!"

"And that was real fine astrogation, Spears," Roger chimed in. "Why, you
laid out such a smooth course, you never left the ground!"

The three Earthworms relaxed, and while Astro brewed hot cups of tea
with synthetic pellets and water from the shower, Tom and Roger told
them about the traditions and customs of the Academy.

Tom began by telling them how important it was for each crew member to
be able to depend on his unit mate. "You see," he said, "in space there
isn't much time for individual heroics. Too many things can happen too
fast for it to be a one-man operation."

"I'll say," piped up Roger. "A couple of times I've been on the radar
deck and seen a hunk of space junk coming down on us fast. So instead of
following book procedure, relaying the dope to Tom on the control deck
to pass it on to Astro, I'd just sing out to Astro direct on the
intercom, 'Give me an upshot on the ecliptic!' or 'Give me a starboard
shot!' and Astro would come through because he knows I always know what
I'm talking about."

"Not always, hot-shot!" growled Astro. "How about the time we went out
to Tara and snatched that hot copper asteroid out of Alpha Centauri's
mouth? _You_ said the time on that reactor blast should be set at--"

"Is that so?" snapped Roger. "Listen, you big overgrown hunk of Venusian
space gas--" Roger got no further. Astro grabbed him by the shirt front,
held him at arm's length, and began tickling him in the ribs. The three
freshmen cadets backed out of the way, glancing fearfully at the giant
Venusian. Astro's strength was awesome when seen for the first time.

"Lemme go, you blasted space ape!" bellowed Roger, between fits of
laughter.

"Say uncle, Manning!" roared Astro. "Promise you won't call me names
again, or by the stars, I'll tickle you until you shake yourself apart!"

"All right--un-un-uncle!" managed Roger.

Astro dropped his unit mate on a bunk like a rag doll and turned back to
Tom with a shrug of his shoulders. "He'll never learn, will he?"
