The Project Gutenberg EBook of Naudsonce, by H. Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Naudsonce

Author: H. Beam Piper

Illustrator: Morey

Release Date: August 18, 2006 [EBook #19076]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NAUDSONCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, William Woods, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









NAUDSONCE



          Bishop Berkeley's famous question
          about the sound of a falling tree
          may have no standing in Science.
          But there is a highly interesting
          question about "sound" that Science
          needs to consider....



BY H. BEAM PIPER

ILLUSTRATED BY MOREY

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]


The sun warmed Mark Howell's back pleasantly. Underfoot, the
mosslike stuff was soft and yielding, and there was a fragrance
in the air unlike anything he had ever smelled. He was going to
like this planet; he knew it. The question was, how would it,
and its people, like him? He watched the little figures advancing
across the fields from the mound, with the village out of sight
on the other end of it and the combat-car circling lazily on
contragravity above.

Major Luis Gofredo, the Marine officer, spoke without lowering
his binoculars:

"They have a tubular thing about twelve feet long; six of them
are carrying it on poles, three to a side, and a couple more are
walking behind it. Mark, do you think it could be a cannon?"

So far, he didn't know enough to have an opinion, and said so,
adding:

"What I saw of the village in the screen from the car, it looked
pretty primitive. Of course, gunpowder's one of those things a
primitive people could discover by accident, if the ingredients
were available."

"We won't take any chances, then."

"You think they're hostile? I was hoping they were coming out to
parley with us."

That was Paul Meillard. He had a right to be anxious; his whole
future in the Colonial Office would be made or ruined by what was
going to happen here.

The joint Space Navy-Colonial Office expedition was looking for
new planets suitable for colonization; they had been out, now,
for four years, which was close to maximum for an exploring
expedition. They had entered eleven systems, and made landings
on eight planets. Three had been reasonably close to Terra-type.
There had been Fafnir; conditions there would correspond to Terra
during the Cretaceous Period, but any Cretaceous dinosaur would
have been cute and cuddly to the things on Fafnir. Then there had
been Imhotep; in twenty or thirty thousand years, it would be
a fine planet, but at present it was undergoing an extensive
glaciation. And Irminsul, covered with forests of gigantic trees;
it would have been fine except for the fauna, which was nasty,
especially a race of subsapient near-humanoids who had just
gotten as far as clubs and _coup-de-poing_ axes. Contact with
them had entailed heavy ammunition expenditure, with two men and
a woman killed and a dozen injured. He'd had a limp, himself,
for a while as a result.

As for the other five, one had been an all-out hell-planet, and
the rest had been the sort that get colonized by irreconcilable
minority-groups who want to get away from everybody else. The
Colonial Office wouldn't even consider any of them.

Then they had found this one, third of a G0-star, eighty million
miles from primary, less axial inclination than Terra, which would
mean a more uniform year-round temperature, and about half land
surface. On the evidence of a couple of sneak landings for
specimens, the biochemistry was identical with Terra's and the
organic matter was edible. It was the sort of planet every explorer
dreams of finding, except for one thing.

It was inhabited by a sapient humanoid race, and some of them were
civilized enough to put it in Class V, and Colonial Office doctrine
on Class V planets was rigid. Friendly relations with the natives
had to be established, and permission to settle had to be guaranteed
in a treaty of some sort with somebody more or less authorized to
make one.

If Paul Meillard could accomplish that, he had it made. He would
stay on with forty or fifty of the ship's company to make
preparations. In a year a couple of ships would come out from Terra,
with a thousand colonists, and a battalion or so of Federation
troops, to protect them from the natives and vice versa. Meillard
would automatically be appointed governor-general.

But if he failed, he was through. Not out--just through. When he
got back to Terra, he would be promoted to some home office position
at slightly higher base pay but without the three hundred per cent
extraterrestrial bonus, and he would vegetate there till he retired.
Every time his name came up, somebody would say, "Oh, yes; he
flubbed the contact on Whatzit."

It wouldn't do the rest of them any good, either. There would
always be the suspicion that they had contributed to the failure.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Bwaaa-waaa-waaanh!_

The wavering sound hung for an instant in the air. A few seconds
later, it was repeated, then repeated again.

"Our cannon's a horn," Gofredo said. "I can't see how they're
blowing it, though."

There was a stir to right and left, among the Marines deployed
in a crescent line on either side of the contact team; a metallic
clatter as weapons were checked. A shadow fell in front of them
as a combat-car moved into position above.

"What do you suppose it means?" Meillard wondered.

"Terrans, go home." He drew a frown from Meillard with the
suggestion. "Maybe it's supposed to intimidate us."

"They're probably doing it to encourage themselves," Anna de Jong,
the psychologist, said. "I'll bet they're really scared stiff."

"I see how they're blowing it," Gofredo said. "The man who's walking
behind it has a hand-bellows." He raised his voice. "Fix bayonets!
These people don't know anything about rifles, but they know what
spears are. They have some of their own."

So they had. The six who walked in the lead were unarmed, unless
the thing one of them carried was a spear. So, it seemed, were the
horn-bearers. Behind them, however, in an open-order skirmish-line,
came fifty-odd with weapons. Most of them had spears, the points
glinting redly. Bronze, with a high copper content. A few had bows.
They came slowly; details became more plainly visible.

The leader wore a long yellow robe; the thing in his hand was a
bronze-headed staff. Three of his companions also wore robes; the
other two were bare-legged in short tunics. The horn-bearers wore
either robes or tunics; the spearmen and bowmen behind either wore
tunics or were naked except for breechclouts. All wore sandals. They
were red-brown in color, completely hairless; they had long necks,
almost chinless lower jaws, and fleshy, beaklike noses that gave
them an avian appearance which was heightened by red crests, like
roosters' combs, on the tops of their heads.

"Well, aren't they something to see?" Lillian Ransby, the linguist asked.

"I wonder how we look to them," Paul Meillard said.

That was something to wonder about, too. The differences between
one and another of the Terrans must puzzle them. Paul Meillard, as
close to being a pure Negro as anybody in the Seventh Century of
the Atomic Era was to being pure anything. Lillian Ransby, almost
ash-blond. Major Gofredo, barely over the minimum Service height
requirement; his name was Old Terran Spanish, but his ancestry
must have been Polynesian, Amerind and Mongolian. Karl Dorver,
the sociographer, six feet six, with red hair. Bennet Fayon,
the biologist and physiologist, plump, pink-faced and balding.
Willi Schallenmacher, with a bushy black beard....

They didn't have any ears, he noticed, and then he was taking stock
of the things they wore and carried. Belts, with pouches, and knives
with flat bronze blades and riveted handles. Three of the delegation
had small flutes hung by cords around their necks, and a fourth had
a reed Pan-pipe. No shields, and no swords; that was good. Swords
and shields mean organized warfare, possibly a warrior-caste. This
crowd weren't warriors. The spearmen and bowmen weren't arrayed for
battle, but for a drive-hunt, with the bows behind the spears to
stop anything that broke through the line.

"All right; let's go meet them." The querulous, uncertain note was
gone from Meillard's voice; he knew what to do and how to do it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gofredo called to the Marines to stand fast. Then they were
advancing to meet the natives, and when they were twenty feet apart,
both groups halted. The horn stopped blowing. The one in the yellow
robe lifted his staff and said something that sounded like,
"_Tweedle-eedle-oodly-eenk_."

The horn, he saw, was made of strips of leather, wound spirally
and coated with some kind of varnish. Everything these people had
was carefully and finely made. An old culture, but a static one.
Probably tradition-bound as all get-out.

Meillard was raising his hands; solemnly he addressed the natives:

"'Twas brillig and the slithy toves were whooping it up in the
Malemute Saloon, and the kid that handled the music box did gyre
and gimble in the wabe, and back of the bar in a solo game all
mimsy were the borogoves, and the mome raths outgabe the lady
that's known as Lou."

That was supposed to show them that we, too, have a spoken language,
to prove that their language and ours were mutually incomprehensible,
