Project Gutenberg's Theory of Circulation by Respiration, by Emma Willard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Theory of Circulation by Respiration
       Synopsis of its Principles and History

Author: Emma Willard

Release Date: August 15, 2006 [EBook #19053]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEORY OF CIRCULATION ***




Produced by Frank van Drogen, Laura Wisewell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)







                                 THEORY

                                   OF

                      CIRCULATION BY RESPIRATION.

                SYNOPSIS OF ITS PRINCIPLES AND HISTORY.


                          WRITTEN, BY REQUEST,
                 FOR THE "U. S. JOURNAL OF HOMOEOPATHY,"
                            BY EMMA WILLARD.


                               NEW-YORK:
    FRANCIS HART & CO. PRINTERS AND STATIONERS, 63 CORTLANDT STREET.
                                 1861.




                                 THEORY

                                   OF

                      CIRCULATION BY RESPIRATION.




SECTION I.

First step in the discovery--Animal Heat the product of Respiration.
    Second step--Heat evolved in the lungs by Respiration there produces
    Expansion. Third step--Expansion; implied motion, which from the
    organism must conduct the blood to the left ventricle of the Heart.
    Theory imperfect, until the formation of sufficient vapor or steam
    in the lungs is perceived and acknowledged.

TO DR. MARCY.--In complying with your request to write for your journal
an article embodying my theory of the motive powers which produce the
circulation of the blood, together with some account of its rise and
progress, I obey what I regard as a call of duty; and thus requested, do
it with pleasure.

But my theory, with its history, cannot thus be written without egotism.
Logicians say, that the way to convince others is to retrace, in order,
the steps by which you yourself became convinced, which is to be
egotistic. But in this case, there is a further reason: the scientific
discoverer must speak of the apparatus by which he experiments, and mine
was often my own physical frame.

Twenty years ago, while yet my mind, laboring with this great subject,
was condemned

                                "to drudge
    Without a second and without a judge,"

you, sir, comprehended the hypothesis which has now become a theory, and
you waited not for others to speak, but you fully acknowledged its
truth; and although, in Hartford, as now in New-York, you were thronged
with practice, (then allopathic), you yet found time to furnish me with
added experiments, made in your office, confirmatory of its truth, which
by your permission were afterwards added in your name to my published
work.

The first step in the theory occurred to my mind in the winter of 1822,
and while I was engaged in founding the Troy Female Seminary. Being in
attendance on a course of lectures on chemistry, and at the same time
teaching to a class Mrs. Marcett's excellent work on that subject, one
cold morning, as I was walking briskly up a hill, I said to myself, Why
do I grow warm? Whence comes this accession of caloric? It cannot be
transmitted to me from any object without, because every thing which
comes in contact with me is cold. Snow is under my feet, and frosty air
surrounds me; and, as to clothing, even the softest furs _impart_ no
warmth--they but keep from escaping that which comes from within. What
other method besides transmission is there of gaining heat? There is the
elimination of caloric, when, in substances chemically combining, weight
is gained and bulk is lost. Is there any such combination going on in
me? Yes; this atmospheric air, when I inspire it, has oxygen combined
with nitrogen; but when I expire, the oxygen has disappeared, and
heavier substances--carbonic acid gas and watery vapor--are returned in
its place. Thus, it must be, animal heat is evolved. It is the product
of respiration; and it is because I breathe faster and deeper, that more
carbon is oxidized or burned, and more heat is set free in my lungs; and
therefore I grow warm as I walk up this hill, though all around me is
cold.

The mind, excited by new and great thoughts, works with unwonted energy;
and mine at once collected so many proofs, that I became perfectly
convinced of the truth of the hypothesis. In searching books, I found
that Lavoisier had taught the same; but he dying, his doctrine was
discarded by English chemists, Dr. Black leading the way, and therefore
it did not then appear in English systems of chemistry. But from that
time, I cherished it with a mother's devotion, watched changes in my own
physical frame relating to it, taught it to my pupils, and held warm
disputes with the medical faculty, who opposed and contemned it.
