The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Revolt on Venus, by Carey Rockwell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Revolt on Venus

Author: Carey Rockwell

Illustrator: Louis Glanzman

Release Date: August 11, 2006 [EBook #19027]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REVOLT ON VENUS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







THE REVOLT ON VENUS

THE TOM CORBETT
SPACE CADET STORIES

By Carey Rockwell

STAND BY FOR MARS!
DANGER IN DEEP SPACE
ON THE TRAIL OF THE SPACE PIRATES
THE SPACE PIONEERS
THE REVOLT ON VENUS

[Illustration: Frontispiece]

A TOM CORBETT Space Cadet Adventure

THE REVOLT ON VENUS

By CAREY ROCKWELL

WILLY LEY _Technical Adviser_

GROSSET & DUNLAP _Publishers_ New York


COPYRIGHT, 1954, BY
ROCKHILL RADIO


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
ILLUSTRATIONS BY LOUIS GLANZMAN

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |
    |                      Transcriber's Note                      |
    |                                                              |
    |   The DP team has failed to uncover any evidence that the    |
    |             copyright on this work was renewed.              |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+




ILLUSTRATIONS


_Frontispiece_

"She tried to get farther into the cave"                 54

They were completely surrounded by the jungle            57

Astro kept his blaster aimed at the monsters            107

His eyes probed the jungle for further movement         115

"Mr. Sinclair!" cried Tom, suddenly relieved            161

The Solar Guard troops landed on the rim of the canyon  189

Sinclair wasn't able to get clear in time               210




THE REVOLT ON VENUS




CHAPTER 1


"Emergency air lock open!"

The tall, broad-shouldered officer, wearing the magnificent
black-and-gold uniform of the Solar Guard, spoke into a small microphone
and waited for an acknowledgment. It came almost immediately.

"Cadet Corbett ready for testing," a voice crackled thinly over the
loud-speaker.

"Very well. Proceed."

Seated in front of the scanner screen on the control deck of the rocket
cruiser _Polaris_, Captain Steve Strong replaced the microphone in its
slot and watched a bulky figure in a space suit step out of the air lock
and drift away from the side of the ship. Behind him, five boys, all
dressed in the vivid blue uniforms of the Space Cadet Corps, strained
forward to watch the lone figure adjust the nozzles of the jet unit on
the back of his space suit.

"Come on, Tom!" said the biggest of the five boys, his voice a low,
powerful rumble as he rooted for his unit mate.

"If Tom makes this one," crowed the cadet next to him, a slender boy
with a thick shock of close-cropped blond hair, "the _Polaris_ unit is
home free!"

"This is the last test, Manning," replied one of the remaining three
cadets, the insigne of the _Arcturus_ unit on the sleeve of his uniform.
"_If_ Corbett makes this one, you fellows deserve to win."

Aboard the rocket cruiser _Polaris_, blasting through the black void of
space two hundred miles above Earth, six Space Cadets and a Solar Guard
officer were conducting the final test for unit honors for the term. All
other Academy units had been eliminated in open competition. Now, the
results of the individual space orientation test would decide whether
the three cadets of the _Arcturus_ unit or the three cadets of the
_Polaris_ unit would win final top unit honors.

Roger Manning and Astro kept their eyes glued to the telescanner screen,
watching their unit mate, Tom Corbett, drift slowly through space toward
his starting position. The young cadet's task was basically simple; with
his space helmet blacked out so that he could not see in any direction,
he was to make his way back to the ship from a point a mile away, guided
only by the audio orders from the examining officer aboard the ship. His
score was measured by the time elapsed, and the amount of corrections
and orders given by the examining officer. It was an exercise designed
to test a cadet's steadiness under emergency conditions of space.

The three members of the _Arcturus_ unit had completed their runs and
had returned to the ship in excellent time. Roger and Astro had also
taken their tests and now it depended on Tom. If he could return to the
_Polaris_ in less than ten minutes, with no more than three corrections,
the _Polaris_ unit would be victorious.

Seated directly in front of the scanner, Captain Steve Strong, the
examining officer, watched the space-suited figure dwindle to a mere
speck on the screen. As the regular skipper of the _Polaris_ crew, he
could not help secretly rooting for Tom, but he was determined to be
fair, even to the extent of declaring the _Arcturus_ unit the winner,
should the decision be very close. He leaned forward to adjust the focus
on the scanner, bringing the drifting figure into a close-up view, and
then lifted the microphone to his lips.

"Stand by, Corbett!" he called. "You're getting close to range."

"Very well, sir," replied Tom. "Standing by."

Behind Strong, Roger and Astro looked at each other and turned back to
the screen. As one, they crossed the fingers of both hands.

"Ready, Corbett!" called Strong. "You'll be clocked from the second
you're on range. One hundred feet--seventy-five--fifty--twenty-five
--ten--_time_!"

As the signal echoed in his blacked-out space helmet, Tom jerked his
body around in a sudden violent move, and grasping the valve of the jet
unit on his back, he opened it halfway. He waited, holding his breath,
expecting to hear Captain Strong correct his course. He counted to ten
slowly, and when no correction came over the headphones, he opened the
valve wide and blindly shot through space.

Aboard the Polaris, Astro and Roger shouted with joy and Strong could
not repress a grin. The tiny figure on the scanner was hurtling straight
for the side of the _Polaris_!

As the image grew larger and larger, anxious eyes swiveled back and
forth from the scanner screen to the steady sweeping hand of the
chronometer. Roger bit his lip nervously, and Astro's hands trembled.

When Tom reached a point five hundred feet away from the ship, Strong
flipped open the audio circuit and issued his first order.

"Range five hundred feet," he called. "Cut jets!"

"You're already here, spaceboy!" yelled Roger into the mike, leaning
over Strong's shoulder. The captain silenced him with a glare. No one
could speak to the examinee but the testing officer.

Tom closed the valve of his jet unit and blindly jerked himself around
again to drift feet first toward the ship. Strong watched this approach
closely, silently admiring the effortless way the cadet handled himself
in weightless space. When Tom was fifty feet away from the ship, and
still traveling quite fast, Strong gave the second order to break his
speed. Tom opened the valve again and felt the tug of the jets braking
his acceleration. He drifted slower and slower, and realizing that he
was close to the hull of the ship, he stretched his legs, striving to
make contact. Seconds later he felt a heavy thump at the soles of his
feet, and within the ship there was the muffled clank of metal boot
weights hitting the metal skin of the hull.

"_Time!_" roared Strong and glanced at the astral chronometer over his
head. The boys crowded around as the Solar Guard captain quickly
computed Tom's score. "Nine minutes, fifty-one seconds, and two
corrections," he announced, unable to keep the pride out of his voice.

"We win! We win!" roared Roger. "Term honors go to the _Polaris_!"

Roger turned around and began pounding Astro on the chest, and the giant
Venusian picked him up and waltzed him around the deck. The three
members of the _Arcturus_ unit waited until the first flush of victory
died away and then crowded around the two boys to congratulate them.

"Don't forget the cadet who did it," commented Strong dryly, and the
five cadets rushed below to the jet-boat deck to wait for Tom.

When Tom emerged from the air lock a few moments later, Roger and Astro
swarmed all over him, and another wild dance began. Finally, shaking
free of his well-meaning but violent unit mates, he grinned and gasped,
"Well, from that reception, I guess I did it."

"Spaceboy"--Roger smiled--"you made the _Arcturus_ unit look like three
old men in a washtub counting toes!"

"Congratulations, Corbett," said Tony Richards of the _Arcturus_ crew,
offering his hand. "That was really fast maneuvering out there."

"Thanks, Tony." Tom grinned, running his hand through his brown curly
hair. "But I have to admit I was a little scared. Wow! What a creepy
feeling to know you're out in space alone and not able to see anything."

Their excitement was interrupted by Strong's voice over the ship's
intercom. "Stand by, all stations!"

"Here we go!" shouted Roger. "Back to the Academy--and leave!"

"_Yeeeeooooow!_" Astro's bull-like roar echoed through the ship as the
cadets hurried to their flight stations.

As command cadet of the _Polaris_, Tom climbed up to the control deck,
and strapping himself into the command pilot's seat, prepared to get
under way. Astro, the power-deck cadet who could "take apart a rocket
engine and put it back together again with his thumbs," thundered below
to the atomic rockets he loved more than anything else in the universe.
Roger Manning, the third member of the famed _Polaris_ unit, raced up
the narrow ladder leading to the radar bridge to take command of
astrogation and communications.

While Captain Strong and the members of the _Arcturus_ unit strapped
themselves into acceleration cushions, Tom conducted a routine check of
the many gauges on the great control panel before him. Satisfied, he
flipped open the intercom and called, "All stations, check in!"

"Radar deck, aye!" drawled Roger's lazy voice.

"Power deck, aye!" rumbled Astro.

"Energize the cooling pumps!" ordered Tom.

"Cooling pumps, aye!"

The whine of the mighty pumps was suddenly heard, moaning eerily
throughout the ship.

"Feed reactant!"

The sharp hiss of fuel being forced into the rocket engines rose above
the whine of the pumps, and the ship trembled.

"Stand by to blast," called Tom. "Standard space speed!"

Instantly the _Polaris_ shot toward Earth in a long, curving arc.
Moments later, when the huge round ball of the mother planet loomed
large on the scanner screen, Roger's voice reported over the intercom,
"Academy spaceport control gives us approach orbit 074 for touchdown on
Ramp Twelve, Tom."

"074 Ramp Twelve," repeated Tom. "Got it!"

"Twelve!" roared Astro suddenly over the intercom. "Couldn't you make it
closer to the Academy than that, Manning? We'll have to walk two miles
to the nearest slidewalk!"

"Too bad, Astro," retorted Roger, "but I guess if I had to carry around
as much useless muscle and bone as you do, I'd complain too!"

"I'm just not as lucky as you, Manning," snapped Astro quickly. "I don't
have all that space gas to float me around."

"Knock it off, fellows," interjected Tom firmly. "We're going into our
approach."

Lying on his acceleration cushion, Strong looked over at Tony Richards
of the _Arcturus_ unit and winked. Richards winked and smiled back.
"They never stop, do they, sir?"

"When they do," replied Strong, "I'll send all three of them to sick bay
for examination."

"Two hundred thousand feet to Earth's surface," called Tom. "Stand by
for landing operations."

As Tom adjusted the many controls on the complicated operations panel of
the ship, Roger and Astro followed his orders quickly and exactly. "Cut
main drive rockets and give me one-half thrust on forward braking
rockets!" ordered Tom, his eyes glued to the altimeter.

The _Polaris_ shuddered under the sudden reverse in power, then began an
upward curve, nose pointing back toward space. Tom barked another
command. "Braking rockets full! Stand by main drive rockets!"

The sleek ship began to settle tailfirst toward its destination--Space
Academy, U.S.A.

In the heart of a great expanse of cleared land in the western part of
the North American continent, the cluster of buildings that marked Space
Academy gleamed brightly in the noon sun. Towering over the green grassy
quadrangle of the Academy was the magnificent Tower of Galileo, built of
pure Titan crystal which gleamed like a gigantic diamond. With smaller
buildings, including the study halls, the nucleonics laboratory, the
cadet dormitories, mess halls, recreation halls, all connected by
rolling slidewalks--and to the north, the vast area of the spaceport
with its blast-pitted ramps--the Academy was the goal of every boy in
the year A.D. 2353, the age of the conquest of space.

Founded over a hundred years before, Space Academy trained the youth of
the Solar Alliance for service in the Solar Guard, the powerful force
created to protect the liberties of the planets. But from the beginning,
Academy standards were so high, requirements so strict, that not many
made it. Of the one thousand boys enrolled every year, it was expected
that only twenty-one of them would become officers, and of this group,
only seven would be command pilots. The great Solar Guard fleet that
patrolled the space lanes across the millions of miles between the
satellites and planets possessed the finest, yet most complicated,
equipment in the Alliance. To be an officer in the fleet required a
combination of skills and technical knowledge so demanding that eighty
per cent of the Solar Guard officers retired at the age of forty.

High over the spaceport, the three cadets of the _Polaris_ unit, happy
over the prospect of a full month of freedom, concentrated on the task
of landing the great ship on the Academy spaceport. Watching the
teleceiver screen that gave him a view of the spaceport astern of the
ship, Tom called into the intercom, "One thousand feet to touchdown. Cut
braking rockets. Main drive full!"

The thunderous blast of the rockets was his answer, building up into
roaring violence. Shuddering, the great cruiser eased to the ground foot
by foot, perfectly balanced on the fiery exhaust from her main tubes.

Seconds later the giant shock absorbers crunched on the ramp and Tom
closed the master switch cutting all power. He glanced at the astral
