The Project Gutenberg EBook of Code Three, by Rick Raphael

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Code Three

Author: Rick Raphael

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: August 24, 2006 [EBook #19111]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CODE THREE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact--Science Fiction,
  February 1963. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
  the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.



                              Code Three




                    The cars on high-speed highways
                    must follow each other like sheep.
                    And they need shepherds.
                    The highway police cruiser of tomorrow
                    however must be massively different--
                    as different as the highways themselves!



                           by Rick Raphael


                      Illustrated by Schoenherr

                           [Illustration]


       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]


The late afternoon sun hid behind gray banks of snow clouds and a cold
wind whipped loose leaves across the drill field in front of the
Philadelphia Barracks of the North American Continental Thruway
Patrol. There was the feel of snow in the air but the thermometer
hovered just at the freezing mark and the clouds could turn either
into icy rain or snow.

Patrol Sergeant Ben Martin stepped out of the door of the barracks and
shivered as a blast of wind hit him. He pulled up the zipper on his
loose blue uniform coveralls and paused to gauge the storm clouds
building up to the west.

The broad planes of his sunburned face turned into the driving cold
wind for a moment and then he looked back down at the weather report
secured to the top of a stack of papers on his clipboard.

Behind him, the door of the barracks was shouldered open by his junior
partner, Patrol Trooper Clay Ferguson. The young, tall Canadian
officer's arms were loaded with paper sacks and his patrol work helmet
dangled by its strap from the crook of his arm.

Clay turned and moved from the doorway into the wind. A sudden gust
swept around the corner of the building and a small sack perched atop
one of the larger bags in his arms blew to the ground and began
tumbling towards the drill field.

"Ben," he yelled, "grab the bag."

The sergeant lunged as the sack bounced by and made the retrieve. He
walked back to Ferguson and eyed the load of bags in the blond-haired
officer's arms.

"Just what is all this?" he inquired.

"Groceries," the youngster grinned. "Or to be more exact, little
gourmet items for our moments of gracious living."

Ferguson turned into the walk leading to the motor pool and Martin
swung into step beside him. "Want me to carry some of that junk?"

"Junk," Clay cried indignantly. "You keep your grimy paws off these
delicacies, peasant. You'll get yours in due time and perhaps it will
help Kelly and me to make a more polished product of you instead of
the clodlike cop you are today."

Martin chuckled. This patrol would mark the start of the second year
that he, Clay Ferguson and Medical-Surgical Officer Kelly Lightfoot
had been teamed together. After twenty-two patrols, cooped up in a
semiarmored vehicle with a man for ten days at a time, you got to know
him pretty well. And you either liked him or you hated his guts.

As senior officer, Martin had the right to reject or keep his partner
after their first eleven-month duty tour. Martin had elected to retain
the lanky Canadian. As soon as they had pulled into New York Barracks
at the end of their last patrol, he had made his decisions. After
eleven months and twenty-two patrols on the Continental Thruways, each
team had a thirty-day furlough coming.

Martin and Ferguson had headed for the city the minute they put their
signatures on the last of the stack of reports needed at the end of a
tour. Then, for five days and nights, they tied one on. MSO Kelly
Lightfoot had made a beeline for a Columbia Medical School seminar on
tissue regeneration. On the sixth day, Clay staggered out of bed,
swigged down a handful of antireaction pills, showered, shaved and
dressed and then waved good-by. Twenty minutes later he was aboard a
jet, heading for his parents' home in Edmonton, Alberta. Martin soloed
around the city for another week, then rented a car and raced up to
his sister's home in Burlington, Vermont, to play Uncle Bountiful to
Carol's three kids and to lap up as much as possible of his sister's
real cooking.

While the troopers and their med officer relaxed, a service crew moved
their car down to the Philadelphia motor pool for a full overhaul and
refitting for the next torturous eleven-month-tour of duty.

The two patrol troopers had reported into the Philadelphia Barracks
five days ago--Martin several pounds heavier courtesy of his sister's
cooking; Ferguson several pounds lighter courtesy of three assorted,
starry-eyed, uniform-struck Alberta maidens.

They turned into the gate of the motor pool and nodded to the sentry
at the gate. To their left, the vast shop buildings echoed to the
sound of body-banging equipment and roaring jet engines. The darkening
sky made the brilliant lights of the shop seem even brighter and the
hulls of a dozen patrol cars cast deep shadows around the work crews.

The troopers turned into the dispatcher's office and Clay carefully
placed the bags on a table beside the counter. Martin peered into one
of the bags. "Seriously, kid, what do you have in that grab bag?"

"Oh, just a few essentials," Clay replied "_Pate de foie gras_, sharp
cheese, a smidgen of cooking wine, a handful of spices. You know,
stuff like that. Like I said--essentials."

"Essentials," Martin snorted, "you give your brains to one of those
Alberta chicks of yours for a souvenir?"

"Look, Ben," Ferguson said earnestly, "I suffered for eleven months in
that tin mausoleum on tracks because of what you fondly like to think
is edible food. You've got as much culinary imagination as Beulah. I
take that back. Even Beulah turns out some better smells when she's
riding on high jet than you'll ever get out of her galley in the next
one hundred years. This tour, I intend to eat like a human being once
again. And I'll teach you how to boil water without burning it."

"Why you ungrateful young--" Martin yelped.

       *       *       *       *       *

The patrol dispatcher, who had been listening with amused tolerance,
leaned across the counter.

"If Oscar Waldorf is through with his culinary lecture, gentlemen," he
said, "perhaps you two could be persuaded to take a little pleasure
ride. It's a lovely night for a drive and it's just twenty-six hundred
miles to the next service station. If you two aren't cooking anything
at the moment, I know that NorCon would simply adore having the
services of two such distinguished Continental Commandos."

Ferguson flushed and Martin scowled at the dispatcher. "Very funny,
clown. I'll recommend you for trooper status one of these days."

"Not me," the dispatcher protested. "I'm a married man. You'll never
get me out on the road in one of those blood-and-gut factories."

"So quit sounding off to us heroes," Martin said, "and give us the
clearances."

The dispatcher opened a loose-leaf reference book on the counter and
then punched the first of a series of buttons on a panel. Behind him,
the wall lighted with a map of the eastern United States to the
Mississippi River. Ferguson and Martin had pencils out and poised over
their clipboards.

The dispatcher glanced at the order board across the room where patrol
car numbers and team names were displayed on an illuminated board.
"Car 56--Martin-Ferguson-Lightfoot," glowed with an amber light. In
the column to the right was the number "26-W." The dispatcher punched
another button. A broad belt of multi-colored lines representing the
eastern segment of North American Thruway 26 flashed onto the map in a
band extending from Philadelphia to St. Louis. The thruway went on to
Los Angeles in its western segment, not shown on the map. Ten bands of
color--each five separated by a narrow clear strip, detailed the
thruway. Martin and Ferguson were concerned with the northern five
bands; NAT 26-westbound. Other unlighted lines radiated out in
tangential spokes to the north and south along the length of the
multi-colored belt of NAT 26.

This was just one small segment of the Continental Thruway system that
spanned North America from coast to coast and crisscrossed north and
south under the Three Nation Road Compact from the southern tip of
Mexico into Canada and Alaska.

Each arterial cut a five-mile-wide path across the continent and from
one end to the other, the only structures along the roadways were the
turretlike NorCon Patrol check and relay stations--looming up at
one-hundred-mile intervals like the fire control islands of
earlier-day aircraft carriers.

Car 56 with Trooper Sergeant Ben Martin, Trooper Clay Ferguson and
Medical-Surgical Officer Kelly Lightfoot, would take their first
ten-day patrol on NAT 26-west. Barring major disaster, they would eat,
sleep and work the entire time from their car; out of sight of any but
distant cities until they had reached Los Angeles at the end of the
patrol. Then a five-day resupply and briefing period and back onto
another thruway.

During the coming patrol they would cross ten state lines as if they
didn't exist. And as far as thruway traffic control and authority was
concerned, state and national boundaries actually didn't exist. With
the growth of the old interstate highway system and the Alcan Highway
it became increasingly evident that variation in motor vehicle laws
from state to state and country to country were creating impossible
situations for any uniform safety control.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the establishment of the Continental Thruway System two decades
later, came the birth of the supra-cop--The North American Thruway
Patrol, known as NorCon. Within the five-mile bands of the
thruways--all federally-owned land by each of the three nations--the
blue-coveralled "Continental Commandos" of NorCon were the sole law
enforcement agency and authority. Violators of thruway law were cited
into NorCon district traffic courts located in the nearest city to
each access port along every thruway.

There was no challenge to the authority of NorCon. Public demand for
faster and more powerful vehicles had forced the automotive industry
to put more and more power under the touch of the ever-growing
millions of drivers crowding the continent's roads. Piston drive gave
way to turbojet; turbojet was boosted by a modification of ram jet and
air-cushion drive was added. In the last two years, the first of the
nuclear reaction mass engines had hit the roads. Even as the hot
Ferraris and Jags of the mid-'60s would have been suicide vehicles on
the T-model roads of the '20s so would today's vehicles be on the
interstates of the '60s. But building roads capable of handling three
hundred to four hundred miles an hour speeds was beyond the financial
and engineering capabilities of individual states and nations. Thus
grew the continental thruways with their four speed lanes in each
direction, each a half-mile wide separated east and west and north and
south by a half-mile-wide landscaped divider. Under the Three Nation
Compact, the thruways now wove a net across the entire North American
continent.

On the big wall map, NAT 26-west showed as four colored lines; blue
and yellow as the two high and ultra-high speed lanes; green and white
for the intermediate and slow lanes. Between the blue and yellow and
the white and green was a red band. This was the police emergency
lane, never used by other than official vehicles and crossed by the
traveling public shifting from one speed lane to another only at
sweeping crossovers.

The dispatcher picked up an electric pointer and aimed the light beam
at the map. Referring to his notes, he began to recite.

"Resurfacing crews working on 26-W blue at milestone Marker 185 to
Marker 187, estimated clearance 0300 hours Tuesday--Let's see, that's
tomorrow morning."

The two officers were writing the information down on their
trip-analysis sheets.
