The Project Gutenberg EBook of Four-Day Planet, by Henry Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Four-Day Planet

Author: Henry Beam Piper

Release Date: October 6, 2006 [EBook #19478]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOUR-DAY PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

       Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
       U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.
       The attribution is not a part of the original book.


                           Four-Day Planet


                           by H. Beam Piper




                                  SF
                              ace books
              A Division of Charter Communications Inc.
                      A GROSSET & DUNLAP COMPANY
                        360 Park Avenue South
                       New York, New York 10010



                  Copyright (C) 1961 by H. Beam Piper


                    _Cover art by Michael Whelan_

       *       *       *       *       *


DEDICATION

For Betty and Vall, with
loving remembrance

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS


 1.  The Ship from Terra

 2.  Reporter Working

 3.  Bottom Level

 4.  Main City Level

 5.  Meeting Out of Order

 6.  Elementary, My Dear Kivelson

 7.  Aboard the _Javelin_

 8.  Practice, 50-MM Gun

 9.  Monster Killing

10.  Mayday, Mayday

11.  Darkness and Cold

12.  Castaways Working

13.  The Beacon Light

14.  The Rescue

15.  Vigilantes

16.  Civil War Postponed

17.  Tallow-Wax Fire

18.  The Treason of Bish Ware

19.  Masks Off

20.  Finale

       *       *       *       *       *




Four-Day Planet

1

THE SHIP FROM TERRA


I went through the gateway, towing my equipment in a contragravity
hamper over my head. As usual, I was wondering what it would take,
short of a revolution, to get the city of Port Sandor as clean and
tidy and well lighted as the spaceport area. I knew Dad's editorials
and my sarcastic news stories wouldn't do it. We'd been trying long
enough.

The two girls in bikinis in front of me pushed on, still gabbling
about the fight one of them had had with her boy friend, and I closed
up behind the half dozen monster-hunters in long trousers, ankle boots
and short boat-jackets, with big knives on their belts. They must have
all been from the same crew, because they weren't arguing about whose
ship was fastest, had the toughest skipper, and made the most money.
They were talking about the price of tallow-wax, and they seemed to
have picked up a rumor that it was going to be cut another ten
centisols a pound. I eavesdropped shamelessly, but it was the same
rumor I'd picked up, myself, a little earlier.

"Hi, Walt," somebody behind me called out. "Looking for some news
that's fit to print?"

I turned my head. It was a man of about thirty-five with curly brown
hair and a wide grin. Adolf Lautier, the entertainment promoter. He
and Dad each owned a share in the Port Sandor telecast station, and
split their time between his music and drama-films and Dad's
newscasts.

"All the news is fit to print, and if it's news the _Times_ prints
it," I told him. "Think you're going to get some good thrillers this
time?"

He shrugged. I'd just asked that to make conversation; he never had
any way of knowing what sort of films would come in. The ones the
_Peenemuende_ was bringing should be fairly new, because she was
outbound from Terra. He'd go over what was aboard, and trade one for
one for the old films he'd shown already.

"They tell me there's a real Old-Terran-style Western been showing on
Voelund that ought to be coming our way this time," he said. "It was
filmed in South America, with real horses."

That would go over big here. Almost everybody thought horses were as
extinct as dinosaurs. I've seen so-called Westerns with the cowboys
riding Freyan _oukry_. I mentioned that, and then added:

"They'll think the old cattle towns like Dodge and Abilene were awful
sissy places, though."

"I suppose they were, compared to Port Sandor," Lautier said. "Are you
going aboard to interview the distinguished visitor?"

"Which one?" I asked. "Glenn Murell or Leo Belsher?"

Lautier called Leo Belsher something you won't find in the dictionary
but which nobody needs to look up. The hunters, ahead of us, heard
him and laughed. They couldn't possibly have agreed more. He was going
to continue with the fascinating subject of Mr. Leo Belsher's ancestry
and personal characteristics, and then bit it off short. I followed
his eyes, and saw old Professor Hartzenbosch, the principal of the
school, approaching.

"Ah, here you are, Mr. Lautier," he greeted. "I trust that I did not
keep you waiting." Then he saw me. "Why, it's Walter Boyd. How is your
father, Walter?"

I assured him as to Dad's health and inquired about his own, and then
asked him how things were going at school. As well as could be
expected, he told me, and I gathered that he kept his point of
expectation safely low. Then he wanted to know if I were going aboard
to interview Mr. Murell.

"Really, Walter, it is a wonderful thing that a famous author like Mr.
Murell should come here to write a book about our planet," he told me,
very seriously, and added, as an afterthought: "Have you any idea
where he intends staying while he is among us?"

"Why, yes," I admitted. "After the _Peenemuende_ radioed us their
passenger list, Dad talked to him by screen, and invited him to stay
with us. Mr. Murell accepted, at least until he can find quarters of
his own."

There are a lot of good poker players in Port Sandor, but Professor
Jan Hartzenbosch is not one of them. The look of disappointment would
have been comical if it hadn't been so utterly pathetic. He'd been
hoping to lasso Murell himself.

"I wonder if Mr. Murell could spare time to come to the school and
speak to the students," he said, after a moment.

"I'm sure he could. I'll mention it to him, Professor," I promised.

Professor Hartzenbosch bridled at that. The great author ought to be
coming to his school out of respect for him, not because a
seventeen-year-old cub reporter sent him. But then, Professor
Hartzenbosch always took the attitude that he was conferring a favor
on the _Times_ when he had anything he wanted publicity on.

The elevator door opened, and Lautier and the professor joined in the
push to get into it. I hung back, deciding to wait for the next one so
that I could get in first and get back to the rear, where my hamper
wouldn't be in people's way. After a while, it came back empty and I
got on, and when the crowd pushed off on the top level, I put my
hamper back on contragravity and towed it out into the outdoor air,
which by this time had gotten almost as cool as a bake-oven.

I looked up at the sky, where everybody else was looking. The
_Peenemuende_ wasn't visible; it was still a few thousand miles
off-planet. Big ragged clouds were still blowing in from the west,
very high, and the sunset was even brighter and redder than when I had
seen it last, ten hours before. It was now about 1630.

Now, before anybody starts asking just who's crazy, let me point out
that this is not on Terra, nor on Baldur nor Thor nor Odin nor Freya,
nor any other rational planet. This is Fenris, and on Fenris the
sunsets, like many other things, are somewhat peculiar.

Fenris is the second planet of a G_{4} star, six hundred and fifty
light-years to the Galactic southwest of the Sol System. Everything
else equal, it should have been pretty much Terra type; closer to a
cooler primary and getting about the same amount of radiation. At
least, that's what the book says. I was born on Fenris, and have never
been off it in the seventeen years since.

Everything else, however, is not equal. The Fenris year is a trifle
shorter than the Terran year we use for Atomic Era dating, eight
thousand and a few odd Galactic Standard hours. In that time, Fenris
makes almost exactly four axial rotations. This means that on one side
the sun is continuously in the sky for a thousand hours, pouring down
unceasing heat, while the other side is in shadow. You sleep eight
hours, and when you get up and go outside--in an insulated vehicle, or
an extreme-environment suit--you find that the shadows have moved only
an inch or so, and it's that much hotter. Finally, the sun crawls down
to the horizon and hangs there for a few days--periods of twenty-four
G.S. hours--and then slides slowly out of sight. Then, for about a
hundred hours, there is a beautiful unfading sunset, and it's really
pleasant outdoors. Then it gets darker and colder until, just before
sunrise, it gets almost cold enough to freeze CO_{2}. Then the sun
comes up, and we begin all over again.

You are picking up the impression, I trust, that as planets go, Fenris
is nobody's bargain. It isn't a real hell-planet, and spacemen haven't
made a swear word out of its name, as they have with the name of
fluorine-atmosphere Nifflheim, but even the Reverend Hiram Zilker, the
Orthodox-Monophysite preacher, admits that it's one of those planets
the Creator must have gotten a trifle absent-minded with.

The chartered company that colonized it, back at the end of the Fourth
Century A.E., went bankrupt in ten years, and it wouldn't have taken
that long if communication between Terra and Fenris hadn't been a
matter of six months each way. When the smash finally came, two
hundred and fifty thousand colonists were left stranded. They lost
everything they'd put into the company, which, for most of them, was
all they had. Not a few lost their lives before the Federation Space
Navy could get ships here to evacuate them.

But about a thousand, who were too poor to make a fresh start
elsewhere and too tough for Fenris to kill, refused evacuation, took
over all the equipment and installations the Fenris Company had
abandoned, and tried to make a living out of the planet. At least,
they stayed alive. There are now twenty-odd thousand of us, and while
we are still very poor, we are very tough, and we brag about it.

There were about two thousand people--ten per cent of the planetary
population--on the wide concrete promenade around the spaceport
landing pit. I came out among them and set down the hamper with my
telecast cameras and recorders, wishing, as usual, that I could find
some ten or twelve-year-old kid weak-minded enough to want to be a
reporter when he grew up, so that I could have an apprentice to help
me with my junk.

As the star--and only--reporter of the greatest--and only--paper on
the planet, I was always on hand when either of the two ships on the
Terra-Odin milk run, the _Peenemuende_ and the _Cape Canaveral_,
landed. Of course, we always talk to them by screen as soon as they
come out of hyperspace and into radio range, and get the passenger
list, and a speed-recording of any news they are carrying, from the
latest native uprising on Thor to the latest political scandal on
Venus. Sometime the natives of Thor won't be fighting anybody at all,
or the Federation Member Republic of Venus will have some
nonscandalous politics, and either will be the man-bites-dog story to
end man-bites-dog stories. All the news is at least six months old,
some more than a year. A spaceship can log a light-year in sixty-odd
hours, but radio waves still crawl along at the same old 186,000 mps.

I still have to meet the ships. There's always something that has to
be picked up personally, usually an interview with some VIP traveling
through. This time, though, the big story coming in on the
_Peenemuende_ was a local item. Paradox? Dad says there is no such
thing. He says a paradox is either a verbal contradiction, and you get
rid of it by restating it correctly, or it's a structural
contradiction, and you just call it an impossibility and let it go at
that. In this case, what was coming in was a real live author, who was
going to write a travel book about Fenris, the planet with the
four-day year. Glenn Murell, which sounded suspiciously like a nom de
plume, and nobody here had ever heard of him.

That was odd, too. One thing we can really be proud of here, besides
the toughness of our citizens, is our public library. When people have
to stay underground most of the time to avoid being fried and/or
frozen to death, they have a lot of time to kill, and reading is one
of the cheaper and more harmless and profitable ways of doing it. And
travel books are a special favorite here. I suppose because everybody
is hoping to read about a worse place than Fenris. I had checked on
Glenn Murell at the library. None of the librarians had ever heard of
him, and there wasn't a single mention of him in any of the big
catalogues of publications.

The first and obvious conclusion would be that Mr. Glenn Murell was
some swindler posing as an author. The only objection to that was that
I couldn't quite see why any swindler would come to Fenris, or what
he'd expect to swindle the Fenrisians out of. Of course, he could be
on the lam from somewhere, but in that case why bother with all the
cover story? Some of our better-known citizens came here dodging
warrants on other planets.

I was still wondering about Murell when somebody behind me greeted me,
and I turned around. It was Tom Kivelson.

Tom and I are buddies, when he's in port. He's just a shade older than
I am; he was eighteen around noon, and my eighteenth birthday won't
come till midnight, Fenris Standard Sundial Time. His father is Joe
