The Project Gutenberg EBook of Stop Look and Dig by George O. Smith



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: Stop Look and Dig

Author: George O. Smith

Release Date: November 29, 2006 [Ebook #19963]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STOP LOOK AND DIG***





Stop Look and Dig


by George O. Smith




Edition 1, (November 29, 2006)






STOP LOOK AND DIG


BY GEORGE O. SMITH

ILLUSTRATED BY SMITH


    The enlightened days of mental telepathy and ESP should have made
    the world a better place, But the minute the Rhine Institute
    opened up, all the crooks decided it was time to go collegiate!


Someone behind me in the dark was toting a needle-ray. The impression came
through so strong that I could almost read the filed-off serial number of
the thing, but the guy himself I couldn't dig at all. I stopped to look
back but the only sign of life I could see was the fast flick of taxicab
lights as they crossed an intersection about a half mile back. I stepped
into a doorway so that I could think and stay out of the line of fire at
the same time.

The impression of the needle-ray did not get any stronger, and that tipped
me off. The bird was following me. He was no peace-loving citizen because
honest men do not cart weapons with the serial numbers filed off.
Therefore the character tailing me was a hot papa with a burner charge
labelled "Steve Hammond" in his needler.

I concentrated, but the only impression I could get would have specified
ninety-eight men out of a hundred anywhere. He was shorter than my
six-feet-two and lighter than my one-ninety. I could guess that he was
better looking. I'd had my features arranged by a blocked drop kick the
year before the National Football League ruled the Rhine Institute out
because of our use of mentals and perceptives. I gave up trying--I wanted
details and not an overall picture of a hotbird carrying a burner.

I wondered if I could make a run for it.

I let my sense of perception dig the street ahead, casing every bump and
irregularity. I passed places where I could zig out to take cover in front
of telephone poles, and other places where I could zag in to take cover
beyond front steps and the like. I let my perception run up the block and
by the time I got to the end of my range, I knew that block just as well
as if I'd made a practise run in the daytime.

At this point I got a shock. The hot papa was coming up the sidewalk hell
bent for destruction. He was a mental sensitive, and he had been following
my thoughts while my sense of perception made its trial run up the street.
He was running like the devil to catch up with my mind and burn it down
per schedule. It must have come as quite a shock to him when he realized
that while the mind he was reading was running like hell up the street,
the hard old body was standing in the doorway waiting for him.

I dove out of my hiding place as he came close. I wanted to tackle him
hard and ask some pointed questions. He saw me as I saw him skidding to an
unbalanced stop, and there was the dull glint of metal in his right hand.
His needle-ray came swinging up and I went for my armpit. I found time to
curse my own stupidity for not having hardware in my own fist at the
moment. But then I had my rod in my fist. I felt the hot scorch of the
needle going off just over my shoulder, and then came the godawful racket
of my ancient forty-five. The big slug caught him high in the belly and
tossed him back. It folded him over and dropped him in the gutter while
the echoes of my cannon were still racketing back and forth up and down
the quiet street.



I had just enough time to dig his wallet, pockets, and billfold before the
whole neighborhood was up and out. Sirens howled in the distance and from
above I could hear the thin wail of a jetcopter. Someone opened a window
and called: "What's going on out there? Cut it out!"

                              [Illustration]

"Tea party," I called back. "Go invite the cops, Tommy."

The window slammed down again. He didn't have to invite the law. It
arrived in three ground cruisers and two jetcopter emergency squads that
came closing in like a collapsing balloon.

The leader of the squadron was a Lieutenant Williamson whom I'd never met
