The Project Gutenberg EBook of Space Viking, by Henry Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Space Viking

Author: Henry Beam Piper

Release Date: March 3, 2007 [EBook #20728]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPACE VIKING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, William Woods and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's note:
This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact--Science Fiction
November 1962, December 1962, January 1963, February 1963.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the copyright
on this publication was renewed.]


[Illustration: SPACE VIKING
A great new novel by H. Beam Piper]

[Illustration][Illustration]




Space Viking


            Vengeance is a strange human motivation--
                 it can drive a man to do things
     which he neither would nor could achieve without it ...
         and because of that it lies behind some of the
               greatest sagas of human literature!


by H. Beam Piper

Illustrated by Schoenherr

They stood together at the parapet, their arms about each other's
waists, her head against his cheek. Behind, the broad leaved
shrubbery gossiped softly with the wind, and from the lower main
terrace came music and laughing voices. The city of Wardshaven
spread in front of them, white buildings rising from the wide spaces
of green treetops, under a shimmer of sun-reflecting aircars above.
Far away, the mountains were violet in the afternoon haze, and the
huge red sun hung in a sky as yellow as a ripe peach.

His eye caught a twinkle ten miles to the southwest, and for an
instant he was puzzled. Then he frowned. The sunlight on the two
thousand-foot globe of Duke Angus' new ship, the _Enterprise_, back
at the Gorram shipyards after her final trial cruise. He didn't want
to think about that, now.

Instead, he pressed the girl closer and whispered her name, "Elaine,"
and then, caressing every syllable, "Lady Elaine Trask of Traskon."

"Oh, no, Lucas!" Her protest was half joking and half apprehensive.
"It's bad luck to be called by your married name before the wedding."

"I've been calling you that in my mind since the night of the Duke's
ball, when you were just home from school on Excalibur."

She looked up from the corner of her eye.

"That was when I started calling me that, too," she confessed.

"There's a terrace to the west at Traskon New House," he told her.
"Tomorrow, we'll have our dinner there, and watch the sunset together."

"I know. I thought that was to be our sunset-watching place."

"You have been peeking," he accused. "Traskon New House was to be
your surprise."

"I always was a present-peeker, New Year's and my birthdays. But I only
saw it from the air. I'll be very surprised at everything inside,"
she promised. "And very delighted."

And when she'd seen everything and Traskon New House wasn't a surprise
any more, they'd take a long space trip. He hadn't mentioned that to
her, yet. To some of the other Sword-Worlds--Excalibur, of course, and
Morglay and Flamberge and Durendal. No, not Durendal; the war had
started there again. But they'd have so much fun. And she would see
clear blue skies again, and stars at night. The cloud-veil hid the stars
from Gram, and Elaine had missed them, since coming home from Excalibur.

The shadow of an aircar fell briefly upon them and they looked up
and turned their heads, in time to see it sink with graceful dignity
toward the landing-stage of Karval House, and he glimpsed its
blazonry--sword and atom-symbol, the badge of the ducal house of
Ward. He wondered if it were Duke Angus himself, or just some of
his people come ahead of him. They should get back to their guests,
he supposed. Then he took her in his arms and kissed her, and she
responded ardently. It must have been all of five minutes since
they'd done that before.

       *       *       *       *       *

A slight cough behind them brought them apart and their heads
around. It was Sesar Karvall, gray-haired and portly, the breast of
his blue coat gleaming with orders and decorations and the sapphire
in the pommel of his dress-dagger twinkling.

"I thought I'd find you two here," Elaine's father smiled. "You'll
have tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow together, but need I remind
you that today we have guests, and more coming every minute."

"Who came in the Ward car?" Elaine asked.

"Rovard Grauffis. And Otto Harkaman; you never met him, did you, Lucas?"

"No; not by introduction. I'd like to, before he spaces out." He had
nothing against Harkaman personally; only against what he represented.
"Is the Duke coming?"

"Oh, surely. Lionel of Newhaven and the Lord of Northport are coming
with him. They're at the Palace now." Karvall hesitated. "His nephew's
back in town."

Elaine was distressed; she started to say: "Oh, dear! I hope he doesn't--"

"Has Dunnan been bothering Elaine again?"

"Nothing to take notice of. He was here, yesterday, demanding to
speak with her. We got him to leave without too much unpleasantness."

"It'll be something for me to take notice of, if he keeps it up
after tomorrow."

For his seconds and Andray Dunnan's, that was; he hoped it wouldn't
come to that. He didn't want to have to shoot a kinsman to the house
of Ward, and a crazy man to boot.

"I'm terribly sorry for him," Elaine was saying. "Father, you should
have let me talk to him. I might have made him understand."

Sesar Karvall was shocked. "Child, you couldn't have subjected
yourself to that! The man is insane!" Then he saw her bare
shoulders, and was even more shocked. "Elaine, your shawl!"

Her hands went up and couldn't find it; she looked about in confused
embarrassment. Amused, Lucas picked it from the shrub onto which she
had tossed it and draped it over her shoulders, his hands lingering
briefly. Then he gestured to the older man to precede them, and
they entered the arbored walk. At the other end, in an open circle,
a fountain played; white marble girls and boys bathing in the
jade-green basin. Another piece of loot from one of the Old Federation
planets; that was something he'd tried to avoid in furnishing
Traskon New House. There'd be a lot of that coming to Gram, after
Otto Harkaman took the _Enterprise_ to space.

"I'll have to come back, some time, and visit them," Elaine
whispered to him. "They'll miss me."

"You'll find a lot of new friends at your new home," he whispered
back. "You wait till tomorrow."

"I'm going to put a word in the Duke's ear about that fellow," Sesar
Karvall, still thinking of Dunnan, was saying. "If he speaks to him,
maybe it'll do some good."

"I doubt it. I don't think Duke Angus has any influence over him at all."

Dunnan's mother had been the Duke's younger sister; from his father
he had inherited what had originally been a prosperous barony. Now
it was mortgaged to the top of the manor-house aerial-mast. The Duke
had once assumed Dunnan's debts, and refused to do so again. Dunnan
had gone to space a few times, as a junior officer on trade-and-raid
voyages into the Old Federation. He was supposed to be a fair
astrogator. He had expected his uncle to give him command of the
_Enterprise_, which had been ridiculous. Disappointed in that,
he had recruited a mercenary company and was seeking military
employment: It was suspected that he was in correspondence with
his uncle's worst enemy, Duke Omfray of Glaspyth.

And he was obsessively in love with Elaine Karvall, a passion which
seemed to nourish itself on its own hopelessness. Maybe it would
be a good idea to take that space trip right away. There ought to
be a ship leaving Bigglersport for one of the other Sword-Worlds,
before long.

       *       *       *       *       *

They paused at the head of the escalators; the garden below was
thronged with guests, the bright shawls of the ladies and the coats
of the men making shifting color-patterns among the flower-beds and
on the lawns and under the trees. Serving-robots, flame-yellow and
black in the Karvall colors, floated about playing soft music and
offering refreshments. There was a continuous spiral of changing
costume-color around the circular robo-table. Voices babbled happily
like a mountain river.

As they stood looking down, another aircar circled low; green and
gold, lettered PANPLANET NEWS SERVICE. Sesar Karvall swore in
irritation.

"Didn't there use to be something they called privacy?" he asked.

"It's a big story, Sesar."

It was; more than the marriage of two people who happened to be in love
with each other. It was the marriage of the farming and ranching barony
of Traskon and the Karvall steel mills. More, it was public announcement
that the wealth and fighting-men of both baronies were now aligned
behind Duke Angus of Wardshaven. So it was a general holiday. Every
industry had closed down at noon today, and would be closed until
morning-after-next, and there would be dancing in every park and
feasting in every tavern. To Sword-Worlders, any excuse for a holiday
was better than none.

"They're our people, Sesar; they have a right to have a good time
with us. I know everybody at Traskon is watching this by screen."

He raised his hand and waved to the news car, and when it swung
its pickup around, he waved again. Then they went down the long
escalator.

Lady Lavina Karvall was the center of a cluster of matrons and
dowagers, around which tomorrow's bridesmaids fluttered like
many-colored butterflies. She took possession of her daughter
and dragged her into the feminine circle. He saw Rovard Grauffis,
small and saturnine, Duke Angus' henchman, and Burt Sandrasan,
Lady Lavina's brother. They spoke, and then an upper-servant,
his tabard blazoned with the yellow flame and black hammer of
Karvall mills, approached his master with some tale of domestic
crisis, and the two went away together.

"You haven't met Captain Harkaman, Lucas," Rovard Grauffis said.
"I wish you'd come over and say hello and have a drink with him.
I know your attitude, but he's a good sort. Personally, I wish
we had a few like him around here."

That was his main objection. There were fewer and fewer men of
that sort on any of the Sword-Worlds.




II


A dozen men clustered around the bartending robot--his cousin
and family lawyer, Nikkolay Trask; Lothar Ffayle, the banker;
Alex Gorram, the shipbuilder, and his son Basil; Baron Rathmore;
more of the Wardshaven nobles whom he knew only distantly.
And Otto Harkaman.

Harkaman was a Space Viking. That would have set him apart, even
if he hadn't topped the tallest of them by a head. He wore a short
black jacket, heavily gold-braided, and black trousers inside
ankle-boots; the dagger on his belt was no mere dress-ornament. His
tousled red-brown hair was long enough to furnish extra padding in
a combat-helmet, and his beard was cut square at the bottom.

He had been fighting on Durendal, for one of the branches of the
royal house contesting fratricidally for the throne. The wrong one;
he had lost his ship, and most of his men and, almost, his own life.
He had been a penniless refugee on Flamberge, owning only the
clothes he stood in and his personal weapons and the loyalty of
half a dozen adventurers as penniless as himself, when Duke Angus
had invited him to Gram to command the _Enterprise_.

"A pleasure, Lord Trask. I've met your lovely bride-to-be, and
now that I meet you, let me congratulate both." Then, as they
were having a drink together, he put his foot in it by asking:
"You're not an investor in the Tanith Adventure, are you?"

He said he wasn't, and would have let it go at that. Young Basil
Gorram had to get his foot in, too.

"Lord Trask does not approve of the Tanith Adventure," he said
scornfully. "He thinks we should stay home and produce wealth,
instead of exporting robbery and murder to the Old Federation
for it."

The smile remained on Otto Harkaman's face; only the friendliness
was gone. He unobtrusively shifted his drink to his left hand.

"Well, our operations are definable as robbery and murder," he
agreed. "Space Vikings are professional robbers and murderers.
And you object? Perhaps you find me personally objectionable?"

"I wouldn't have shaken your hand or had a drink with you if I did.
I don't care how many planets you raid or cities you sack, or how
many innocents, if that's what they are, you massacre in the Old
Federation. You couldn't possibly do anything worse than those
people have been doing to one another for the past ten centuries.
What I object to is the way you're raiding the Sword-Worlds."

"You're crazy!" Basil Gorram exploded.

"Young man," Harkaman reproved, "the conversation was between Lord
Trask and myself. And when somebody makes a statement you don't
understand, don't tell him he's crazy. Ask him what he means.
What _do_ you mean, Lord Trask?"

"You should know; you've just raided Gram for eight hundred of our
best men. You raided me for close to forty vaqueros, farm-workers,
lumbermen, machine-operators, and I doubt I'll be able to replace
them with as good." He turned to the elder Gorram. "Alex, how many
have you lost to Captain Harkaman?"

Gorram tried to make it a dozen; pressed, he admitted to a score and
a half. Roboticians, machine-supervisors, programmers, a couple of
engineers, a foreman. There was grudging agreement from the others.
Burt Sandrasan's engine-works had lost almost as many, of the same
kind. Even Lothar Ffayle admitted to losing a computerman and
a guard-sergeant.

And after they were gone, the farms and ranches and factories would
go on, almost but not quite as before. Nothing on Gram, nothing on
any of the Sword-Worlds, was done as efficiently as three centuries
ago. The whole level of Sword-World life was sinking, like the east
coastline of this continent, so slowly as to be evident only from
the records and monuments of the past. He said as much, and added:

"And the genetic loss. The best Sword-World genes are literally
escaping to space, like the atmosphere of a low-gravity planet,
each generation begotten by fathers slightly inferior to the last.
It wasn't so bad when the Space Vikings raided directly from the
Sword-Worlds; they got home once in a while. Now they're conquering
planets in the Old Federation for bases, and staying there."

       *       *       *       *       *

Everybody had begun to relax; this wouldn't be a quarrel. Harkaman,
who had shifted his drink back to his right hand, chuckled.

"That's right. I've fathered my share of brats in the Old
Federation, and I know Space Vikings whose fathers were born on
Old Federation planets." He turned to Basil Gorram. "You see, the
gentleman isn't crazy, at all. That's what happened to the Terran
Federation, by the way. The good men all left to colonize, and the
stuffed shirts and yes-men and herd-followers and safety-firsters
stayed on Terra and tried to govern the galaxy."

"Well, maybe this is all new to you, captain," Rovard Grauffis
said sourly, "but Lucas Trask's dirge for the Decline and Fall
of the Sword-Worlds is an old song to the rest of us. I have
too much to do to stay here and argue."

Lothar Ffayle evidently did intend to stay and argue.

"All you're saying, Lucas, is that we're expanding. You want us
to sit here and build up population pressure like Terra in the
First Century?"

"With three and a half billion people spread out on twelve planets?
They had that many on Terra alone. And it took us eight centuries
to reach that."

That had been since the Ninth Century, Atomic Era, at the end of
the Big War. Ten thousand men and women on Abigor, refusing to
surrender, had taken the remnant of the System States Alliance navy
to space, seeking a world the Federation had never heard of and
wouldn't find for a long time. That had been the world they had
called Excalibur. From it, their grandchildren had colonized Joyeuse
and Durendal and Flamberge; Haulteclere had been colonized in the
next generation from Joyeuse, and Gram from Haulteclere.

"We're not expanding, Lothar; we're contracting. We stopped
expanding three hundred and fifty years ago, when that ship came
back to Morglay from the Old Federation and reported what had
been happening out there since the Big War. Before that, we were
discovering new planets and colonizing them. Since then, we've
been picking the bones of the dead Terran Federation."

       *       *       *       *       *

Something was going on by the escalators to the landing stage.
People were moving excitedly in that direction, and the news cars
were circling like vultures over a sick cow. Harkaman wondered,
hopefully, if it mightn't be a fight.

"Some drunk being bounced." Nikkolay, Lucas' cousin, commented.
"Sesar's let all Wardshaven in here, today. But, Lucas, this Tanith
adventure; we're not making any hit-and-run raid. We're taking over
a whole planet; it'll be another Sword-World in forty or fifty
years."

[Illustration]

"Inside another century, we'll conquer the whole Federation," Baron
Rathmore declared. He was a politician and never let exaggeration
worry him.

"What I don't understand," Harkaman said, "is why you support Duke
Angus, Lord Trask, if you think the Tanith adventure is doing Gram
so much harm."

[Illustration]

"If Angus didn't do it, somebody else would. But Angus is going to
make himself King of Gram, and I don't think anybody else could do
that. This planet needs a single sovereignty. I don't know how much
you've seen of it outside this duchy, but don't take Wardshaven as
typical. Some of these duchies, like Glaspyth or Didreksburg, are
literal snake pits. All the major barons are at each other's
throats, and they can't even keep their own knights and petty-barons
in order. Why, there's a miserable little war down in Southmain
Continent that's been going on for over two centuries."

"That's probably where Dunnan's going to take that army of his,"
a robot-manufacturing baron said. "I hope it gets wiped out, and
Dunnan with it."

"You don't have to go to Southmain; just go to Glaspyth," somebody
else said.

