The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ten From Infinity, by Paul W. Fairman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ten From Infinity

Author: Paul W. Fairman

Release Date: March 20, 2007 [EBook #20856]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEN FROM INFINITY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Janet Blenkinship and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







SOMETHING WAS WRONG


It began when a pedestrian got hit by a cab in New York City. No doubt
it was the only motor mishap in the history of creation that reached out
among the stars--for far out in space a signal was registered:
_Something has gone wrong...._

And something had gone wrong, for the doctors discovered their accident
patient had _two_ hearts. It was the beginning of the discovery that the
Earth had been invaded by 10 such creatures from Outer Space.

Every effort was made to learn their purpose. An orbital flight was
launched to spot alien bodies--only to be destroyed in space. One of the
alien men was captured--but no threat of pain or death could unlock the
secret in his brain.

Something had gone wrong. And somehow, some way had to be found to make
it right--before the threat of danger overwhelmed all mankind.


AUTHOR'S PROFILE

Ivar Jorgensen is the pen name of a former topflight magazine editor who
is now devoting his full time to free-lance writing.

He was born in St. Louis and spent most of his early years in the
Midwest. Before getting into the publishing field he held a number of
jobs, including those of elevator operator and theater usher.

Mr. Jorgensen has written numerous science-fiction short stories as well
as several contemporary and suspense novels. TEN FROM INFINITY is his
first full-length science-fiction novel.


       *       *       *       *       *


_A Science-Fiction Novel_

TEN FROM INFINITY

Ivar Jorgensen

Cover Painting by Ralph Brillhart




A Monarch Books Science-Fiction Novel
Published in January, 1963
Copyright (C) 1963 by Ivar Jorgensen

Monarch Books are published by MONARCH BOOKS, INC., Capital Building,
Derby, Connecticut, and represent the works of outstanding novelists and
writers of non-fiction especially chosen for their literary merit and
reading entertainment.

Printed in the United States of America
All Rights Reserved


       *       *       *       *       *



1


It began when a pedestrian got hit by a cab at the corner of 59th Street
and Park Avenue, Manhattan, New York City, U.S.A. No doubt it was the
first motor mishap in the history of creation that reached out among the
stars.

The pedestrian was walking south on Park Avenue, toward Grand Central
Station. He was looking at the upper skeleton of the vast new Pan Am
Building which blocked out the sky in that direction. But he should have
been watching traffic because a yellow cab tagged him neatly and knocked
him across the walk into a clump of pigeons that scattered upward in all
directions.

The cab driver swore. Citizenry gathered. An alert free-lance news
photographer who happened to be passing took the most important shot of
his career. After a while, the ambulance came and the dazed pedestrian
was pointed toward the nearest emergency ward, which happened to be in
the Park Hill Hospital.

The pigeons settled back. The curious went their different ways.

And far out in space, among the yellow pinpoints we call stars, a signal
was registered. The signal was of grave import to those who received it.

The signal said, _Something has gone wrong._

       *       *       *       *       *

From the springboard of this incident, there emerged several occurrences
of note. The first in sequence took place in the Park Hill Hospital. The
time of that particular ambulance's arrival was 11:15 P.M. At
that hour the harvest of violence in Manhattan was being delivered to
its logical granaries in the form of broken heads, slashed bodies, and
dazed, shock-strained eyes. The examining rooms at Park Hill were full,
and some cases of lesser import were waiting on stretchers and benches
in the corridors.

That was where the pedestrian waited. Unlike others, he was very
patient. He seemed to understand that this sort of thing took time; or
perhaps he didn't. At any rate, he lay staring up at the ceiling,
unmoving, seemingly uncaring, until an intern named Frank Corson stopped
beside his stretcher and looked down at him in moody-eyed weariness.
Then Corson managed a smile.

"Sorry about the service, mister. Full house tonight."

"That's quite all--right."

Corson touched the broken leg. "I can give you a shot if the pain's
hitting too hard."

"It does not--pain."

"Stout fellow." Frank Corson probed with fingers that were growing more
expert day by day. "Good clean break. Not swelling, either." He touched
the patient's wrist, then put a stethoscope to his chest.

Actually, he was thinking of a different chest and different legs at the
time--the ones belonging to a copper-haired girl named Rhoda Kane.
Rhoda's legs were far more alluring. Her chest had added equipment that
was a haven of rest under trying circumstances, and Corson yearned for
midnight when he would quit this charnel house and climb into Rhoda's
convertible and--perhaps later--do a little chest analysis without
benefit of stethoscope.

Now he sighed, commandeered a passing orderly, and went to work.

Twenty minutes later he saw his patient deposited in a ten-bed ward. He
transcribed his data onto the clipboard at the foot of the bed, and
looked guiltily into the hall to see how things were going. He felt
guilty because he was tempted to dog it. And he did. He headed for the
locker room where he punched a cup of coffee out of the machine and
thought some more about Rhoda's legs.

Fifteen minutes later, Corson climbed into the convertible and leaned
over and kissed Rhoda Kane. "Hi, baby. You smell wonderful."

"You smell of disinfectant, darling." She wore a yellow print dress that
exposed a lot of healthily tanned skin. "Did you have a rough day?"

He leaned back against the seat and pushed his legs as far under the
dashboard as possible. He sighed and closed his eyes. But then he opened
them again and his face went blank.

She waited a few more moments and then said, "Honey--I'm here. Little
Rhoda. Remember me?"

The vague, thoughtful look vanished as he jerked his head around. "Oh,
sure--sure, baby." He grinned. "A rough one. If I'd known doctoring was
like this I'd have been a nice prosperous butcher."

"Do you want to drive?"

"No, you drive. I'll sit here and look at your beautiful profile."

They drove to Rhoda's apartment--Frank couldn't afford one--and he put
Rhoda at one end of the sofa and stretched out with his head in her lap.
He unbuttoned her blouse, put a hand over her breast, and teased the
nipple.

"Mr. Corson, you're a wolf."

"Kiss me."

"Well, I don't know," she teased.

He pulled her head down and she murmured, "Oh, darling...."

But he let go of her in the middle of the kiss and, when she
straightened, the blank, thoughtful look was back on his face.

"Frank--what is it?"

The look stayed. "I don't know."

"Something's bothering you."

"It seems to be. But I don't know what it is."

"Did it happen at the hospital?"

He frowned. "I guess it must have. It's been bugging me since--"

Rhoda showed concern. "Did it have to do with a patient?"

"Patients are all I work with. Let's see--" He stopped and his frown
deepened. "It was that damned accident case. Broken leg. I set it and
put him in ward five. I--"

His frown deepened as he sat up. "Uh-huh. It was that damned pulse.
That's it. There was something wrong. That pulse was even and steady
but, Goddamn it, something was wrong!" He got to his feet. "Baby--I've
got to go back to Park Hill."

"Do you want to take the car or shall I drive you?"

"You drive," he said absently as he got up from the sofa and reached for
his necktie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank hurried in through the emergency entrance and went to the
admissions desk. A kindly, gray-haired nurse was working with papers and
she dug deep into the pile in response to Frank's query.

"We didn't find much on him. An identification card with the name
William Matson. Nothing else except a wallet initialed W. M. containing
thirty-six dollars in cash."

"_Nothing_ else?"

The gray-haired nurse shook her head. "No social security number, no
driver's license, no home or business address."

"Damned odd, don't you think?"

"Not at Park Hill. We get them in here without a blessed thing but their
clothing. In fact, two weeks ago the boys picked up a stark-naked blonde
out of a car crash on East River Drive."

Frank grinned automatically, but the grin fell from his face like a mask
the moment he turned from the desk. He went through the locker room and
got his stethoscope on the way to Ward Five.

The patient known to the hospital as William Matson lay quietly on his
back, staring at the ceiling. Frank checked the clipboard. There were no
notations but his own. He went around the bed and stood looking down at
the patient.

"Feeling better?"

"I feel all--right."

_There's some sort of a speech block here_, Frank thought as he bent
over and lowered the sheet. "I'm just doing a little checking," he said
casually. "No cause for alarm."

"I am not--alarmed."

Corson frowned slightly as he concentrated on his work. He went over the
patient's torso, up and down, back and forth. At times he straightened
to rest his back and stared down into the calm, expressionless face on
the pillow.

Twenty minutes passed, during which time Frank Corson checked and
rechecked every inch of the man's torso. When he finished, he slowly
folded his stethoscope and pulled the sheet back into place. He stared
at the patient for a full minute without bringing the slightest change
in the empty expression.

"Sleep well," he said, and walked slowly away.

Back in the street, five minutes later, he dropped into the seat beside
Rhoda. She eyed him questioningly and when he did not respond, she
asked, "Everything all right?"

"I don't know. I guess so."

"What do you mean--guess so? It is or it isn't."

"There was something about a patient's heartbeat. I passed it over on
the first examination, but it stuck in my mind. That's why I had to go
back."

"And ...?"

"He's got two hearts."

"He's _what_?"

"He's got two hearts, my beautiful love. One in his chest, where it
ought to be, and one in the center of his lower abdomen."

"You're--you're kidding."

"No, darling," Frank Corson said dreamily. "On this night of nights I
found a man who is pretty rare indeed. A man with two healthy,
functioning hearts."

"All right," Rhoda asked wonderingly. "What do we do about it?"

"We go home for the time being, baby--to your nice, private, wonderful
apartment."

"And ...?"

"We make love," he said absently.

       *       *       *       *       *

Les King, the free-lance news photographer, surveyed his night's work
and was not happy. It had been singularly unproductive. A couple of
sneak necking shots he'd snapped during a stroll through Central Park
had come through a little too pornographic to be of value. Les threw
them into the wastebasket. A shot of a man leaning out of a
