The Project Gutenberg EBook of Legacy, by James H Schmitz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Legacy

Author: James H Schmitz

Release Date: May 17, 2007 [EBook #21510]
[Last updated: December 15, 2013]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEGACY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Joel Schlosberg and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's note:

Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the United States
copyright on this publication was renewed.




LEGACY

BY JAMES H. SCHMITZ


AUTHOR OF _THE WITCHES OF KARRES_

(ORIG. TITLE: A TALE OF TWO CLOCKS)




MEET TRIGGER ARGEE....


Half a block from the shopping center, a row of spacers on planet-leave
came rollicking cheerily toward her.... Trigger shifted toward the edge
of the sidewalk to let them pass. As the line swayed up on her left,
there was a shadowy settling of an aircar at the curb to her right.

With loud outcries of glad recognition and whoops of laughter, the line
swung in about her, close. Bodies crowded against her, a hand was
clapped over her mouth. Other hands held her arms. Her feet came off the
ground and she had a momentary awareness of being rushed expertly
forward.

There was a lurching twist as the aircar shot upward.


SHE'S ABOUT TO ENTER THE MYSTERY OF HER LIFE, IN

Legacy


       *       *       *       *       *


_Also by James H. Schmitz_

THE DEMON BREED
THE UNIVERSE AGAINST HER


ACE
SCIENCE
FICTION


       *       *       *       *       *


Legacy

JAMES H. SCHMITZ


SF

ace books

A Division of Charter Communications Inc.
A GROSSET & DUNLAP COMPANY
360 Park Avenue South
New York, New York 10010




LEGACY


Originally published as
A TALE OF TWO CLOCKS


An ACE Book


_Cover art by Bob Adragna_


First Ace printing: May 1979


Printed in U.S.A




       *       *       *       *       *


This book is dedicated affectionately
to my father


       *       *       *       *       *




1


It was the time of sunrise in Ceyce, the White City, placidly beautiful
capital of Maccadon, the University World of the Hub.

In the Colonial School's sprawling five-mile complex of buildings and
tropical parks, the second student shift was headed for breakfast, while
a larger part of the fourth shift moved at a more leisurely rate toward
their bunks. The school's organized activities were not much affected by
the hour, but the big exercise quadrangle was almost deserted for once.
Behind the railing of the firing range a young woman stood by herself,
gun in hand, waiting for the automatic range monitor to select a new
string of targets for release.

She was around twenty-four, slim and trim in the school's comfortable
hiking outfit. Tan shirt and knee-length shorts, knee stockings,
soft-soled shoes. Her sun hat hung on the railing, and the dawn wind
whipped strands of shoulder-length, modishly white-silver hair along her
cheeks. She held a small, beautifully worked handgun loosely beside
her--the twin-barrelled sporting Denton which gunwise citizens of the
Hub rated as a weapon for the precisionist and expert only. In
institutions like the Colonial School it wasn't often seen.

At the exact instant the monitor released its new flight of targets, she
became aware of the aircar gliding down toward her from the
administration buildings on the right. Startled, she glanced sideways
long enough to identify the car's two occupants, shifted her attention
back to the cluster of targets speeding toward her, studied the flight
pattern for another unhurried half-second, finally raised the Denton.
The little gun spat its noiseless, invisible needle of destruction eight
times. Six small puffs of crimson smoke hung in the air. The two
remaining targets swerved up in a mocking curve and shot back to their
discharge huts.

The girl bit her lip in moderate annoyance, safetied and holstered the
gun and waved her hand left-right at the range attendant to indicate she
was finished. Then she turned to face the aircar as it settled slowly to
the ground twenty feet away. Her gray eyes studied its occupants
critically.

"Fine example you set the students!" she remarked. "Flying right into a
hot gun range!"

Doctor Plemponi, principal of the Colonial School, smiled soothingly.
"Eight years ago, your father bawled me out for the very same thing,
Trigger! Much more abusively, I must say. You know that was my first
meeting with old Runser Argee, and I--"

"Plemp!" Mihul, Chief of Physical Conditioning, Women's Division,
cautioned sharply from the seat behind him. "Watch what you're doing,
you ass!"

Confused, Doctor Plemponi turned to look at her. The aircar dropped the
last four feet to a jolting landing. Mihul groaned. Plemponi apologized.
Trigger walked over to them.

"Does he do that often?" she asked interestedly.

"Every other time!" Mihul asserted. She was a tall, lean, muscular slab
of a woman, around forty. She gave Trigger a wink behind Plemponi's
back. "We keep the chiropractors on stand-by duty when we go riding with
Plemp."

"Now then! Now then!" Doctor Plemponi said. "You distracted my attention
for a moment, that's all. Now, Trigger, the reason we're here is that
Mihul told me at our prebreakfast conference you weren't entirely happy
at the good old Colonial School. So climb in, if you don't have much
else to do, and we'll run up to the office and discuss it." He opened
the door for her.

"Much else to do!" Trigger gave him a look. "All right, Doctor. We'll
run up and discuss it."

She went back for her sun hat, climbed in, closed the door and sat down
beside him, shoving the holstered Denton forward on her thigh.

Plemponi eyed the gun dubiously. "Brushing up in case there's another
grabber raid?" he inquired. He reached out for the guide stick.

Trigger shook her head. "Just working off hostility, I guess." She
waited till he had lifted the car off the ground in a reckless swoop.
"That business yesterday--it really was a grabber raid?"

"We're almost sure it was," Mihul said behind her, "though I did hear
some talk they might have been after those two top-secret plasmoids in
your Project."

"_That's_ not very likely," Trigger remarked. "The raiders were a half
mile away from where they should have come down if the plasmoids were
what they wanted. And from what I saw of them, they weren't nearly a big
enough gang for a job of that kind."

"I thought so, too," Mihul said. "They were topflight professionals, in
any case. I got a glimpse of some of their equipment. Knockout
guns--foggers--and that was a fast car!"

"Very fast car," Trigger agreed. "It's what made me suspicious when I
first saw them come in."

"They also," said Mihul, "had a high-speed interplanetary hopper waiting
for them in the hills. Two more men in it. The cops caught them, too."
She added, "They were grabbers, all right!"

"Anything to indicate whom they were after?" Trigger asked.

"No," Mihul said. "Too many possibilities. Twenty or more of the
students in that area at the time had important enough connections to
class as grabber bait. The cops won't talk except to admit they were
tipped off about the raid. Which was obvious. The way they popped up out
of nowhere and closed in on those boys was a beautiful sight to see!"

"I," Trigger admitted, "didn't see it. When that car homed in, I yelled
a warning to the nearest bunch of students and dropped flat behind a
rock. By the time I risked a look, the cops had them."

"You showed very good sense," Plemponi told her earnestly. "I hope they
burn those thugs! Grabbing's a filthy business."

"That large object coming straight at you," Mihul observed calmly, "is
another aircar. In this lane it has the right of way. You do not have
the right of way. Got all that, Plemp?"

"Are you sure?" Doctor Plemponi asked her bewilderedly. "Confound it! I
shall blow my siren."

He did. Trigger winced. "There!" Plemponi said triumphantly as the other
driver veered off in fright.

Trigger told herself to relax. Aircars were so nearly accident-proof
that even Plemponi couldn't do more than snarl up traffic in one. "Have
there been other raids in the school area since I left?" she asked, as
he shot up out of the quadrangle and turned toward the balcony of his
office.

"That was just under four years ago, wasn't it?" Mihul said. "No, you
were still with us when we had the last one.... Six years back.
Remember?"

Trigger did. Two students had been picked up on that occasion--sons of
some Federation official. The grabbers had made a clean getaway, and it
had been several months later before she heard the boys had been
redeemed safely.

Plemponi descended to a teetery but gentle landing on the office
balcony. He gave Trigger a self-satisfied look. "See?" he said tersely.
"Let's go in, ladies. Had breakfast yet, Trigger?"

Trigger had finished breakfast a half-hour earlier, but she accepted a
cup of coffee. Mihul, all athlete, declined. She went over to Plemponi's
desk and stood leaning against it, arms folded across her chest, calm
blue eyes fixed thoughtfully on Trigger. With her lithe length of body,
Mihul sometimes reminded Trigger of a ferret, but the tanned face was a
pleasant one and there was humor around the mouth. Even in Trigger's
pregraduate days, she and Mihul had been good friends.

Doctor Plemponi removed a crammed breakfast tray from a wall chef, took
a chair across from Trigger, sat down with the tray on his knees,
excused himself, and began to eat and talk simultaneously.

"Before we go into that very reasonable complaint you made to Mihul
yesterday," he said, "I wish you'd let me point out a few things."

Trigger nodded. "Please do."

"You, Trigger," Plemponi told her, "are an honored guest here at the
Colonial School. You're the daughter of our late friend and colleague
Runser Argee. You were one of our star pupils--not just as a small-arms
medallist either. And now you're the secretary and assistant of the
famous Precolonial Commissioner Holati Tate--which makes you almost a
participant in what may well turn out to be the greatest scientific
event of the century.... I'm referring, of course," Plemponi added, "to
Tate's discovery of the Old Galactic plasmoids."

"Of course," agreed Trigger. "And what is all this leading up to,
Plemp?"

He waved a piece of toast at her. "No. Don't interrupt! I still have to
point out that because of the exceptional managerial abilities you
revealed under Tate, you've been sent here on detached duty for the
Precolonial Department to aid the Commissioner and Professor Mantelish
in the University League's Plasmoid Project. That means you're a pretty
important person, Trigger! Mantelish, for all his idiosyncrasies, is
undoubtedly the greatest living biologist in the League. And the
Plasmoid Project here at the school is without question the League's
most important current undertaking."

"So I've been told," said Trigger. "That's why I want to find out what's
gone haywire with it."

"In a moment," Plemponi said. "In a moment." He located his napkin,
wiped his lips carefully. "Now I've mentioned all this simply to make it
very, very clear that we'll do anything we can to keep you satisfied.
We're delighted to have you with us. We are honored!" He beamed at her.
"Right?"

Trigger smiled. "If you say so. And thanks very much for all the lovely
compliments, Doctor. But now let's get down to business."

Plemponi glanced over at Mihul and looked evasive. "That being?" he
asked.

"You know," Trigger said. "But I'll put it into specific questions if
you like. Where's Commissioner Tate?"

"I don't know."

"Where is Mantelish?"

He shook his head. "I don't know that either." He began to look unhappy.

"Oh?" said Trigger. "Who does know then?"

"I'm not allowed to tell you," Doctor Plemponi said firmly.

Trigger raised an eyebrow. "Why not?"

"Federation security," Plemponi said, frowning. He added, "I wasn't
supposed to tell you that either, but what could I do?"

"Federation security? Because of the plasmoids?"

"Yes.... Well.... I'd--I don't know."

Trigger sighed. "Is it just me you're not supposed to tell these things
to?"

"No, no, no," Plemponi said hastily. "Nobody. I'm not supposed to admit
to anyone that I know anything of the whereabouts of Holati Tate or
