The Project Gutenberg EBook of The 4-D Doodler, by Graph Waldeyer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The 4-D Doodler

Author: Graph Waldeyer

Release Date: August 3, 2007 [EBook #22227]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 4-D DOODLER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

This etext was produced from Comet, July 1941. Extensive research did
not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication
was renewed.


   [Illustration: _The Professor's head, suspended above the body,
                   glared about. The mouth moved rapidly_--]




                          The 4-D DOODLER



                         by GRAPH WALDEYER

       *       *       *       *       *




"Do you believe, Professor Gault, that this four dimensional
plane contains life--intelligent life?"

At the question, Gault laughed shortly. "You have been reading
pseudo-science, Dr. Pillbot," he twitted. "I realize that as a
psychiatrist, you are interested in minds, in living beings,
rather than in dimensional planes. But I fear you will find no
minds to study in the fourth dimension. There aren't any there!"

Professor Gault paused, peered from beneath bushy white brows out
over the laboratory. To his near sighted eyes the blurred figure
of Harper, his young assistant, seemed busily at work over his
mathematical charts. Gault hoped sourly that the young man was
actually working and not just drawing more of his absurd,
senseless designs amidst the mathematical computations....

"Your proof," Dr. Pillbot broke into his thoughts insistently,
"is purely negative, Professor! How can you know there are no
beings in the fourth dimension, unless you actually enter this
realm, to see for yourself?"

Professor Gault stared at the fat, puffy face of his visitor, and
snorted loudly.

"I am afraid, Pillbot, you do not comprehend the impossibility of
such a passage. We can not possibly break from the confines of
our three dimensional world. Here, let me explain by a simple
illustration."

Gault took up a book, held it so that a shadow fell onto the
surface of the desk.

"That shadow," he said, "is two dimensional, has length and
breadth, but no thickness. Now in order to enter the third
dimension, our plane, the shadow would have to bulge out in some
way, into the dimension of thickness an obvious impossibility.
Similarly, we can not enter the fourth dimension. Do you see?"

"No!" retorted Pillbot with some heat. "In the first place, we
are not two dimensional shadows, and--why, what is the matter?"

Professor Gault's lanky form had stiffened, his near sighted eyes
glaring out over the laboratory to the rear of Pillbot. The
psychiatrist wheeled around, followed his host's gaze.

It was Harper. That young man's antics drew an amazed grunt from
Pillbot. He was describing peculiar motions in the air with his
pencil. Circles, whorls, angles, abrupt jabs forward. He bent
over the paper on the desk, made a few sweeps of the pencil, then
the pencil rose again into the air to describe more erratic
motions. Harper himself seemed in a trance.

Suddenly Pillbot gave a stifled gasp. It seemed to him that
Harper's arm vanished at the elbow as it stabbed forward, then
reappeared. Once again the phenomenon happened.

Pillbot blinked rapidly, rubbed his eyes. It must have been
illusion, he decided. It was too ... unlikely....

