Project Gutenberg's The Whispering Spheres, by Russell Robert  Winterbotham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Whispering Spheres

Author: Russell Robert  Winterbotham

Release Date: August 3, 2007 [EBook #22226]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHISPERING SPHERES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

This etext was produced from Comet, July 1941. Extensive research did
not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication
was renewed.




   [Illustration: _Something--like an inner eye--glowed for just a
                   moment as the sphere advanced._]




                       The Whispering Spheres



       _An alien life-form--metallic sinister--threatening all
        mankind with annihilation._



                        by R. R. WINTERBOTHAM

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I

THE CAULDRON


The factory saw-toothed the horizon with its hideous profile as
the moon rose in the east. The red glow of the furnaces bathed
the tall buildings, the gigantic scaffolds, the cord-like
elevated pipelines and the columnar smokestacks in the crimson of
anger. Even the moon seemed to fade as the long-fingered
smokestacks reached toward it belching their pollution. The air,
which should have been clean, was filled with the reek of
unfamiliar odors.

From the machine shop, where giant cannon were forged into
smooth, sleek instruments of death, came noise: unchecked,
unmuffled, blasphemous din. But something odd was afoot. There
was a sudden hush. It seemed as if a giant hand had covered the
metal city to muffle its screams.

In the nearby city of box-like houses, where the workers lived,
there was an echoing stir. Lights glowed in the windows of the
tiny homes. People were awakened in the night by the sudden
cessation of din.

Something was wrong in the factory.

But there couldn't be anything wrong. The factory was enclosed by
a high, electrified fence. There were guards on duty night and
day, armed to the teeth and ready to shoot an intruder who failed
to give an account of himself. There were wars and rumors of wars
on the face of the earth and there was need for the uninterrupted
production of sleek cannon.

But, if something were wrong, why didn't the whistle blow? There
were signals: three short blasts, repeated many times, meant
fire; one long blast meant a breakdown; five toots meant a
layoff. But now the whistle was silent.

Heads popped from the windows of the houses in the city. They
listened. Was it a whistle that the workers heard? No. It was a
whispering, barely audible at first, then louder. It was the
whisper of tongues of flame. But no flames were visible. Only the
red glow of the furnaces lighted up the factory's profile.

One by one the lights of the city went out as workers went back
to bed, to toss restlessly. Without noise there could be no
sleep.

The tongues of flame still whispered.

       *       *       *       *       *

A car moved rapidly through the streets of the city. At the wheel
was a man dressed in a captain's uniform. The machine whirled
onto the highway that led toward the factory. A barricade,
lighted by torch-lanterns, barred his path. A sentry with a
bayoneted gun stood to one side, signaling a halt.

The car slowed.

"Captain Ted Taylor, ordnance department!" the captain said,
extending his pass toward the sentry.

The sentry signaled him on.

The car came within a stone's throw of the factory, where it
turned into a parking lot. The officer climbed out, noiselessly,
and moved into the shadows.

Once Captain Taylor had been a scientist, but that was long ago,
before wars had made biology very unexciting.

Out of the shadows a second figure moved. He was a short, stocky
man, compared with the slender, graceful figure of the captain.

"Ps-st! Captain!"

"Masters!"

"You got my short-wave call, I see. I was afraid you would be
asleep. He came late, but he's in the tunnel now."

"Who is it?"

"The fellow we've suspected all along. Poses as an ignorant
laborer, but he's not ignorant by a long shot. His name is Hank
Norden."

Masters pointed toward a clump of bushes. As he did, he caught
the captain's arm with his left hand. The bushes were moving.

A black hole appeared at the base of the bushes and from it
emerged the head and shoulders of a man. Taylor drew his pistol.
The man's head turned, searching the shadows to see if he was
observed. He failed to detect the figures of Taylor and Masters,
huddled nearby in the shadows.

The man scrambled from the hole. He closed the trap door behind
him and then started to move rapidly away.

"Halt!" barked Taylor.

The man began to run. The captain's pistol spat, kicking up dust
beside the running feet. The fleeing man jumped to one side, to
spoil Taylor's aim on the next shot, but as he did so, he
stumbled and fell.

A moment later Taylor had landed on top of him, pinning him to
the ground.

The faded moonlight showed angry eyes, a jutting, undershot jaw
and a sharp, pointed nose.

"Damn you!" spat the captive.

Taylor removed a revolver from the prisoner's clothing and tossed
it to Masters.

"It's Norden, all right," Masters said, scrutinizing the captive.
"I'd know that jaw in a million. What are you doing here,
fellah?"

"I'm blowing the factory to hell!" Norden said between his teeth.
