The Project Gutenberg EBook of Exile, by Horace Brown Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Exile

Author: Horace Brown Fyfe

Release Date: August 16, 2007 [EBook #22346]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXILE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Alexander Bauer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              EXILE

                          BY H. B. FYFE

                       ILLUSTRATED BY EMSH


      The Dome of Eyes made it almost impossible for Terrans
      to reach the world of Tepokt. For those who did land
      there, there was no returning--only the bitterness of
      respect--and justice!


The Tepoktan student, whose blue robe in George Kinton's opinion clashed
with the dull purple of his scales, twiddled a three-clawed hand for
attention. Kinton nodded to him from his place on the dais before the
group.

"Then you can give us no precise count of the stars in the galaxy,
George?"

Kinton smiled wrily, and ran a wrinkled hand through his graying hair.
In the clicking Tepoktan speech, his name came out more like "Chortch."

Questions like this had been put to him often during the ten years since
his rocket had hurtled through the meteorite belt and down to the
surface of Tepokt, leaving him the only survivor. Barred off as they
were from venturing into space, the highly civilized Tepoktans
constantly displayed the curiosity of dreamers in matters related to the
universe. Because of the veil of meteorites and satellite fragments
whirling about their planet, their astronomers had acquired torturous
skills but only scraps of real knowledge.

"As I believe I mentioned in some of my recorded lectures," Kinton
answered in their language, "the number is actually as vast as it seems
to those of you peering through the Dome of Eyes. The scientists of my
race have not yet encountered any beings capable of estimating the
total."

[Illustration]

He leaned back and scanned the faces of his interviewers, faces that
would have been oddly humanoid were it not for the elongated snouts and
pointed, sharp-toothed jaws. The average Tepoktan was slightly under
Kinton's height of five-feet-ten, with a long, supple trunk. Under the
robes their scholars affected, the shortness of their two bowed legs was
not obvious; but the sight of the short, thick arms carried high before
their chests still left Kinton with a feeling of misproportion.

He should be used to it after ten years, he thought, but even the reds
or purples of the scales or the big teeth seemed more natural.

"I sympathize with your curiosity," he added. "It is a marvel that your
scientists have managed to measure the distances of so many stars."

He could tell that they were pleased by his admiration, and wondered yet
again why any little show of approval by him was so eagerly received.
Even though he was the first stellar visitor in their recorded history,
Kinton remained conscious of the fact that in many fields he was unable
to offer the Tepoktans any new ideas. In one or two ways, he believed,
no Terran could teach their experts anything.

"Then will you tell us, George, more about the problems of your first
space explorers?" came another question.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before Kinton had formed his answer, the golden curtains at the rear of
the austerely simple chamber parted. Klaft, the Tepoktan serving the
current year as Kinton's chief aide, hurried toward the dais. The
twenty-odd members of the group fell silent on their polished stone
benches, turning their pointed visages to follow Klaft's progress.
