The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jubilation, U.S.A., by G. L. Vandenburg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jubilation, U.S.A.

Author: G. L. Vandenburg

Release Date: September 12, 2007 [EBook #22589]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUBILATION, U.S.A. ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           JUBILATION, U.S.A.

                          By G. L. VANDENBURG


     _You've heard, I'm sure, about the two Martians who went into
     a bar, saw a jukebox flashing and glittering, and said to it,
     "What's a nice girl like you doing in a joint like this?"
     Well, here's one about two Capellans and a slot-machine...._


Toryl pointed the small crypterpreter toward the wooden,
horseshoe-shaped sign. The sign's legend was carved in bright yellow
letters. Sartan, Toryl's companion, watched up and down the open highway
for signs of life. In seconds the small cylindrical mechanism completed
the translation.

The sign said:

      JUBILATION, U.S.A.!!

    The doggondest, cheeriest
     little town in America!

The two aliens smiled at each other. Unaccustomed to oral conversation,
they exchanged thoughts.

"_The crypterpreter worked incredibly fast. The language is quite
simple. It would seem safe to proceed. The sign indicates
friendliness_," thought Toryl, the older of the two Capellans.

"_Very well, Brother_," replied Sartan, "_though I still worry for the
safety of the ship_."

"_Sartan, our instruments tell us that anyone who discovers the ship_,"
Toryl explained, a trifle impatient, "_will show a remarkable degree of
curiosity before they display any hostility_."

Sartan agreed to dismiss his worries and the two aliens began to walk
along the barren highway. Before them, at a great distance, they could
see a cluster of small frame buildings. When they had walked a hundred
feet or more they encountered another sign.

         JUBILATION, U.S.A.!!

    WELCOME, STRANGER! See America
         first and begin with
              JUBILATION!

And several hundred feet further two more signs.

    THE ROTARY CLUB of Jubilation
    welcomes and extends the warm
    hand of friendship to you!!!!
    You are now entering Paradise,
              brother!

    HOWDY, STRANGER! COME RIGHT
    ON IN, STAY AWHILE AND MAKE
         YOURSELF TO HOME!

      --Jubilation Chamber of
        Commerce--

As members of a peaceful race, Toryl and Sartan naturally found the
signs encouraging. They walked at a sprightly pace.

