The Project Gutenberg EBook of --And Devious the Line of Duty, by Tom Godwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: --And Devious the Line of Duty

Author: Tom Godwin

Illustrator: Schelling

Release Date: September 12, 2007 [EBook #22585]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK --AND DEVIOUS THE LINE OF DUTY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            --And Devious
                            the Line of Duty

              Sometimes the most diligent and loyal thing
                      an old man can do is fumble,
          drink beer, and let a young man get into trouble....

                             by Tom Godwin

                        Illustrated by Schelling


"We're almost there, my boy." The big, gray-haired man who would be
Lieutenant Dale Hunter's superior--Strategic Service's Special Agent,
George Rockford--opened another can of beer, his fifth. "There will be
intrigue already under way when this helicopter sets down with us.
Attempted homicide will soon follow. The former will be meat for me. You
will be meat for the latter."

Rockford was smiling as he spoke; the genial, engaging smile of a fond
old father. But the eyes, surrounded by laughter crinkles, were as
unreadable as two disks of gray slate. They were the eyes of a poker
player--or master con man.

"I don't understand, sir," Hunter said.

"Of course not," Rockford agreed. "It's a hundred light-years back to
Earth. Here on Vesta, to make sure there _is_ an Earth in the future,
you're going to do things never dreamed of by your Terran Space Patrol
instructors there. You'll be amazed, my boy."

[Illustration]

Hunter said nothing but he felt a growing dislike for the condescending
Rockford. Only a few weeks ago President Diskar, himself, had said: _For
more than a century these truly valiant men of the Space Patrol have
been our unwavering outer guard; have fought and died by legions, that
Earth and the other worlds of the Terran Republic might remain free--_

"I suppose you know," Rockford said, "that there will be no more than
four days in which to stop the Verdam oligarchy from achieving its
long-time ambition of becoming big enough to swallow the Terran
Republic."

"I know," Hunter answered.

Jardeen, Vesta's companion world, was the key. Jardeen was large and
powerful, with a space navy unsurpassed by that of any other single
world. A large group of now-neutral worlds would follow Jardeen's lead
and Jardeen's alliance with the Verdam People's Worlds would mean the
quick end for the Terran Republic. But, if Jardeen could be persuaded to
ally with the Terran Republic, the spreading, grasping arms of the
Verdam octopus would begin to wither away--

Rockford spoke again:

"Val Boran, Jardeen's Secretary of Foreign Relations, is the man who
will really make Jardeen's decision. I know him slightly. Since my
public role is that of Acting Ambassador, he agreed--reluctantly--to
come to Vesta so that the talks could be on a neutral world. With him
will be Verdam's Special Envoy Sonig; a wily little man who has been
working on Boran for several weeks. He seems to be succeeding quite
well--here's a message I received from Earth early this morning."

Rockford handed him a sheet of the green Hyperspace Communications
paper. The message was in code, with Rockford's scribbled translation
beneath:

_Intelligence reports Verdam forces already massed for attack in Sector
A-13, in full expectation of Jardeen's alliance. Anti-Terran propaganda,
stressing the New Jardeen Incident, being used in preparation for what
will be their claim of "defensive action to protect innocent worlds from
Terran aggression." Terran forces will be outnumbered five to one. The
urgent necessity of immediate and conclusive counter measures by you on
Vesta is obvious._

Hunter handed the paper back, thinking, _It's worse than any of us
thought_, and wondering how Supreme Command could ever have entrusted
such an important task to a beer-guzzling old man from Strategic
Service--a branch so unknown that he had never even heard of it until
his briefing the day before he left Earth.

He saw that they had left the desert behind and were going up the long
slope of a mountain. "The meeting will be on this mountain?" he asked.

Rockford nodded. "The rustic Royal Retreat. Princess Lyla will be our
hostess. Her mother and father were killed in an airplane accident a
year ago and she was the only child. You will also get to meet Lord Narf
of the Sea Islands, her husband-by-proxy, who regards himself as a rare
combination of irresistible woman-killer and rugged man-among-men."

"Husband-by-proxy?" Hunter asked.

"The king worshiped his daughter and his dying request to her was that
she promise to marry Lord Narf. Narf's father had been the king's
closest friend and the king was sure that his old friend's son would
always love and care for Lyla. Lyla dutifully, at once, married Narf by
proxy, which is like a legally binding formal engagement under Vestan
law. Four days from now the time limit is up and they'll be formally
married. Unless she should do the unprecedented thing of renouncing the
proxy marriage."

Rockford drained the last of the beer from the can. "Those are the
characters involved in our play. I have a plan. That's why I told Space
Patrol to send me a brand-new second lieutenant--young, strong, fairly
handsome--and expendable. I hope you can be philosophical about the
latter."

"Sir," Hunter said, unable to keep a touch of stiffness out of his tone,
"it is not exactly unknown in the Space Patrol for a man to die in the
line of duty."

"Ah ... yes." Rockford was regarding him with disturbing amusement. "You
are thinking, of course, of dying dramatically behind a pair of blazing
blasters. But you will soon learn, my boy, that a soldier's duty is to
protect the worlds he represents by whatever actions will produce the
best results, no matter how unheroic those actions may be."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Attention, please." It was the voice of the pilot. "We are now going to
land."

Hunter preceded Rockford out of the helicopter and onto the green grass
of a small valley, across which tall, red-trunked cloud trees were
scattered. Pale gray ghost trees, with knobby, twisted limbs, grew
thickly among the cloud trees. There was a group of rustic cabins,
connected by gravel paths, and a much larger building which he assumed
would be a meeting hall.

"Hello."

He turned, and looked into the brown eyes of a girl. Her green skirt and
orange blouse made a gay splash of color, her red-brown hair was
wind-tumbled and carefree about her shoulders, in her hand was a bouquet
of bright spring flowers.

But there was no smile of spring in the dark eyes and the snub-nosed
little face was solemn and old beyond its years.

"You're Lieutenant Hunter, aren't you?" she asked in the same low, quiet
voice.

"Princess Lyla!" There seemed to be genuine delight in Rockford's
greeting as he hurried over. "You're looking more like a queen every
day!"

Her face lighted with a smile, making it suddenly young and beautiful.
"I'm so glad to see you again, George--"

"Ah ... good afternoon."

The voice was loud, unpleasantly gravelly. They turned, and Hunter saw a
tall, angular man of perhaps forty whose pseudogenial smile was not
compatible with his sour, square-jawed face and calculating little eyes.

He spoke to Rockford. "You're Ambassador Rockford, here to represent the
Terran Republic, I believe." He jerked his head toward Princess Lyla,
who was no longer smiling. "My wife, Princess Lyla."

"Oh, she and I have been friends since she was ten, Lord Narf."

"And this young man"--Narf glanced at Hunter--"is your aide, I presume.
Lyla, did you think to send anyone after their luggage?"

A servant was already carrying their luggage--and cases of Rockford's
beer--out of the helicopter. Hunter followed the other toward the
cabins. Narf, in the lead, was saying:

"... Ridiculously primitive here, now, but I'm having some decent
furniture and well-trained servants sent up from my Sea Island
estates...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The cabin was large and very comfortable, as Rockford mentioned to
Princess Lyla.

"I'm glad you like it," she said. "Val Boran and Envoy Sonig are already
here and we'll meet for dinner in the central hall. I thought that if we
all got acquainted in a friendly atmosphere like that, it might help a
lot to...."

"That reminds me"--Narf glanced at his watch--"I promised this Boran he
could have a discussion with me--Vesta-Jardeen tariff policies. I
suppose he's already waiting. Come on, Lyla--it will do you no harm to
listen and learn a bit about interplanetary business."

For a long moment she looked at Narf silently, her eyes thoughtful, then
