The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bread Overhead, by Fritz Reuter Leiber

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Bread Overhead

Author: Fritz Reuter Leiber

Illustrator: Wood

Release Date: September 11, 2007 [EBook #22579]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BREAD OVERHEAD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                               Bread
                                 Overhead

                            By FRITZ LEIBER


               _The Staff of Life suddenly and
                     disconcertingly sprouted wings
                           --and mankind had to eat crow!_


                          Illustrated by WOOD


As a blisteringly hot but guaranteed weather-controlled future summer
day dawned on the Mississippi Valley, the walking mills of Puffy
Products ("Spike to Loaf in One Operation!") began to tread delicately
on their centipede legs across the wheat fields of Kansas.

The walking mills resembled fat metal serpents, rather larger than those
Chinese paper dragons animated by files of men in procession. Sensory
robot devices in their noses informed them that the waiting wheat had
reached ripe perfection.

As they advanced, their heads swung lazily from side to side, very much
like snakes, gobbling the yellow grain. In their throats, it was
threshed, the chaff bundled and burped aside for pickup by the crawl
trucks of a chemical corporation, the kernels quick-dried and blown
along into the mighty chests of the machines. There the tireless mills
ground the kernels to flour, which was instantly sifted, the bran being
packaged and dropped like the chaff for pickup. A cluster of tanks which
gave the metal serpents a decidedly humpbacked appearance added water,
shortening, salt and other ingredients, some named and some not. The
dough was at the same time infused with gas from a tank conspicuously
labeled "Carbon Dioxide" ("No Yeast Creatures in Your Bread!").

[Illustration]

Thus instantly risen, the dough was clipped into loaves and shot into
radionic ovens forming the midsections of the metal serpents. There the
bread was baked in a matter of seconds, a fierce heat-front browning the
crusts, and the piping-hot loaves sealed in transparent plastic bearing
the proud Puffyloaf emblem (two cherubs circling a floating loaf) and
ejected onto the delivery platform at each serpent's rear end, where a
cluster of pickup machines, like hungry piglets, snatched at the loaves
with hygienic claws.

A few loaves would be hurried off for the day's consumption, the
majority stored for winter in strategically located mammoth deep
freezes.

But now, behold a wonder! As loaves began to appear on the delivery
platform of the first walking mill to get into action, they did not
linger on the conveyor belt, but rose gently into the air and slowly
traveled off down-wind across the hot rippling fields.

       *       *       *       *       *

The robot claws of the pickup machines clutched in vain, and, not
noticing the difference, proceeded carefully to stack emptiness, tier by
tier. One errant loaf, rising more sluggishly than its fellows, was
snagged by a thrusting claw. The machine paused, clumsily wiped off the
injured loaf, set it aside--where it bobbed on one corner, unable to
take off again--and went back to the work of storing nothingness.

A flock of crows rose from the trees of a nearby shelterbelt as the
flight of loaves approached. The crows swooped to investigate and then
suddenly scattered, screeching in panic.

The helicopter of a hangoverish Sunday traveler bound for Wichita shied
