The Project Gutenberg EBook of Warning from the Stars, by Ron Cocking

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Warning from the Stars

Author: Ron Cocking

Illustrator: Summers

Release Date: September 9, 2007 [EBook #22545]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WARNING FROM THE STARS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









               _Don't believe in flying saucers? Neither
                do we, but that doesn't necessarily mean
                that there can be no other way for Earth
                to get its last...._


 WARNING
 FROM THE STARS

 By RON COCKING

 ILLUSTRATOR SUMMERS


It was a beautifully machined container, shaped like a two pound
chocolate candy box, the color and texture of lead. The cover fitted so
accurately that it was difficult to see where it met the lip on the
base.

Yet when Forster lifted the container from the desk in the security
guards' office, he almost hit himself in the face with it, so light was
it.

He read the words clumsily etched by hand into the top surface with some
sharp instrument:

    TO BE OPENED ONLY BY:
    Dr. Richard Forster,
    Assistant Director,
    Air Force Special Research Center,
    Petersport, Md.

    CAUTION: Open not later than
    24 hours after receipt.

    DO NOT OPEN in atmosphere less
    than equivalent of 65,000 feet
    above M.S.L.

He turned the container over and over. It bore no other markings--no
express label or stamps, no file or reference number, no return address.

It was superbly machined, he saw.

Tentatively he pulled at the container cover, it was as firm as if it
had been welded on. But then, if the cover had been closed in the thin
atmosphere of 65,000 feet, it would be held on by the terrific pressure
of a column of air twelve miles high.

Forster looked up at the burly guard.

"Who left this here?"

"Your guess is as good as mine, sir." The man's voice was as close to
insolence as the difference in status would allow, and Forster
bristled.

"I just clocked in an hour ago. There was a thick fog came on all of a
sudden, and there was a bit of confusion when we were changing over.
They didn't say anything about the box when I relieved."

"Fog?" Forster queried. "How could fog form on a warm morning like
this?"

"You're the scientist, sir. You tell me. Went as fast as it came."

"Well--it looks like very sloppy security. The contents of this thing
must almost certainly be classified. Give me the book and I'll sign for
it. I'll phone you the file number when I find the covering
instructions."

       *       *       *       *       *

Forster was a nervous, over-conscientious little man, and his day was
already ruined, because any departure from strict administrative routine
worried and upset him. Only in his field of aviation medicine did he
feel competent, secure.

He knew that around the center they contemptuously called him
"Lilliput." The younger researchers were constantly trying to think up
new ways to play jokes on him, and annoy him.

Crawley Preston, the research center's director and his chief, had been
summoned to Washington the night before. Forster wished fervently that
he was around to deal with this matter. Now that relations between East
and West had reached the snapping point, the slightest deviation from
security regulations usually meant a full-scale inquiry.

