The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stutterer, by R.R. Merliss

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Stutterer

Author: R.R. Merliss

Illustrator: Riley

Release Date: September 5, 2007 [EBook #22512]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STUTTERER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE STUTTERER

BY R. R. MERLISS


 _A man can be killed by a toy gun--he can
 die of fright, for heart attacks can kill.
 What, then, is the deadly thing that must
 be sealed away, forever locked in buried
 concrete--a thing or an idea?_


Illustrated by Riley


[Illustration]

Out of the twenty only one managed to escape the planet. And he did it
very simply, merely by walking up to the crowded ticket window at one of
the rocket ports and buying passage to Earth. His Army identification
papers passed the harassed inspection of the agent, and he gratefully
and silently pocketed the small plastic stub that was handed him in
exchange for his money.

He picked his way with infinite care through the hordes of ex-soldiers
clamoring for passage back to the multitudinous planets from which they
had come. Then he slowly climbed the heavy ramp into the waiting rocket.

He saw with relief that the seats were strongly constructed, built to
survive the pressure of many gravities and he chose one as far removed
as possible from the other passengers.

He was still very apprehensive, and, as he waited for the rocket to take
off, he tried hard to remember the principles of the pulse drive that
powered the ship, and whether his additional weight would upset its
efficiency enough to awaken suspicion.

The seats filled quickly with excited hurrying passengers. Soon he heard
the great door clang shut, and saw the red light flicker on, warning of
the take-off. He felt a slow surge of pressure as the ship arose from
the ground, and his chair creaked ominously with the extra weight. He
became fearful that it might collapse, and he strained forward trying to
shift some of the pressure through his feet to the floor. He sat that
way, tense and immobile, for what seemed a long time until abruptly the
strain was relieved and he heard the rising and falling whine of the
rockets that told him the ship was in pulse drive, flickering back and
forth across the speed of light.

He realized that the pilots had not discovered his extra weight, and
that the initial hazards were over. The important thing was to look like
a passenger, a returning soldier like the others, so that no one would
notice him and remember his presence.

His fellow travelers were by this time chatting with one another, some
playing cards, and others watching the teledepth screens. These were the
adventurers who had flocked from all corners of the galaxy to fight in
the first national war in centuries. They were the uncivilized few who
had read about battle and armed struggle in their history books and
found the old stories exciting.

They paid no attention to their silent companion who sat quietly looking
through the quartz windows at the diamond-bright stars, tacked against
the blackness of infinity.

The fugitive scarcely moved the entire time of the passage. Finally when
Earth hung out in the sky like a blue balloon, the ship cut its
pulsations and swung around for a tail landing.

The atmosphere screamed through the fins of the rocket, and the
continents and the countries, and then the rivers and the mountains took
shape. The big ship settled down as gently as a snowflake, shuddered a
few times and was quiet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The passengers hurriedly gathered up their scattered belongings and
pushed toward the exit in a great rush to be out and back on Earth.

The fugitive was the last to leave. He stayed well away from the others,
being fearful that, if he should touch or brush up against someone, his
identity might be recognized.

When he saw the ramp running from the ship to the ground, he was
dismayed. It seemed a flimsy structure, supported only by tubular steel.
Five people were walking down it, and he made a mental calculation of
their weight--about eight hundred pounds he thought. He weighed five
times that. The ramp was obviously never built to support such a load.

He hesitated, and then he realized that he had caught the eye of the
stewardess waiting on the ground. A little panicky, he stepped out with
one foot and he was horrified to feel the steel buckle. He drew back
hastily and threw a quick glance at the stewardess. Fortunately at the
moment she was looking down one field and waving at someone.

The ramp floor was supported by steel tubes at its edges and in its
exact center. He tentatively put one foot in the middle over the support
and gradually shifted his weight to it. The metal complained creakily,
but held, and he slowly trod the exact center line to Earth. The
stewardess' back was turned toward him as he walked off across the field
toward the customhouse.

He found it comforting to have under his feet what felt like at least
one yard of cement. He could step briskly and not be fearful of
betraying himself.

There was one further danger: the customs inspector.

He took his place at the end of the line and waited patiently until it
led him up to a desk at which a uniformed man sat, busily checking and
stamping declarations and traveling papers. The official, however, did
not even look up when he handed him his passport and identification.

"Human. You don't have to go through immigration," the agent said. "Do
you have anything to declare?"

"N-no," the traveler said. "I d-didn't bring anything in."

"Sign the affidavit," the agent said and pushed a sheet of paper toward
him.

The traveler picked up a pen from the desk and signed "Jon Hall" in a
clear, perfect script.

The agent gave it a passing glance and tossed it into a wire basket.

Then he pushed his uniform cap back exposing a bald head. "You're my
last customer for a while, until the rocket from Sirius comes in. Guess
I might as well relax for a minute." He reached into a drawer of the
desk and pulled out a package of cigarettes, of which he lit one.

"You been in the war, too?" he asked.

Hall nodded. He did not want to talk any more than he had to.

The agent studied his face.

