The Project Gutenberg EBook of Suite Mentale, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Suite Mentale

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: EMSH

Release Date: September 25, 2007 [EBook #22763]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUITE MENTALE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Just about a year ago, two enthusiastic young men came to see me,
    and during the course of the visit announced that they were starting
    a campaign to make their living in science fiction--and also to
    become "names" in the best science fiction magazines. They planned
    to collaborate on some material, and write on their own as well,
    intending to make the grade both ways._

    _One of the pair was a well-known science fiction fan, who had
    appeared once or twice in the "pro mags," as fans designate journals
    like this one. The other was Randall Garrett, who had previously
    sold a respectable number of stories to various magazines in the
    science fiction and fantasy field._

    _I shall not try to insult your intelligence by stating that I told
    them I knew they could do it; on the contrary, I larded doubt with
    sympathy. However, this story, and Robert A. Madle's "Inside Science
    Fiction" will show how wrong I was!_




SUITE MENTALE

by Randall Garrett

_Illustrated by EMSH_




OVERTURE--ADAGIO MISTERIOSO

The neurosurgeon peeled the thin surgical gloves from his hands as the
nurse blotted the perspiration from his forehead for the last time after
the long, grueling hours.

"They're waiting outside for you, Doctor," she said quietly.

The neurosurgeon nodded wordlessly. Behind him, three assistants were
still finishing up the operation, attending to the little finishing
touches that did not require the brilliant hand of the specialist. Such
things as suturing up a scalp, and applying bandages.

The nurse took the sterile mask--no longer sterile now--while the doctor
washed and dried his hands.

"Where are they?" he asked finally. "Out in the hall, I suppose?"

[Illustration]

She nodded. "You'll probably have to push them out of the way to get out
of Surgery."

       *       *       *       *       *

Her prediction was almost perfect. The group of men in conservative
business suits, wearing conservative ties, and holding conservative,
soft, felt hats in their hands were standing just outside the door. Dr.
Mallon glanced at the five of them, letting his eyes stop on the face of
the tallest. "He may live," the doctor said briefly.

"You don't sound very optimistic, Dr. Mallon," said the FBI man.

Mallon shook his head. "Frankly, I'm not. He was shot laterally, just
above the right temple, with what looks to me like a .357 magnum pistol
slug. It's in there--" He gestured back toward the room he had just
left. "--you can have it, if you want. It passed completely through the
brain, lodging on the other side of the head, just inside the skull.
