The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Point of View, by Stanley Grauman Weinbaum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Point of View

Author: Stanley Grauman Weinbaum

Release Date: October 5, 2007 [EBook #22895]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POINT OF VIEW ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _A Martian Odyssey and Others_
    published in 1949. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor
    spelling and typographical errors have been corrected without note.




THE POINT OF VIEW




"I am too modest!" snapped the great Haskel van Manderpootz, pacing
irritably about the limited area of his private laboratory, glaring at
me the while. "That is the trouble. I undervalue my own achievements,
and thereby permit petty imitators like Corveille to influence the
committee and win the Morell prize."

"But," I said soothingly, "you've won the Morell physics award half a
dozen times, professor. They can't very well give it to you every year."

"Why not, since it is plain that I deserve it?" bristled the professor.
"Understand, Dixon, that I do not regret my modesty, even though it
permits conceited fools like Corveille, who have infinitely less reason
than I for conceit, to win awards that mean nothing save prizes for
successful bragging. Bah! To grant an award for research along such
obvious lines that I neglected to mention them, thinking that even a
Morell judge would appreciate their obviousness! Research on the
psychon, eh! Who discovered the psychon? Who but van Manderpootz?"

"Wasn't that what you got last year's award for?" I asked consolingly.
"And after all, isn't this modesty, this lack of jealousy on your part,
a symbol of greatness of character?"

"True--true!" said the great van Manderpootz, mollified. "Had such an
affront been committed against a lesser man than myself, he would
doubtless have entered a bitter complaint against the judges. But not I.
Anyway, I know from experience that it wouldn't do any good. And
besides, despite his greatness, van Manderpootz is as modest and
shrinking as a violet." At this point he paused, and his broad red face
tried to look violet-like.

I suppressed a smile. I knew the eccentric genius of old, from the days
when I had been Dixon Wells, undergraduate student of engineering, and
had taken a course in Newer Physics (that is, in Relativity) under the
famous professor. For some unguessable reason, he had taken a fancy to
me, and as a result, I had been involved in several of his experiments
since graduation. There was the affair of the subjunctivisor, for
instance, and also that of the idealizator; in the first of these
episodes I had suffered the indignity of falling in love with a girl two
weeks after she was apparently dead, and in the second, the equal or
greater indignity of falling in love with a girl who didn't exist, never
had existed, and never would exist--in other words, with an ideal.
Perhaps I'm a little susceptible to feminine charms, or rather, perhaps
I used to be, for since the disaster of the idealizator, I have grimly
relegated such follies to the past, much to the disgust of various
'vision entertainers, singers, dancers, and the like.

So of late I had been spending my days very seriously, trying
wholeheartedly to get to the office on time just once, so that I could
refer to it next time my father accused me of never getting anywhere on
time. I hadn't succeeded yet, but fortunately the N. J. Wells
Corporation was wealthy enough to survive even without the full-time
services of Dixon Wells, or should I say even _with_ them? Anyway, I'm
sure my father preferred to have me late in the morning after an evening
with van Manderpootz than after one with Tips Alva or Whimsy White, or
one of the numerous others of the ladies of the 'vision screen. Even in
the twenty-first century, he retained a lot of old-fashioned ideas.

Van Manderpootz had ceased to remember that he was as modest and
shrinking as a violet. "It has just occurred to me," he announced
impressively, "that years have character much as humans have. This year,
2015, will be remembered in history as a very stupid year, in which the
Morell prize was given to a nincompoop. Last year, on the other hand,
