The Project Gutenberg EBook of Solomon's Orbit, by William Carroll

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Solomon's Orbit

Author: William Carroll

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: October 24, 2007 [EBook #23160]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLOMON'S ORBIT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]




                 Solomon's Orbit

     There will, sooner or later, be problems
 of "space junk," and the right to dump in space.
               But not like this...!

                by William Carroll

             Illustrated by Schoenherr


"Comrades," said the senior technician, "notice the clear view of North
America. From here we watch everything; rivers, towns, almost the
people. And see, our upper lens shows the dark spot of a meteor in
space. Comrades, the meteor gets larger. It is going to pass close to
our wondrous machine. Comrades ... Comrades ... turn to my channel. It
is no meteor--it is square. The accursed Americans have sent up a house.
Comrades ... an ancient automobile is flying toward our space machine.
Comrades ... it is going to--Ah ... the picture is gone."

Moscow reported the conversation, verbatim, to prove their space vehicle
was knocked from the sky by a capitalistic plot. Motion pictures clearly
showed an American automobile coming toward the Russian satellite.
Russian astronomers ordered to seek other strange orbiting devices
reported: "We've observed cars for weeks. Have been exiling technicians
and photographers to Siberia for making jokes of Soviet science. If
television proves ancient automobiles are orbiting the world, Americans
are caught in obvious attempt to ridicule our efforts to probe mysteries
of space."

       *       *       *

Confusion was also undermining American scientific study of the heavens.
At Mount Palomar the busy 200-inch telescope was photographing a strange
new object, but plates returned from the laboratory caused astronomers
to explode angrily. In full glory, the photograph showed a tiny image of
an ancient car. This first development only affected two photographers
at Mount Palomar. They were fired for playing practical jokes on the
astronomers. Additional exposures of other newfound objects were made.
Again the plates were returned; this time with three little old cars
