The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Glory of Ippling, by Helen M. Urban

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Glory of Ippling

Author: Helen M. Urban

Release Date: October 24, 2007 [EBook #23185]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GLORY OF IPPLING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy_ December 1962. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note. Subscript characters are
    shown within {braces}.




      _He brought them life and hope.
 Why wouldn't the fools take it from him?_


             By HELEN M. URBAN



               THE GLORY OF
                  IPPLING


There's an axiom in the galaxy: The more complicated the machine, the
bigger mess it can make. Like the time the planetary computer for
Buughabyta flipped its complete grain-futures series. The computer
ordered only 15 acres, and Buughabytians had to live for a full year off
the government's stored surplus--thus pounding down the surplus, forcing
up the price, eliminating the subsidy and balancing the Buughabytian
budget for fifteen years--an unprecedented bit of nonsense that almost
had permanent effects. But a career economist with an eye for flubup and
complication managed to restore balanced disorder, bringing Buughabyta
right back to normalcy.

Or like the time a matter-duplicator receiver misread OCH{3}CH{3}OH, to
turn out a magnificently busted blonde sphygmomano-raiser with an
HOCH{3}OH replacement, putting a strain on the loyalty of a billion
teen-age girls dedicated to Doyle Oglevie worship. Doyle-she insisted
she was Doyle-he, as it took quite a while for her hormones to overcome
the memory of his easy, eyelash-flapping, tone-torturing microphone
conquests. Put a strain on his wardrobe, too.

No machine, of course, can compare for complexity with any group of
humans who have been collected into machine-like precision of
operation. Take one time when an Ipplinger Cultural Contact Group was
handed a Boswellister with V.I.P. connections and orders to put him to
an assignment--for his maturity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Boswellister sat patiently. He squirmed emotionally up and down his
backbone, but he affected a disdainful appearance of patience in view of
the importance of his and his poppa's positions compared with the
pawn-like minusculity of the audience's.

The Blond Terror strode majestically down the aisle of the open air
sports arena, preceded by twenty-four harem-darling dancing girls. The
orchestra wailed an oriental sinuosity of woodwinds and drums,
accompanying the hip-twitching, nearly naked, sloe- (by benefit of
make-up) eyed, black-haired beauties.

Fifteen heavyweights, draped in leopard skins, had preceded the dancers
to set up the Blond Terror's tub on a polar bear rug in the center of
the ring. A dozen luscious watercarriers had emptied their jars into the
tub. Soap and towels, oils and perfumes, mirror and comb, were arranged
on top of a lushly ornamented box that stood by one of the corner posts.
