The Project Gutenberg EBook of Unspecialist, by Murray F. Yaco

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Unspecialist

Author: Murray F. Yaco

Release Date: November 11, 2007 [EBook #23443]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNSPECIALIST ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction, October, 1959. Extensive research did not reveal any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.

Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Dialect
spellings, contractions and discrepancies have been retained.




UNSPECIALIST

[Illustration]


_A machine can be built to do any accurately described job better
than any man. The superiority of a man is that he can do an unexpected,
undescribed, and emergency job ... provided he hasn't been especially
trained to be a machine._


BY MURRAY F. YACO




Banner ripped open his orders, read them, stared in disbelief for a
quick moment, then cursed wildly while reaching for the telephone.

"Hello, Gastonia? Yes, I got 'em. What kinda way to waste our time you
lunkheads think ... oh, it's you, colonel!"

Banner dropped the receiver and let it dangle. He sank into the only
soft chair in the apartment and watched hypnotically as the phone's
receiver limply coiled and uncoiled at the end of the wire.

Somebody knocked on, then opened the door. "Hi, pretty boy, you got our
orders?"

"Come on in and hear about it," Banner said. He got up from the chair,
ran his hands compulsively through his recently short-cropped red hair,
hung up the phone and shoved the orders into his co-pilot's hands.

Warcraft read them over three times, then sank into the chair just
vacated by Banner. Finally--while Banner poured them both a drink--he
managed to blurt, "Potato fertilizer and tractor fuel--Oh, no. Oh, no,
no, no!"

"Oh, yes, yes, yes," Banner said bitterly. "We are heroes of the
spaceways; yes, indeed. We train for ten years. Acquire great skill in
the art of the patrol. We dedicate ourselves to the protection of the
Federation. We ready ourselves for war. We gird our young, strong
loins, we--"

"You're getting hysterical," said Warcraft, who poured himself another
drink, began pacing the floor and took up where Banner had left off.
"We've never even been lost on patrol. And now they do this. It's
unbelievable! Potato fertilizer and tractor fuel. We're supposed to
travel thirty-six light-years, pick up one thousand sleds of the stuff,
deliver it to some God-forsaken farm planet another thirty years out,
and return to base. You know what they'll do then?" He turned to
Banner, pointed his finger accusingly and repeated, "You know what
they'll do then?"

"How would I know," said Banner, glumly staring into his drink.

"Well, I can tell you what they'll do. Yes, sir, I can tell you."
Warcraft's pudgy face and oversize brown eyes seemed to melt into each
other, giving him the appearance of an angry, if not very bright,
chimpanzee.
