The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tales of Fantasy and Fact, by Brander Matthews

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tales of Fantasy and Fact

Author: Brander Matthews

Release Date: December 2, 2007 [EBook #23678]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES OF FANTASY AND FACT ***




Produced by Bethanne M. Simms and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: Minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note. Dialect spellings, contractions and discrepancies have
been retained.


[Illustration: LOST AGAIN
                   P. 136]




TALES OF FANTASY AND FACT



By

BRANDER MATTHEWS



NEW YORK
HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
1896



BOOKS BY BRANDER MATTHEWS.

THE THEATRES OF PARIS.
FRENCH DRAMATISTS OF THE 19TH CENTURY.
THE LAST MEETING, a Story.
A SECRET OF THE SEA, and Other Stories.
PEN AND INK: Essays on Subjects of More or Less Importance.
A FAMILY TREE, and Other Stories.
WITH MY FRIENDS: Tales Told in Partnership.
A TALE OF TWENTY-FIVE HOURS.
TOM PAULDING, a Story for Boys.
IN THE VESTIBULE LIMITED, a Story.
AMERICANISMS AND BRITICISMS, with Other Essays on Other Isms.
THE STORY OF A STORY, and Other Stories.
THE DECISION OF THE COURT, a Comedy.
STUDIES OF THE STAGE.
THIS PICTURE AND THAT, a Comedy.
VIGNETTES OF MANHATTAN.
THE ROYAL MARINE, an Idyl of Narragansett.
BOOK-BINDINGS, Old and New; Notes of a Book-Lover.
HIS FATHER'S SON, a Novel of New York.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF AMERICAN LITERATURE.
TALES OF FANTASY AND FACT.
ASPECTS OF FICTION, and Other Ventures in Criticism. (In Press.)

Copyright, 1896, by HARPER & BROTHERS.
_All rights reserved._




TO
THE MEMORY OF MY FRIEND
H. C. BUNNER




CONTENTS


                                                     Page

A PRIMER OF IMAGINARY GEOGRAPHY                         3

THE KINETOSCOPE OF TIME                                27

THE DREAM-GOWN OF THE JAPANESE AMBASSADOR              57

THE RIVAL GHOSTS                                       93

SIXTEEN YEARS WITHOUT A BIRTHDAY                      131

THE TWINKLING OF AN EYE                               143

A CONFIDENTIAL POSTSCRIPT                             207




A PRIMER OF IMAGINARY GEOGRAPHY


"Ship ahoy!"

There was an answer from our bark--for such it seemed to me by this
time--but I could not make out the words.

"Where do you hail from?" was the next question.

I strained my ears to catch the response, being naturally anxious to
know whence I had come.

"From the City of Destruction!" was what I thought I heard; and I
confess that it surprised me not a little.

"Where are you bound?" was asked in turn.

Again I listened with intensest interest, and again did the reply
astonish me greatly.

"Ultima Thule!" was the answer from our boat, and the voice of the man
who answered was deep and melancholy.

Then I knew that I had set out strange countries for to see, and that I
was all unequipped for so distant a voyage. Thule I knew, or at least I
had heard of the king who reigned there once and who cast his goblet
into the sea. But Ultima Thule! was not that beyond the uttermost
borders of the earth?

"Any passengers?" was the next query, and I noted that the voice came
now from the left and was almost abreast of us.

"One only," responded the captain of our boat.

"Where bound?" was the final inquiry.

"To the Fortunate Islands!" was the answer; and as I heard this my
spirits rose again, and I was glad, as what man would not be who was on
his way to the paradise where the crimson-flowered meadows are full of
the shade of frankincense-trees and of fruits of gold?

Then the boat bounded forward again, and I heard the wash of the waves.

All this time it seemed as though I were in darkness; but now I began
dimly to discern the objects about me. I found that I was lying on a
settee in a state-room at the stern of the vessel. Through the small
round window over my head the first rays of the rising sun darted and
soon lighted the little cabin.

As I looked about me with curiosity, wondering how I came to be a
passenger on so unexpected a voyage, I saw the figure of a man framed
in the doorway at the foot of the stairs leading to the deck above.

How it was I do not know, but I made sure at once that he was the
captain of the ship, the man whose voice I had heard answering the
hail.

He was tall and dark, with a scant beard and a fiery and piercing gaze,
which penetrated me as I faced him. Yet the expression of his
countenance was not unfriendly; nor could any man lay eyes upon him
without a movement of pity for the sadness written on his visage.

I rose to my feet as he came forward.

"Well," he said, holding out his hand, "and how are you after your
nap?"

He spoke our language with ease and yet with a foreign accent. Perhaps
it was this which betrayed him to me.

"Are you not Captain Vanderdecken?" I asked as I took his hand
heartily.

"So you know me?" he returned, with a mournful little laugh, as he
motioned to me to sit down again.

Thus the ice was broken, and he took his seat by my side, and we were
soon deep in talk.

When he learned that I was a loyal New-Yorker, his cordiality
increased.

"I have relatives in New Amsterdam," he cried; "at least I had once.
Diedrich Knickerbocker was my first cousin. And do you know Rip Van
Winkle?"

Although I could not claim any close friendship with this gentleman, I
boasted myself fully acquainted with his history.

"Yes, yes," said Captain Vanderdecken, "I suppose he was before your
time. Most people are so short-lived nowadays; it's only with that
Wandering Jew now that I ever have a chat over old times. Well, well,
but you have heard of Rip? Were you ever told that I was on a visit to
Hendrik Hudson the night Rip went up the mountain and took a drop too
much?"

I had to confess that here was a fact I had not before known.

"I ran up the river," said the Hollander, "to have a game of bowls with
the Englishman and his crew, nearly all of them countrymen of mine;
and, by-the-way, Hudson always insists that it was I who brought the
storm with me that gave poor Rip Van Winkle the rheumatism as he slept
off his intoxication on the hillside under the pines. He was a good
fellow, Rip, and a very good judge of schnapps, too."

Seeing him smile with the pleasant memories of past companionship, I
marvelled when the sorrowful expression swiftly covered his face again
as a mask.

"But why talk of those who are dead and gone and are happy?" he asked
in his deep voice. "Soon there will be no one left, perhaps, but
Ahasuerus and Vanderdecken--the Wandering Jew and the Flying Dutchman."

He sighed bitterly, and then he gave a short, hard laugh.

"There's no use talking about these things, is there?" he cried. "In an
hour or two, if the wind holds, I can show you the house in which
Ahasuerus has established his museum, the only solace of his lonely
life. He has the most extraordinary gathering of curiosities the world
has ever seen--truly a virtuoso's collection. An American reporter came
on a voyage with me fifty or sixty years ago, and I took him over
there. His name was Hawthorne. He interviewed the Jew, and wrote up the
collection in the American papers, so I've been told."

"I remember reading the interview," I said, "and it was indeed a most
remarkable collection."

"It's all the more curious now for the odds and ends I've been able to
pick up here and there for my old friend," Vanderdecken declared; "I
got him the horn of Hernani, the harpoon with which Long Tom Coffin
pinned the British officer to the mast, the long rifle of Natty Bumppo,
the letter A in scarlet cloth embroidered in gold by Hester Prynne, the
banner with the strange device 'Excelsior,' the gold bug which was once
used as a plummet, Maud Muller's rake, and the jack-knives of Hosea
Biglow and Sam Lawson."

"You must have seen extraordinary things yourself," I ventured to
suggest.

"No man has seen stranger," he answered, promptly. "No man has ever
been witness to more marvellous deeds than I--not even Ahasuerus, I
verily believe, for he has only the land, and I have the boundless sea.
I survey mankind from China to Peru. I have heard the horns of elfland
blowing, and I could tell you the song the sirens sang. I have dropped
anchor at the No Man's Land, and off Lyonesse, and in Xanadu, where
Alph the sacred river ran. I have sailed from the still-vexed
Bermoothes to the New Atlantis, of which there is no mention even until
the year 1629."

"In which year there was published an account of it written in the
Latin tongue, but by an Englishman," I said, desirous to reveal my
acquirements.

"I have seen every strange coast," continued the Flying Dutchman. "The
Island of Bells and Robinson Crusoe's Island and the Kingdoms of
Brobdingnag and Lilliput. But it is not for me to vaunt myself for my
voyages. And of a truth there are men I should like to have met and
talked with whom I have yet failed to see. Especially is there one
Ulysses, a sailor-man of antiquity who called himself Outis, whence I
have sometimes suspected that he came from the town of Weissnichtwo."

Just to discover what Vanderdecken would say, I inquired innocently
whether this was the same person as one Captain Nemo of whose submarine
exploits I had read.

"Captain Nemo?" the Flying Dutchman repeated scornfully. "I never heard
of him. Are you sure there is such a fellow?"

I tried to turn the conversation by asking if he had ever met another
ancient mariner named Charon.

"Oh, yes," was his answer. "Charon keeps the ferry across the Styx to
the Elysian Fields, past the sunless marsh of Acheron. Yes--I've met
him more than once. I met him only last month, and he was very proud of
his new electric launch with its storage battery."

When I expressed my surprise at this, he asked me if I did not know
that the underworld was now lighted by electricity, and that Pluto had
put in all the modern improvements. Before I had time to answer, he
rose from his seat and slapped me on the shoulder.

"Come up with me!--if you want to behold things for yourself," he
cried. "So far, it seems to me, you have never seen the sights!"

I followed him on deck. The sun was now two hours high, and I could
just make out a faint line of land on the horizon.

"That rugged coast is Bohemia, which is really a desert country by the
sea, although ignorant and bigoted pedants have dared to deny it," and
the scorn of my companion as he said this was wonderful to see. "Its
borders touch Alsatia, of which the chief town is a city of refuge. Not
far inland, but a little to the south, is the beautiful Forest of
Arden, where men and maids dwell together in amity, and where clowns
wander, making love to shepherdesses. Some of these same pestilent
pedants have pretended to believe that this forest of Arden was
situated in France, which is absurd, as there are no serpents and no
lions in France, while we have the best of evidence as to the existence
of both in Arden--you know that, don't you?"

I admitted that a green and gilded snake and a lioness with udders all
drawn dry were known to have been seen there both on the same day. I
ventured to suggest further that possibly this Forest of Arden was the
Wandering Wood where Una met her lion.

"Of course," was the curt response; "everybody knows that Arden is a
most beautiful region; even the toads there have precious jewels in
their heads. And if you range the forest freely you may chance to find
also the White Doe of Rylstone and the goat with the gilded horns that
told fortunes in Paris long ago by tapping with his hoof on a
tambourine."

"These, then, are the Happy Hunting-Grounds?" I suggested with a light
laugh.

"Who would chase a tame goat?" he retorted with ill-concealed contempt
for my ill-advised remark.

I thought it best to keep silence; and after a minute or two he resumed
the conversation, like one who is glad of a good listener.

"In the outskirts of the Forest of Arden," he began again, "stands
the Abbey of Thelema--the only abbey which is bounded by no wall
and in which there is no clock at all nor any dial. And what need is
there of knowing the time when one has for companions only comely and
well-conditioned men and fair women of sweet disposition? And the motto
of the Abbey of Thelema is _Fais ce que voudra_--Do what you will; and
many of those who dwell in the Forest of Arden will tell you that they
have taken this also for their device, and that if you live under the
greenwood tree you may spend your life--as you like it."

I acknowledged that this claim was probably well founded, since I
recalled a song of the foresters in which they declared themselves
without an enemy but winter and rough weather.

"Yes," he went on, "they are fond of singing in the Forest of Arden,
and they sing good songs. And so they do in the fair land beyond where
I have never been, and which I can never hope to go to see for myself,
if all that they report be true--and yet what would I not give to see
it and to die there."

And as he said this sadly, his voice sank into a sigh.

"And where does the road through the forest lead, that you so much wish
to set forth upon it?" I asked.

"That's the way to Arcady," he said--"to Arcady where all the leaves
are merry. I may not go there, though I long for it. Those who attain
to its borders never come back again--and why should they leave it? Yet
there are tales told, and I have heard that this Arcady is the
veritable El Dorado, and that in it is the true Fountain of Youth,
gushing forth unfailingly for the refreshment of all who may reach it.
But no one may find the entrance who cannot see it by the light that
never was on land or sea."

"It must be a favored region," I remarked.

"Of a truth it is," he answered; "and on the way there is the orchard
where grow the golden apples of Hesperides, and the dragon is dead now
that used to guard them, and so any one may help himself to the
beautiful fruit. And by the side of the orchard flows the river Lethe,
of which it is not well for man to drink, though many men would taste
it gladly." And again he sighed.

I knew not what to say, and so waited for him to speak once more.

"That promontory there on the weather bow," he began again after a few
moments' silence, "that is Barataria, which was long supposed to be an
island by its former governor, Don Sancho Panza, but which is now known
by all to be connected with the mainland. Pleasant pastures slope down
to the water, and if we were closer in shore you might chance to see
Rozinante, the famous charger of Don Quixote de la Mancha, grazing
amicably with the horse that brought the good news from Ghent to Aix."

"I wish I could see them!" I cried, enthusiastically; "but there is
another horse I would rather behold than any--the winged steed
Pegasus."

Before responding, my guide raised his hand and shaded his eyes and
scanned the horizon.

"No," he said at last. "I cannot descry any this afternoon. Sometimes
in these latitudes I have seen a dozen hippogriffs circling about the
ship, and I should like to have shown them to you. Perhaps they are all
in the paddock at the stock-farm, where Apollo is now mating them with
night-mares in the hope of improving the breed from which he selects
the coursers that draw the chariot of the sun. They say that the
experiment would have more chance of success if it were easier to find
the night-mares' nests."

"It was not a hippogriff I desired to see especially," I returned when
he paused, "although that would be interesting, no doubt. It was the
renowned Pegasus himself."

"Pegasus is much like the other hippogriffs," he retorted, "although
perhaps he has a little better record than any of them. But they say he
has not won a single aerial handicap since that American professor of
yours harnessed him to a one-hoss shay. That seemed to break his
spirit, somehow; and I'm told he would shy now even at a broomstick
train."

"Even if he is out of condition," I declared, "Pegasus is still the
steed I desire to see above all."

"I haven't set eyes on him for weeks," was the answer, "so he is
probably moulting; this is the time of year. He has a roomy boxstall in
the new Augean stable at the foot of Mount Parnassus. You know they
have turned the spring of Castaly so that it flows through the
stable-yard now, and so it is easy enough to keep the place clean."

"If I may not see Pegasus," I asked, "is there any chance of my being
taken to the Castle of the Sleeping Beauty?"

"I have never seen it myself," he replied, "and so I cannot show it to
you. Rarely indeed may I leave the deck of my ship to go ashore; and
this castle that you ask about is very far inland. I am told that it is
in a country which the French travellers call _La Scribie_, a curious
land, wherein the scene is laid of many a play, because its laws and
its customs are exactly what every playwright has need of; but no poet
has visited it for many years. Yet the Grand Duchess of Gerolstein,
whose domains lie partly within the boundaries of Scribia, is still a
subscriber to the _Gazette de Hollande_--the only newspaper I take
himself, by the way."

This last remark of the Captain's explained how it was that he had
been able to keep up with the news of the day, despite his constant
wanderings over the waste of waters; and what more natural in fact than
that the Flying Dutchman should be a regular reader of the _Holland
Gazette_?

Vanderdecken went forward into the prow of the vessel, calling to me to
follow.

"Do you see those peaks afar in the distance?" he asked, pointing over
the starboard bow.

I could just make out a saw-like outline in the direction indicated.

"Those are the Delectable Mountains," he informed me; "and down on a
hollow between the two ranges is the Happy Valley."

"Where Rasselas lived?"
