The Project Gutenberg EBook of Charley de Milo, by 
Laurence Mark Janifer AKA Larry M. Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Charley de Milo

Author: Laurence Mark Janifer AKA Larry M. Harris

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release Date: December 18, 2007 [EBook #23889]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLEY DE MILO ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]

 CHARLEY
 de MILO

 By LARRY M. HARRIS

 Illustrated by Emsh


 _It isn't at all obvious--at first thought--that
 having two perfectly good, usable arms could be a
 real handicap to a man...._


    "To be, or not to be--that is the question.
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
    The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
    Or to take arms ..."
              _Hamlet_, Act III, Scene I


The rocket was on the way up, but Professor Lightning didn't seem to
care. Outside the cooktent Wrout flapped his arms and, on that signal,
Seaman started up the big electric band, whooping it up with John Philip
Sousa for openers, while all over the midway the lights snapped on, big
whites and yellows, reds, greens, purples and dusky violets framing, in
a titillating dimness, the front flap of the girlie tent. The outside
talkers were busy outside the spectacle tents like Wicks' Hell Drivers,
Biggest Auto Show in Fifty States--outside the grind shows, the eats,
the rides: "Here and now, for the fourth part of one single dollar bill,
the most amazing ..." "... Terrifying and strange beings from the
farthest reaches of the Earth who will exhibit ..." "... Dances learned
at the Court of the Sultan, Ay-rab dances right here, right on the
inside, for only--"

And the crowd, filing in, laughed and chattered and shrieked on swooping
rides, the Great Crane, the Space Race, the Merry-Go-Round and the
Horses, threw down money to win a kewpie doll, a Hawaiian lei, a real
life-size imitation scale model of Luna in three real dimensions ...
living it up on the first show, while the rocket climbed on and out, and
bubbled excitement in the blood.

The rocket was up: the carnival was open. But Professor Lightning didn't
seem to care. He sat in the cooktent with his eyes hooded and hidden
under the unshaded glow of a hundred-and-fifty-watt Forever bulb, while
Charley de Milo fidgeted his feet, and listened, and tried to cut the
old man off.

"Look, professor," he said nervously, "why don't we talk about it later?
Table it, till after the show?" He scratched the side of his head with
his left foot. "I got to go on in a couple of minutes," he said. "I can
hear the talker going now. I got to--"

"Forget the show," Professor Lightning said. His voice was flatter and
harsher, and his face more tense, than Charley ever remembered seeing
it. "The show isn't important."

Charley blinked, trying to understand. "But, Professor--"

"Listen to me," Professor Lightning said. "The world is at the beginning
of a new cultural revolution. Since the Cold War melted, and freedom of
inquiry and research began to live again on both sides of the old Iron
Curtain, science has begun a new Renaissance. The cultural interflow
has--"

"Please, professor," Charley said miserably, rubbing his toes together.
"There isn't much time before I got to go on. And you ought to be
inside the Science tent, too, because any minute--"

"If I am not in the tent," Professor Lightning said calmly, "I will not
appear in the show. It does not matter."

"But they'll fire you," Charley said. He grabbed for a cigarette with
his right foot and got it into his mouth. Striking a match with his left
foot, he lit the cigarette and blew out a long, ragged plume of smoke.
"If you're not there on time," he said in strained tones, "they'll fire
you. And what about me?"

Professor Lightning gestured with both big hands. It was the same
movement he used every night, when he showed the crowd there were no
wires or batteries secreted on his person. Charley half-expected him to
grab hold of a couple of light bulbs and show them glowing in his fists.
But the gesture was meant, this time, as an aid to relaxation. "Don't
worry," Professor Lightning said, in a grating sort of caricature of a
soothing tone. "If they fire me ... well, then, they save me the trouble
of quitting. And as for you, my boy, a carnival job should be the
furthest thing from your thoughts."

"Well, it isn't," Charley said sourly. "And if you'll excuse me,
professor, I care how I get the money to eat, even if you don't. I got a
good job--"

"You won't need your job," Professor Lightning said, "if you'll listen
to me."

Charley made up his mind. Much as he hated to be impolite, there were
some things more important than social forms, he decided. He stood up.
"After the show, professor," he said with firmness, and went out of the
cooktent, heading at a rapid dogtrot for the big tent at the other side
of the midway. As he reached it he could see Dave Lungs, the outside
talker, climb up on the front platform to begin his spiel.

"Marvels of the world!" Dave announced without preliminary. "Wonders of
the natural universe! Surprises and startling sights for every member of
the family!" By the time he had got that far, a crowd was beginning to
collect in front of the platform. "For the fourth part of a single
dollar bill--" Dave went on, but Charley didn't have the time to listen;
he was in the bally.

He lifted the backflap of the tent with one foot, and wriggled inside.

As he made his way to the cluster of people near the front flap, past
the booths and stands, he felt an enormous sense of relief. He had made
it--with all of fifty seconds to spare.

Ned and Ed stood next to him. "Where you been?" Ed said in a nasal
whisper.

"I got held up," Charley explained. "Professor Lightning, he was talking
to me, and--"

"Later," Ned said. His voice was lower and throatier than Ed's; it was
the only way Charley could tell them apart, but then, he thought, nobody
ever had to tell them apart. They were, like all Siamese twins, always
together. "We're going on," Ned said, and he and his twin moved forward.

Charley moved into place behind them, and came out blinking in the glare
of the front platform.
