The Project Gutenberg EBook of Unborn Tomorrow, by Dallas McCord Reynolds

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Unborn Tomorrow

Author: Dallas McCord Reynolds

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: December 20, 2007 [EBook #23942]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNBORN TOMORROW ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]

 UNBORN
 TOMORROW

BY MACK REYNOLDS

Illustrated by Freas


 _Unfortunately, there was only
 one thing he could bring back
 from the wonderful future ...
 and though he didn't want to
 ... nevertheless he did...._


Betty looked up from her magazine. She said mildly, "You're late."

"Don't yell at me, I feel awful," Simon told her. He sat down at his
desk, passed his tongue over his teeth in distaste, groaned, fumbled in
a drawer for the aspirin bottle.

He looked over at Betty and said, almost as though reciting, "What I
need is a vacation."

"What," Betty said, "are you going to use for money?"

"Providence," Simon told her whilst fiddling with the aspirin bottle,
"will provide."

"Hm-m-m. But before providing vacations it'd be nice if Providence
turned up a missing jewel deal, say. Something where you could deduce
that actually the ruby ring had gone down the drain and was caught in
the elbow. Something that would net about fifty dollars."

Simon said, mournful of tone, "Fifty dollars? Why not make it five
hundred?"

"I'm not selfish," Betty said. "All I want is enough to pay me this
week's salary."

"Money," Simon said. "When you took this job you said it was the romance
that appealed to you."

"Hm-m-m. I didn't know most sleuthing amounted to snooping around
department stores to check on the clerks knocking down."

Simon said, enigmatically, "Now it comes."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a knock.

Betty bounced up with Olympic agility and had the door swinging wide
before the knocking was quite completed.

He was old, little and had bug eyes behind pince-nez glasses. His suit
was cut in the style of yesteryear but when a suit costs two or three
hundred dollars you still retain caste whatever the styling.

Simon said unenthusiastically, "Good morning, Mr. Oyster." He indicated
the client's chair. "Sit down, sir."

The client fussed himself with Betty's assistance into the seat,
bug-eyed Simon, said finally, "You know my name, that's pretty good.
