Project Gutenberg's A Spaceship Named McGuire, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Spaceship Named McGuire

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Douglas

Release Date: January 7, 2008 [EBook #24198]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SPACESHIP NAMED MCGUIRE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          Transcriber's Note:

 This etext was produced from Analog, July 1961. Extensive research did
 not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication
 was renewed.




                             A SPACESHIP

                                NAMED

                               McGUIRE



                                  By

                           RANDALL GARRETT


     _The basic trouble with McGuire was that, though "he" was a
     robot spaceship, nevertheless "he" had a definite weakness
     that a man might understand...._


                        Illustrated by Douglas

       *       *       *       *       *




No. Nobody ever deliberately named a spaceship that. The staid and
stolid minds that run the companies which design and build spaceships
rarely let their minds run to fancy. The only example I can think of
is the unsung hero of the last century who had puckish imagination
enough to name the first atomic-powered submarine _Nautilus_. Such
minds are rare. Most minds equate dignity with dullness.

This ship happened to have a magnetogravitic drive, which
automatically put it into the MG class. It also happened to be the
first successful model to be equipped with a Yale robotic brain, so it
was given the designation MG-YR-7--the first six had had more bugs in
them than a Leopoldville tenement.

So somebody at Yale--another unsung hero--named the ship McGuire; it
wasn't official, but it stuck.

The next step was to get someone to test-hop McGuire. They needed just
the right man--quick-minded, tough, imaginative, and a whole slew of
complementary adjectives. They wanted a perfect superman to test pilot
their baby, even if they knew they'd eventually have to take second
best.

It took the Yale Space Foundation a long time to pick the right man.

No, I'm not the guy who tested the McGuire.

I'm the guy who stole it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shalimar Ravenhurst is not the kind of bloke that very many people can
bring themselves to like, and, in this respect, I'm like a great many
people, if not more so. In the first place, a man has no right to go
around toting a name like "Shalimar"; it makes names like "Beverly"
and "Leslie" and "Evelyn" sound almost hairy chested. You want a dozen
other reasons, you'll get them.

Shalimar Ravenhurst owned a little planetoid out in the Belt, a hunk
of nickel-iron about the size of a smallish mountain with a gee-pull
measurable in fractions of a centimeter per second squared. If you're
susceptible to spacesickness, that kind of gravity is about as much
help as aspirin would have been to Marie Antoinette. You get the
feeling of a floor beneath you, but there's a distinct impression that
it won't be there for long. It keeps trying to drop out from under
you.

I dropped my flitterboat on the landing field and looked around
without any hope of seeing anything. I didn't. The field was about the
size of a football field, a bright, shiny expanse of rough-polished
metal, carved and smoothed flat from the nickel-iron of the planetoid
itself. It not only served as a landing field, but as a reflector
beacon, a mirror that flashed out the sun's reflection as the
planetoid turned slowly on its axis. I'd homed in on that beacon, and
now I was sitting on it.

There wasn't a soul in sight. Off to one end of the rectangular field
was a single dome, a hemisphere about twenty feet in diameter and half
as high. Nothing else.

I sighed and flipped on the magnetic anchor, which grabbed hold of the
metal beneath me and held the flitterboat tightly to the surface. Then
I cut the drive, plugged in the telephone, and punched for "Local."

The automatic finder searched around for the Ravenhurst tickler
signal, found it, and sent out a beep along the same channel.

I waited while the thing beeped twice. There was a click, and a voice
said: "Raven's Rest. Yes?" It wasn't Ravenhurst.

I said: "This is Daniel Oak. I want to talk to Mr. Ravenhurst."

"Mr. Oak? But you weren't expected until tomorrow."

"Fine. I'm early. Let me talk to Ravenhurst."

"But Mr. Ravenhurst wasn't expecting you to--"

I got all-of-a-sudden exasperated. "Unless your instruments are
running on secondhand flashlight batteries, you've known I was coming
for the past half hour. I followed Ravenhurst's instructions not to
use radio, but he should know I'm here by this time. He told me to
come as fast as possible, and I followed those instructions, too. I
always follow instructions when I'm paid enough.

"Now, I'm here; tell Ravenhurst I want to talk to him, or I'll simply
flit back to Eros, and thank him much for a pretty retainer that
didn't do him any good but gave me a nice profit for my trouble."

"One moment, please," said the voice.

It took about a minute and a half, which was about nine billion
jiffies too long, as far as I was concerned.

Then another voice said: "Oak? Wasn't expecting you till tomorrow."

"So I hear. I thought you were in a hurry, but if you're not, you can
just provide me with wine, women, and other necessities until
tomorrow. That's above and beyond my fee, of course, since you're
wasting my time, and I'm evidently not wasting yours."

I couldn't be sure whether the noise he made was a grunt or a muffled
chuckle, and I didn't much care. "Sorry, Oak; I really didn't expect
you so soon, but I do want to ... I want you to get started right
away. Leave your flitterboat where it is; I'll have someone take care
of it. Walk on over to the dome and come on in." And he cut off.

I growled something I was glad he didn't hear and hung up. I wished
that I'd had a vision unit on the phone; I'd like to have seen his
face. Although I knew I might not have learned much more from his
expression than I had from his voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

I got out of the flitterboat, and walked across the dome, my magnetic
soles making subdued clicking noises inside the suit as they caught
and released the metallic plain beneath me. Beyond the field, I was
surrounded by a lumpy horizon and a black sky full of bright, hard
stars.

The green light was on when I reached the door to the dome, so I
opened it and went on in, closing it behind me. I flipped the toggle
that began flooding the room with air. When it was up to pressure, a
trap-door in the floor of the dome opened and a crew-cut, blond young
man stuck his head up. "Mr. Oak?"

I toyed, for an instant, with the idea of giving him a sarcastic
answer. Who else would it be? How many other visitors were running
around on the surface of Raven's Rest?

Instead, I said: "That's right." My voice must have sounded pretty
muffled to him through my fishbowl.

"Come on down, Mr. Oak. You can shuck your vac suit below."

I thought "below" was a pretty ambiguous term on a low-gee lump like
this, but I followed him down the ladder. The ladder was a necessity
for fast transportation; if I'd just tried to jump down from one floor
to the next, it would've taken me until a month from next St.
Swithin's Day to land.

The door overhead closed, and I could hear the pumps start cycling.
The warning light turned red.

I took off my suit, hung it in a handy locker, showing that all I had
on underneath was my skin-tight "union suit."

"All right if I wear this?" I asked the blond young man, "Or should I
borrow a set of shorts and a jacket?" Most places in the Belt, a union
suit is considered normal dress; a man never knows when he might have
to climb into a vac suit--_fast_. But there are a few of the
hoity-toity places on Eros and Ceres and a few of the other
well-settled places where a man or woman is required to put on shorts
and jacket before entering. And in good old New York City, a man and
woman were locked up for "indecent exposure" a few months ago. The
judge threw the case out of court, but he told them they were lucky
they hadn't been picked up in Boston. It seems that the eye of the
bluenose turns a jaundiced yellow at the sight of a union suit, and he
sees red.

But there were evidently no bluenoses here. "Perfectly all right, Mr.
Oak," the blond young man said affably. Then he coughed politely and
added: "But I'm afraid I'll have to ask you to take off the gun."

I glanced at the holster under my armpit, walked back over to the
locker, opened it, and took out my vac suit.

"Hey!" said the blond young man. "Where are you going?"

"Back to my boat," I said calmly. "I'm getting tired of this runaround
already. I'm a professional man, not a hired flunky. If you'd called a
doctor, you wouldn't tell him to leave his little black bag behind; if
you'd called a lawyer, you wouldn't make him check his brief case. Or,
if you did, he'd tell you to drop dead.

"I was asked to come here as fast as possible, and when I do, I'm told
to wait till tomorrow. Now you want me to check my gun. The hell with
you."

"Merely a safety precaution," said the blond young man worriedly.

