The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Green Beret, by Thomas Edward Purdom

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Green Beret

Author: Thomas Edward Purdom

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: January 14, 2008 [EBook #24278]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREEN BERET ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

         This etext was produced from Analog, January 1961.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.



                            [Illustration]


                                 THE

                                GREEN

                                BERET




                            By TOM PURDOM



     _It's not so much the decisions a man does make that mark
     him as a Man--but the ones he refrains from making. Like the
     decision "I've had enough!"_


                      Illustrated by Schoenherr

       *       *       *       *       *




Read locked the door and drew his pistol. Sergeant Rashid handed
Premier Umluana the warrant.

"We're from the UN Inspector Corps," Sergeant Rashid said. "I'm
very sorry, but we have to arrest you and bring you in for trial
by the World Court."

If Umluana noticed Read's gun, he didn't show it. He read the
warrant carefully. When he finished, he said something in Dutch.

"I don't know your language," Rashid said.

"Then I'll speak English." Umluana was a small man with wrinkled
brow, glasses and a mustache. His skin was a shade lighter than
Read's. "The Inspector General doesn't have the power to arrest a
head of state--especially the Premier of Belderkan. Now, if
you'll excuse me, I must return to my party."

In the other room people laughed and talked. Glasses clinked in
the late afternoon. Read knew two armed men stood just outside
the door. "If you leave, Premier, I'll have to shoot you."

"I don't think so," Umluana said. "No, if you kill me, all Africa
will rise against the world. You don't want me dead. You want me
in court."

Read clicked off the safety.

"Corporal Read is very young," Rashid said, "but he's a crack
shot. That's why I brought him with me. I think he _likes_ to
shoot, too."

Umluana turned back to Rashid a second too soon. He saw the
sergeant's upraised hand before it collided with his neck.

"Help! _Kidnap._"

Rashid judo chopped him and swung the inert body over his
shoulders. Read pulled a flat grenade from his vest pocket. He
dropped it and yellow psycho gas hissed from the valve.
