The Project Gutenberg EBook of Vigorish, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Vigorish

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Release Date: January 21, 2008 [EBook #24382]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VIGORISH ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net








                               VIGORISH

                            By WALTER BUPP

                        Illustrated by Petrizzo

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction June 1960. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     _If it "takes a thief to catch a thief" ... what does it take to
     catch a psi-gifted thief?_


What do you hate and fear the most? I know a girl who gags and throws up
at the mere sight of a bird. Poor kid, when she was a barefoot moppet
she stepped on a fledgling robin in the grass. She hasn't gotten over
the squish of it yet.

Birds don't trouble me. I can look at them all day. It takes snakes to
give me the green shudders. I hate them.

She was getting better at them, I decided. This was the fourth one since
breakfast and the roughest-looking of the lot. It was a diamondback
rattler, and lay coiled on the rug at my feet. I turned my swivel chair
slowly back to my desk and riveted my eyes to the blotter. Snakes are
ghastly things. But there was no future in letting them shake me up.

I bent over in my swivel chair and swung my left arm like a flail just
below this rattler's raised head. He struck at me, but late, and missed.
The swipe I took at him should have swept him over, but he got his coils
around me. When I heaved back up straight before my desk, he was as
neatly wrapped around my forearm as a Western Union splice.

Enough of his tail was free to make that buzz that means "Look out!"
About a foot of his business end stood up off my arm. His forked tongue
flicked out over his horny lip, pink and dainty.

"Now, vanish!" I said to the snake. It didn't. Instead the door to my
office opened, letting in a little more of the unmistakable smell of the
hospital, as well as old Maragon, Grand Master of the Lodge. He was
complaining and shaking a finger at me as he came toward my desk. He
didn't jump more than a foot when he got a look at my arm. His shaggy
gray eyebrows climbed way, way up his forehead in a mutely shouted
question.

I wouldn't give the old goat the time of day. When I dead-panned him,
he shrugged and lowered himself into the chair beside my desk.

"Thought you hated snakes, Lefty," he said.

"A guy could get used to almost anything, Grand Master," I said. "I
found a cobra under my pillow when I rolled out of the sack this
morning. A coral snake fell out of the folds of my towel when I went to
take a shower. Somebody stashed a bushmaster here in my locker to meet
me when I dressed for surgery. I'm getting almost fond of snakes."

Maragon semaphored doubt by squeezing his eyebrows down in a scowl.
"Even _real_ snakes?" he protested.

"It's the most artful hallucination I've ever experienced," I granted.
"This snake has weight, a cold feel and a scratchy scaliness. This new
witch of yours really knows her stuff. I just would have thought..." I
dribbled off, raising my shoulders.

"Thought what, Lefty?"

"Oh," I said. "That it was somehow beneath the dignity of the Grand
Master to drag himself down here to the hospital just to add a little
conviction to the hallucination. I mean, working up a big entrance, and
all this pretense of your seeing a snake."

His smile was a little weary. "Try a lift, Lefty," Maragon said.

He had finally overplayed his hand. Hallucinations don't respond to
telekinesis--there's nothing there to lift. I fixed on the rattler's
crouching head and lifted. The TK jerked the S-shaped curve out of his
neck. I could feel his coils fight my lift. At some moment there I must
have gotten the point that _this_ snake was real.

I guess I was screaming and shaking it from me for five minutes after
Maragon had unwrapped the coils from my arm.

"All right. All right. All right," I said to him, shaking my head. "So
it had no fangs. You've still got me sold. I'll go to Nevada for you."
I'd have gone clear to Hell to get away from that hallucinating witch he
had working on me. I'd gotten used to hallucinations--but who can get
used to the doubt that one of those dreadful visions is real? I'd had my
lesson.

       *       *       *       *       *

It served me right, of course. It had begun when Peno Rose had first
visored me from Lake Tahoe. I had told him "No." Too busy, _much_ too
busy, with TK surgery at Memorial Hospital. It didn't mean a thing to me
that some cross-roader with plenty of TK was stealing the Sky Hi Club's
casino blind. But Peno had known me from my days on the Crap Patrol, and
wasn't much impressed that I'd reached the thirty-third degree. He'd
gotten the Senior United States senator from Nevada to put heat on the
Lodge.

When Maragon first visored me on it, I simply refused to discuss it and
switched off. That was the big mistake. I had an obligation to the Lodge
for my TK training, and there was no honorable way I could turn my back
on it. The Grand Master is a patient, if deadly, old goat, and he came
after me in person.

I'd just walked out of surgery, and was still in mask and gown. The
surgeon who had done the cutting while I had put TK clamps on the
inaccessible arteries was at my side, breathing a sigh of relief that
the patient hadn't died on the table. He'd still die, I figured, but not
on the table. I'd felt the fluttery rasp of his heart muscle as it had
strained against my lift. He didn't have too long.

"Thank God for a dry field," the scalpel surgeon said, politely holding
out his left hand to me. I shook it with my left. That's why I hadn't
done the cutting, too. There aren't any one-handed surgeons. My right
arm looks fine. It just hasn't any strength. Old Maragon had told me
once that my TK powers were a pure case of compensation for a useless
arm. The surgeon dropped my hand. "You're the best, Wally Bupp," he
said. He's too good a friend of mine to call me "Lefty" and remind me
that I'm a cripple.

It was Maragon who did that. I hadn't noticed him, but somebody gave me
the grip, and I looked around. He was back against the wall, short, gray
and square. I gave his ear lobe a TK tug in return, harder, perhaps,
than was necessary, and nodded for him to follow both of us to my
office.

"We'll have to talk about it, Lefty," he said, as he closed the door
against the smell of iodoform.

"No, we don't," I said. "I don't care who is losing how much money at
Peno Rose's Sky Hi Club. Right here in this hospital people are dying.
Ask old Thousand Cuts," I went on, nodding to the scalpel surgeon. "We
just pulled one out of the fire. When does this come in second best to
saving the skin of some tinhorn gambler?"

"Your Lodge obligations come first," he said quietly. "We have a
