The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Unnecessary Man, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Unnecessary Man

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Martinez

Release Date: February 6, 2008 [EBook #24529]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNNECESSARY MAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE
 UNNECESSARY
 MAN

 BY RANDALL GARRETT


 _Sometimes an organizational setup
 grows, sets its ways, and becomes
 so traditional that once-necessary
 jobs become unnecessary. But it is
 sometimes quite hard to spot just
 which man is the unnecessary one. In
 this case ... not the one you think!_


 Illustrated by Martinez


    _"I recall," said the Businessman, "that William Wrigley, Junior,
    once said:_ 'When two men in a business always agree, one of them is
    unnecessary.' _How true that is."_

    _The Philosopher cast his eyes toward Heaven. "O God! The Mercantile
    Mind!" He looked back at the Businessman. "When two men in a
    business always agree, one of them will come in handy as a
    scapegoat."_

                                                 _THE IDLE WORSHIPERS_
                                                 by R. Phillip Dachboden

[Illustration]

Lord Barrick Sorban, Colonel, H.I.M.O.G., Ret., sipped gently at his
drink and looked mildly at the sheaf of newsfacsimile that he'd just
bought fresh from the reproducer in the lobby of the Royal Hotel. Sorban
did not look like a man of action; he certainly did not look like a
retired colonel of His Imperial Majesty's Own Guard. The most likely
reason for this was that he was neither.

Not that he was incapable of action on a physical level if it became
necessary; he was past forty, but his tough, hard body was in as fine a
shape as it had been fifteen years before, and his reflexes had slowed
only slightly. The only major change that had occurred in his body
during that time had been the replacement of an irreparably damaged left
hand by a prosthetic.

But Lord Barrick Sorban preferred to use his mind, to initiate action in
others rather than himself, and his face showed it. His was a precision
mind, capable of fast, accurate computations, and his eyes betrayed the
fact, but the rest of his face looked, if anything, rather like that of
a gentle, persuasive schoolteacher--the type whom children love and
parents admire and both obey.

Nor was he a retired colonel of the Imperial bodyguard, except on paper.
According to the official records, he had been retired for medical
reasons--the missing left hand. In reality, his position in the Imperium
was a great deal higher than that of an ordinary colonel, and he was
still in the active service of the Emperor. It was a secret known only
to a comparative few, and one that was carefully guarded.

He was a fairly tall man, as an Imperial Guardsman had to be, with a
finely-shaped head and dark hair that was shot through with a single
streak of gray from an old burn wound. In an officer's uniform, he
looked impressive, but in civilian dress he looked like a competent
businessman.

He held the newsfac in his prosthetic left hand, which was
indistinguishable in appearance and in ordinary usage from the flesh,
bone, and blood that it had replaced. Indeed, the right hand, with its
stiff little finger, often appeared to be more useless than the left.
The hand, holding the glass of rye-and-ginger, gave an impression of
over-daintiness because of that stiff digit.

Lord Sorban paid little attention to the other customers in the bar;
customers of the Green Room of the Royal Hotel weren't the noisy kind,
anyway. He kept his attention on the newsfac for the most part; only a
small amount of awareness was reserved for the approach of the man he
was waiting for.

The banner line on the newsfac said:

    BAIRNVELL OCCUPIED
    BY IMPERIAL FORCES

He read through the article hurriedly, absorbing what facts he didn't
know, and then flipped over to the editorial page. If he knew the
_Globe_, there would sure as Space be an editorial.

There was.

    At 0231 Greenwich Earth Time, 3/37/229, the forces of the Imperial
    Government occupied the planet Bairnvell. (See article, Page One.)
    The ships of the Imperial Space Force landed, purportedly at the
    request of Obar Del Pargon, rebel leader of the anti-Presidential
    forces. That such an action should be condoned by the Imperial File
    is astounding enough; that it should be ordered by the Prime
    Portfolio himself is almost unbelievable.

    The government of Bairnvell, under the leadership of President
    Alverdan, was not, by any means, up to the standards of the Empire;
    the standard of living is lower, and the political freedom of the
    people is not at all what we are used to. But that is no excuse for
    interfering with the lawful government of any planet. If the
