The Project Gutenberg EBook of Adaptation, by Dallas McCord Reynolds

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Adaptation

Author: Dallas McCord Reynolds

Illustrator: John Schoenherr

Release Date: March 4, 2008 [EBook #24749]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADAPTATION ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


ADAPTATION

By MACK REYNOLDS

Illustrated by Schoenherr


    _When a man has a great deal of knowledge, it becomes extremely easy
    for him to confuse "knowledge" with "wisdom" ... and forget that the
    antonym of "wisdom" is not "ignorance" but "folly."_




FORWARD


_Hardly had man solved his basic problems on the planet of his origin
than he began to fumble into space. Barely a century had elapsed in the
exploration of the Solar System than he began to grope for the stars._

_And suddenly, with an all but religious zeal, mankind conceived its
fantasy dream of populating the galaxy. Never in the history of the race
had fervor reached such a peak and held so long. The question of why was
seemingly ignored. Millions of Earth-type planets beckoned and with a
lemming-like desperation humanity erupted into them._

_But the obstacles were frightening in their magnitude. The planets and
satellites of Sol had proven comparatively tractable and those that were
suited to man-life were quickly brought under his dominion. But there,
of course, he had the advantage of proximity. The time involved in
running back and forth to the home planet was meaningless and all
Earth's resources could be thrown into each problem's solving._

_But a planet a year removed in transportation or even communication?
Ay! this was another thing and more than once a million colonists were
lost before the Earthlings could adapt to new climates, new flora and
fauna, new bacteria--or to factors which the most far out visionary had
never fancied, perhaps the lack of something never before missed._

_So, mad with the lust to seed the universe with his kind, men sought
new methods. To a hundred thousand worlds they sent smaller colonies, as
few as a hundred pioneers apiece, and there marooned them, to adapt, if
adapt they could._

_For a millennium each colony was left to its own resources, to conquer
the environment or to perish in the effort._

_A thousand years was sufficient. Invariably it was found, on those
planets where human life survived at all, man slipped back during his
first two or three centuries into a state of barbarism. Then slowly
began to inch forward again. There were exceptions and the progress on
one planet never exactly duplicated that on another, however the average
was surprisingly close to both nadir and zenith, in terms of evolution
of society._

_In a thousand years it was deemed by the Office of Galactic
Colonization such pioneers had largely adjusted to the new environment
and were ready for civilization, industrialization and eventual
assimilation into the rapidly evolving Galactic Commonwealth._

_Of course, even from the beginning, new and unforeseen problems
manifested themselves ..._

                                       _from_ "Man In Antiquity"
                                         _published in Terra City, Sol
                                         Galactic Year 3,502._




I.


The Co-ordinator said, "I suppose I'm an incurable romantic. You see, I
hate to see you go." Academician Amschel Mayer was a man in early middle
years; Dr. Leonid Plekhanov, his contemporary. They offset one another;
Mayer thin and high-pitched, his colleague heavy, slow and dour. Now
they both showed their puzzlement.

The Co-ordinator added, "Without me."

Plekhanov kept his massive face blank. It wasn't for him to be impatient
with his superior. Nevertheless, the ship was waiting, stocked and
crewed.

Amschel Mayer said, "Certainly a last minute chat can't harm." Inwardly
he realized the other man's position. Here was a dream coming true, and
Mayer and his fellows were the last thread that held the Co-ordinator's
control over the dream. When they left, half a century would pass before
he could again check developments.

The Co-ordinator became more businesslike. "Yes," he said, "but I have
more in mind than a chat. Very briefly, I wish to go over your
assignment. Undoubtedly redundant, but if there are questions, no matter
how seemingly trivial, this is the last opportunity to air them."

_What possible questions could there be at this late date?_ Plekhanov
thought.

The department head swiveled slowly in his chair and then back again as
he talked. "You are the first--the first of many, many such teams. The
manner in which you handle your task will effect man's eternity.
Obviously, since upon your experience we will base our future policies
on interstellar colonization." His voice lost volume. "The position in
which you find yourselves should be humbling."

"It is," Amschel Mayer agreed. Plekhanov nodded his head.

The Co-ordinator nodded, too. "However, the situation is as near ideal
as we could hope. Rigel's planets are all but unbelievably Earthlike.
Almost all our flora and fauna have been adaptable. Certainly our race
has been.

"These two are the first of the seeded planets. Almost a thousand years
ago we deposited small bodies of colonists upon each of them. Since then
we have periodically checked, from a distance, but never intruded." His
eyes went from one of his listeners to the other. "No comments or
questions, thus far?"

Mayer said, "This is one thing that surprises me. The colonies are so
small to begin with. How could they possibly populate a whole world in
one millennium?"

The Co-ordinator said, "Man adapts, Amschel. Have you studied the
development of the United States? During her first century and a half
the need was for population to fill the vast lands wrested from the
Amer-Inds. Families of eight, ten, and twelve children were the common
thing, much larger ones were not unknown. And the generations crowded
one against another; a girl worried about spinsterhood if she reached
seventeen unwed. But in the next century? The frontier vanished, the
driving need for population was gone. Not only were drastic immigration
laws passed, but the family shrunk rapidly until by mid-Twentieth
Century the usual consisted of two or three children, and even the
childless family became increasingly common."

Mayer frowned impatiently, "But still, a thousand years. There is always
famine, war, disease ..."

Plekhanov snorted patronizingly. "Forty to fifty generations, Amschel?
Starting with a hundred colonists? Where are your mathematics?"

The Co-ordinator said, "The proof is there. We estimate that each of
Rigel's planets now supports a population of nearly one billion."

"To be more exact," Plekhanov rumbled, "some nine hundred million on
Genoa, seven and a half on Texcoco."

Mayer smiled wryly. "I wonder what the residents of each of these
planets call their worlds. Hardly the same names we have arbitrarily
bestowed."

"Probably each call theirs _The World_," the Co-ordinator smiled. "After
all, the basic language, in spite of a thousand years, is still
Amer-English. However, I assume you are familiar with our method of
naming. The most advanced culture on Rigel's first planet is to be
compared to the Italian cities during Europe's feudalistic era. We have
named that planet Genoa. The most advanced nation of the second planet
is comparable to the Aztecs at the time of the conquest. We considered
Tenochtitlan but it seemed a tongue twister, so Texcoco is the
alternative."

"Modernizing Genoa," Mayer mused, "should be considerably easier than
the task on semiprimitive Texcoco."

Plekhanov shrugged, "Not necessarily."

The Co-ordinator held up a hand and smiled at them. "Please, no debates
on methods at present. An hour from now you will be in space with a year
of travel before you. During that time you'll have opportunity for
discussion, debate and hair pulling on every phase of your problem."

His expression became more serious. "You are acquainted with the unique
position you assume. These colonists are in your control to an extent no
small group has ever dominated millions of others before. No Caesar ever
exerted the power that will be in your educated hands. For a half
century you will be as gods. Your science, your productive know-how,
your medicine--if it comes to that, your weapons--are many centuries in
advance of theirs. As I said before, your position should be humbling."

Mayer squirmed in his chair. "Why not check upon us, say, once every
decade? In all, our ship's company numbers but sixteen persons. Almost
anything could happen. If you were to send a department craft each ten
years ..."

The Co-ordinator was shaking his head. "Your qualifications are as high
as anyone available. Once on the scene you will begin accumulating
information which we, here in Terra City, do not have. Were we to send
another group in ten years to check upon you, all they could do would be
interfere in a situation all the factors with which they would not be
cognizant."

Amschel Mayer shifted nervously. "But no matter how highly trained, nor
how earnest our efforts, we still may fail." His voice worried. "The
department cannot expect guaranteed success. After all, we are the
first."

"Admittedly. Your group is first to approach the hundreds of thousands
of planets we have seeded. If you fail, we will use your failure to
perfect the eventual system we must devise for future teams. Even your
failure would be of infinite use to us." He lifted and dropped a
shoulder. "I have no desire to undermine your belief in yourselves
but--how are we to know?--perhaps there will be a score of failures
before we find the ideal method of quickly bringing these primitive
colonies into our Galactic Commonwealth."

The Co-ordinator came to his feet and sighed. He still hated to see them
go. "If there is no other discussion ..."




II.


Specialist Joseph Chessman stood stolidly before a viewing screen.
Theoretically he was on watch. Actually his eyes were unseeing, there
was nothing to see. The star pattern changed so slowly as to be all but
permanent.

Not that every other task on board was not similar. One man could have
taken the _Pedagogue_ from the Solar System to Rigel, just as easily as
its sixteen-hand crew was doing. Automation at its ultimate, not even
the steward department had tasks adequately to fill the hours.

He had got beyond the point of yawning, his mind was a blank during
these hours of duty. He was a stolid, bear of a man, short and massive
of build.

A voice behind him said, "Second watch reporting. Request permission to
take over the bridge."

Chessman turned and it took a brief moment for the blankness in his eyes
to fade into life. "Hello Kennedy, you on already? Seems like I just got
here." He muttered in self-contradiction, "Or that I've been here a
month."

Technician Jerome Kennedy grinned. "Of course, if you want to stay ..."

Chessman said glumly, "What difference does it make where you are? What
are they doing in the lounge?"

Kennedy looked at the screen, not expecting to see anything and
accomplishing just that. "Still on their marathon argument."

Joe Chessman grunted.

Just to be saying something, Kennedy said, "How do you stand in the big
debate?"

"I don't know. I suppose I favor Plekhanov. How we're going to take a
bunch of savages and teach them modern agriculture and industrial
methods in fifty years under democratic institutions, I don't know. I
can see them putting it to a vote when we suggest fertilizer might be a
good idea." He didn't feel like continuing the conversation. "See you
later, Kennedy," and then, as an afterthought, formally, "Relinquishing
the watch to Third Officer."

As he left the compartment, Jerry Kennedy called after him, "Hey, what's
the course!"

Chessman growled over his shoulder, "The same it was last month, and the
same it'll be next month." It wasn't much of a joke but it was the only
one they had between themselves.

In the ship's combination lounge and mess he drew a cup of coffee. Joe
Chessman, among whose specialties were propaganda and primitive
politics, was third in line in the expedition's hierarchy. As such he
participated in the endless controversy dealing with overall strategy
but only as a junior member of the firm. Amschel Mayer and Leonid
Plekhanov were the center of the fracas and right now were at it hot and
heavy.

Joe Chessman listened with only half interest. He settled into a chair
on the opposite side of the lounge and sipped at his coffee. They were
going over their old battlefields, assaulting ramparts they'd stormed a
thousand times over.

Plekhanov was saying doggedly, "Any planned economy is more efficient
than any unplanned one. What could be more elementary than that? How
could anyone in his right mind deny that?"

And Mayer snapped, "_I_ deny it. That term _planned economy_ covers a
multitude of sins. My dear Leonid, don't be an idiot ..."

"I beg your pardon, sir!"

"Oh, don't get into one of your huffs, Plekhanov."

They were at that stage again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Technician Natt Roberts entered, a book in hand, and sent the trend of
conversation in a new direction. He said, worriedly, "I've been studying
up on this and what we're confronted with is two different ethnic
periods, barbarism and feudalism. Handling them both at once doubles our
problems."

One of the junior specialists who'd been sitting to one side said, "I've
been thinking about that and I believe I've got an answer. Why not all
of us concentrate on Texcoco? When we've brought them to the Genoa
level, which shouldn't take more than a decade or two, then we can start
working on the Genoese, too."

Mayer snapped, "And by that time we'll have hardly more than half our
fifty years left to raise the two of them to an industrial technology.
Don't be an idiot, Stevens."

Stevens flushed his resentment.

Plekhanov said slowly, "Besides, I'm not sure that, given the correct
method, we cannot raise Texcoco to an industrialized society in
approximately the same time it will take to bring Genoa there."

Mayer bleated a sarcastic laugh at that opinion.

Natt Roberts tossed his book to the table and sank into a chair. "If
only one of them had maintained itself at a reasonable level of
development, we'd have had help in working with the other. As it is,
there are only sixteen of us." He shook his head. "Why did the knowledge
held by the original colonists melt away? How can an intelligent people
