The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Alternate Plan, by Gerry Maddren

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Alternate Plan

Author: Gerry Maddren

Release Date: March 9, 2008 [EBook #24792]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ALTERNATE PLAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE ALTERNATE PLAN

By GERRY MADDREN


 _The operation was a very serious one and Bart Neely
 was willing to put himself into Dr. Morton's hands.
 But if things turned out badly, Bart was going to
 teach them a lesson. He was going to refuse to die._


Bart Neely was fighting the hypo. They'd slipped that over on him. Now
he had to struggle to keep his brain ready for plan B. The alternate
plan. He nodded feebly at his reflection in the mirror over the white
enamel dresser. This throat-trouble wasn't going to lick him. He lay
back on the cool white pillow. Medical men always thought theirs was the
final answer; well, psychologists like himself knew there was a broader
view of man than the anatomical. There was a vast region of energy at
man's disposal; the switch to turn it on, located in the brain.

Rubber-soled shoes squished across the bare floor as Dr. Jonas Morton
came into Bart's room. His hair was hidden by a sterile cap, his arms
bare to well above the elbows.

Looks like a damned butcher, thought Bart.

"Bart, I want you to reconsider the anesthetic. I think you ought to be
out for this one, completely out." The doctor's voice became a shade
less professional. "I don't tell you how to run your perception
experiments, I think you ought to let me judge what's best in the
surgical area."

