The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Deadly Daughters, by Winston K. Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Deadly Daughters

Author: Winston K. Marks

Illustrator: Irving Novick

Release Date: March 30, 2008 [EBook #24965]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEADLY DAUGHTERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 The
 _DEADLY_ Daughters

 By WINSTON K. MARKS

 ILLUSTRATOR NOVICK


 _These gorgeous fanatics were
 equally at home with men,
 murder, or matrimony, and
 they used all three with
 amazing success._


Dr. Hubert Long, 40, bachelor and assistant professor of political
science at Mentioch University, thrust his rugged, unlovely face
forward, sticking out his neck literally and figuratively.

"The Humanist Party," he shouted at the 800 odd students in the lecture
hall, "is not a political party at all. It's an oligarchy, so firmly
established in Washington that our electoral form of government is an
empty ritual, a ridiculous myth. Our elections are rigged to perpetuate
a select group of feminists in absolute power."

[Illustration: Saving Dr. Long came in the line of duty.]

The mixed group of seniors stirred in their seats with wide eyes, and
many began taking notes.

"This may cost me my position at the university," he said grimly, "but
the time has come for all responsible citizens to face the fact that the
Government of the United States of America has degenerated into little
better than an absolute dictatorship!"

This time a rustle of whispering grew to restless buzzing. A young man
in a bowtie leaped to his feet breaking the no-questions rule in Long's
over-size classes. "May the _Mentioch Bugle_ quote you, Dr. Long?"

"You may headline those views, and I hope you do," Long declared
belligerently, adding extra emphasis.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Exactly what do you imply when you call the Humanist Party a group of
feminists?" the young man asked, encouraged.

Long's gaze swept out, noting the mild amusement on the faces of the men
students, the growing annoyance in the women. He fixed the reporter for
the campus paper with a level stare. "I suppose you feel that because
only 30 percent of our legislatures are women, that men still dominate
