The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sun King, by Gaston Derreaux

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sun King

Author: Gaston Derreaux

Release Date: April 1, 2008 [EBook #24973]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUN KING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The SUN KING

By GASTON DERREAUX


 The people of Par'si'ya forgot their God, and
 worshipped only murder, and sin. But then the
 virgin Too-che gave birth to a male child....


Before the flood, even before Egypt's greatness, the world was divided
into three main countries, named Jaffeth, Shem and Arabin'ya. There were
other less populated lands and places; Uropa in the west, Heleste in the
north, and the two great lands of the far west, called North and South
Guatama.

Now, at the juncture of the borders of the three greatest countries, lay
a mighty city, named Oas. It was the capital city of the Arabin'yan
nation called Par'si'ya.

Its Temple of Skulls was the greatest known to any traveler, but the
temples built to the god, Mazda, and his son, Ihua'Mazda, were empty and
unadorned--the people had forgotten God.

So-qi, King of Oas, sent out his armies throughout Jaffeth (China),
conquering and slaying, bringing back ever more skulls for the Golgotha
temples, more gold and more slaves for the enriching of King So-qi. His
harem was the greatest of buildings of the mighty city, and his wives
beyond man's ability to count.

       *       *       *       *       *

Too-che was one of the finest ornaments of the city of Oas. Too-che was
slim, her breasts were two mounds of magic, her eyes were pools of
mystic green depths, her legs were subtle, sinuous beauty.

But Too-che was a virgin, and in all that city of a million sinful
souls, she alone held aloof from the sins of the flesh.

[Illustration: When the soldiers of the city Oas saw that their King had
