The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gift Bearer, by Charles Louis Fontenay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Gift Bearer

Author: Charles Louis Fontenay

Release Date: April 2, 2008 [EBook #24975]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIFT BEARER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









_The Gift Bearer_

By CHARLES L. FONTENAY


 _This could well have been Montcalm's greatest opportunity;
 a chance to bring mankind priceless gifts from worlds beyond.
 But Montcalm was a solid family man--and what about that nude
 statue in the park?_


It was one of those rare strokes of poetic something-or-other that the
whole business occurred the morning after the stormy meeting of the
Traskmore censorship board.

Like the good general he was, Richard J. Montcalm had foreseen trouble
at this meeting, for it was the boldest invasion yet into the territory
of evil and laxity. His forces were marshaled. Several of the town's
ministers who had been with him on other issues had balked on this one,
but he had three of them present, as well as heads of several women's
clubs.

As he had anticipated, the irresponsible liberals were present to do
battle, headed by red-haired Patrick Levitt.

"This board," said Levitt in his strong, sarcastic voice, "has gone too
far. It was all right to get rid of the actual filth ... and everyone
will agree there was some. But when you banned the sale of some
magazines and books because they had racy covers or because the contents
were a little too sophisticated to suit the taste of members of this
board ... well, you can carry protection of our youth to the point of
insulting the intelligence of adults who have a right to read what they
want to."
