The Project Gutenberg EBook of Control Group, by Roger Dee

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Control Group

Author: Roger Dee

Release Date: March 29, 2008 [EBook #24949]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONTROL GROUP ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 _"Any problem posed by one group of
 human beings can be resolved by any
 other group." That's what the Handbook
 said. But did that include primitive
 humans? Or the Bees? Or a ..._


CONTROL GROUP

By ROGER DEE


The cool green disk of Alphard Six on the screen was infinitely welcome
after the arid desolation and stinking swamplands of the inner planets,
an airy jewel of a world that might have been designed specifically for
the hard-earned month of rest ahead. Navigator Farrell, youngest and
certainly most impulsive of the three-man Terran Reclamations crew,
would have set the _Marco Four_ down at once but for the greater caution
of Stryker, nominally captain of the group, and of Gibson, engineer, and
linguist. Xavier, the ship's little mechanical, had--as was usual and
proper--no voice in the matter.

"Reconnaissance spiral first, Arthur," Stryker said firmly. He chuckled
at Farrell's instant scowl, his little eyes twinkling and his naked
paunch quaking over the belt of his shipboard shorts. "Chapter One,
Subsection Five, Paragraph Twenty-seven: _No planetfall on an
unreclaimed world shall be deemed safe without proper--_"

Farrell, as Stryker had expected, interrupted with characteristic
impatience. "Do you _sleep_ with that damned Reclamations Handbook, Lee?
Alphard Six isn't an unreclaimed world--it was never colonized before
the Hymenop invasion back in 3025, so why should it be inhabited now?"

Gibson, who for four hours had not looked up from his interminable chess
game with Xavier, paused with a beleaguered knight in one blunt brown
hand.

"No point in taking chances," Gibson said in his neutral baritone. He
shrugged thick bare shoulders, his humorless black-browed face unmoved,
when Farrell included him in his scowl. "We're two hundred twenty-six
light-years from Sol, at the old limits of Terran expansion, and there's
no knowing what we may turn up here. Alphard's was one of the first
systems the Bees took over. It must have been one of the last to be
abandoned when they pulled back to 70 Ophiuchi."

"And I think _you_ live for the day," Farrell said acidly, "when we'll
stumble across a functioning dome of live, buzzing Hymenops. Damn it,
Gib, the Bees pulled out a hundred years ago, before you and I were
born--neither of us ever saw a Hymenop, and never will!"

"But I saw them," Stryker said. "I fought them for the better part of
the century they were here, and I learned there's no predicting nor
understanding them. We never knew why they came nor why they gave up and
left. How can we know whether they'd leave a rear-guard or booby trap
here?"

He put a paternal hand on Farrell's shoulder, understanding the younger
man's eagerness and knowing that their close-knit team would have been
the more poorly balanced without it.

"Gib's right," he said. He nearly added _as usual_. "We're on rest leave
at the moment, yes, but our mission is still to find Terran colonies
enslaved and abandoned by the Bees, not to risk our necks and a valuable
Reorientations ship by landing blind on an unobserved planet. We're too
close already. Cut in your shields and find a reconnaissance spiral,
will you?"

Grumbling, Farrell punched coordinates on the Ringwave board that lifted
the _Marco Four_ out of her descent and restored the bluish enveloping
