The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Monster, by S. M. Tenneshaw

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Monster

Author: S. M. Tenneshaw

Release Date: March 25, 2008 [EBook #24913]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MONSTER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The MONSTER

By S. M. TENNESHAW


 What will cosmic rays do to a living organism?
 Will they destroy life, or produce immortality?
 The eminent Dr. Blair Gaddon thought he knew ...


Fred Trent pulled his coupe into the curb and leaned his head out the
open window beside him.

"Hi, Joan, need any help?"

He called to a trim-looking girl in a nurse's uniform. Joan Drake was
holding on to a leash with both hands, and her slender body was tugging
against the leash as she strained against the pull of a Great Dane on
the other end.

She looked over her shoulder as Trent called out, her blonde hair
glinting in the warm afternoon sunlight. Blue eyes smiled an impish
greeting at him.

"Hello, Fred. No thanks. Brutus and I get along famously."

Trent opened the car door and got out. He walked up the sidewalk and
stood beside the girl.

[Illustration: They watched as white-hot flames shot from the base of
the cradled rocket. There was a tremendous roaring, and then the rocket
slowly lifted upward.]

"Business must be mighty slack for the great gland specialist, Stanley
Fenwick. Is this all he can find for his pretty nurse to do?"

The girl sniffed. "Walking Brutus around has its compensations. At least
he doesn't get fresh--like some people I know."

Fred grinned as he saw the huge dog suddenly turn on its leash and raise
itself off the ground to stick out a long rapier-like tongue and lick
the girl's cheek before she could move her head away.

"Down, Brutus! Down!" she called out, half-laughing.

Trent stepped in and pulled the big animal away from the girl, patting
the dog's head as he did so.

"What was that you said about getting fresh?" Trent asked her. "Looks to
me like the dog's life is the best around the Fenwick offices."

"Just don't get any ideas!" Joan Drake shot back.

"I've already got them," he replied. "Which reminds me, am I seeing you
tonight?"

The girl held a tight grip on the leash and looked at him coyly.

"Let's see. We'll take in a movie, stop for a bite to eat at Joe's
Hamburger Palace, and then drive out to North Butte. You'll park the car
and then you'll ask me when I'm going to quit my job and settle down
raising a family for you, and I'll say--"

"You'll say not until I get the biggest scoop in Arizona, a big raise,
and a bonus as a down payment on a house," he completed her sentence.

"There! You see? We might just as well not have our date. In effect,
we've had it already."

He looked at her for a long moment, and when he spoke again his voice
had lost its humorous note.

"You forgot one very important item. When I ask you that usual question,
and after you give your usual answer, I'll take you in my arms and tell
you how much you mean to me, and--"

"You win," she interrupted him. "I had forgotten about that."

       *       *       *       *       *

The dog started to pull against the leash again and Fred reached out to
help her hold the big animal in check. Then she looked at him again.

"What brings you to the outskirts of Tucson? Don't tell me there's a big
story breaking on the edge of town."

He shook his head. "Not exactly. I'm on my way to the Rocket Research
Proving Grounds. Just a routine story on the experiment they're going to
pull off this evening. I've got to interview Mathieson, Gaddon, and a
few other scientists on the project."

The girl laughed. "That's something of a coincidence. Dr. Blair Gaddon
is in Dr. Fenwick's office right now."

Fred Trent's eyebrows raised in surprise.

"That so? Something wrong with him?"

"No. He's just having a physical checkup. Seems to be worried about his
heart. Dr. Fenwick didn't need me since it's a routine job, so I took
Brutus for a walk."

Trent nodded. "That's a bit of luck. I think I'll stick around and give
Gaddon a lift out to the Proving Grounds. I wanted to talk to him
anyway."

"In that case," the girl replied, "you can give me a hand putting Brutus
back in his kennel. Once he gets out he's something of a problem."

Fred nodded, taking the leash from her hands and feeling the big dog tug
against him.

"Never could figure out why Fenwick wanted a big hound like this. Seems
to me a terrier would be more practical."

"That's a matter of taste," Joan answered. "Dr. Fenwick is very fond of
Brutus--and so am I for that matter. But tell me something about this
experiment you're covering."

They had turned in at a large Spanish type house that Trent knew served
as a combination living quarters and office for the famous gland
specialist. He shrugged.

"Don't know much about it myself. They're shooting off this new type
rocket, a really big affair, loaded with all sorts of instruments. Some
sort of experiment with cosmic rays. The rocket will go up to the outer
layers of the Earth's atmosphere, where a clocked mechanism will release
a parachute-attached section containing the instruments. This will float
back to the surface of the Earth.

"There is one interesting thing about it though. They're also including
a live animal with the instruments. A cat I believe. They want to see
what effect the cosmic rays will have on a living creature."

The girl turned a shocked face toward him as they walked up the steps to
the front door of the house. Trent could see a panel in the center of
the door that opened from the inside, and over it, the sign, _Doctor is
in, please ring_.

"But I think that's positively cruel!" Joan Drake said earnestly.
"Subjecting an innocent animal to what may be certain death!"

Fred laughed at her concern. "Hold on, now. You should be the last one
to take such an attitude. Doesn't medical science experiment on animals
to find out about human ailments?"

"That's different," the girl insisted, opening the door and leading the
way into a long hall. "Doctors know what they are doing--but this is a
sheer waste of life ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Trent let the dog pull him down the hall toward a door at the end which
he knew opened on the backyard where the Great Dane was kept.

"Seems to me it's much the same thing," he answered her. "Scientists
want to explore the mysteries of space, and the only way to do it is
with an animal. Or would you like to make the trip--maybe I can arrange
it? Would make a big story, just the one I've been waiting for."

"I believe you would at that!" she mocked, opening the rear door.
"Here, give me the leash."

Trent handed over the leash to her and watched as she released the huge
dog. Brutus flicked out a long tongue once again and caught the girl's
cheek in a wet caress before she straightened.

"Brutus! Now get along with you!"

The dog took a leisurely bound through the door and into the backyard.
Trent glanced through the door at the tall fenced-in yard with the large
kennel that might well have served as a small garage. He stood beside
the girl watching the big animal romp for a few moments, then she shut
the door and they turned back down the hall.

"I'll have to go inside now, Fred," she said. "If you want to wait for
Gaddon, have a seat. It shouldn't be long."

She started to turn in at a door marked private, when Fred pulled her
gently around and before she could stop him, had kissed her.

"I was getting mighty jealous of Brutus. Now I feel better."

"I don't know which of you I prefer," she shot back, then smiled and
pulled away from him.

He watched her open the office door and close it after her.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had lit his second cigarette and gotten halfway through his third
magazine on the rack beside the chair when the office door opened again.
He heard the pleasant voice of Dr. Stanley Fenwick.

"If every man had a heart as strong as yours, Blair, we wouldn't need
half the doctors we have."
