The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Happy Unfortunate, by Robert Silverberg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Happy Unfortunate

Author: Robert Silverberg

Release Date: April 10, 2008 [EBook #25035]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPY UNFORTUNATE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                THE
                               HAPPY
                            UNFORTUNATE

                       By ROBERT SILVERBERG


     _Dekker, back from space, found great physical changes in
     the people of Earth; changes that would have horrified
     him five years before. But now, he wanted to be like the
     rest--even if he had to lose an eye and both ears to do it._


Rolf Dekker stared incredulously at the slim, handsome young Earther who
was approaching the steps of Rolf's tumbling-down Spacertown shack.
_He's got no ears_, Rolf noted in unbelief. After five years in space,
Rolf had come home to a strangely-altered world, and he found it hard to
accept.

Another Earther appeared. This one was about the same size, and gave the
same impression of fragility. This one had ears, all right--and a pair
of gleaming, two-inch horns on his forehead as well. _I'll be eternally
roasted_, Rolf thought. _Now I've seen everything._

Both Earthers were dressed in neat, gold-inlaid green tunics, costumes
which looked terribly out of place amid the filth of Spacertown, and
their hair was dyed a light green to match.

He had been scrutinizing them for several moments before they became
aware of him. They both spotted him at once and the one with no ears
turned to his companion and whispered something. Rolf, leaning forward,
strained to hear.

"... beautiful, isn't he? That's the biggest one I've seen!"

"Come over here, won't you?" the horned one called, in a soft, gentle
voice which contrasted oddly with the raucous bellowing Rolf had been
accustomed to hearing in space. "We'd like to talk to you."

Just then Kanaday emerged from the door of the shack and limped down
to the staircase.

[Illustration: The doctor refused to change Dekker, so Dekker was going
to change the doctor.]

"Hey, Rolf!" he called. "Leave those things alone!"

"Let me find out what they want first, huh?"

"Can't be any good, whatever it is," Kanaday growled. "Tell them to get
out of here before I throw them back to wherever they came from. And
make it fast."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two Earthers looked at each other uneasily. Rolf walked toward them.

"He doesn't like Earthers, that's all," Rolf explained. "But he won't do
anything but yell."

Kanaday spat in disgust, turned, and limped back inside the shack.

"I didn't know you were wearing horns," Rolf said.

The Earther flushed. "New style," he said. "Very expensive."

"Oh," Rolf said. "I'm new here; I just got back. Five years in space.
When I left you people looked all alike. Now you wear horns."

"It's the new trend," said the earless one. "We're Individs. When you
left the Conforms were in power, style-wise. But the new surgeons can do
almost anything, you see."

The shadow of a frown crossed Rolf's face. "Anything?"

"Almost. They can't transform an Earther into a Spacer, and they don't
think they ever will."

"Or vice versa?" Rolf asked.

They sniggered. "What Spacer would want to become an Earther? Who would
give up that life, out in the stars?"

Rolf said nothing. He kicked at the heap of litter in the filthy street.
_What spacer indeed?_ he thought. He suddenly realized that the two
little Earthers were staring up at him as if he were some sort of beast.
He probably weighed as much as both of them, he knew, and at six-four he
was better than a foot taller. They looked like children next to him,
like toys. The savage blast of acceleration would snap their flimsy
bodies like toothpicks.

"What places have you been to?" the earless one asked.

"Two years on Mars, one on Venus, one in the Belt, one on Neptune," Rolf
recited. "I didn't like Neptune. It was best in the Belt; just our one
ship, prospecting. We made a pile on Ceres--enough to buy out. I shot
half of it on Neptune. Still have plenty left, but I don't know what I
can do with it." He didn't add that he had come home puzzled, wondering
