The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pharaoh's Broker, by Ellsworth Douglass

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Pharaoh's Broker
       Being the Very Remarkable Experiences in Another World of Isidor Werner

Author: Ellsworth Douglass

Release Date: May 2, 2008 [EBook #25295]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHARAOH'S BROKER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, George Snoga, Stephen Blundell and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









              PHARAOH'S BROKER

   BEING THE VERY REMARKABLE EXPERIENCES
            IN ANOTHER WORLD OF
               ISIDOR WERNER

            (WRITTEN BY HIMSELF)


 EDITED, ARRANGED, AND WITH AN INTRODUCTION
           BY ELLSWORTH DOUGLASS


                  [Device]


                   LONDON
         C. ARTHUR PEARSON LIMITED
           HENRIETTA STREET W.C.
                    1899




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.
    Obsolete spellings have been retained. The oe ligature is
    represented by [oe].




CONTENTS


                                                  PAGE
 INTRODUCTION: ELUSIVE TRUTH                         7


               BOOK I. SECRETS OF SPACE

 CHAPTER
      I. DR. HERMANN ANDERWELT                      19
     II. THE GRAVITY PROJECTILE                     27
    III. STRUCTURE OF THE PROJECTILE                37
     IV. WHAT IS ON MARS?                           48
      V. FINAL PREPARATIONS                         57
     VI. FAREWELL TO EARTH                          67
    VII. THE TERRORS OF LIGHT                       81
   VIII. THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW                   91
     IX. TRICKS OF REFRACTION                       99
      X. THE TWILIGHT OF SPACE                     108
     XI. TELLING THE TIME BY GEOGRAPHY             117
    XII. SPACE FEVER                               126
   XIII. THE MYSTERY OF A MINUS WEIGHT             141


               BOOK II. OTHER WORLD LIFE

      I. WHY MARS GIVES A RED LIGHT                157
     II. THE TERROR BIRDS                          170
    III. TWO OF US AGAINST THE ARMIES OF MARS      182
     IV. THE STRANGE BRAVERY OF MISS BLANK         192
      V. ZAPHNATH, RULER OF THE KEMI               204
     VI. THE IRON MEN FROM THE BLUE STAR           220
    VII. PARALLEL PLANETARY LIFE                   240
   VIII. A PLAGIARIST OF DREAMS                    249
     IX. GETTING INTO THE CORNER                   260
      X. HUMANITY ON PTAH                          275
     XI. REVOLUTIONIST AND EAVESDROPPER            283
    XII. THE DOCTOR DISAPPEARS                     292
   XIII. THE REVELATION OF HOTEP                   304




INTRODUCTION

Elusive Truth


It was the Chicago _Tribune_ of June 13th, 189-, which contained this
paragraph under the head-line: "Big Broker Missing!"

   "The friends of Isidor Werner, a young man prominent in Board of
   Trade circles, are much concerned about him, as he has not been seen
   for several days. He made his last appearance in the wheat pit as a
   heavy buyer Tuesday forenoon. That afternoon he left his office at
   Room 87 Board of Trade, and has not been seen since, nor can his
   whereabouts be learned. He is six feet two inches high, of athletic
   build, with black hair and moustache, a regular nose, and an
   unpronounced Jewish appearance. His age is hardly more than
   twenty-seven, but he has often made himself felt as a market force on
   the Board of Trade, where he was well thought of."

But it was the _Evening Post_ of the same date which prided itself on
unearthing the real sensation. A scare-head across the top of a first
page column read:

   "A PLUNGER'S LAST PLUNGE!"

   "The daring young broker who held the whole wheat market in his hands
   a few months ago, amassing an independent fortune in three days, but
   losing most of it gamely on subsequent changes in the market, has
   made his last plunge. This time he has gone into the cold, kind bosom
   of Lake Michigan. Isidor Werner evened up his trades in the wheat
   market last Tuesday forenoon, and then applied for his balance-sheet
   at a higher clearing house! No trace of him or clue to his
   whereabouts was found, until the _Evening Post_, on the principle of
   setting one mystery to solve another, sent its representative to
   examine a strange steel rocket, discovered half-buried in the sands
   of Lake Michigan, near Berrien Springs, two days ago. Our reporter
   investigated this bullet-shaped contrivance and found an opening into
   it, and within he discovered a scrap of paper on which were written
   the words: 'Farewell to Earth for ever!' Werner's friends, when
   interviewed by the _Evening Post_, all positively identified the
   handwriting of this scrap as his chirography. It is supposed that he
   took an excursion steamer to St. Joseph, Michigan, last Tuesday or
   Wednesday afternoon, and walking down the shore toward Berrien
   Springs, finally threw himself into the Lake. Neither Israel Werner,
   with whom the dead man lived on Indiana Avenue, nor Patrick Flynn,
   the chief clerk at his office, can give any reason for the suicide,
   or explain the exact connection of the infernal machine (if such it
   be) with the sad circumstance. But they both positively identify the
   handwriting on the scrap of paper. We have wired our representative
   to bring the mysterious machine to Chicago; and those who think they
   may be able to throw any light upon the case, are invited to call at
   the office of the _Evening Post_ and examine it."

The _Inter Ocean_ developed a theory that the suicide was only a
pretended one for the purpose of fraudulently collecting life insurance
policies. It was cited that Isidor Werner had insured his life for more
than $100,000, and this in spite of the fact that he had no family,
parents, brothers or sisters to provide for; but had taken the policies
in favour of his uncle, Israel Werner, and in case of his prior death,
in favour of a cousin, Ruth Werner. This theory gained but little
currency among those who knew the man best, and although the insurance
companies prepared to resist payment of the policies to the bitter end,
yet, as time went on, no one attempted to prove his death, nor to claim
the handsome sum which would result from it. Moreover, Israel Werner and
his daughter Ruth, the beneficiaries under the policies, persisted in
believing that their relative was yet alive, though they could give no
good reasons for so believing, nor explain his disappearance.

In its issue of June 15th the _Tribune_ scouted the idea of suicide
altogether. It had a better and more plausible theory of the case.
Isidor Werner had a large sum of money in the Corn Exchange Bank,
drawing interest by the year. In case of either a premeditated or a
pretended suicide he would most certainly have withdrawn, and made some
disposition of, this money. In fact, he had, on the day of his
disappearance, drawn out five thousand dollars of it in gold. For this
coin the _Tribune_ believed he had been murdered, and that they had a
clue to the murderer. The vanished man had several times been seen in
the company of a suspicious German, of intelligent but erratic
appearance. This queer character lived in a hotbed of socialism on the
West Side, and the young broker was supposed to be in his power. In
fact, it was known for certain that the erratic German had secured a
large sum of money from him, and that Werner had visited his rooms in
the slums of the West Side more than once. Moreover, the two had made a
secret railway journey together two days before the disappearance, and
on the very day that Werner was last seen, the German had fled his
lodgings without giving any explanation of his departure to his few
acquaintances. When the _Tribune_ reporter called at these lodgings, the
landlord still had in his possession a gold eagle, with which the German
had paid his rent, and in the grate of the deserted room were the
charred remains of burnt papers. One of these was a rather firm, crisp
cinder, and had been a blue-print of a drawing. As nearly as could be
judged, from its shrivelled state, it appeared to be the plan of some
infernal machine. The name of the fugitive was Anderwelt, and he called
himself a doctor. Further investigations were being carried on by the
_Tribune_, which promised to prove beyond a doubt that he was the
murderer of Isidor Werner.

But the _Evening Post_ still held the palm for sensations, and I copy
verbatim from its columns of June 15th:

   "It is rare that a newspaper, dealing strictly in facts, has to
   record anything so closely bordering on the supernatural and
   mysterious as that which we must now relate. The following facts,
   however, are vouched for by the entire editorial department of the
   _Evening Post_, and many of them by several hundred witnesses. We
   begin by apologising to the hundreds who have called at this office
   and have been unable to see the Werner infernal machine. We gave it
   that name in a thoughtless jest, but its subsequent actions have more
   than justified the title. Our reporter brought it from Berrien
   Springs, as directed, and deposited it in the court of the _Evening
   Post_ building. As is quite generally known, this court is a central
   well in the building, affording ventilation and light to the interior
   offices, from every one of which can be seen what goes on in it. The
   well is spanned by a glass roof above the eighth storey. In this
   court, at eleven o'clock this morning, the entire editorial and a
   large part of the business staff of this paper, repaired, to examine
   the mysterious rocket-like thing. A little lid was opened, showing
   the recess where the tell-tale scrap of paper, written by Werner, had
   been found. Inside there seemed to be a pair of peculiar battery
   cells, whose exact nature was hidden by the outer shell. Outside
   there were several thumb-screws, which were turned both ways without
   any apparent effect. While making this examination the machine had
   been set up on its lower end, and when it was again laid down it
   _refused to lie on its side_, but persisted in _standing erect of its
   own accord_. This was the more wonderful because the lower end was
   not flat, so that it would afford a good base, but was pointed. More
   than a hundred people saw it stand up on this sharp tip, saw it lift
   up light weights which were placed upon it to hold it on its side,
   and saw it quickly right itself when it was placed vertically but
   wrong end down.

   "Thinking this queer property had been contributed to it in some way
   by loosening the thumb-screws, they were next all set down as tightly
   as possible, to see if this tendency to erectness would be lost.
   Then, to the astonishment of every one in the court, and of several
   hundred people who were by this time watching from the interior
   windows, this infernal machine, without any explosion, burning of
   gases, or any apparent force acting upon it, slowly _rose from the
   ground_, and then, travelling more swiftly, _shot through the roof of
   glass_ and vanished from sight! Nor has the most diligent search
   enabled us to recover it. Does it possess the secret of Isidor
   Werner's death?"

But the Chicago _Herald_ had been working thoroughly and saying little
until its issue of June 16th, when it claimed the credit of solving the
whole mystery. Its long article lies before me as I write: There had
been no suicide; there had been no murder; there had been no infernal
machine. Doctor Anderwelt was a learned man, and the warm personal
friend of Isidor Werner. Both men had shared the same fate; they might
yet be alive, but they were certainly _at the bottom of Lake Michigan
together_! They were imprisoned there in a sunken submarine boat, which
was the invention of Doctor Anderwelt, and was built with funds
furnished by the young broker. The foundryman who had constructed the
big torpedo-shaped contrivance had been interviewed. He knew both men,
and they were on the most friendly terms. In a moment of confidence
Doctor Anderwelt had told him the machine was for submarine exploration;
had explained the four-winged rudder, which would make it dive into the
water, rise to the surface, or direct it to right or to left. Moreover,
there were closed living compartments, around which were chambers
containing a supply of air. He himself had pumped them full of
compressed air, and it was so arranged that foul air could be let out
when used and new air admitted. When all had been finished the
foundryman had shipped the new invention, _via_ the Michigan Southern
Railway, to the shore of the Lake near Whiting, Indiana. Next the
_Herald_ had sought and found the conductor whose train had hauled it to
Whiting. He remembered switching off the flat-car there, and he was
surprised on his return trip next morning to see the heavy thing already
unloaded and gone.

Undoubtedly, the two men had made an experiment with the diving boat
under the surface of the water; and its failure to operate as hoped had
resulted in its sinking to the bottom, with the two men imprisoned in
it. On no other hypothesis could its disappearance, and that of the two
men, be so plausibly accounted for. But as they had stores of air, and
probably of food, there was a possibility that they were still alive
inside the thing in the bottom of the Lake! Only three days had elapsed
since it had been launched, and the _Herald_ was willing to head a
subscription to drag the Lake and send divers to search for and rescue
the two unfortunate men!

All this serves to illustrate the untiring energy of newspaper
investigation, as well as the remarkable fertility of journalistic
imagination; for none of these clever theories hit at the real truth, or
explained the correct bearing of the astonishing facts which the
newspapers had so industriously unearthed.

And if the mystery of the disappearance of Isidor Werner was uncommonly
deep and wonderful, the explanation and final solution of it is not less
marvellous. After a delay of more than six years, it has just now come
into my hands whole and perfect. It is in no less satisfactory form than
a complete manuscript written by the very hand of Isidor Werner! I came
strangely into possession of it, and it relates a story of interest and
wonder, compared with which the mystery of his disappearance pales into
insignificance. But the reader may judge for himself, for here follows
the story exactly as he wrote it. Upon his manuscript I have bestowed
hardly more than a proof-reader's technical revision.

                                                   ELLSWORTH DOUGLASS.

    BOSTON, U.S.A.,
 _December 13th, 1898._




BOOK I

Secrets of Space




CHAPTER I

Dr. Hermann Anderwelt


I had been busy all day trying to swarm the bees and secure my honey.
The previous day had been February 29th, a date which doesn't often
happen, and which I had especial reason to remember, for it had been the
most successful of my business career. I had made a long guess at the
shaky condition of the great house of Slater, Bawker & Co., who had been
heavy buyers of wheat. I had talked the market down, sold it down,
hammered it down; and, true enough, what nobody else seemed to expect
really happened. The big firm failed, the price of wheat went to smash
in a panic of my mixing, and, as a result, I saw a profit of more than
two hundred thousand dollars in the deal. But, in order to secure this
snug sum, I still had to buy back the wheat I had sold at higher prices,
and this I didn't find so easy. The crowd in the wheat pit had seen my
hand, and were letting me play it alone against them all.

After the session I hurried to my office to get my overcoat and hat,
having an engagement to lunch at the Club.

"If you please, Mr. Werner, there is a queer old gentleman in your
private office who wishes to see you," said Flynn, my chief clerk.

"Ask him to call again to-morrow; I am in a great hurry to-day," I said,
slipping on one sleeve of my overcoat as I started out.

"But he has been waiting in there since eleven o'clock, and said he very
much wished to see you when you had plenty of time. He would not allow
me to send on the floor for you during the session."

"Since eleven o'clock! Did he have his lunch and a novel sent up? Well,
I can hardly run away from a man who has waited three and a half hours
to see me;" and I entered my private office with my overcoat on.

Seated in my deep, leathern arm-chair was an elderly man, with rather
long and bushy iron-grey hair, and an uneven grey beard. His head
inclined forward, he breathed heavily, and was apparently fast asleep.

"You will pardon my awaking you, but I never do business asleep!" I
ventured rather loudly.

Slowly the steel-blue eyes opened, and, without any start or
discomposure, the old man answered,--

"And I--my most successful enterprises are developed in my dreams."

His features and his accent agreed in pronouncing him German. He arose
calmly, buttoned the lowest button of his worn frock-coat, and, instead
of extending his hand to me, he poked it inside his coat, letting it
hang heavily on the single button. It was a lazy but characteristic
attitude. It tended to make his coat pouch and his shoulders droop. I
remembered having seen it somewhere before.

"Mr. Werner, I have a matter of the deepest and vastest importance to
unfold to you," he began, rather mysteriously, "for which I desire five
hours of your unemployed time----"

"Five hours!" I interrupted. "You do not know me! That much is hard to
find without running into the middle of the night, or into the middle of
