The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Machine That Saved The World, by
William Fitzgerald Jenkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Machine That Saved The World

Author: William Fitzgerald Jenkins

Release Date: August 2, 2008 [EBook #26174]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MACHINE THAT SAVED THE WORLD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Graeme Mackreth and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcribers note.

This etext was produced from Amazing Stories December 1957. Extensive
research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
publication was renewed.


   THE MACHINE
   THAT SAVED
   THE WORLD


   By


   MURRAY
   LEINSTER

_They were broadcasts from nowhere--sinister emanations flooding in from
space--smashing any receiver that picked them up. What defense could
Earth devise against science such as this?_

[Illustration: Did the broadcasts foretell flesh-rending supersonic
blasts?]

The first broadcast came in 1972, while Mahon-modified machines were
still strictly classified, and the world had heard only rumors about
them. The first broadcast was picked up by a television ham in Osceola,
Florida, who fumingly reported artificial interference on the amateur TV
bands. He heard and taped it for ten minutes--so he said--before it blew
out his receiver. When he replaced the broken element, the broadcast was
gone.

But the Communications Commission looked at and listened to the tape and
practically went through the ceiling. It stationed a monitor truck in
Osceola for months, listening feverishly to nothing.

Then for a long while there were rumors of broadcasts which blew out
receiving apparatus, but nothing definite. Weird patterns appeared on
screens high-pitched or deep-bass notes sounded--and the receiver went
out of operation. After the ham operator in Osceola, nobody else got
more than a second or two of the weird interference before blowing his
set during six very full months of CC agitation.

Then a TV station in Seattle abruptly broadcast interference
superimposed on its regular network program. The screens of all sets
tuned to that program suddenly showed exotic, curiously curved,
meaningless patterns on top of a commercial spectacular broadcast. At
the same time incredible chirping noises came from the speakers,
alternating with deep-bass hootings, which spoiled the ju-ju music of
the most expensive ju-ju band on the air. The interference ended only
with a minor break-down in the transmitting station. It was the same
sort of interference that the Communications Commission had thrown fits
about in Washington. It threw further fits now.

       *       *       *       *       *

A month later a vision-phone circuit between Chicago and Los Angeles was
unusable for ten minutes. The same meaningless picture-pattern and the
same preposterous noises came on and monopolized the line. It ceased
when a repeater-tube went out and a parallel circuit took over. Again,
frantic agitation displayed by high authority.

Then the interference began to appear more frequently, though still
capriciously. Once a Presidential broadcast was confused by interference
apparently originating in the White House, and again a three-way
top-secret conference between the commanding officers of three military
departments ceased when the unhuman-sounding noises and the scrambled
picture pattern inserted itself into the closed-circuit discussion. The
conference broke up amid consternation. For one reason, military
circuits were supposed to be interference-proof. For another, it
appeared that if interference could be spotted to this circuit or this
receiver it was likely this circuit or that receiver could be tapped.

For a third reason, the broadcasts were dynamite. As received, they
were badly scrambled, but they could be straightened out. Even the first
one, from Osceola, was cleaned up and understood. Enough so to make top
authority tear its hair and allow only fully-cleared scientific
consultants in on the thing.

The content of the broadcasts was kept considerably more secret than the
existence of Mahon units and what they could do. And Mahon units were
brand-new, then, and being worked with only at one research installation
in the United States.

The broadcasts were not so closely confined. The same wriggly patterns
and alien noises were picked up in Montevideo, in Australia, in Panama
City, and in grimly embattled England. All the newspapers discussed them
without ever suspecting that they had been translated into plain speech.
They were featured as freak news--and each new account mentioned that
the broadcast reception had ended with a break-down of the receiving
apparatus.

Guarded messages passed among the high authorities of the nations that
picked up the stuff. A cautious inquiry went even to the Compubs.

The Union of Communist Republics answered characteristically. It asked a
question about Mahon units. There were rumors, it said, about a new
principle of machine-control lately developed in the United States. It
was said that machines equipped with the new units did not wear out,
that they exercised seeming intelligence at their tasks, and that they
promised to end the enormous drain on natural resources caused by the
wearing-out and using-up of standard-type machinery.

The Compub Information Office offered to trade data on the broadcasts
for data about the new Mahon-modified machines. It hinted at extremely
important revelations it could make.

The rest of the world deduced astutely that the Compubs were scared,
too. And they were correct.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, quite suddenly, a break came. All previous broadcast receptions
had ended with the break-down of the receiving instrument. Now a
communicator named Betsy, modified in the Mahon manner and at work in
the research installation working with Mahon-modified devices, began to
pick up the broadcasts consistently, keeping each one on its screen
until it ended.

Day after day, at highly irregular intervals, Betsy's screen lighted up
and showed the weird patterns, and her loudspeakers emitted the peepings
and chirps and deep-bass hootings of the broadcasts. And the high brass
went into a dither to end all dithers as tapes of the received material
reached the Pentagon and were translated into intelligible speech and
pictures.

       *       *       *       *       *

This was when Metech Sergeant Bellews, in charge of the Rehab Shop at
Research Installation 83, came into the affair. Specifically, he entered
the picture when a young second lieutenant came to the shop to fetch him
to Communications Center in that post.

The lieutenant was young and tall and very military. Sergeant Bellews
was not. So he snorted, upon receipt of the message. He was at work on a
vacuum cleaner at the moment--a Mahon-modified machine with a flickering
yellow standby light that wavered between brightness and dimness with
much more than appropriate frequency. The Rehabilitation Shop was where
Mahon-modified machines were brought back to usefulness when somebody
messed them up. Two or three machines--an electric ironer, for
one--operated slowly and hesitantly. That was occupational therapy. A
washing-machine churned briskly, which was convalescence. Others,
ranging from fire-control computers to teletypes and automatic lathes,
simply waited with their standby lights flickering meditatively
according to the manner and custom of Mahon-modified machines. They were
ready for duty again.

The young lieutenant was politely urgent.

"But I been there!" protested Sergeant Bellews. "I checked! It's a
communicator I named Betsy. She's all right! She's been mishandled by
the kinda halfwits Communications has around, but she's a good,
well-balanced, experienced machine. If she's turning out broadcasts,
it's because they're comin' in! She's all right!"

"I know," said the young lieutenant soothingly. His uniform and his
manners were beautiful to behold. "But the Colonel wants you there for a
conference."

"I got a communicator in the shop here," said Sergeant Bellews
suspiciously. "Why don't he call me?"

"Because he wants to try some new adjustments on--ah--Betsy, Sergeant.
You have a way with Mahon machines. They'll do things for you they won't
do for anybody else."

Sergeant Bellews snorted again. He knew he was being buttered up, but
he'd asked for it. He even insisted on it, for the glory of the
Metallurgical Technicians' Corps. The big brass tended to regard Metechs
as in some fashion successors to the long-vanished veterinary surgeons
of the Farriers' Corps, when horses were a part of the armed forces.
Mahon-modified machines were new--very new--but the top brass naturally
remembered everything faintly analogous and applied it all wrong. So
Sergeant Bellews conducted a one-man campaign to establish the dignity
of his profession.

But nobody without special Metech training ought to tinker with a
Mahon-modified machine.

"If he's gonna fool with Betsy," said the Sergeant bitterly, "I guess I
gotta go over an' boss the job."

He pressed a button on his work-table. The vacuum cleaner's standby
light calmed down. The button provided soothing sub-threshold stimuli to
the Mahon unit, not quite giving it the illusion of operating
perfectly--if a Mahon unit could be said to be capable of illusion--but
maintaining it in the rest condition which was the foundation of
Mahon-unit operation, since a Mahon machine must never be turned off.

