The Project Gutenberg EBook of Next Door, Next World, by Robert Donald Locke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Next Door, Next World

Author: Robert Donald Locke

Illustrator: Douglas

Release Date: August 6, 2008 [EBook #26205]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEXT DOOR, NEXT WORLD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Dave Lovelace, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









 NEXT
 DOOR,
 NEXT
 WORLD

     By ROBERT
     DONALD
     LOCKE


 _Almost any phenomenon can be
 used--or act--for good or ill.
 Mutation usually brings ill--but
 it also brings greatness. Change
 can go any direction._


           Illustrated by Douglas


Hungrily, the cradled vessel's great steel nose pointed up to the
distant stars. She was the _Cosmos XII_, newest and sleekest of the
Space Service's rapidly-expanding wing of interstellar scout ships, and
she was now ready for operational work.

Major Lance Cooper, a big man with space-tanned features, stood in the
shadow of the control bunker and watched the swarm of ground crewmen
working at last-minute speed atop the loading tower. Inside him burned a
hunger, too.

Hunger, and another emotion--pride.

The pride swelled Lance's open-collared khaki shirt, as he envisioned
himself at the ship's controls within a few minutes. Finally, after long
years of study, sweat and dedication, he'd made it to the Big League. No
more jockeying those tubby old rocket-pots to Luna! From here on, he was
going to see, taste, feel what the universe was like way, way out--in
Deep Space. The _Cosmos XII_, like her earlier sisters, was designed to
plow through that shuddery nowhere the cookbooks identified as
"hyperspace."

Lance's glance shifted upward, scanning the velvet backdrop of frosty
white points of light against which the slender, silverish, almost
wingless form stood framed. More stars than a man could visit in a
lifetime! And some already within grasp!

His exultant feeling grew, and Lance kept his head tilted backward.
Alpha Centauri, the most popular target, was not visible at this
latitude; and Barnard's star, besides being far too faint, lay on the
other side of the sun. But there shone Sirius, just as bright as it had
glittered for the Greeks, and frosty Procyon, a little to the north.
Both orbs twinkled and beckoned, evoking strange and demanding dreams!

One day, Man would be able to make landings. Teams of scientists
outfitted to the eyebrows and trained to cope with any environment or
emergency, would explore unknown jungles, _llanos_, steppes; tramp up
and down fertile vales and hills under blue-hot alien suns. Perhaps,
they might even contact native species boasting human intelligence:
mammalian hunters and fishers, city-building lizards, sky-probing
arachnids--who knew what?

But now, of course, all that Headquarters permitted of flights was the
most furtive of reconnoitering. You hoisted your scout ship aloft under
high-gee, cleared the ecliptic, then swung out of normal space and
_jumped_. When you materialized in the new sector, you set your cameras
clicking, toggled all the other instruments into recording radiation,
gravity pressures, spectroscopy, at slam-bang speed. The very instant
your magnetic tapes got crammed to capacity, you pressed six dozen panic
buttons and scooted like a scared jackrabbit for Home, Sweet Home.

Adventure? It wasn't even mentioned on the travel posters, yet.

But, adventure would follow.

Some day.

Meanwhile, at the taxpayers' expense, you--the guardian of the
Peace--had enjoyed the billion-dollar thrill of viewing our Solar System
from light-years and light-years of distance. Or so the manual said,
right here on Insert Page 30-Dash-11-Dash-6.

Lance thought about those veteran hype-pilots who'd already poked around
in the great black Cold out there. How was it they were always
compensating for their frustration?

Now, he remembered.

Having few tall tales to spellbind audiences with when they swooped back
down on Home Base after their missions, the hype-pilots got around it by
bragging up Terra itself, and how at least you could always depend upon
good old Earth to come up with something to relax this Warp-Weary
generation!

"Something, for example, such as we now hold in our hand, brothers!"
Lance could hear them now. "Namely, one of these superbly-programmed
cocktails, as only Casey can turn out."

(Casey was the Officers Club barkeep and much-beribboned mixologist.)

"A real 'Casey Special'--look at its pristine beauty! What better
consolation can a man ask, for not having gotten to land at the apogee
point of his orbit?"

"Besides"--this usually came out after two or three more
tongue-loosening toasts had been quaffed to the beasts of
Headquarters--"what's so blasted special about landing on some
God-forsaken rock _out there_?

"Hell's bells! Earth is a planet too, isn't it? And when you've been
cooped up in a parsec-gobbling pot for a very, very long two weeks, any
planet looming in your viewscope cries to be set down upon. Your own
prosaic hunk of mud is good as any!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lance Cooper's rambling thoughts broke off their aimless tracking to
swing one hundred and eighty degrees in midspace and dart right back to
Earth.

Here at this very moment--and less than a hundred yards away--came
Terra's foremost attraction for him. His hammering heartbeat would have
placed him on the "grounded" list immediately, had there been a medico
with a stethoscope hanging about to detect it.

The attraction's name was Carolyn Sagen, and she was hurrying directly
across the concrete apron.

Even under the incandescent work-lamps of the crew scrambling up and
down the ladders, she looked as fetching as a video starlet making her
first personal-appearance tour of the nation. Only the fact she was
Colonel "Hard-Head" Sagen's family pride and joy kept the helmeted and
half-puckered up techs on the rungs from whistling themselves dry in
their enthusiasm.

Now, she had completely bypassed the work area. Here, the lighting did
not reach and the paler illumination of starshine took over. It seemed
to render the girl's soft blond hair and her full warm lips more
intimately something belonging to Lance Cooper alone--and he liked that.
He saw that she had turned up the collar of her tan coat against the
night wind.

While still a step or two distant from him, Carolyn halted. Her
worshiping eyes rested fully upon the big pilot. Lance thought he
detected a troubled expression.

Then, the girl managed a tight smile that conveyed her outward
resignment to all Man's absurd aspirations to own the galaxy:

"Don't worry about 'Security,' Lance. Dad wrote me out an O.K. to
skitter up this close to the Launching Area. You know"--she gestured
self-consciously--"big crucial moment ... lovers' farewell ... I pulled
all the stops, but it worked."

"Matter of fact," she added, in an obvious attempt at facetiousness,
"Dad opined he'd have walloped the daylights out of me, if I hadn't put
up a struggle to get near my man."

