The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cerebrum, by Albert Teichner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cerebrum

Author: Albert Teichner

Illustrator: Lloyd Birmingham

Release Date: October 3, 2008 [EBook #26761]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CEREBRUM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









CEREBRUM

By ALBERT TEICHNER


 _For thousands of years the big brain served as a
               master switchboard for the thoughts
                         and emotions of humanity.
   Now the central mind was showing signs of decay
                            ... and men went mad._


Illustrated by BIRMINGHAM

[Illustration]


The trouble began in a seemingly trivial way. Connor had wanted to speak
to Rhoda, his wife, wished himself onto a trunk line and then waited.
"Dallas Shipping here, Mars and points Jupiterward, at your service,"
said a business-is-business, unwifely voice in his mind.

"I was not calling you," he thought back into the line, now also getting
a picture, first flat, then properly 3-D and in color. It was a
paraNormally luxurious commercial office.

"I am the receptionist at Dallas Shipping," the woman thought back
firmly. "You rang and I answered."

"I'm sure I rang right," Connor insisted.

"And I'm sure I know my job," Dallas Shipping answered. "I have received
as many as five hundred thought messages a day, some of them highly
detailed and technical and--"

"Forget it," snapped Connor. "Let's say I focussed wrong."

He pulled back and twenty seconds later finally had Rhoda on the line.
"Queerest thing happened," he projected. "I just got a wrong party."

"Nothing queer about it," his wife smiled, springing to warm life on his
inner eye. "You just weren't concentrating, Connor."

"Don't you hand me that too," he grumbled. "I _know_ I thought on the
right line into Central. Haven't I been using the System for sixty
years?"

"Exactly--all habit and no attention."

How smugly soothing she was some days! "I think the trouble's in Central
itself. The Switcher isn't receiving me clearly."

"Lately I've had some peculiar miscalls myself," Rhoda said nervously.
"But you _can't_ blame Central Switching!"

"Oh, I didn't mean that!" By now he was equally nervous and only too
happy to end the conversation. Ordinarily communications were not
monitored but if this one had been there could certainly be a slander
complaint.

       *       *       *

On his way home in the monorail Connor tried to reach his office and had
the frightening experience of having his telepathic call refused by
Central. Then he refused in turn to accept a call being projected at
him, but when an Urgent classification was added he had to take it. "For
your unfounded slander of Central Switching's functioning," announced
the mechanically-synthesized voice, "you are hereby Suspended
indefinitely from the telepathic net. From this point on all paraNormal
privileges are withdrawn and you will be able to communicate with your
fellows only in person or by written message."

Stunned, Connor looked about at his fellow passengers. Most of them had
their eyes closed and their faces showed the mild little smile which was
the outer hallmark of a mind at rest, tuned in to a music channel or
some other of the hundreds of entertainment lines available from
Central. How much he had taken that for granted just a few minutes ago!

Three men, more shabbily dressed, were unsmilingly reading books. They
were fellow pariahs, Suspended for one reason or another from
paraNormal privileges. Only the dullest, lowest-paying jobs were
available to them while anyone inside the System could have Central read
any book and transmit the information directly into his cortex. The
shabbiest one of all looked up and his sympathetic glance showed that he
had instantly grasped Connor's changed situation.

Connor looked hastily away; he didn't want any sympathy from that kind
