The Project Gutenberg EBook of It Could Be Anything, by John Keith Laumer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: It Could Be Anything

Author: John Keith Laumer

Illustrator: Virgil Finlay

Release Date: October 5, 2008 [EBook #26782]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IT COULD BE ANYTHING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









By KEITH LAUMER

                     it could be
                      ANYTHING

 _Keith Laumer, well-known for his tales of adventure
 and action, shows us a different side of his talent
   in this original, exciting and thought-provoking
       exploration of the meaning of meaning._

Illustrated by FINLAY

[Illustration]


"She'll be pulling out in a minute, Brett," Mr. Phillips said. He tucked
his railroader's watch back in his vest pocket. "You better get
aboard--if you're still set on going."

"It was reading all them books done it," Aunt Haicey said. "Thick books,
and no pictures in them. I knew it'd make trouble." She plucked at the
faded hand-embroidered shawl over her thin shoulders, a tiny bird-like
woman with bright anxious eyes.

"Don't worry about me," Brett said. "I'll be back."

[Illustration]

"The place'll be yours when I'm gone," Aunt Haicey said. "Lord knows it
won't be long."

"Why don't you change your mind and stay on, boy?" Mr. Phillips said,
blinking up at the young man. "If I talk to Mr. J.D., I think he can
find a job for you at the plant."

"So many young people leave Casperton," Aunt Haicey said. "They never
come back."

Mr. Phillips clicked his teeth. "They write, at first," he said. "Then
they gradually lose touch."

"All your people are here, Brett," Aunt Haicey said. "Haven't you been
happy here?"

"Why can't you young folks be content with Casperton?" Mr. Phillips
said. "There's everything you need here."

"It's that Pretty-Lee done it," Aunt Haicey said. "If it wasn't for that
girl--"

A clatter ran down the line of cars. Brett kissed Aunt Haicey's dry
cheek, shook Mr. Phillips' hand, and swung aboard. His suitcase was on
one of the seats. He put it up above in the rack, and sat down, turned
to wave back at the two old people.

It was a summer morning. Brett leaned back and watched the country slide
by. It was nice country, Brett thought; mostly in corn, some cattle, and
away in the distance the hazy blue hills. Now he would see what was on
the other side of them: the cities, the mountains, and the ocean. Up
until now all he knew about anything outside of Casperton was what he'd
read or seen pictures of. As far as he was concerned, chopping wood and
milking cows back in Casperton, they might as well not have existed.
They were just words and pictures printed on paper. But he didn't want
to just read about them. He wanted to see for himself.

       *       *       *

Pretty-Lee hadn't come to see him off. She was probably still mad about
yesterday. She had been sitting at the counter at the Club Rexall,
drinking a soda and reading a movie magazine with a big picture of an
impossibly pretty face on the cover--the kind you never see just walking
down the street. He had taken the next stool and ordered a coke.

"Why don't you read something good, instead of that pap?" he asked her.

"Something good? You mean something dry, I guess. And don't call it ...
that word. It doesn't sound polite."

"What does it say? That somebody named Doll Starr is fed up with glamor
and longs for a simple home in the country and lots of kids? Then why
doesn't she move to Casperton?"

"You wouldn't understand," said Pretty-Lee.

He took the magazine, leafed through it. "Look at this: all about
people who give parties that cost thousands of dollars, and fly all over
the world having affairs with each other and committing suicide and
getting divorced. It's like reading about Martians."

"I still like to read about the stars. There's nothing wrong with it."

"Reading all that junk just makes you dissatisfied. You want to do your
hair up crazy like the pictures in the magazines and wear weird-looking
clothes--"

Pretty-Lee bent her straw double. She stood up and took her shopping
bag. "I'm very glad to know you think my clothes are weird--"

"You're taking everything I say personally. Look." He showed her a
full-color advertisement on the back cover of the magazine. "Look at
this. Here's a man supposed to be cooking steaks on some kind of
back-yard grill. He looks like a movie star; he's dressed up like he was
going to get married; there's not a wrinkle anywhere. There's not a spot
on that apron. There isn't even a grease spot on the frying pan. The
lawn is as smooth as a billiard table. There's his son; he looks just
like his pop, except that he's not grey at the temples. Did you ever
really see a man that handsome, or hair that was just silver over the
ears and the rest glossy black? The daughter looks like a movie starlet,
and her mom is exactly the same, except that she has that grey streak in
front to match her husband. You can see the car in the drive; the treads
of the tires must have just been scrubbed; they're not even dusty.
There's not a pebble out of place; all the flowers are in full bloom; no
dead ones. No leaves on the lawn; no dry twigs showing on the trees.
That other house in the background looks like a palace, and the man with
the rake, looking over the fence: he looks like this one's twin brother,
and he's out raking leaves in brand new clothes--"

Pretty-Lee grabbed her magazine. "You just seem to hate everything
that's nicer than this messy town--"

"I don't think it's nicer. I like you; your hair isn't always perfectly
smooth, and you've got a mended place on your dress, and you feel human,
you smell human--"

"Oh!" Pretty-Lee turned and flounced out of the drug store.

       *       *       *

Brett shifted in the dusty plush seat and looked around. There were a
few other people in the car. An old man was reading a newspaper; two old
ladies whispered together. There was a woman of about thirty with a
mean-looking kid; and some others. They didn't look like magazine
pictures, any of them. He tried to picture them doing the things you
read in newspapers: the old ladies putting poison in somebody's tea; the
old man giving orders to start a war. He thought about babies in houses
in cities, and airplanes flying over, and bombs falling down: huge
explosive bombs. Blam! Buildings fall in, pieces of glass and stone fly
through the air. The babies are blown up along with everything else--

But the kind of people he knew couldn't do anything like that. They
liked to loaf and eat and talk and drink beer and buy a new tractor or
refrigerator and go fishing. And if they ever got mad and hit
somebody--afterwards they were embarrassed and wanted to shake hands....

The train slowed, came to a shuddery stop. Through the window he saw a
cardboardy-looking building with the words BAXTER'S JUNCTION painted
across it. There were a few faded posters on a bulletin board. An old
man was sitting on a bench, waiting. The two old ladies got off and a
boy in blue jeans got on. The train started up. Brett folded his jacket
and tucked it under his head and tried to doze off....

       *       *       *       *       *

Brett awoke, yawned, sat up. The train was slowing. He remembered you
couldn't use the toilets while the train was stopped. He got up and went
to the end of the car. The door was jammed. He got it open and went
inside and closed the door behind him. The train was going slower,
clack-clack ... clack-clack ... clack; clack ... cuh-lack ...

He washed his hands, then pulled at the door. It was stuck. He pulled
harder. The handle was too small; it was hard to get hold of. The train
came to a halt. Brett braced himself and strained against the door. It
didn't budge.

He looked out the grimy window. The sun was getting lower. It was about
three-thirty, he guessed. He couldn't see anything but some dry-looking
fields.

Outside in the corridor there were footsteps. He started to call, but
then didn't. It would be too embarrassing, pounding on the door and
yelling, "Let me out! I'm stuck in the toilet ..."

He tried to rattle the door. It didn't rattle. Somebody was dragging
something heavy past the door. Mail bags, maybe. He'd better yell. But
dammit, the door couldn't be all that hard to open. He studied the
latch. All he had to do was turn it. He got a good grip and twisted.
Nothing.

He heard the mail bag bump-bump, and then another one. To heck with it;
he'd yell. He'd wait until he heard the footsteps pass the door again
and then he'd make some noise.

Brett waited. It was quiet now. He rapped on the door anyway. No answer.
Maybe there was nobody left in the car. In a minute the train would
start up and he'd be stuck here until the next stop. He banged on the
door. "Hey! The door is stuck!"

It sounded foolish. He listened. It was very quiet. He pounded again.
The car creaked once. He put his ear to the door. He couldn't hear
anything. He turned back to the window. There was no one in sight. He
put his cheek flat against it, looked along the car. He saw only dry
fields.

He turned around and gave the door a good kick. If he damaged it, it was
too bad; the railroad shouldn't have defective locks on the doors. If
