Project Gutenberg's The Sword and the Atopen, by Taylor H. Greenfield

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Sword and the Atopen

Author: Taylor H. Greenfield

Release Date: October 11, 2008 [EBook #26883]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SWORD AND THE ATOPEN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 The Sword
 and the Atopen

 By TAYLOR H. GREENFIELD

    _The conversion of light into electricity by spectrum is an
    interesting possibility. The idea of using foreign proteins on the
    human system to repel enemies, is also interesting. Do you get it?
    We didn't either until we read the story. Read the yarn and you'll
    get it too._


Although Divine intervention in human affairs passed into the realm of
the mythical toward the end of the twentieth or at the dawn of the
twenty-first century, one is almost inclined to give thanks to the
Supernatural for the marvelous efficacy of Dr. Rutledge's discovery and
stratagem which so recently freed us from the Oriental menace.

A year ago only the Mississippi and the most severe winter in many
generations was staying the complete invasion of the United States. In
an unbelievably secret manner our enemies had for five decades been
developing a scientific offensive against which our laboratories could
not in a short interval protect us. The vast and fundamental discoveries
made during the past hundred years by the Orientals (and now the
heritage of the whole world) can only be compared to the Industrial
Revolution of the nineteenth century. Without warning, through the
discovery of the cause of gravitation, the Mongols practically lifted
their Nangsi metal transports (which were built of a material combining
the lightness of aluminum with the strength and hardness of steel) out
of the sea; and in five days skimmed across the surface of the Pacific.
The whole West lay at their mercy, though we know with what gallantry
their forces were held in check from summer until winter, when the enemy
had reached the Mississippi.

[Illustration: They were planning details of the final campaign.]

Of course, one of the surprises which the Orientals had not counted on
was the providential inspiration of Dr. Mernick of the Hopkins, who
devised the now famous Mernickian transformer by which light from the
sun, received through a series of grates, is stepped from the
wavelengths of light into those of electricity. This gave us a sudden
limitless source of power on which the enemy had not counted. It
