The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Place in the Sun, by C.H. Thames

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Place in the Sun

Author: C.H. Thames

Release Date: October 19, 2008 [EBook #26966]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PLACE IN THE SUN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ October 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.




A "JOHNNY MAYHEM" ADVENTURE




A PLACE IN THE SUN



By C. H. THAMES


    _Mayhem, the man of many bodies, had been given some weird
    assignments in his time, but saving The Glory of the Galaxy
    wasn't difficult--it was downright impossible!_


The SOS crackled and hummed through subspace at a speed which left
laggard light far behind. Since subspace distances do not coincide with
normal space distances, the SOS was first picked up by a Fomalhautian
freighter bound for Capella although it had been issued from a point in
normal space midway between the orbit of Mercury and the sun's corona in
the solar system.

    [Illustration: The terrible weapon blasted death and carnage
    through the ship.]

The radioman of the Fomalhautian freighter gave the distress signal to
the Deck Officer, who looked at it, blinked, and bolted 'bove decks to
the captain's cabin. His face was very white when he reached the door
and his heart pounded with excitement. As the Deck Officer crossed an
electronic beam before the door a metallic voice said: "The Captain is
asleep and will be disturbed for nothing but emergency priority."

Nodding, the Deck officer stuck his thumb in the whorl-lock of the door
and entered the cabin. "Begging your pardon, sir," he cried, "but we
just received an SOS from--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Captain stirred groggily, sat up, switched on a green night light
and squinted through it at the Deck Officer. "Well, what is it? Isn't
the Eye working?"

"Yes, sir. An SOS, sir...."

"If we're close enough to help, subspace or normal space, take the usual
steps, lieutenant. Surely you don't need me to--"

"The usual steps can't be taken, sir. Far as I can make out, that ship
is doomed. She's bound on collision course for Sol, only twenty million
miles out now."

"That's too bad, lieutenant," the Captain said with genuine sympathy in
his voice. "I'm sorry to hear that. But what do you want me to do about
it?"

"The ship, sir. The ship that sent the SOS--hold on to your hat, sir--"

"Get to the point now, will you, young man?" the Captain growled
sleepily.

"The ship which sent the SOS signal, the ship heading on collision
course for Sol, is the _Glory of the Galaxy_!"

For a moment the Captain said nothing. Distantly, you could hear the hum
of the subspace drive-unit and the faint whining of the stasis
generator. Then the Captain bolted out of bed after unstrapping himself.
In his haste he forgot the ship was in weightless deep space and went
sailing, arms flailing air, across the room. The lieutenant helped him
down and into his magnetic-soled shoes.

"My God," the Captain said finally. "Why did it happen? Why did it have
to happen to the _Glory of the Galaxy_?"

"What are you going to do, sir?"

"_I_ can't do anything. I won't take the responsibility. Have the
radioman contact the Hub at once."

"Yes, sir."

_The Glory of the Galaxy_, the SOS ship heading on collision course with
the sun, was making its maiden run from the assembly satellites of Earth
across the inner solar system via the perihelion passage which would
bring it within twenty-odd million miles of the sun, to Mars which now
was on the opposite side of Sol from Earth. Aboard the gleaming new ship
was the President of the Galactic Federation and his entire cabinet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Fomalhautian freighter's emergency message was received at the Hub
of the Galaxy within moments after it had been sent, although the normal
space distance was in the neighborhood of one hundred thousand light
years. The message was bounced--in amazingly quick time--from office to
office at the hub, cutting through the usual red tape because of its top
priority. And--since none of the normal agencies at the Hub could handle
it--the message finally arrived at an office which very rarely received
official messages of any kind. This was the one unofficial, extra-legal
office at the Hub of the Galaxy. Lacking official function, the office
had no technical existence and was not to be found in any Directory of
the Hub. At the moment, two young men were seated inside. Their sole job
was to maintain liaison with a man whose very existence was doubted by
most of the human inhabitants of the Galaxy but whose importance could
not be measured by mere human standards in those early days when the
Galactic League was becoming the Galactic Federation.

The name of the man with whom they maintained contact was Johnny Mayhem.

"Did you read it?" the blond man asked.

"I read it."
