The Project Gutenberg EBook of Zehru of Xollar, by Hal K. Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Zehru of Xollar

Author: Hal K. Wells

Release Date: October 14, 2008 [EBook #26917]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZEHRU OF XOLLAR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: _Blake made a lightning snatch at a tentacle with both
hands._]


Zehru of Xollar

By Hal K. Wells


  Three Earthlings are whisked on an
 inter-dimensional journey to the den
      of the Scientist Zehru.


When the rolling thunder of infra-bass first came to their ears, Robert
Blake and Helen Lawton were standing on the platform of a New York
subway station waiting for the arrival of an uptown express to bear them
to their homes.

They made a strikingly attractive couple as they stood there. New York
had not had time as yet to remove the bronze tan of an outdoor life from
Blake's ruggedly good-looking face. His tall athletic figure was still
conspicuous for the lithe strength that had made him an All-Western
tackle less than two years ago.

Standing beside Blake's husky figure, Helen Lawton looked like a tiny,
very perfect, blonde doll, with an exquisitely molded face framed in
curly bobbed hair that was the clear golden-amber hue of orange honey.
There was a diamond sparkling on the ring finger of the girl's slim left
hand, placed there by Blake.

It was well after midnight, and the only other passenger waiting on the
station was a burly chap leaning against one of the white pillars on the
other side of the platform. After a casual glance at the fellow, with
his derby hat shoved far back from a low forehead, his blatantly
conspicuous clothing, and the suspicious bulge under one arm-pit, Blake
had mentally set him down as a minor gangster, probably a strong-arm man
for some beer mob.

Blake and Helen had been standing there but a few minutes when the
strange sound first became audible. For a moment Blake thought it was
merely the rumbling roar of an express approaching far down the tunnel.
Then he realized that no subway train could possibly produce a sound
effect so oddly disturbing and strangely alien.

It was like no sound that Blake had ever heard before. Vibrant with
colossal power, it suggested a sustained note struck from a giant organ,
a note so low in pitch that it seemed a full octave below the lowest
bass note ever struck. Whatever it was, the thundering vibration of
infra-bass was coming nearer with startling swiftness.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was impossible to locate the source of the mighty pulsing note. It
seemed to be coming simultaneously from all directions, like a great
hollow sphere of invisible sound waves closing in with the station
platform as its central focal point.

Helen's face was white with dread as she shrank closer into Blake's
embrace. Blake noted that the gangster across the platform was standing
tensely at bay with his back against the pillar and his right hand
thrust under his coat as he stared wildly about him in an effort to
discover the cause of the disturbance.

The rolling thunder closed in upon them with a final rush that brought
it so near that their very bodies seemed to vibrate in harmony with that
mighty note of shuddering bass. Then with startling abruptness the green
net came.

Out from the walls and down from the roof spurted scores of quivering
ribbons of blinding green flame. Swiftly the radiant tendrils rushed in
upon the shrinking three from every side, while the infra-bass thundered
in mighty crescendo.

Blake instinctively swept Helen close within the shelter of his arms in
an effort to protect her with his own body against the searing menace of
those onrushing green flames. The next moment the fiery ribbons were
upon them, lashing about their bodies, crossing and crisscrossing in the
air above and around them in a great tangled web of interlacing lines of
flame that filled the entire platform.

       *       *       *       *       *

With a shock of relief Blake found that there was no heat in those
strange flames, but his relief was short-lived as the next second
brought him realization of the real menace of the radiant ribbons. There
was a solidity and strength in those glowing streamers that held them as
helplessly captive as though they were gripped in ribbons of steel.
Dazed and helpless, the three struggled for a moment in the meshes of
the weird net of flame like fish caught in the strands of some giant
cosmic seine.

The trembling thunder of infra-bass abruptly changed to a thin whining
note so high in pitch that it seemed the nearly soundless ghost of a
metallic scream. With the change in sound Blake became aware of a new
and astounding change in his surroundings.

The walls and roof of the station seemed closing in upon him as though
he were growing in size at an incredible rate. The next moment he shot
through the roof, hurtling on and upward with the velocity of a rocket.
The sensation was one that his reeling brain could not even grasp. His
body seemed to be inside every stone, iron bar, and lump of earth, yet
at the same time every exterior object seemed _within_ his body. It was
