The Project Gutenberg EBook of Summer Snow Storm, by Adam Chase

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Summer Snow Storm

Author: Adam Chase

Illustrator: Llewellyn

Release Date: October 19, 2008 [EBook #26968]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUMMER SNOW STORM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 SUMMER
     SNOW STORM

 By ADAM CHASE


    _Snow in summer is of course impossible. Any weather expert will
    tell you so. Weather Bureau Chief Botts was certain no such
    absurdity could occur. And he would have been right except for one
    thing. It snowed that summer._


It was, as the expression goes, raining cats and dogs. Since the Weather
Bureau had predicted fair and warmer, the Weather Bureau was not
particularly happy about the meteorological state of affairs. No one,
however was shocked.

Until it started to snow.

This was on the twenty-fifth of July in the U.S.A....

Half an hour before the fantastic meteorological turn of events, Bureau
Chief Botts dangled the forecast sheet before Johnny Sloman's bloodshot
eyes and barked, "It's all over the country by now, you dunderhead!"
Then, as an afterthought: "Did you write this?"

"Yes," said Sloman miserably.

Slowly, Botts said, "Temperature, eighty degrees. Precipitation
expected: snow. _Snow_, Sloman. Well, that's what it says."

"It was a mistake, Chief. Just--heh-heh--a mistake."

"The prediction should have been for fair and warmer!" Botts screamed.

"But it's raining," Sloman pointed out.

"We make mistakes," said Botts in a suddenly velvety voice. Then, as if
_that_ had been a mistake, bellowed: "But not this kind of mistake,
Sloman! Snow in July! We have a reputation to maintain! If not for
accuracy, at least for credulity."

"Yes, sir," said Johnny Sloman. One of the troubles was, he had a
hangover. Although, actually, that was a consequence of the real
trouble. The real trouble was his fiancee. Make that his ex-fiancee.
Because last night Jo-Anne had left him. "You--you're just going no
place at all, Johnny Sloman," she had said. "You're on a treadmill
and--not even running very fast." She had given him back the
quarter-carat ring tearfully, but Johnny hadn't argued. Jo-Anne had a
stubborn streak and he knew when Jo-Anne's mind was made up. So Johnny
had gone and gotten drunk for the first time since the night after
college graduation, not too many years ago, and the result was a
nationally-distributed forecast of snow.

Chief Botts' first flush of anger had now been replaced by self-pity.
His red, loose-jowled face was sagging and his eyes became watery as he
said, "At least you could have double-checked it. As a member of this
Bureau you only have to fill out the forecast once every ten days. Is
that so hard? Is there any reason why you should predict snow for July
25th?" His voice became silky soft as he added, "You realize, of course,
Sloman, that if this was anything but a civil service job you'd be out
on your ear for a stunt like this! Well, there are other ways. I can
pass over you for promotion. I _intend_ to pass over you until the
crack of doom. You'll be a GS-5 the rest of your working life. Are you
satisfied, Sloman? Snow in July ..." Chief Botts' voice trailed off, the
Chief following it.

Johnny sat with his head in his hands until Harry Bettis, the GS-5
weatherman who shared his small office with him, came in. Naturally,
hangover or no, Johnny had reported for work first. Johnny was always
first in the office, but it didn't seem to do any good. Now, Harry
Bettis could come in an hour late and read the funnies half the day and
