Project Gutenberg's Hellhounds of the Cosmos, by Clifford Donald Simak

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hellhounds of the Cosmos

Author: Clifford Donald Simak

Release Date: October 24, 2008 [EBook #27013]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HELLHOUNDS OF THE COSMOS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: _He glimmered momentarily, then vanished._]


Hellhounds of the Cosmos

By Clifford D. Simak


 Weird are the conditions of the
 interdimensional struggle faced
 by Dr. White's ninety-nine men.


The paper had gone to press, graphically describing the latest of the
many horrible events which had been enacted upon the Earth in the last
six months. The headlines screamed that Six Corners, a little hamlet in
Pennsylvania, had been wiped out by the Horror. Another front-page
story told of a Terror in the Amazon Valley which had sent the natives
down the river in babbling fear. Other stories told of deaths here and
there, all attributable to the "Black Horror," as it was called.

The telephone rang.

"Hello," said the editor.

"London calling," came the voice of the operator.

"All right," replied the editor.

He recognized the voice of Terry Masters, special correspondent. His
voice came clearly over the transatlantic telephone.

"The Horror is attacking London in force," he said. "There are thousands
of them and they have completely surrounded the city. All roads are
blocked. The government declared the city under martial rule a quarter
of an hour ago and efforts are being made to prepare for resistance
against the enemy."

"Just a second," the editor shouted into the transmitter.

He touched a button on his desk and in a moment an answering buzz told
him he was in communication with the press-room.

"Stop the presses!" he yelled into the speaking tube. "Get ready for a
new front make-up!"

"O.K.," came faintly through the tube, and the editor turned back to the
phone.

"Now let's have it," he said, and the voice at the London end of the
wire droned on, telling the story that in another half hour was read by
a world which shuddered in cold fear even as it scanned the glaring
headlines.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Woods," said the editor of the _Press_ to a reporter, "run over and
talk to Dr. Silas White. He phoned me to send someone. Something about
this Horror business."

Henry Woods rose from his chair without a word and walked from the
office. As he passed the wire machine it was tapping out, with a
maddeningly methodical slowness, the story of the fall of London. Only
half an hour before it had rapped forth the flashes concerning the
attack on Paris and Berlin.

He passed out of the building into a street that was swarming with
terrified humanity. Six months of terror, of numerous mysterious deaths,
of villages blotted out, had set the world on edge. Now with London in
possession of the Horror and Paris and Berlin fighting hopelessly for
their lives, the entire population of the world was half insane with
fright.

Exhorters on street corners enlarged upon the end of the world, asking
that the people prepare for eternity, attributing the Horror to the act
of a Supreme Being enraged with the wickedness of the Earth.

Expecting every moment an attack by the Horror, people left their work
and gathered in the streets. Traffic, in places, had been blocked for
hours and law and order were practically paralyzed. Commerce and
transportation were disrupted as fright-ridden people fled from the
larger cities, seeking doubtful hiding places in rural districts from
the death that stalked the land.

A loudspeaker in front of a music store blared forth the latest news
flashes.

"It has been learned," came the measured tones of the announcer, "that
all communication with Berlin ceased about ten minutes ago. At Paris all
efforts to hold the Horror at bay have been futile. Explosives blow it
apart, but have the same effect upon it as explosion has on gas. It
flies apart and then reforms again, not always in the same shape as it
was before. A new gas, one of the most deadly ever conceived by man, has
failed to have any effect on the things. Electric guns and heat guns
have absolutely no effect upon them.

"A news flash which has just come in from Rome says that a large number
of the Horrors has been sighted north of that city by airmen. It seems
they are attacking the capitals of the world first. Word comes from
Washington that every known form of defense is being amassed at that
city. New York is also preparing...."

Henry Woods fought his way through the crowd which milled in front of
the loudspeaker. The hum of excitement was giving away to a silence, the
silence of a stunned people, the fearful silence of a populace facing a
presence it is unable to understand, an embattled world standing with
useless weapons before an incomprehensible enemy.

In despair the reporter looked about for a taxi, but realized, with a
groan of resignation, that no taxi could possibly operate in that
crowded street. A street car, blocked by the stream of humanity which
jostled and elbowed about it, stood still, a defeated thing.

Seemingly the only man with a definite purpose in that whirlpool of
terror-stricken men and women, the newspaperman settled down to the
serious business of battling his way through the swarming street.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Before I go to the crux of the matter," said Dr. Silas White, about
half an hour later, "let us first review what we know of this so-called
Horror. Suppose you tell me exactly what you know of it."

Henry Woods shifted uneasily in his chair. Why didn't the old fool get
down to business? The chief would raise hell if this story didn't make
the regular edition. He stole a glance at his wrist-watch. There was
still almost an hour left. Maybe he could manage it. If the old chap
would only snap into it!

"I know no more," he said, "than is common knowledge."

The gimlet eyes of the old white-haired scientist regarded the
newspaperman sharply.

"And that is?" he questioned.
