The Project Gutenberg EBook of My Shipmate--Columbus, by Stephen Wilder

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: My Shipmate--Columbus

Author: Stephen Wilder

Illustrator: Llewellyn

Release Date: October 24, 2008 [EBook #27019]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY SHIPMATE--COLUMBUS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 My
 Shipmate--
 Columbus

 By STEPHEN WILDER


    _We've been taught from childhood that the earth is round and that
    Columbus discovered America. But maybe we take too much on faith.
    This first crossing for instance. Were you there? Did you see
    Columbus land? Here's the story of a man who can give us the
    straight facts._


The laughter brought spots of color to his cheeks. He stood there for a
while, taking it, and then decided he had had enough and would sit down.
A whisper of amusement still stirred the room as he returned to his seat
and the professor said,

"But just a moment, Mr. Jones. Won't you tell the class what makes you
think Columbus was not the 'bold skipper' the history books say he was.
After all, Mr. Jones, this is a history class. If you know more or
better history than the history books do, isn't it your duty to tell
us?"

[Illustration: He clutched at his slashed veins and snarled into the
face of death.]

"I didn't say he _wasn't_," Danny Jones said desperately as the laughter
started again. Some profs were like that, he thought. Picking on one
student and making the rest of the class laugh and think what a great
guy the prof was and what a prize dodo the hapless student was. "I
said," Danny went on doggedly, "Columbus might not have been--maybe
wasn't--the bold skipper the history books claim he was. I can't prove
it. No one can. I haven't a time machine."

Again it was the wrong thing to say. The professor wagged a finger in
front of his face and gave Danny a sly look. "Don't you," he said,
"don't you indeed? I was beginning to think you had been willed H. G.
Wells' famous literary invention, young man." That one had the class all
but rolling in the aisles.

Danny said desperately, "No! No, I mean, they don't even know for sure
if Columbus was born in Genoa. They just think he was. So they also
could be wrong about--"

Abruptly the professor's face went serious. "My dear Mr. Jones," he said
slowly, acidly, "don't you think we've had enough of fantasy? Don't you
think we ought to return to history?"

Danny sat down and for a moment shut his eyes but remained conscious of
everyone looking at him, staring at him, evaluating. It wasn't so easy,
he decided, being a sophomore transfer student from a big city college,
where almost everything went and there was a certain amount of anonymity
in the very size of the classes, to a small town college where every
face, after a week or so, was familiar. Danny wished he had kept his big
yap shut about Columbus, but it was too late now. They'd be ribbing him
for weeks....

On his way back to the dorm after classes he was hailed by a student who
lived down the hall from him, a fellow named Groves, who said, "How's
the boy, Danny. Next thing you'll tell us is that Cortez was really a
sexy Spanish broad with a thirty-eight bust who conquered Montezuma and
his Indians with sex appeal. Get it, boy. I said--"

"Aw, lay off," Danny grumbled.

The other boy laughed, then shrugged, then said, "Oh yeah, forgot to
tell you. There's a telegram waiting for you in the dorm. House-mother's
got it. Well, see you, Vasco da Gama."

Danny trudged on to the Georgian-style dormitory and went inside,
through the lobby and behind the stairs to the house-mother's office at
the rear of the building. She was a kindly-looking old woman with a halo
of white hair and a smile which made her a good copy of everyone's
grandmother. But now her face was set in unexpectedly grim lines.
"Telegram for you, Danny," she said slowly. "They read it over the
telephone first, then delivered it." She held out a yellow envelope.
"I'm afraid it's some bad news, Danny." She seemed somehow reluctant to
part with the little yellow envelope.

"What is it?" Danny said.

"You'd better read it yourself. Here, sit down."

Danny nodded, took the envelope, sat down and opened it. He read, MR.
DANNY JONES, WHITNEY COLLEGE, WHITNEY, VIRGINIA. REGRET TO INFORM YOU
UNCLE AVERILL PASSED AWAY LAST NIGHT PEACEFULLY IN HIS SLEEP LEAVING
UNSPECIFIED PROPERTY TO YOU. It was signed with a name Danny did not
recognize.

"I'm terribly sorry," the house-mother said, placing her hand on
Danny's shoulder.

"Oh, that's all right, Mrs. Grange. It's all right. You see, Uncle
Averill wasn't a young man. He must have been in his eighties."

"Were you very close to him, Danny?"

"No, not for a long time. When I was a kid--"

Mrs. Grange smiled.

"Well, when I was eight or nine, I used to see him all the time. We
stayed at his place on the coast near St. Augustine, Florida, for a
year. I--I feel sorry about Uncle Averill, Mrs. Grange, but I feel
better about something that happened in class today. I--I think Uncle
Averill would have approved of how I acted."

"Want to talk about it?"

"Well, it's just he always said never to take any so-called fact for
granted, especially in history. I can almost remember his voice now, the
way he used to say, 'if ever there's an argument in history, sonny, all
you ever get is the propaganda report of the side which won.' You know,
Mrs. Grange, I think he was right. Of course, a lot of folks thought old
Uncle Averill was a little queer. Touched in the head is what they
said."

"They oughtn't to say such things."
