The Project Gutenberg EBook of Master of None, by Lloyd Neil Goble

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Master of None

Author: Lloyd Neil Goble

Release Date: December 2, 2008 [EBook #27383]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MASTER OF NONE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Dave Lovelace, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


MASTER OF NONE

BY NEIL GOBLE


    The advantages of specialization are so obvious that, today, we
    don't even know how to recognize a competent syncretist!


Freddy the Fish glanced at the folded newspaper beside him on the bench.
A little one-column headline caught his eye:

    MYSTERIOUS SIGNALS
     FROM OUTER SPACE

"Probably from Cygnus," he said.

Freddy mashed a peanut, popped the meat into his mouth, and tossed the
shell to the curb in front of his bench. He munched and idly watched two
sparrows arguing over the discarded delicacy; the victor flitted to the
head of a statue, let go a triumphant dropping onto the marble nose, and
hopped to a nearby branch.

"Serves him right," Freddy said. He yawned and rubbed the stubble on his
chin. Not yet long enough for scissors, he decided. He pulled his feet
up on the bench, twisting in an effort to get comfortable. The sun was
in his eyes, so he reclaimed the discarded newspaper and spread it over
his face. His eyes momentarily focused on MYSTERIOUS SIGNALS FROM OUTER
SPACE, right over his nose.

"Sure, Cygnus," he muttered, and closed his eyes and dropped off to
sleep.

When he was awakened, it was by an excited hand shaking his shoulder and
a panting, "Freddy! Freddy! Lookit the Extra just came out!"

Freddy slowly sat up, ascertained the identity of the intruder and the
fact that the sun was setting, and said, "Good evening, Willy. Please
stop rattling that paper in my face."

"But just read it, Freddy," Willy shrieked, waving the paper so
frantically that Freddy couldn't make out the big black headline.
"'Positive contact from another planet,' the guy was yellin'. They put
out an Extra so I snitched one from the boy. Read it to me, huh, Freddy?
I'm dyin' o' curious."

"So give it here and I'll read it for you. Quit shakin' it or you'll
tear it all up," Freddy snorted.

"Read it to me, huh, Freddy," Willy said, handing over the paper. "I
don't know no one else that reads so good."

Freddy studied the headline and the first paragraph silently, then
whistled lightly and lowered the paper.

"Y'know, Willy," he said, "the last thing I read before I dropped off a
while ago was about these signals. But the funny thing is, I'd just
assumed they were from Cygnus."

"What's a Cygnus, Freddy?" Willy asked, still pop-eyed. "A smoke? A
dame? Or you mean like from Hunger?"

"Cygnus, my boy," Freddy explained patronizingly, "is a constellation
within which there are two colliding galaxies. These colliding galaxies
produce the most powerful electromagnetic radiations in the universe--an
undecillion watts!"

"What's an undecillion?"

"An undecillion is ten raised to the 36th power," Freddy sighed, fearing
that he wasn't getting through to Willy.

