The Project Gutenberg EBook of Medal of Honor, by Dallas McCord Reynolds

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Medal of Honor

Author: Dallas McCord Reynolds

Illustrator: Bernklau

Release Date: December 2, 2008 [EBook #27393]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEDAL OF HONOR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 MEDAL
   OF
     HONOR

 By MACK REYNOLDS

 ILLUSTRATED by BERNKLAU


 _According to tradition,
 the man who held the
 Galactic Medal of Honor
 could do no wrong. In a
 strange way, Captain Don
 Mathers was to learn
 that this was true._


Don Mathers snapped to attention, snapped a crisp salute to his
superior, said, "Sub-lieutenant Donal Mathers reporting, sir."

The Commodore looked up at him, returned the salute, looked down at the
report on the desk. He murmured, "Mathers, One Man Scout V-102. Sector
A22-K223."

"Yes, sir," Don said.

The Commodore looked up at him again. "You've been out only five days,
Lieutenant."

"Yes, sir, on the third day I seemed to be developing trouble in my fuel
injectors. I stuck it out for a couple of days, but then decided I'd
better come in for a check." Don Mathers added, "As per instructions,
sir."

"Ummm, of course. In a Scout you can hardly make repairs in space. If
you have any doubts at all about your craft, orders are to return to
base. It happens to every pilot at one time or another."

"Yes, sir."

"However, Lieutenant, it has happened to you four times out of your last
six patrols."

Don Mathers said nothing. His face remained expressionless.

"The mechanics report that they could find nothing wrong with your
engines, Lieutenant."

"Sometimes, sir, whatever is wrong fixes itself. Possibly a spot of bad
fuel. It finally burns out and you're back on good fuel again. But by
that time you're also back to the base."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Commodore said impatiently, "I don't need a lesson in the
shortcomings of the One Man Scout, Lieutenant. I piloted one for nearly
five years. I know their shortcomings--and those of their pilots."

"I don't understand, sir."

The Commodore looked down at the ball of his thumb. "You're out in space
for anywhere from two weeks to a month. All alone. You're looking for
Kraden ships which practically never turn up. In military history the
only remotely similar situation I can think of were the pilots of World
War One pursuit planes, in the early years of the war, when they still
flew singly, not in formation. But even they were up there alone for
only a couple of hours or so."

"Yes, sir," Don said meaninglessly.

The Commodore said, "We, here at command, figure on you fellows getting
a touch of space cafard once in a while and, ah, _imagining_ something
wrong in the engines and coming in. But," here the Commodore cleared his
throat, "four times out of six? Are you sure you don't need a psych,
Lieutenant?"

Don Mathers flushed. "No, sir, I don't think so."

The Commodore's voice went militarily expressionless. "Very well,
Lieutenant. You'll have the customary three weeks leave before going out
again. Dismissed."

Don saluted snappily, wheeled and marched from the office.

Outside, in the corridor, he muttered a curse. What did that chairborne
brass hat know about space cafard? About the depthless blackness, the
wretchedness of free fall, the tides of primitive terror that swept you
when the animal realization hit that you were away, away, away from the
environment that gave you birth. That you were alone, alone, _alone_. A
million, a million-million miles from your nearest fellow human. Space
cafard, in a craft little larger than a good-sized closet! What did the
Commodore know about it?

Don Mathers had conveniently forgotten the other's claim to five years'
service in the Scouts.

       *       *       *       *       *

He made his way from Space Command Headquarters, Third Division, to
Harry's Nuevo Mexico Bar. He found the place empty at this time of the
day and climbed onto a stool.

Harry said, "Hi, Lootenant, thought you were due for a patrol. How come
you're back so soon?"

Don said coldly, "You prying into security subjects, Harry?"

"Well, gee, no Lootenant. You know me. I know all the boys. I was just
making conversation."

"Look, how about some more credit, Harry? I don't have any pay coming up
for a week."

"Why, sure. I got a boy on the light cruiser _New Taos_. Any spaceman's
credit is good with me. What'll it be?"

"Tequila."

Tequila was the only concession the Nuevo Mexico Bar made to its name.
Otherwise, it looked like every other bar has looked in every land and
in every era. Harry poured, put out lemon and salt.

Harry said, "You hear the news this morning?"

"No, I just got in."

"Colin Casey died." Harry shook his head. "Only man in the system that
held the Galactic Medal of Honor. Presidential proclamation, everybody
in the system is to hold five minutes of silence for him at two o'clock,
Sol Time. You know how many times that medal's been awarded, Lootenant?"
Before waiting for an answer, Harry added, "Just thirty-six times."

Don added dryly, "Twenty-eight of them posthumously."

"Yeah." Harry, leaning on the bar before his sole customer, added in
wonder, "But imagine. The Galactic Medal of Honor, the bearer of which
can do no wrong. Imagine. You come to some town, walk into the biggest
jewelry store, pick up a diamond bracelet, and walk out. And what
happens?"

Don growled, "The jewelry store owner would be over-reimbursed by
popular subscription. And probably the mayor of the town would write you
a letter thanking you for honoring his fair city by deigning to notice
one of the products of its shops. Just like that."

