The Project Gutenberg EBook of Upstarts, by L. J. Stecher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Upstarts

Author: L. J. Stecher

Illustrator: Dillon

Release Date: December 11, 2008 [EBook #27492]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UPSTARTS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









UPSTARTS


 Earth was being bet on to break
 her blockade ... but what was the
 purse ... and who was to collect?


By L. J. STECHER, JR.

Illustrated by DILLON


The sight of an Earthman on Vega III, where it was impossible for an
outlander to be, brought angry crowds to surround John Crownwall as he
strode toward the palace of Viceroy Tronn Ffallk, ruler of Sector XII of
the Universal Holy Empire of Sunda. He ignored the snarling, the
spitting, the waving of boneless prehensile fingers, as he ignored the
heavy gravity and heavier air of the unfamiliar planet.

John Crownwall, florid, red-headed and bulky, considered himself to be a
bold man. But here, surrounded by this writhing, slithering mass of
eight-foot creatures, he felt distinctly unhappy. Crownwall had heard
about creatures that slavered, but he had never before seen it done.
These humanoids had large mouths and sharp teeth, and they
unquestionably slavered. He wished he knew more about them. If they
carried out the threats of their present attitude, Earth would have to
send Marshall to replace him. And if Crownwall couldn't do the job,
thought Crownwall, then it was a sure bet that Marshall wouldn't have a
chance.

He climbed the great ramp, with its deeply carved Greek key design,
toward the mighty entrance gate of the palace. His manner demonstrated
an elaborate air of unconcern that he felt sure was entirely wasted on
these monsters. The clashing teeth of the noisiest of them were only
inches from the quivering flesh of his back as he reached the upper
level. Instantly, and unexpectedly to Crownwall, the threatening crowd
dropped back fearfully, so that he walked the last fifty meters alone.

Crownwall all but sagged with relief. A pair of guards, their purple
hides smoothly polished and gleaming with oil, crossed their ceremonial
pikes in front of him as he approached the entrance.

"And just what business do you have here, stranger?" asked the senior of
the guards, his speaking orifice framing with difficulty the sibilances
of Universal Galactic.

"What business _would_ I have at the Viceroy's Palace?" asked Crownwall.
"I want to see Ffallk."

"Mind your tongue," growled the guard. "If you mean His Effulgence,
Right Hand of the Glorious Emperor, Hereditary Ruler of the Seventy
Suns, Viceroy of the Twelfth Sector of the Universal Holy
Empire"--Universal Galactic had a full measure of ceremonial words--"he
sees only those whom he summons. If you know what's good for you, you'll
get out of here while you can still walk. And if you run fast enough,
maybe you can even get away from that crowd out there, but I doubt it."

"Just tell him that a man has arrived from Earth to talk to him. He'll
summon me fast enough. Meanwhile, my highly polished friends, I'll just
wait here, so why don't you put those heavy pikes down?"

Crownwall sat on the steps, puffed alight a cigarette, and blew expert
smoke rings toward the guards.

An elegant courtier, with elaborately jeweled harness, bustled from
