The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astronomical Instruments and Accessories, by
Wm. Gaertner & Co.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Astronomical Instruments and Accessories

Author: Wm. Gaertner & Co.

Release Date: December 10, 2008 [EBook #27477]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS ***




Produced by Matthew Rongey, Brownfox and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)











Catalog A. 1908.

ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS
... AND ...
ACCESSORIES.

[Illustration]

WM. GAERTNER & CO.
5345-5349 Lake Ave.
CHICAGO.




Catalog A. 1908.

ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS
... AND ...
ACCESSORIES.

[Illustration]

WM. GAERTNER & CO.
5345-5349 Lake Ave.
CHICAGO.




Notice.


This catalogue supersedes former editions.

The prices given in this catalogue are net and do not include packing which
will be charged at cost.

To avoid mistakes and delays when ordering please give catalogue number and
shipping instructions.

Most of the instruments listed in this catalogue are constructed to order
only but the smaller sizes of telescopes with accessories, chronographs,
simpler measuring machines, etc., are usually kept in stock.

The apparatus listed in this catalogue is of our own manufacture, excepting
the astronomical regulator clocks, which we have listed for the convenience
of our customers.

All orders will be filled as promptly as possible with due regard to
thorough workmanship and efficient inspection.

Everything that leaves our establishment is carefully tested and inspected
and we can guarantee our apparatus to be, in every respect, fully as
represented. Any piece, which does not come up to the most exacting
requirements will always be promptly replaced within the shortest possible
time.

We shall be glad to satisfy any special requirements of our customers and
will make any desired alterations and additions on the standard designs.




Introduction.


In the following pages we have endeavored to give to our customers an idea
of the line of astronomical instruments of the latest and most improved
