The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Undersea Tube, by L. Taylor Hansen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Undersea Tube

Author: L. Taylor Hansen

Illustrator: Hans Waldemar Wessolowski

Release Date: December 25, 2008 [EBook #27609]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNDERSEA TUBE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The Undersea Tube

BY L. TAYLOR HANSEN


Classic Reprint from AMAZING STORIES, Nov., 1929

Copyright, 1929, by E. P. Incorporated


[Illustration]


If my friend the engineer had not told me the Tube was dangerous, I
would not have bought a ticket on that fatal night, and the world would
never have learned the story of the Golden Cavern and the City of the
Dead. Having therefore, according to universal custom, first made my
report as the sole survivor of the much-discussed Undersea Tube disaster
to the International Committee for the Investigation of Disasters, I am
now ready to outline that story for the world. Naturally I am aware of
the many wild tales and rumors that have been circulated ever since the
accident, but I must ask my readers to bear with me while I attempt to
briefly sketch, not only the tremendous difficulties to be overcome by
the engineers, but also the wind-propulsion theory which was made use of
in this undertaking; because it is only by understanding something of
these two phases of the Tube's engineering problems that one can
understand the accident and its subsequent revelations.

It will be recalled by those who have not allowed their view of modern
history to become too hazy, that the close of the twentieth century saw
a dream of the engineering world at last realized--the completion of the
long-heralded undersea railroad. It will also be recalled that the
engineers in charge of this stupendous undertaking were greatly
encouraged by the signal success of the first tube under the English
Channel, joining England and France by rail. However, it was from the
second tube across the Channel and the tube connecting Montreal to New
York, as well as the one connecting New York and Chicago, that they
obtained some of their then radical ideas concerning the use of wind
power for propulsion. Therefore, before the Undersea Tube had been
completed, the engineers in charge had decided to make use of the new
method in the world's longest tunnel, and upon that decision work was
immediately commenced upon the blue-prints for the great air pumps that
were to rise at the two ends--Liverpool and New York. However, I will
touch upon the theory of wind-propulsion later and after the manner in
which it was explained to me.

It will be recalled that after great ceremonies, the Tube was begun
simultaneously at the two terminating cities and proceeded through solid
rock--low enough below the ocean floor to overcome the terrible pressure
of the body of water over it, and yet close enough to the sea to
overcome the intensity of subterranean heat. Needless to say, it was an
extremely hazardous undertaking, despite the very careful surveys that
had been made, for the little parties of workmen could never tell when
they would strike a crack or an unexpected crevice that would let down
upon them with a terrible rush, the waters of the Atlantic. But hazard
is adventure, and as the two little groups of laborers dug toward each
