The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Astronomy of Milton's 'Paradise Lost', by
Thomas Orchard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Astronomy of Milton's 'Paradise Lost'

Author: Thomas Orchard

Release Date: March 29, 2009 [EBook #28434]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMY ***




Produced by David Edwards, Nigel Blower and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


Greek letters used to identify stars (Bayer designation), are replaced
with the full name of the Greek letter, e.g. Alpha Centauri.

The single Greek word in the text is transliterated within braces, {kome}.

Minor punctuation and hyphenation inconsistencies have been corrected.

The spelling "Bernices" for "Berenices" has been retained throughout.

The following minor typographical errors have been corrected:
p75:  "establish" changed to "established"
p99:  "Firmanent" changed to "Firmament"
p111: "they thoughts" changed to "thy thoughts"
p120: "suen" changed to "seuen"
p134: "consequenc" changed to "consequence"
p146: "geographieal" changed to "geographical"
p167: "Lyrae" changed to "Lyrae" for consistency
p286: Removed redundant word "degrees" following the degree symbol




                THE ASTRONOMY
                     OF
           MILTON'S 'PARADISE LOST'




[Illustration: A TYPICAL SUN-SPOT]




                THE ASTRONOMY
                     OF
           MILTON'S 'PARADISE LOST'

                     BY

           THOMAS N. ORCHARD, M.D.

MEMBER OF THE BRITISH ASTRONOMICAL ASSOCIATION


_These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty! thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair: Thyself how wondrous then!
Unspeakable._


           LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
         LONDON, NEW YORK, AND BOMBAY
                     1896

             All rights reserved




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                             PAGE
   I. A Short Historical Sketch of Astronomy                           1
  II. Astronomy in the Seventeenth Century                            45
 III. Milton's Astronomical Knowledge                                 81
  IV. Milton and Galileo                                             113
   V. The Seasons                                                    140
  VI. The Starry Heavens                                             152
 VII. The Starry Heavens                                             200
VIII. Description of Celestial Objects Mentioned in 'Paradise Lost'  244
  IX. Milton's Imaginative and Descriptive Astronomy                 306




ILLUSTRATIONS


_PLATES_

A Typical Sun-spot                                        _Frontispiece_
Venus on the Sun's Disc                               _To face page_  66
Cluster in Hercules                                          "       218
Great Nebula in Orion                                        "       230
A Portion of the Moon's Surface                              "       268


_IN TEXT_

FIG.                                                                PAGE
1.  The Ptolemaic System of the Universe                              86
2.  Milton's Division of Universal Space                              96
3.  A Binary Star System--70 Ophiuchi                                184
4.  The Orbits of the Components of Gamma Virginis                   189
5.  Apparent Orbit of the Companion of Sirius                        190
6.  A Sun-spot Magnified                                             247
7.  The Corona during the Eclipse of May 1883                        254
8.  A Portion of the Milky Way                                       289



PREFACE


Many able and cultured writers have delighted to expatiate on the
beauties of Milton's 'Paradise Lost,' and to linger with admiration over
the lofty utterances expressed in his poem. Though conscious of his
inability to do justice to the sublimest of poets and the noblest of
sciences, the author has ventured to contribute to Miltonic literature a
work which he hopes will prove to be of an interesting and instructive
character. Perhaps the choicest passages in the poem are associated with
astronomical allusion, and it is chiefly to the exposition and
illustration of these that this volume is devoted.

The writer is indebted to many authors for information and reference,
and especially to Miss Agnes M. Clerke, Professors Masson and Young, Mr.
James Nasmyth, Mr. G. F. Chambers, and Sir Robert Ball. Also to the
works of the late Mr. R. A. Proctor, Sirs W. and J. Herschel, Admiral
Smyth, Professor Grant, Mr. J. R. Hind, Sir David Brewster, Rev. A. B.
Whatton, and Prebendary Webb.

Most of the illustrations have been supplied by the Publishers: Messrs.
Macmillan and W. Hunt & Co. have kindly permitted the reproduction of
some of their drawings.

MANCHESTER, _March 1896_.




CHAPTER I

A SHORT HISTORICAL SKETCH OF ASTRONOMY


Astronomy is the oldest and most sublime of all the sciences. To a
contemplative observer of the heavens, the number and brilliancy of the
stars, the lustre of the planets, the silvery aspect of the Moon, with
her ever-changing phases, together with the order, the harmony, and
unison pervading them all, create in his mind thoughts of wonder and
admiration. Occupying the abyss of space indistinguishable from
infinity, the starry heavens in grandeur and magnificence surpass the
loftiest conceptions of the human mind; for, at a distance beyond the
range of ordinary vision, the telescope reveals clusters, systems,
galaxies, universes of stars--suns--the innumerable host of heaven, each
shining with a splendour comparable with that of our Sun, and, in all
likelihood, fulfilling in a similar manner the same beneficent purposes.

The time when man began to study the stars is lost in the antiquity of
prehistoric ages. The ancient inhabitants of the Earth regarded the
heavenly bodies with veneration and awe, erected temples in their
honour, and worshipped them as deities. Historical records of astronomy
carry us back several thousand years. During the greater part of this
time, and until a comparatively recent period, astronomy was associated
with astrology--a science which originated from a desire on the part of
mankind to penetrate the future, and which was based upon the supposed
influence of the heavenly bodies upon human and terrestrial affairs. It
was natural to imagine that the overruling power which governed and
directed the course of sublunary events resided in the heavens, and that
its decrees might be understood by watching the movements of the
heavenly bodies under its control. It was, therefore, believed that by
observing the configuration of the planets and the positions of the
constellations at the instant of the birth of an individual, his
horoscope, or destiny, could be foretold; and that by making
observations of a somewhat similar nature the occurrence of events of
public importance could be predicted. When, however, the laws which
govern the motions of the heavenly bodies became better known, and
especially after the discovery of the great law of gravitation,
astrology ceased to be a belief, though for long after it retained its
power over the imagination, and was often alluded to in the writings of
poets and other authors.

In the early dawn of astronomical science, the theories upheld with
regard to the structure of the heavens were of a simple and primitive
nature, and might even be described as grotesque. This need occasion no
surprise when we consider the difficulties with which ancient
astronomers had to contend in their endeavours to reduce to order and
harmony the complicated motions of the orbs which they beheld circling
around them.

The grouping of the stars into constellations having fanciful names,
derived from fable or ancient mythology, occurred at a very early
period, and though devoid of any methodical arrangement, is yet
sufficiently well-defined to serve the purposes of modern astronomers.
Several of the ancient nations of the earth, including the Chaldeans,
Egyptians, Hindus, and Chinese, claim to have been the earliest
astronomers. Chinese records of astronomy reveal an antiquity of near
3,000 years B.C., but they contain no evidence that their authors
possessed any scientific knowledge, and they merely record the
occurrence of solar eclipses and the appearances of comets.

It is not known when astronomy was first studied by the Egyptians; but
what astronomical information they have handed down is not of a very
intelligible kind, nor have they left behind any data that can be relied
upon. The Great Pyramid, judging from the exactness with which it faces
the cardinal points, must have been designed by persons who possessed a
good knowledge of astronomy, and it was probably made use of for
observational purposes.

It is now generally admitted that correct astronomical observations were
first made on the plains of Chaldea, records of eclipses having been
discovered in Chaldean cities which date back 2,234 years B.C. The
Chaldeans were true astronomers: they made correct observations of the
risings and settings of the heavenly bodies; and the exact orientation
of their temples and public buildings indicates the precision with which
they observed the positions of celestial objects. They invented the
zodiac and gnomon, made use of several kinds of dials, notified
eclipses, and divided the day into twenty-four hours.

To the Greeks belongs the credit of having first studied astronomy in a
regular and systematic manner. THALES (640 B.C.) was one of the earliest
of Greek astronomers, and may be regarded as the founder of the science
among that people. He was born at Miletus, and afterwards repaired to
Egypt for the purpose of study. On his return to Greece he founded the
Ionian school, and taught the sphericity of the Earth, the obliquity of
the ecliptic, and the true causes of eclipses of the Sun and Moon. He
also directed the attention of mariners to the superiority of the Lesser
Bear, as a guide for the navigation of vessels, as compared with the
Great Bear, by which constellation they usually steered. Thales believed
the Earth to be the centre of the universe, and that the stars were
composed of fire; he also predicted the occurrence of a great solar
eclipse.

Thales had for his successors Anaximander, Anaximenes, and Anaxagoras,
who taught the doctrines of the Ionian school.

The next great astronomer that we read of is PYTHAGORAS, who was born at
Samos 590 B.C. He studied under Thales, and afterwards visited Egypt and
India, in order that he might make himself familiar with the scientific
theories adopted by those nations. On his return to Europe he founded
his school in Italy, and taught in a more extended form the doctrines of
the Ionian school. In his speculations with regard to the structure of
the universe he propounded the theory (though the reasons by which he
sustained it were fanciful) that the Sun is the centre of the planetary
system, and that the Earth revolves round him. This theory--the accuracy
of which has since been confirmed--received but little attention from
his successors, and it sank into oblivion until the time of Copernicus,
by whom it was revived. Pythagoras discovered that the Morning and
Evening Stars are one and the same planet.

Among the famous astronomers who lived about this period we find
recorded the names of Meton, who introduced the Metonic cycle into
Greece and erected the first sundial at Athens; Eudoxus, who persuaded
the Greeks to adopt the year of 365-1/4 days; and Nicetas, who taught
that the Earth completed a daily revolution on her axis.

The Alexandrian school, which flourished for three centuries prior to
the Christian era, produced men of eminence whose discoveries and
investigations, when arranged and classified, enabled astronomy to be
regarded as a true theoretical science. The positions of the fixed stars
and the paths of the planets were determined with greater accuracy, and
irregularities of the motions of the Sun and Moon were investigated with
greater precision. Attempts were made to ascertain the distance of the
Sun from the Earth, and also the dimensions of the terrestrial sphere.
The obliquity of the ecliptic was accurately determined, and an arc of
the meridian was measured between Syene and Alexandria. The names of
Aristarchus, Eratosthenes, Aristyllus, Timocharis, and Autolycus, are
familiarly known in association with the advancement of the astronomy of
this period.

We now reach the name of HIPPARCHUS of Bithynia (140 B.C.), the most
illustrious astronomer of antiquity, who did much to raise astronomy to
