The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Calm Man, by Frank Belknap Long

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Calm Man

Author: Frank Belknap Long

Release Date: April 21, 2009 [EBook #28583]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CALM MAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Dip the pen of a Frank Belknap Long into a bottle of ink and the
    result is always bound to be a scintillating piece of brilliant
    imaginative science fiction. And he's done it again in the tortured
    story of Sally._


  the
 calm
  man

 _by ... Frank Belknap Long_


 Sally watched the molten gold glow in the sky. Then knew she
 would not see her son and her husband ever again on Earth.


Sally Anders had never really thought of herself as a wallflower. A girl
could be shy, couldn't she, and still be pretty enough to attract and
hold men?

Only this morning she had drawn an admiring look from the milkman and a
wolf cry from Jimmy on the corner, with his newspapers and shiny new
bike. What if the milkman was crowding sixty and wore thick-lensed
glasses? What if Jimmy was only seventeen?

A male was a male, and a glance was a glance. Why, if I just primp a
little more, Sally told herself, I'll be irresistible.

Hair ribbons and perfume, a mirror tilted at just the right angle, an
invitation to a party on the dresser--what more did a girl need?

"Dinner, Sally!" came echoing up from the kitchen. "Do you want to be
late, child?"

Sally had no intention of being late. Tonight she'd see him across a
crowded room and her heart would skip a beat. He'd look at her and
smile, and come straight toward her with his shoulders squared.

There was always one night in a girl's life that stands above all other
nights. One night when the moon shone bright and clear and the clock on
the wall went _tick tock, tick tock, tick tock_. One night when each
tick said, "You're beautiful! Really beautiful!"

Giving her hair a final pat Sally smiled at herself in the mirror.

In the bathroom the water was still running and the perfumed bath soap
still spread its aromatic sweet odor through the room. Sally went into
the bathroom and turned off the tap before going downstairs to the
kitchen.

"My girl looks radiant tonight!" Uncle Ben said, smiling at her over his
corned beef and cabbage.

Sally blushed and lowered her eyes.

"Ben, you're making her nervous," Sally's mother said, laughing.

Sally looked up and met her uncle's stare, her eyes defiant. "I'm not
bad-looking whatever you may think," she said.

"Oh, now, Sally," Uncle Ben protested. "No sense in getting on a high
horse. Tonight you may find a man who just won't be able to resist you."

"Maybe I will and maybe I won't," Sally said. "You'd be surprised if I
did, wouldn't you?"

It was Uncle Ben's turn to lower his eyes.

"I'll tell the world you've inherited your mother's looks, Sally," he
said. "But a man has to pride himself on something. My defects of
character are pretty bad. But no one has ever accused me of dishonesty."

Sally folded her napkin and rose stiffly from the table.

