The Project Gutenberg EBook of Beyond the Door, by Philip K. Dick

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Beyond the Door

Author: Philip K. Dick

Release Date: April 30, 2009 [EBook #28644]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEYOND THE DOOR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Did you ever wonder at the lonely life the bird in a cuckoo clock
    has to lead--that it might possibly love and hate just as easily as
    a real animal of flesh and blood? Philip Dick used that idea for
    this brief fantasy tale. We're sure that after reading it you'll
    give cuckoo clocks more respect._


 beyond
    the
   door

 _by ... Philip K. Dick_


 Larry Thomas bought a cuckoo clock
 for his wife--without knowing the
 price he would have to pay.


That night at the dinner table he brought it out and set it down beside
her plate. Doris stared at it, her hand to her mouth. "My God, what is
it?" She looked up at him, bright-eyed.

"Well, open it."

Doris tore the ribbon and paper from the square package with her sharp
nails, her bosom rising and falling. Larry stood watching her as she
lifted the lid. He lit a cigarette and leaned against the wall.

"A cuckoo clock!" Doris cried. "A real old cuckoo clock like my mother
had." She turned the clock over and over. "Just like my mother had, when
Pete was still alive." Her eyes sparkled with tears.

"It's made in Germany," Larry said. After a moment he added, "Carl got
it for me wholesale. He knows some guy in the clock business. Otherwise
I wouldn't have--" He stopped.

Doris made a funny little sound.

