The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sargasso of Space, by Edmond Hamilton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sargasso of Space

Author: Edmond Hamilton

Release Date: May 16, 2009 [EBook #28832]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SARGASSO OF SPACE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






 Transcriber's Note

 This etext was produced from Astounding Stories September 1931.
 Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
 on this publication was renewed.

[Illustration: She was floating along the wreck-pack's edge.]




The Sargasso of Space

_By Edmond Hamilton_

     Helpless, doomed, into the graveyard of space floats the wrecked
     freighter _Pallas_.


Captain Crain faced his crew calmly. "We may as well face the facts,
men," he said. "The ship's fuel-tanks are empty and we are drifting
through space toward the dead-area."

The twenty-odd officers and men gathered on the middle-deck of the
freighter _Pallas_ made no answer, and Crain continued:

"We left Jupiter with full tanks, more than enough fuel to take us to
Neptune. But the leaks in the starboard tanks lost us half our supply,
and we had used the other half before discovering that. Since the ship's
rocket-tubes cannot operate without fuel, we are simply drifting. We
would drift on to Neptune if the attraction of Uranus were not pulling
us to the right. That attraction alters our course so that in three
ship-days we shall drift into the dead-area."

Rance Kent, first-officer of the _Pallas_, asked a question: "Couldn't
we, raise Neptune with the radio, sir, and have them send out a
fuel-ship in time to reach us?"

"It's impossible, Mr. Kent," Crain answered. "Our main radio is dead
without fuel to run its dynamotors, and our auxiliary set hasn't the
power to reach Neptune."

"Why not abandon ship in the space-suits," asked Liggett, the
second-officer, "and trust to the chance of some ship picking us up?"

The captain shook his head. "It would be quite useless, for we'd simply
drift on through space with the ship into the dead-area."

The score of members of the crew, bronzed space-sailors out of every
port in the solar system, had listened mutely. Now, one of them, a tall
tube-man, stepped forward a little.

"Just what is this dead-area, sir?" he asked. "I've heard of it, but as
this is my first outer-planet voyage, I know nothing about it."

"I'll admit I know little more," said Liggett, "save that a good many
disabled ships have drifted into it and have never come out."

      *      *      *      *      *

"The dead area," Crain told them, "is a region of space ninety thousand
miles across within Neptune's orbit, in which the ordinary gravitational
attractions of the solar system are dead. This is because in that region
the pulls of the sun and the outer planets exactly balance each other.
Because of that, anything in the dead-area, will stay in there until
time ends, unless it has power of its own. Many wrecked space-ships have
drifted into it at one time or another, none ever emerging; and it's
believed that there is a great mass of wrecks somewhere in the area,
drawn and held together by mutual attraction."

"And we're drifting in to join them," Kent said. "Some prospect!"

"Then there's really no chance for us?" asked Liggett keenly.

Captain Crain thought. "As I see it, very little," he admitted. "If our
auxiliary radio can reach some nearby ship before the _Pallas_ enters
the dead-area, we'll have a chance. But it seems a remote one."

He addressed himself to the men: "I have laid the situation frankly
before you because I consider you entitled to the truth. You must
remember, however, that while there is life there is hope.

"There will be no change in ship routine, and the customary watches will
be kept. Half-rations of food and water will be the rule from now on,
though. That is all."

As the men moved silently off, the captain looked after them with
something of pride.

"They're taking it like men," he told Kent and Liggett. "It's a pity
there's no way out for them and us."

"If the _Pallas_ does enter the dead-area and join the wreck-pack,"
Liggett said, "how long will we be able to live?"

"Probably for some months on our present condensed air and food
supplies," Crain answered. "I would prefer, myself, a quicker end."

"So would I," said Kent. "Well, there's nothing left but to pray for
some kind of ship to cross our path in the next day or two."

      *      *      *      *      *

Kent's prayers were not answered in the next ship-day, nor in the next.
For, though one of the _Pallas'_ radio-operators was constantly at the
instruments under Captain Crain's orders, the weak calls of the
auxiliary set raised no response.

Had they been on the Venus or Mars run, Kent told himself, there would
be some chance, but out here in the vast spaces, between the outer
planets, ships were fewer and farther between. The big, cigar-shaped
freighter drifted helplessly on in a broad curve toward the dreaded
area, the green light-speck of Neptune swinging to their left.

On the third ship-day Kent and Captain Crain stood in the pilot-house
behind Liggett, who sat at the now useless rocket-tube controls. Their
eyes were on the big glass screen of the gravograph. The black dot on it
that represented their ship was crawling steadily toward the bright red
circle that stood for the dead-area....

They watched silently until the dot had crawled over the circle's red
line, heading toward its center.

"Well, we're in at last," Kent commented. "There seems to be no change
in anything, either."

Crain pointed to the instrument-panel. "Look at the gravitometers."
