The Project Gutenberg EBook of Spawn of the Comet, by Harold Thompson Rich

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Spawn of the Comet

Author: Harold Thompson Rich

Release Date: June 3, 2009 [EBook #29027]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPAWN OF THE COMET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


This etext was produced from “Astounding Stories” November 1931.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.



[Illustration: Professor Wentworth swung his cannon ray upon that
advancing horde.]


    A swarm of huge, fiery ants, brood of a mystery comet, burst
    from their shells to threaten the unsuspecting world.




Spawn of the Comet

By H. Thompson Rich


    Tokyo, June 10 (AP).--A number of the meteors that pelted
    Japan last night, as the earth passed through the tail of the
    Mystery Comet have been found and are puzzling astronomers
    everywhere.

    About the size of baseballs, orange in color, they appear to
    be of some unknown metal. So far, due to their extreme
    hardness, all attempts to analyze them have failed.

    Their uniformity of size and marking gives rise to the popular
    belief that they are seeds, and, fantastic though this
    conception is, it finds support in certain scientific quarters
    here.

Jim Carter read the news dispatch thoughtfully and handed it back to
his chief without comment.

"Well, what do you make of it?"

Miles Overton, city editor of _The New York Press_, shoved his green
eye-shade far back on his bald head and glanced up irritably from his
littered desk.

"I don't know," said Jim.

"You don't know!" Overton snorted, biting his dead cigar impatiently.
"And I suppose you don't know they're finding the damn things right
here in New York, not to mention Chicago, London, Rio and a few other
places," he added.

"Yes, I know about New York. It's a regular egg hunt."

"Egg hunt is right! But why tell me all this now? I didn't see any
mention of 'em in your report of last night's proceedings. Did you see
any?"

"No, but I saw a lot of shooting stars!" said Jim, recalling that
weird experience he and the rest of humanity had passed through so
recently.

"Yeah, I'll say!" Overton lit his wrecked cigar and dragged on it
soothingly. "Now then, getting back to cases--what are these damn
things, anyway? That's what I'd like to know."

"So would I," said Jim. "Maybe they _are_ seeds?"

Overton frowned. He was a solid man, not given to fancies. He had a
paper to get out every day and that taxed his imagination to the
limit. There was no gray matter left for any such idle musings as Jim
suggested. What he wanted was facts, and he wanted them right away.

"Eggs will do!" he said. "Go out and get one--and find out what's
inside it."

"Okay, Chief," said Jim, but he knew it was a large order. "I'll have
one on your desk for breakfast!"

Then, with a grave face that denied his light words, he stepped from
the city room on that fantastic assignment.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the television broadcast hour and crowds thronged the upper
level of Radio Plaza, gazing, intently at the bulletin screen, as Jim
Carter emerged from the Press tower.

News from the ends of the earth, in audio-picture form, flashed before
their view; but only the reports on the strange meteors from the tail
of 1947, IV--so designated by astronomers because it was the fourth
comet discovered that year--held their interest. Nothing since the
great Antarctic gold rush of '33 had so gripped the public as the
dramatic arrival and startling behavior of this mysterious visitant
from outer space.

Jim paused a moment, halfway across the Plaza, to take a look at the
screen himself.

The substance of the Tokyo dispatch, supplemented by pictures of
Japanese scientists working over the baffling orange spheres, had just
gone off. Now came a flash from Berlin, in which a celebrated German
chemist was seen directing an effort to cut into one of them with an
acid drill. It failed and the scientist turned to declare to the world
that the substance seemed more like crystal than metal and was harder
than diamond.

Jim tarried no longer. He knew where he was going. It was still early
and Joan would be up--Joan Wentworth, daughter of Professor Stephen
Wentworth, who held the chair of astro-lithology at Hartford
University. It was as their guest at the observatory last night that
he had seen 1947, IV at close range, as the earth passed through her
golden train with that awesome, unparalleled display of fireworks.

Now he'd have the pleasure of seeing Joan again, and at the same time
get the low-down from her father on those confounded seeds--or eggs,
rather. If anyone could crack one of them, he'd bet Professor
Wentworth could.

So, hastening toward the base of Plaza Airport, he took an elevator to
ramp-level 118, where his auto-plane was parked, and five minutes
later was winging his way to Hartford.

       *       *       *       *       *

Throttle wide, Jim did the eighty miles to the Connecticut capital in
a quarter of an hour.

Then, banking down through the warm June night onto the University
landing field, he retracted the wings of his swift little bus and
motored to the foot of Observatory Hill.

Parking outside the Wentworth home, he mounted the steps and rang the
bell.

It was answered by a slim, appealing girl of perhaps twenty-two. Hers
was a wistful, oval face, with a small, upturned nose; and her clear
hazel eyes were the sort that always seem to be enjoying some amusing
secret of their own. Her hair was a soft brown, worn loose to the
shoulders, after the style then in vogue.

"Joan!" blurted Jim.

"What brings you here at such an hour, Jimmy Carter?" she asked with
mock severity.
