The Project Gutenberg EBook of It's All Yours, by Sam Merwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: It's All Yours

Author: Sam Merwin

Release Date: June 21, 2009 [EBook #29195]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IT'S ALL YOURS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _It was a strange and bitter Earth over which the Chancellor
    ruled--a strange and deformed world. There were times when the
    Chancellor suspected that he really was a humanistic old fool, but
    this seemed to be his destiny and it was difficult to be anything
    else. Human, like all other organic life on Earth, was dying. Where
    it spawned, it spawned monsters. What was to be the answer?_


  it's
   all
 yours

 _by ... Sam Merwin, Jr._


 It was a lonely thing to rule over a dying world--a
 world that had become sick, so terribly sick....


The Chancellor's private washroom, discreetly off the innermost of his
official suite of offices, was a dream of gleaming black porcelain and
solid gold. Each spout, each faucet, was a gracefully stylized mermaid,
the combination stall shower-steam room a marvel of hydraulic comfort
and decor with variable lighting plotted to give the user every sort of
beneficial ray, from ultraviolet to black heat.

But Bliss was used to it. At the moment, as he washed his hands, he was
far more concerned with the reflection of his face in the mirror above
the dolphin-shaped bowl. With a sort of wry resignation, he accepted the
red rims of fatigue around his eyes, the batch of white at his left
temple that was spreading toward the top of his dark, well-groomed head.
He noted that the lines rising from the corners of his mouth to the
curves of his nostrils seemed to have deepened noticeably during the
past few days.

As he dried his hands in the air-stream, he told himself that he was
letting his imagination run away with him--imagination had always been
his weakness, and a grave failing for a head of state. And while he drew
on his special, featherweight gloves, he reminded himself that, if he
was aging prematurely, it was nobody's fault but his own. No other man
or woman approaching qualification for the job would have taken it--only
a sentimental, humanistic fool like himself.

He took a quick sip from the benzedral fountain, waited for the
restorative to do its work. Then, feeling moderately refreshed, he
returned to his office, sank into the plastifoam cushions of the chair
behind his tabletop mountain of a desk and pressed the button that
informed Myra, his confidential secretary, he was ready.
