The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pygmy Planet, by John Stewart Williamson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Pygmy Planet

Author: John Stewart Williamson

Release Date: June 20, 2009 [EBook #29177]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PYGMY PLANET ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Astounding Stories February 1932.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                           The Pygmy Planet

                          By Jack Williamson




[Sidenote: Down into the infinitely small goes Larry on his mission to
the Pygmy Planet.]

[Illustration: _It paused, seeming to regard them with malevolent
eyes._]

"Nothing ever happens to me!" Larry Manahan grumbled under his breath,
sitting behind his desk at the advertising agency which employed his
services in return for the consideration of fifty a week. "All the
adventure I know is what I see in the movies, or read about in
magazines. What wouldn't I give for a slice of real life!"

Unconsciously, he tensed the muscles of his six feet of lean, hard
body. His crisp, flame-colored hair seemed to bristle; his blue eyes
blazed. He clenched a brown hammer of a fist.

Larry felt himself an energetic, red-blooded square peg, badly
afflicted with the urge for adventure, miserably wedged in a round
hole. It is one of the misfortunes of our civilization that a young
man who, for example, might have been an excellent pirate a couple of
centuries ago, must be kept chained to a desk. And that seemed to be
Larry's fate.

"Things happen to other people," he muttered. "Why couldn't an
adventure come to me?"

He sat, staring wistfully at a picture of a majestic mountain
landscape, soon to be used in the advertising of a railway company
whose publicity was handled by his agency, when the jangle of the
telephone roused him with a start.

"Oh, Larry--" came a breathless, quivering voice.

Then, with a click, the connection was broken.

The voice had been feminine and had carried a familiar ring. Larry
tried to place it, as he listened at the receiver and attempted to get
the broken connection restored.

"Your party hung up, and won't answer," the operator informed him.

He replaced the receiver on the hook, still seeking to follow the thin
thread of memory given him by the familiar note in that eager excited
voice. If only the girl had spoken a few more words!

       *       *       *       *       *

Then it came to him.

"Agnes Sterling!" he exclaimed aloud.

Agnes Sterling was a slender, elfish, dark-haired girl--lovely, he had
thought her, on the occasions of their few brief meetings. Larry knew
her as the secretary and laboratory assistant of Dr. Travis Whiting, a
retired college professor known for his work on the structure of the
atom. Larry had called at the home-laboratory of the savant, months
before, to check certain statistics to be used for advertising
purposes and had met the girl there. Only a few times since had he
seen her.

Now she had called him in a voice that fairly trembled with
excitement--and, he thought, dread! And she had been interrupted
before she had time to give him any message.

For a few seconds Larry stared at the telephone. Then he rose abruptly
to his feet, crammed his hat on his head, and started for the door.

"The way to find adventure is to go after it," he murmured. "And this
is the invitation!"

It was not many minutes later that he sprang out of a taxi at the
front of the building in which Dr. Travis Whiting made his home and
maintained a private experimental laboratory. It was a two-story
stucco house, rather out of date, set well back from the sidewalk,
with a scrap of lawn and a few straggling shrubs before it. The door
was closed, the windows curtained blankly. The place seemed deserted
and forbidding.

Larry ran up the uneven brick walk to the door and rang the bell.
Impatiently, he waited a few moments. No sound came from within. He
felt something ominous, fateful, about the silent mystery that seemed
to shroud the old house. For the first time, it occurred to him that
Agnes might be in physical danger, as a result of some incautious
experiment on the part of Dr. Whiting.

       *       *       *       *       *

Instinctively, his hand sought the door knob. To his surprise, the
door was unlocked. It swung open before him. For a moment he stared,
hesitating, into the dark hall revealed beyond. Then, driven by the
thought that Agnes might be in danger, he advanced impulsively.

The several doors opening into the hall were closed. The one at the
back, he knew, gave admittance to the laboratory. Impelled by some
vague premonition, he hastened toward it down the long hall and threw
it open.

As he stepped inside the room, his foot slipped on a spot of something
red. Recovering his balance with difficulty, he peered about.

Bending down, Larry briefly examined the red spot on which he had
slipped. It was a pool of fresh blood which had not yet darkened.
Lying beside it, crimson-splashed, was a revolver. As he picked up the
weapon, he cried out in astonishment.

Something had happened to the gun. The trigger guard was torn from it,
and the cylinder crushed as if in some resistless grasp; the stock was
twisted, and the barrel bent almost into a circle. The revolver had
been crumpled by some terrific force--as a soft clay model of it might
have been broken by the pressure of a man's hand.

"Crimson shades of Caesar!" he muttered, and dropped the crushed
weapon to the floor again.

His eyes swept the silent laboratory.

It was a huge room, taking up all the rear part of the house, from the
first floor to the roof. Gray daylight streamed through a sky-light,
