The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hoofer, by Walter M. Miller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hoofer

Author: Walter M. Miller

Release Date: June 19, 2009 [EBook #29170]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOOFER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _A wayfarer's return from a far country to his wife and family may
    be a shining experience, a kind of second honeymoon. Or it may be so
    shadowed by Time's relentless tyranny that the changes which have
    occurred in his absence can lead only to tragedy and despair. This
    rarely discerning, warmly human story by a brilliant newcomer to the
    science fantasy field is told with no pulling of punches, and its
    adroit unfolding will astound you._


    the
 hoofer

 _by ... Walter M. Miller, Jr._


 A space rover has no business with a family. But what can a man
 in the full vigor of youth do--if his heart cries out for a home?


They all knew he was a spacer because of the white goggle marks on his
sun-scorched face, and so they tolerated him and helped him. They even
made allowances for him when he staggered and fell in the aisle of the
bus while pursuing the harassed little housewife from seat to seat and
cajoling her to sit and talk with him.

Having fallen, he decided to sleep in the aisle. Two men helped him to
the back of the bus, dumped him on the rear seat, and tucked his gin
bottle safely out of sight. After all, he had not seen Earth for nine
months, and judging by the crusted matter about his eyelids, he couldn't
have seen it too well now, even if he had been sober. Glare-blindness,
gravity-legs, and agoraphobia were excuses for a lot of things, when a
man was just back from Big Bottomless. And who could blame a man for
acting strangely?

Minutes later, he was back up the aisle and swaying giddily over the
little housewife. "How!" he said. "Me Chief Broken Wing. You wanta
Indian wrestle?"

The girl, who sat nervously staring at him, smiled wanly, and shook her
head.

"Quiet li'l pigeon, aren'tcha?" he burbled affectionately, crashing into
the seat beside her.

The two men slid out of their seats, and a hand clamped his shoulder.
"Come on, Broken Wing, let's go back to bed."

"My name's Hogey," he said. "Big Hogey Parker. I was just kidding about
being a Indian."

"Yeah. Come on, let's go have a drink." They got him on his feet, and
led him stumbling back down the aisle.

"My ma was half Cherokee, see? That's how come I said it. You wanta hear
a war whoop? Real stuff."
