The Project Gutenberg EBook of Houlihan's Equation, by Walt Sheldon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Houlihan's Equation

Author: Walt Sheldon

Release Date: June 19, 2009 [EBook #29168]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOULIHAN'S EQUATION ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Every writer must seek his own Flowery Kingdom in imagination's
    wide demesne, and if that search can begin and end on Earth his
    problem has been greatly simplified. In post-war Japan Walt Sheldon
    has found not only serenity, but complete freedom to write
    undisturbed about the things he treasures most. A one-time Air Force
    officer, he has turned to fantasy in his lighter moments, to bring
    us such brightly sparkling little gems as this._


 houlihan's
   equation

 _by ... Walt Sheldon_


 The tiny spaceship had been built for a journey to a star. But its
 small, mischievous pilots had a rendezvous with destiny--on Earth.


I must admit that at first I wasn't sure I was hearing those noises. It
was in a park near the nuclear propulsion center--a cool, green spot,
with the leaves all telling each other to hush, be quiet, and the soft
breeze stirring them up again. I had known precisely such a secluded
little green sanctuary just over the hill from Mr. Riordan's farm when I
was a boy.

Now it was a place I came to when I had a problem to thrash out. That
morning I had been trying to work out an equation to give the
coefficient of discharge for the matter in combustion. You may call it
gas, if you wish, for we treated it like gas at the center for
convenience--as it came from the rocket tubes in our engine.

Without this coefficient to give us control, we would have lacked a
workable equation when we set about putting the first moon rocket around
those extraordinary engines of ours, which were still in the undeveloped
blueprint stage.

I see I shall have to explain this, although I had hoped to get right
along with my story. When you start from scratch, matter discharged
from any orifice has a velocity directly proportional to the square root
of the pressure-head driving it. But when you actually put things
together, contractions or expansions in the gas, surface roughness and
other factors make the velocity a bit smaller.

At the terrible discharge speed of nuclear explosion--which is what the
drive amounts to despite the fact that it is simply water in which
nuclear salts have been previously dissolved--this small factor makes
quite a difference. I had to figure everything into it--diameter of the
nozzle, sharpness of the edge, the velocity of approach to the point of
discharge, atomic weight and structure-- Oh, there is so much of this
that if you're not a nuclear engineer yourself it's certain to weary
you.
