The Project Gutenberg EBook of Raiders of the Universes, by Donald Wandrei

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Raiders of the Universes

Author: Donald Wandrei

Release Date: July 12, 2009 [EBook #29389]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RAIDERS OF THE UNIVERSES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: _He somehow managed to close the tiny switch._]


Raiders of the Universes

By Donald Wandrei


  Childlike, the great astronomer
 Phobar stands before the metallic
  invaders of the ravished solar
              system.


It was in the thirty-fourth century that the dark star began its famous
conquest, unparalleled in stellar annals. Phobar the astronomer
discovered it. He was sweeping the heavens with one of the newly
invented multi-powered Sussendorf comet-hunters when something caught
his eye--a new star of great brilliance in the foreground of the
constellation Hercules.

For the rest of the night, he cast aside all his plans and concentrated
on the one star. He witnessed an unprecedented event. Mercia's
nullifier had just been invented, a curious and intricate device, based
on four-dimensional geometry, that made it possible to see occurrences
in the universe which had hitherto required the hundreds of years needed
for light to cross the intervening space before they were visible on
Earth. By a hasty calculation with the aid of this invention, Phobar
found that the new star was about three thousand light-years distant,
and that it was hurtling backward into space at the rate of twelve
hundred miles per second. The remarkable feature of his discovery was
this appearance of a fourth-magnitude star where none had been known to
exist. Perhaps it had come into existence this very night.

On the succeeding night, he was given a greater surprise. In line with
the first star, but several hundred light-years nearer, was a second new
star of even more brightness. And it, too, was hurtling backward into
space at approximately twelve hundred miles per second. Phobar was
astonished. Two new stars discovered within twenty-four hours in the
same part of the heavens, both of the fourth magnitude! But his surprise
was as nothing when on the succeeding night, even while he watched, a
third new star appeared in line with these, but much closer.

At midnight he first noticed a pin-point of faint light; by one o'clock
the star was of eighth magnitude. At two it was a brilliant sun of the
second magnitude blazing away from Earth like the others at a rate of
twelve hundred miles per second. And on the next evening, and the next,
and the next, other new stars appeared until there were seven in all,
every one on a line in the same constellation Hercules, every one with
the same radiance and the same proper motion, though of varying size!

       *       *       *       *       *

Phobar had broadcast his discovery to incredulous astronomers; but as
star after star appeared nightly, all the telescopes on Earth were
turned toward one of the most spectacular cataclysms that history
recorded. Far out in the depths of space, with unheard-of regularity and
unheard-of precision, new worlds were flaming up overnight in a line
that began at Hercules and extended toward the solar system.

Phobar's announcement was immediately flashed to Venus, Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn, the other members of the Five World Federation. Saturn
reported no evidence of the phenomena, because of the interfering rings
and the lack of Mercia's nullifier. But Jupiter, with a similar device,
witnessed the phenomena and announced furthermore that many stars in the
neighborhood of the novae had begun to deviate in singular and abrupt
fashion from their normal positions.

There was not as yet much popular interest in the phenomena. Without
Mercia's nullifier, the stars were not visible to ordinary eyes, since
the light-rays would take years to reach the Earth. But every astronomer
who had access to Mercia's nullifier hastened to focus his telescope on
the region where extraordinary events were taking place out in the
unfathomable gulf of night. Some terrific force was at work, creating
worlds and disturbing the positions of stars within a radius already
known to extend billions and trillions of miles from the path of the
seven new stars. But of the nature of that force, astronomers could only
guess.

       *       *       *       *       *

Phobar took up his duties early on the eighth night. The last star had
appeared about five hundred light-years distant. If an eighth new star
was found, it should be not more than a few light-years away. But
nothing happened. All night Phobar kept his telescope pointed at the
probable spot, but search as he might, the heavens showed nothing new.
In the morning he sought eagerly for news of any discovery made by
fellow-watchers, but they, too, had found nothing unusual. Could it be
that the mystery would now fade away, a new riddle of the skies?

The next evening, he took up his position once more, training his
telescope on the seven bright stars, and then on the region where an
eighth, if there were one, should appear. For hours he searched the
abyss in vain. He could find none. Apparently the phenomena were ended.
At midnight he took a last glance before entering on some tedious
calculations. It was there! In the center of the telescope a faint, hazy
object steadily grew in brightness. All his problems were forgotten as
Phobar watched the eighth star increase hourly. Closer than any other,
