The Project Gutenberg EBook of The End of Time, by Wallace West

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The End of Time

Author: Wallace West

Release Date: July 15, 2009 [EBook #29410]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE END OF TIME ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                         Transcriber's Note:

     This etext was produced from Astounding Stories March 1933.
     Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
     U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.




                           The End of Time



                           By Wallace West

       *       *       *       *       *




[Sidenote: By millions of millions the creatures of earth slow and
drop when their time-sense is mysteriously paralyzed.]


"There is no doubt of it!" The little chemist pushed steel-bowed
spectacles up on his high forehead and peered at his dinner guest with
excited blue eyes. "Time will come to an end at six o'clock this
morning."

Jack Baron, young radio engineer at the Rothafel Radio laboratories,
and protege of Dr. Manthis, his host, laughed heartily.

"What a yarn you spin, Doctor," he said. "Write it for the movies."

"But it's true," insisted the older man. "Something is paralyzing our
time-sense. The final stroke will occur about daybreak."

"Bosh! You mean the earth will stop rotating, the stars blink out?"

"Not at all. Such things have nothing to do with time. You may know
your short waves, but your general education has been sadly
neglected." The scientist picked up a weighty volume. "Maybe this will
explain what I mean. It's from Immanuel Kant's 'Critique of Pure
Reason.' Listen:

     'Time is not something which subsists of itself, or which
     inheres in things as an objective determination, and
     therefore, remains, when abstraction is made of the
     subjective conditions of the intuition of things. For in
     the former case it would be something real, yet without
     presenting to any power of perception any real object. In
     the latter case, as an order of determination inherent in
     things themselves, it could not be antecedent to things, as
     their condition, nor discerned or intuited by means of
     synthetical propositions _a priori_. But all this is quite
     possible when we regard time as merely the subjective
     condition under which all our intuitions take place.'

"There. Does that make it clear?"

"Clear as mud," grinned Baron. "Kant is too deep for me."

"I'll give you another proof," snapped Manthis. "Look at your watch."

The other drew out his timepiece. Slowly his face sobered.

"Why, I can't see the second hand," he exclaimed. "It's just a blur!"

"Exactly! Now look at the minute hand. Can you see it move?"

"Yes, quite clearly."

"What time is it?"

[Illustration: _A few remained standing like statues._]

"Half past one. Great Scott! So that's why you spun that yarn." Baron
hoisted his six feet one out of the easy chair. "It's way past your
bedtime. Didn't mean to keep you up." He stared again at his watch as
if it had betrayed him. "It seems we just finished dinner. I must have
dozed off...."

"Nonsense," sniffed Manthis. "You arrived at eight o'clock--an hour
late. You and I and my daughter had dinner. Then the two of us came in
here. We smoked a cigarette or two. Now it's half-past one. Do you
need more proof?"

"Your theory's all wet somewhere," the younger man protested with a
shaky laugh. "If my watch isn't broken, time must be speeding up, not
stopping."

"That comes from depending on your senses instead of your
intelligence. Think a minute. If the watch seems running double speed
that would indicate that your perception of its movements had slowed
down fifty per cent."

Baron sank back into his chair, leaned forward and gripped his curly
black hair with trembling fingers. He felt dizzy and befuddled.

"June," called the doctor. Then to the agitated youth he added: "Watch
my daughter when she comes in if you still think I'm crazy."

As he spoke the door flew open and a slim, golden-haired girl shot
into the room like a motion picture character in one of those comedies
which is run double speed. Jack's eyes could hardly follow her
movements.

She came behind her father and threw one slim arm about his shoulders.
She spoke, but her usually throaty voice was only a high-pitched
squeak.

"Can't understand you, dear," interrupted her father. "Write it down."

"June is using a drug which I prepared to keep her time sense normal,"
Manthis explained as the girl's pen raced over a pad. "That's why she
disappeared after dinner. I wanted you to get the full effect. Now
read this."

"The deadline is approaching," the girl's message read. "You'd better
take your injection now. It is 2:30 A.M."

"All right, prepare the hypodermics," directed the chemist. He had to
repeat this in a falsetto voice before June understood. "Make one for
Jack too."

June went out at express-train speed.

Baron glanced at his watch again. The minute hand was moving with the
speed at which the second hand usually traveled. Three fifteen
already!

When he looked up June was in the room again with two hypodermic
needles. Quickly she removed her father's coat and made the injection.

