The Project Gutenberg EBook of Loot of the Void, by Edwin K. Sloat

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Loot of the Void

Author: Edwin K. Sloat

Release Date: July 19, 2009 [EBook #29457]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOOT OF THE VOID ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

   This etext was produced from Astounding Stories September 1932.
   Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
   U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.



                           Loot of the Void


                          By Edwin K. Sloat

       *       *       *       *       *




[Sidenote: Into the Trap-Door City of great spiders goes Penrun after
the hidden plunder of the space-pirate Halkon.]


Dick Penrun glanced up incredulously.

"Why, that's impossible; you would have to be two hundred years old!"
he exclaimed.

Lozzo nervously ran a hand through his white mop of hair.

"But it is true, Sirro," he assured his companion. "We Martians
sometimes live three centuries. You should know that I am only a
hundred and seventy-five, and I do not lie when I say I was a cabin
boy under Captain Halkon."

[Illustration: _Down from the pinnacle of rock streaked a gigantic
spider._]

His voice sank to a whisper, and he glanced apprehensively about the
buffet of the _Western Star_ which was due now in three days at the
Martian city of Nurm. Penrun's eyes followed his anxious glances
curiously. The buffet was partly filled with passengers, smoking,
gossiping women, and men at cards, or throwing dice in the Martian
gambling game of _diklo_, which was the universal fad of the moment.
No place could have been safer, Penrun reflected. Doubtless the old
man's caution was a lifelong habit acquired in his youth, if he had
actually served under Halkon.

Before long the old codger would be saying that he knew the hiding
place of Halkon's treasure, about which there were probably more
legends and yarns than anything else in the Universe. A century had
elapsed since the death of the famous pirate who had preyed on the
shipping of the Void with fearless, ruthless audacity and had piled up
a fabulous treasure before that fatal day when the massed battle
spheres of the Interplanetary Council trapped his ships out near
Mercury and blew them to atoms there in the sun-beaten reaches of
space. Some of the men had been captured; old Lozzo might have been
one of them. Penrun knew the history of Halkon from childhood, and for
a very good reason.

The ancient Martian stirred uneasily. His piercing blue eyes turned
again to Penrun's face.

"Every word I have said is true, Sirro," he repeated hurriedly. "I
boarded this ship at New York with the sole intention of discharging
my sworn duty and giving a message to the grandson of Captain Orion
Halkon, his first male descendant."

       *       *       *       *       *

Penrun's eyes widened in startled amazement. He, himself, was the
grandson of the notorious Halkon, a fact that not more than half a
dozen people in the Universe knew--or so he had always believed. His
mother, Halkon's only daughter, good and upright woman that she was,
had hidden that family skeleton far back in the closet and solemnly
warned Dick Penrun and his two sisters to keep it there. Yet this old
man, who had singled him out of the crowd in the buffet not thirty
minutes ago and drew him into conversation, knew the secret. Perhaps
he really had been a cabin boy under Halkon!

"I have been serving out the hundred-year sentence for piracy the
judges imposed on me, a century in your own Earth prison of Sing
Sing," muttered Lozzo. "I have just been released. Quick! My inner
gods tell me my vase of life is toppling. I swore to your grandfather
that I would deliver the message. It is here. Guard well your own
life, for this paper is a thing of evil!"

His hand rested nervously on the edge of the table. The ancient blue
eyes swept the buffet with a lightning glance. Then he slid his hand
forward across the polished wood. Penrun glimpsed a bit of yellow,
folded paper beneath it. Then something tweaked his hair. A deafening
explosion filled the buffet. Lozzo stiffened, his mouth gaped in a
choked scream, and he sprawled across the table, dead.

As he fell, a fat white hand darted over the table toward the oblong
of folded, yellow paper lying unprotected on its surface. Penrun
clutched at it frantically. The fat fingers closed on the paper and
were gone.

Penrun whirled about. The drapes of the doorway framed a heavy, pasty
face with liquid black eyes. The slug gun was aiming again, this time
at Penrun. He hurled himself sideways out of his chair as it roared a
second time. The heavy slug buried itself in the corpse of the old
Martian on the table. The face in the doorway vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next instant Penrun was through the door and racing down the long
promenade deck under the glow of the electric lights, for the
quartering sun was shining on the opposite side of the ship. Far down
the deck ahead fled the slayer.

The killer paused long enough to drop an emergency bulkhead gate. Five
minutes later when Penrun and the other passengers succeeded in
