The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cost of Living, by Robert Sheckley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cost of Living

Author: Robert Sheckley

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release Date: July 19, 2009 [EBook #29458]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COST OF LIVING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: Illustrated by EMSH]


 Cost
 of
 Living

 _If easy payment plans were
     to be really efficient, patrons'
         lifetimes had to be extended!_

 By ROBERT SHECKLEY


Carrin decided that he could trace his present mood to Miller's suicide
last week. But the knowledge didn't help him get rid of the vague,
formless fear in the back of his mind. It was foolish. Miller's suicide
didn't concern him.

But why had that fat, jovial man killed himself? Miller had had
everything to live for--wife, kids, good job, and all the marvelous
luxuries of the age. Why had he done it?

"Good morning, dear," Carrin's wife said as he sat down at the breakfast
table.

"Morning, honey. Morning, Billy."

His son grunted something.

You just couldn't tell about people, Carrin decided, and dialed his
breakfast. The meal was gracefully prepared and served by the new
Avignon Electric Auto-cook.

His mood persisted, annoyingly enough since Carrin wanted to be in top
form this morning. It was his day off, and the Avignon Electric finance
man was coming. This was an important day.

He walked to the door with his son.

"Have a good day, Billy."

His son nodded, shifted his books and started to school without
answering. Carrin wondered if something was bothering him, too. He hoped
not. One worrier in the family was plenty.

"See you later, honey." He kissed his wife as she left to go shopping.

At any rate, he thought, watching her go down the walk, at least she's
happy. He wondered how much she'd spend at the A. E. store.

Checking his watch, he found that he had half an hour before the A. E.
finance man was due. The best way to get rid of a bad mood was to drown
it, he told himself, and headed for the shower.

       *       *       *       *       *
