Project Gutenberg's The Man the Martians Made, by Frank Belknap Long

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Man the Martians Made

Author: Frank Belknap Long

Release Date: July 17, 2009 [EBook #29432]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN THE MARTIANS MADE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _If Frank Belknap Long is not one of the deans of science fiction
    writers, there can certainly be no dispute that he is high on the
    faculty board. His pen is indefatigable, it seems, and his
    characters come alive as with few other writers. We're sure you'll
    like this new suspenseful tale of his._


      the
      man
      the
 martians
     made

 _by ... Frank Belknap Long_


 No mortal had ever seen the Martians, but they had heard their
 whisperings--without knowing the terrible secret they kept hidden.


There was death in the camp.

I knew when I awoke that it had come to stand with us in the night and
was waiting now for the day to break and flood the desert with light.
There was a prickling at the base of my scalp and I was drenched with
cold sweat.

I had an impulse to leap up and go stumbling about in the darkness. But
I disciplined myself. I crossed my arms and waited for the sky to grow
bright.

Daybreak on Mars is like nothing you've ever dreamed about. You wake up
in the morning, and there it is--bright and clear and shining. You pinch
yourself, you sit up straight, but it doesn't vanish.

Then you stare at your hands with the big callouses. You reach for a
mirror to take a look at your face. That's not so good. That's where
ugliness enters the picture. You look around and you see Ralph. You see
Harry. You see the women.

On Earth a woman may not look her glamorous best in the harsh light of
early dawn, but if she's really beautiful she doesn't look too bad. On
Mars even the most beautiful woman looks angry on arising, too weary
and tormented by human shortcomings to take a prefabricated metal shack
and turn it into a real home for a man.

You have to make allowances for a lot of things on Mars. You have to
start right off by accepting hardship and privation as your daily lot.
You have to get accustomed to living in construction camps in the
desert, with the red dust making you feel all hollow and dried up
inside. Making you feel like a drum, a shriveled pea pod, a salted fish
hung up to dry. Dust inside of you, rattling around, canal water seepage
rotting the soles of your boots.

So you wake up and you stare. The night before you'd collected driftwood
and stacked it by the fire. The driftwood has disappeared. Someone has
stolen your very precious driftwood. The Martians? Guess again.

You get up and you walk straight up to Ralph with your shoulders
squared. You say, "Ralph, why in hell did you have to steal my
driftwood?"

In your mind you say that. You say it to Dick, you say it to Harry. But
what you really say is, "Larsen was here again last night!"

You say, I put a fish on to boil and Larsen ate it. I had a nice deck of
cards, all shiny and new, and Larsen marked them up. It wasn't me
cheating. It was Larsen hoping I'd win so that he could waylay me in the
desert and get all of the money away from me.

You have a girl. There aren't too many girls in the camps with laughter
and light and fire in them. But there are a few, and if you're lucky you
take a fancy to one particular girl--her full red lips and her spun gold
hair. All of a sudden she disappears. Somebody runs off with her. It's
Larsen.

In every man there is a slumbering giant. When life roars about you on a
world that's rugged and new you've got to go on respecting the lads who
have thrown in their lot with you, even when their impulses are as harsh
as the glint of sunlight on a desert-polished tombstone.

You think of a name--Larsen. You start from scratch and you build Larsen
up until you have a clear picture of him in your mind. You build him up
until he's a great shouting, brawling, golden man like Paul Bunyon.

Even a wicked legend can seem golden on Mars. Larsen wasn't just my
slumbering giant--or Dick's, or Harry's. He was the slumbering giant in
all of us, and that's what made him so tremendous. Anything gigantic has
beauty and power and drive to it.

Alone we couldn't do anything with Larsen's gusto, so when some great
act of wickedness was done with gusto how could it be us? Here comes
Larsen! He'll shoulder all the guilt, but he won't feel guilty because
he's the first man in Eden, the child who never grew up, the laughing
boy, Hercules balancing the world on his shoulders and looking for a
woman with long shining tresses and eyes like the stars of heaven to
bend to his will.
