Project Gutenberg's The Valor of Cappen Varra, by Poul William Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Valor of Cappen Varra

Author: Poul William Anderson

Release Date: July 29, 2009 [EBook #29542]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VALOR OF CAPPEN VARRA ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _We have said that there are many and strange shadows, memories
    surviving from dim pasts, in this FANTASTIC UNIVERSE of ours. Poul
    Anderson turns to a legend from the Northern countries, countries
    where even today the pagan past seems only like yesterday, and tells
    the story of Cappen Varra, who came to Norren a long, long time
    ago._


    the
  valor
     of
 cappen
  varra

 by ... _POUL ANDERSON_


 "Let little Cappen go," they
 shouted. "Maybe he can sing
 the trolls to sleep--"


The wind came from the north with sleet on its back. Raw shuddering
gusts whipped the sea till the ship lurched and men felt driven
spindrift stinging their faces. Beyond the rail there was winter night,
a moving blackness where the waves rushed and clamored; straining into
the great dark, men sensed only the bitter salt of sea-scud, the nettle
of sleet and the lash of wind.

Cappen lost his footing as the ship heaved beneath him, his hands were
yanked from the icy rail and he went stumbling to the deck. The bilge
water was new coldness on his drenched clothes. He struggled back to his
feet, leaning on a rower's bench and wishing miserably that his quaking
stomach had more to lose. But he had already chucked his share of
stockfish and hardtack, to the laughter of Svearek's men, when the gale
started.

Numb fingers groped anxiously for the harp on his back. It still seemed
intact in its leather case. He didn't care about the sodden wadmal
breeks and tunic that hung around his skin. The sooner they rotted off
him, the better. The thought of the silks and linens of Croy was a sigh
in him.

Why had he come to Norren?

A gigantic form, vague in the whistling dark, loomed beside him and gave
him a steadying hand. He could barely hear the blond giant's bull tones:
"Ha, easy there, lad. Methinks the sea horse road is too rough for yer
feet."

"Ulp," said Cappen. His slim body huddled on the bench, too miserable to
care. The sleet pattered against his shoulders and the spray congealed
in his red hair.

Torbek of Norren squinted into the night. It made his leathery face a
mesh of wrinkles. "A bitter feast Yolner we hold," he said. "'Twas a
madness of the king's, that he would guest with his brother across the
water. Now the other ships are blown from us and the fire is drenched
out and we lie alone in the Wolf's Throat."

Wind piped shrill in the rigging. Cappen could just see the longboat's
single mast reeling against the sky. The ice on the shrouds made it a
pale pyramid. Ice everywhere, thick on the rails and benches, sheathing
the dragon head and the carved stern-post, the ship rolling and
staggering under the great march of waves, men bailing and bailing in
the half-frozen bilge to keep her afloat, and too much wind for sail or
oars. Yes--a cold feast!

"But then, Svearek has been strange since the troll took his daughter,
three years ago," went on Torbek. He shivered in a way the winter had
not caused. "Never does he smile, and his once open hand grasps tight
about the silver and his men have poor reward and no thanks. Yes,
