The Project Gutenberg EBook of George Loves Gistla, by James McKimmey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: George Loves Gistla

Author: James McKimmey

Release Date: August 2, 2009 [EBook #29578]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEORGE LOVES GISTLA ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 GEORGE
 LOVES
 GISTLA

By JAMES McKIMMEY, Jr.


    _"Why don't you find yourself some nice little American girl," his
    father had often repeated. But George was on Venus ... and he loved
    pale green skin ... and globular heads and most of all, George loved
    Gistla._


George Kenington was sixteen, and, as he told himself, someone who was
sixteen knew more about love than someone who was, say, forty-two. Like
his father, for instance. A whole lot more probably. When you were
forty-two, you got narrow-minded and nervous and angry. You said this is
this, and that is that, and there is nothing else. When someone thought
and felt and talked that way, George thought bitterly, there was not
enough room inside that person to know what it was like, loving a
Venusian.

But George knew. He knew very well.

Her name was Gistla. She was not pretty in standards of American
colonists. She had the pale greenish Venusian skin, and she was too
short and rather thick. Her face, of course, was not an American face.
It was the face of native Venus. Round and smooth, with the large
lidless eyes. There were no visible ears and a lack of hair strengthened
the globular look of her head.

But she was a person. The beauty was inside of her. Did you have to
point to a girl's face and say, "Here is where the nose should be, here
is where the ears should be?" Did you have to measure the width between
eyes and test the color of the skin? Did you have to check the size of
the teeth and the existence of hair? Was all of this necessary to
understand what was _inside_ someone?

George snapped a leaf from an overhanging vine and threw it angrily to
the ground. He was walking along a thin path that led from the colony to
the tangled hills beyond, where hues of red and yellow and purple
reflected like bold sweeps of watercolor. In a moment he would see
Gistla, and with the color before his eyes and the sweet perfume of the
flowers in his lungs, he felt again the familiar rise of excitement.

George had not always lived on Venus. The Colony was very new. By 2022,
most of the Earth countries had sent colonizers to Mars. But as yet, in
June of that year, Venus had been touched by only the sparsest invasion
of American civilization. George had arrived just three years ago, when
his father had been appointed Secretary of the colonizing unit.

And that was the whole trouble, really. Father was the Secretary, Mother
was the Secretary's wife, Sister was the daughter of the Secretary.
Everybody was wrapped up in it. Except George.

George loved Gistla.

"Why don't you find yourself some nice little American girl?" his father
had said. "Say like Henry Farrel's little daughter?"

Henry Farrel's little daughter was a sweet sickening girl with a nasty
temper and a nasty tongue. Her father was Governor of the Colony. She
told you about it all the time.

"Or," his father had told him, "why not little what's-her-name, Doug
Brentwood's daughter?"

Little what's-her-name's father was the President of the Council. "My
father is President of the Council," she said. Over and over, as though
in a settlement the size of the Colony, there would be anyone who
