The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lighter Than You Think, by Nelson Bond

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lighter Than You Think

Author: Nelson Bond

Release Date: August 15, 2009 [EBook #29698]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIGHTER THAN YOU THINK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _It's possible that you won't agree with us that Pat Pending's
    latest adventure is a delightful story--possible IF you haven't been
    used to laughing in recent years. Blue Book printed more than a
    dozen of these stories by Nelson Bond about the "greatest
    inventulator of all time"._


 lighter
    than
     you
   think

 _by NELSON BOND_


 Sandy's eyes needed only jet propulsion to become flying
 saucers. Wasn't Pat wonderful? she beamed, at everyone.


Some joker in the dear, dead days now virtually beyond recall won
two-bit immortality by declaring that, "What this country needs is a
good five-cent cigar."

Which is, of course, Victorian malarkey. What this country _really_
needs is a good five-cent nickel. Or perhaps a good cigar-shaped
spaceship. There's a fortune waiting somewhere out in space for the man
who can go out there and claim it. A fortune! And if you think I'm just
talking through my hat, lend an ear ...

Joyce started the whole thing. Or maybe I did when for the umpteenth
time I suggested she should marry me. She smiled in a way that showed
she didn't disapprove of my persistence, but loosed a salvo of
devastating negatives.

"No deal," she crisped decisively. "Know why? No dough!"

"But, sugar," I pleaded, "two can live as cheaply as one--"

"This is true," replied Joyce, "only of guppies. Understand, Don, I
don't mind changing my name from Carter to Mallory. In fact, I'd rather
like to. But I have no desire whatever to be known to the neighbors as
'that poor little Mrs. Mallory in last year's coat.'

"I'll marry you," she continued firmly, "when, as and if you get a
promotion."

Her answer was by no stretch of the imagination a reason for loud
cheers, handsprings and cartwheels. Because I'm a Federal employee. The
United States Patent Office is my beat. There's one nice thing to be
said about working for the bewhiskered old gentleman in the
star-spangled stovepipe and striped britches: it's permanent. Once you
get your name inscribed on the list of Civil Service employees it takes
an act of Congress to blast it off again. And of course I don't have to
remind you how long it takes _that_ body of vote-happy windbags to act.
Terrapins in treacle are greased lightning by comparison.

But advancement is painfully slow in a department where discharges are
unheard of and resignations rare. When I started clerking for this
madhouse I was assistant to the assistant Chief Clerk's assistant. Now,
ten years later, by dint of mighty effort and a cultivated facility for
avoiding Senatorial investigations, I've succeeded in losing only one of
those redundant adjectives.

Being my secretary, Joyce certainly realized this. But women have a
remarkable ability to separate business and pleasure. So:

"A promotion," she insisted. "Or at least a good, substantial raise."

"In case you don't know it," I told her gloomily, "you are displaying a
lamentably vulgar interest in one of life's lesser values. Happiness,
