The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sorry: Wrong Dimension, by Ross Rocklynne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Sorry: Wrong Dimension

Author: Ross Rocklynne

Release Date: August 5, 2009 [EBook #29620]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SORRY: WRONG DIMENSION ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 SORRY:
      Wrong Dimension

 BY ROSS ROCKLYNNE


 _So the baby had a pet monster. And so nobody but
 baby could see it. And so a couple of men dropped
 out of thin air to check and see if the monster
 was licensed or not. So what's strange about that?_


Baby didn't cry all day, because he had a monster for a playmate. But I
didn't know he had a playmate, and much less did I know it was a
monster. The honest truth is that for the first time since baby was
born, I had my nerves under control, and I didn't dare investigate why
he wasn't crying. I got all the ironing done--all of it, mind you--and I
got Harry's work-clothes mended and I also read three installments of a
Saturday Evening Post serial I'd been saving. And besides this Mabel, my
neighbor, and I had a couple or three cups of coffee. We also had a
giggling fit. I remember once we went off into hysterics at the picture
of ourselves we had--two haggard old wrecks of women, worn out at
twenty-three from too much work around the house. "But thank Heavens
baby hasn't cried all day!" I gurgled when we came out of it.

"Neither has mine," said Mabel, who isn't due for six months.

"Mabel, honest, you kill me," I said, "and excuse me while I comb my
messy hair--because I'm _not_ a wreck. Harry said so. He says I'm still
the best hunk of female pulchritude he's met since high school--and
we've been married two years!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I went into the bathroom leaving Mabel choking hysterically behind me.
When I came out of the bathroom, she was hysterical but in a different
way. She'd discovered why Harry, Jr., wasn't crying. She'd been in the
nursery. Her face was white as an egg-shell.

"He's playing with something," she chattered. "It's _alive_. I heard it
cooing back."

I ran three steps to baby's crib ... one on the corner of Little Jack
Horner, one on the sheep of Little Bo Peep, one on the cupboard of Old
