The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cuckoo Clock, by Wesley Barefoot

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Cuckoo Clock

Author: Wesley Barefoot

Illustrator: Ernie Barth

Release Date: August 6, 2009 [EBook #29623]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CUCKOO CLOCK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE
 CUCKOO
 CLOCK

 BY WESLEY BAREFOOT


 _You know a murderer preys on your household--lives
 with you--depends on you--and you have no defence!_


Death wore the seeming of a battered Chevrolet.

The child's scream and the screech of rubber on concrete knifed through
two seconds of time before snapping, like a celery stalk of sound, into
aching silence. The silence of limbo, called into being for the space of
a slow heartbeat. Then the thud of running feet, the rising hubbub of
many voices.

"Give her air!"

"Keep back. Don't try to move her."

"Somebody call an ambulance."

"Yeah, and somebody call a cop, too."

"I couldn't help it." It was the driver of the ramshackle Chevvie. "She
fell off the curb right in front of me. Honest to God, it wasn't my
fault."

"Got to report these things right away," said the grey-haired man beside
him. "No cause to worry if you ain't to blame."

"Probably no brakes," said a heavily accented voice, and another spoke
as if on cue, "Probably no insurance, neither."

"Let me through! Oh, please--" The woman's voice was on the edge of
hysteria. She came through the crowd like an automaton, not seeing the
people she shoved and elbowed aside.

       *       *       *       *       *

"D.O.A.," said the woman heavily. Her face was no longer twisted with
shock, and she was almost pretty again. "D.O.A. Dead on arrival, it
means. Oh, Jim, I never knew they said that." Suddenly there were tears
