The Project Gutenberg EBook of Martians Never Die, by Lucius Daniel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Martians Never Die

Author: Lucius Daniel

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release Date: August 19, 2009 [EBook #29735]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARTIANS NEVER DIE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









martians never die

By LUCIUS DANIEL


 _It was a wonderful bodyguard:
 no bark, no bite, no sting ...
 just conversion of the enemy!_


At three-fifteen, a young man walked into the circular brick building
and took a flattened package of cigarettes from his shirt pocket.

"Mr. Stern?" he asked, throwing away the empty package.

Stern looked with hard eyes at the youthful reporter. He recognized the
type.

"So they're sending around cubs now," he said.

"I'm no cub--I've been on the paper a whole year," the reporter
protested, and then stopped, realizing his annoyance had betrayed him.

"Only a year. The first time they sent their best man."

"This ain't the first time," said the young man, assuming a bored look.
"It's the fourth time, and next year I don't think anybody will come at
all. Why should they?"

"Why, because they might be able to make it," Beryl spoke up. "Something
must have happened before."

Stern watched the reporter drink in Beryl's loveliness.

"Well, Mrs. Curtis," the young man said, "everyone has it figured out
that Dr. Curtis got stuck in the fourth dimension, or else lost, or
died, maybe. Even Einstein can't work out the stellar currents your
husband was depending on."

"It's very simple," replied Beryl, "but I can't explain it intelligibly.
I wish you could have talked to Dr. Curtis."

"Why is it that we have to come out here just once a year to wait for
him? Is that how the fourth dimension works?"

"It's the only time when the stellar currents permit the trip back to
Earth. And it's _not_ the fourth dimension! Clyde was always irritated
when anyone would talk about his traveling to Mars in the fourth
dimension."

"It's interdimensional," Stern put in.

"And you're his broker?" asked the reporter, throwing his cigarette down
on the brick floor and stepping on it. "You're his old friend from
college days, handled his financial affairs, and helped him raise enough
money to build his machine?"

"Yes," Stern replied, a little pompously. "It was through my efforts
that several wealthy men took an interest in the machine, so that Dr.
Curtis did not have to bear the entire expense himself."

"Yeah, yeah," the reporter sighed. "I read an old story on it before I
came here. Now I'm out of cigarettes." He looked hopefully at Stern.

Stern returned the look coldly. "There's a store where you can buy some
about three blocks down the road."

"Is that the room where he's expected to materialize with his machine?"
The reporter pointed to an inner door.

