The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Long Voyage, by Carl Richard Jacobi

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Long Voyage

Author: Carl Richard Jacobi

Release Date: August 20, 2009 [EBook #29742]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONG VOYAGE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _When we published Carl Jacobi's last story we had no assurance he
    would be with us so soon again. For when a uniquely gifted
    science-fantasy writer becomes radio-active on the entertainment
    meter and goes voyaging into the unknown, he may be gone from the
    world we know for as long as yesterday's tomorrow. But Carl Jacobi
    has not only returned almost with the speed of light--he has brought
    with him shining new nuggets of wonder and surmise._


    the
   long
 voyage

 _by ... Carl Jacobi_


 The secret lay hidden at the end of nine landings,
 and Medusa-dark was one man's search for it--in
 the strangest journey ever made.


A soft gentle rain began to fall as we emerged from the dark woods and
came out onto the shore. There it was, the sea, stretching as far as the
eye could reach, gray and sullen, and flecked with green-white froth.
The blue _hensorr_ trees, crowding close to the water's edge, were bent
backward as if frightened by the bleakness before them. The sand,
visible under the clear patches of water, was a bleached white like the
exposed surface of a huge bone.

We stood there a moment in silence. Then Mason cleared his throat
huskily.

"Well, here goes," he said. "We'll soon see if we have any friends
about."

He unslung the packsack from his shoulders, removed its protective outer
shield and began to assemble the organic surveyor, an egg-shaped ball of
white carponium secured to a segmented forty-foot rod. While Brandt and
I raised the rod with the aid of an electric fulcrum, Mason carefully
placed his control cabinet on a piece of outcropping rock and made a
last adjustment.

The moment had come. Even above the sound of the sea, you could hear
the strained breathing of the men. Only Navigator Norris appeared
unconcerned. He stood there calmly smoking his pipe, his keen blue eyes
squinting against the biting wind.

Mason switched on the speaker. Its high-frequency scream rose
deafeningly above us and was torn away in unsteady gusts. He began to
turn its center dial, at first a quarter circle, and then all the way to
the final backstop of the calibration. All that resulted was a
continuation of that mournful ululation like a wail out of eternity.

Mason tried again. With stiff wrists he tuned while perspiration stood
out on his forehead, and the rest of us crowded close.

"It's no use," he said. "This pickup failure proves there isn't a
vestige of animal life on Stragella--on this hemisphere of the planet,
at least."

Navigator Norris took his pipe from his mouth and nodded. His face was
expressionless. There was no indication in the man's voice that he had
suffered another great disappointment, his sixth in less than a year.

"We'll go back now," he said, "and we'll try again. There must be some
planet in this system that's inhabited. But it's going to be hard to
tell the women."

Mason let the surveyor rod down with a crash. I could see the anger and
resentment that was gathering in his eyes. Mason was the youngest of our
party and the leader of the antagonistic group that was slowly but
steadily undermining the authority of the Navigator.

This was our seventh exploratory trip after our sixth landing since
entering the field of the sun Ponthis. Ponthis with its sixteen
equal-sized planets, each with a single satellite. First there had been
Coulora; then in swift succession, Jama, Tenethon, Mokrell, and R-9. And
now Stragella. Strange names of strange worlds, revolving about a
