The Project Gutenberg EBook of Life Sentence, by James McConnell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Life Sentence

Author: James McConnell

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: September 2, 2009 [EBook #29889]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE SENTENCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 Life
   Sentence

 By JAMES McCONNELL

 Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


 _"Happy New Year!" she cried. But how often
 should one hear it said in a single lifetime?_


Outside, bells were ringing. "Happy New Year!"

The mad sound of people crazed for the moment, shouting, echoed the
bells.

"Happy New Year!"

A sound of music, waxing, waning, now joined in wild symphony by the
voices, now left alone to counterpoint the noise of human
celebration....

For a while, Oliver Symmes heard the raucous music of the crowd. It
became a part of him, seemed to come from somewhere inside him, gave him
life. And then, as always, it passed on, leaving him empty.

Shadows....

The door to his room opened and a young-looking woman, dressed in a
pleasant green uniform, came in and turned up the light. On her sleeve
she wore the badge of geriatrician, with the motto, "To Care for the
Aged."

"Happy New Year, Mr. Symmes," she said, and went over to stand by the
window. In the mild light, the sheen of her hair attracted attention
away from the slight imperfections of her face.

She watched the crowd outside, wishing she could be a part of it. There
seemed so little life inside the prison where the only function of
living was the awaiting of death. "To Care for the Aged." That meant to
like and love them as well as to take physical care of them. Only,
somehow, it seemed so hard to _really_ love them.

She sighed and turned away from the window to look at one of the reasons
she could not be with the rest of the world that night.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat bunched up in his chair like a vegetable. She could have closed
one of her hands around both his arms together. Or his legs. Bones and
skin and a few little muscles left, and that was all. Skin tight,
drumlike, against the skull. Cheeks shrunk, lips slightly parted by the
contraction of the skin. Even the wrinkles he should have had were
erased by the shrinkage of the epidermis. Even in a strong light, the
faint wrinkle lines were barely visible.

After a moment of looking at him, she put a smile back on her face and
repeated her greeting.

"I said, 'Happy New Year,' Mr. Symmes."

He raised his eyes to her for a moment, then slowly lowered them,
uncomprehendingly.

"He looks just a little bit like a caricature," she said to herself,
feeling a little more tenderness toward him. "A cute little stick man
made of leaves and twigs and old bark and ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Shadows._ For so long there had been shadows. And for a time the
