The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astounding Stories of Super-Science, May,
1930, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Astounding Stories of Super-Science, May, 1930

Author: Various

Release Date: August 26, 2009 [EBook #29809]
[Last updated: March 20, 2011]


Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                           [Illustration:]

                              ASTOUNDING

                               STORIES

                           OF SUPER-SCIENCE

                                 20c





              _On Sale the First Thursday of Each Month_

W. M. CLAYTON, Publisher HARRY BATES, Editor DOUGLAS M. DOLD,
Consulting Editor


The Clayton Standard on a Magazine Guarantees:

     _That_ the stories therein are clean, interesting, vivid; by
     leading writers of the day and purchased under conditions
     approved by the Authors' League of America;

     _That_ such magazines are manufactured in Union shops by
     American workmen;

     _That_ each newsdealer and agent is insured a fair profit;

     _That_ an intelligent censorship guards their advertising
     pages.

     _The other Clayton magazines are_:

ACE-HIGH MAGAZINE, RANCH ROMANCES, COWBOY STORIES, CLUES, FIVE-NOVELS
MONTHLY, WIDE WORLD ADVENTURES, ALL STAR DETECTIVE STORIES, RANGELAND
LOVE STORY MAGAZINE, WESTERN ADVENTURES, _and_ FOREST AND STREAM

_More Than Two Million Copies Required to Supply the Monthly Demand
for Clayton Magazines._

       *       *       *       *       *




VOL. II, No. 2 CONTENTS MAY, 1930


COVER DESIGN                  H. W. WESSOLOWSKI

    _Painted in Water-colors from a Scene in_ "_The Atom-Smasher_."

INTO THE OCEAN'S DEPTHS       SEWELL PEASLEE WRIGHT         151

    _To Save Imee's Race of Men-Who-Returned-To-The-Sea, Two Land-Men
     Answer the Challenge of the Dreaded Rorn, Corsairs of the Under-Seas._

MURDER MADNESS                MURRAY LEINSTER               166

    _Murder Madness! Seven Secret Service Men Had Completely Disappeared.
     Another Had Been Found a Screaming, Homicidal Maniac, Whose Fingers
     Writhed Like Snakes. So Bell, of the Secret "Trade," Plunges into
     South America After The Master--the Mighty, Unknown Octopus of Power
     Whose Diabolical Poison Threatens a Continent!_ (_Beginning a
     Four-part Novel._)

BRIGANDS OF THE MOON          RAY CUMMINGS                  195

    _Gregg and Anita Risk Quick, Sure Death in a Desperate Bluff on the
     Ruthless Martian Brigands._ (_Part Three of a Four-part Novel._)

THE JOVIAN JEST               LILITH LORRAINE               228

    _There Came to Our Pigmy Planet a Radiant Wanderer with a Message--and
     a Jest--from the Vasty Universe._

THE ATOM-SMASHER              VICTOR ROUSSEAU               234

    _Four Destinies Rocket Through the Strange Time-Space of the Fourth
     Dimension in Tode's Marvelous Atom-Smasher._ (_A Complete Novelette._)

THE READERS' CORNER           ALL OF US                     277

    _A Meeting Place for Readers of Astounding Stories._



Single Copies, 20 Cents (In Canada, 25 Cents) Yearly Subscription,
$2.00

Issued monthly by Publishers' Fiscal Corporation, 80 Lafayette St.,
New York, N. Y. W. M. Clayton, President; Nathan Goldmann, Secretary.
Application for entry as second-class mail pending at the Post Office
at New York, under Act of March 3, 1879. Title registered as a Trade
Mark in the U. S. Patent Office. Member Newsstand Group--Men's List.
For advertising rates address E. R. Crowe & Co., Inc., 25 Vanderbilt
Ave., New York; or 225 North Michigan Ave., Chicago.

       *       *       *       *       *




Into the Ocean's Depths

A Sequel to "From the Ocean's Depths"

_By Sewell Peaslee Wright_

[Illustration: The two shark-faced creatures were dragging at my arms
and legs.]

[Sidenote: To save Imee's race of Men-Who-Returned-To-The-Sea, two
Land-Men answer the challenge of the dreaded Rorn, corsairs of the
under-seas.]


I read the telegram for the second time. Then I folded it up, put it
in my pocket, and pressed the little button on my desk. My mind was
made up.

"Miss Fentress, I'm leaving this afternoon on an extended trip. The
Florida address will reach me after Thursday. Tell Wade and Bennett to
carry on. I think you have everything in hand? Is everything clear to
you?"

"Yes, Mr. Taylor." Miss Fentress was not in the least surprised. She
was used to my sudden trips. The outfit got along perfectly without
me; sometimes I think my frequent absences are good for the business.
The boys work like the devil to make a fine showing while I'm away.
And Miss Fentress is a perfect gem of a secretary. I had nothing to
worry about there.

"Fine! Will you get my diggings on the phone?" I hurriedly put my few
papers in place, and signed a couple of letters. Then Josef was on the
wire.

"Josef? Pack my bags right away, will you? For Florida. The usual
things.... Yes, right away. I'll be leaving by noon.... Yes, driving
through."

       *       *       *       *       *

That was that. There were a few more letters to sign, a few hasty
instructions to be given regarding one or two matters that were
hanging fire. Then, on my way to my bachelor apartments, I read the
telegram through again:

     THINK IT WORTH WHILE IF YOU FEEL ADVENTUROUS AND HAVE
     NOTHING PRESSING TO COME TO THE MONSTROSITY STOP MAKE YOUR
     WILL FIRST STOP SHALL LOOK FOR YOU ANY DAY AS I KNOW YOU ARE
     ALWAYS LOOKING FOR EXCITEMENT AND NEVER HAVE ANYTHING
     IMPORTANT TO DO SO DON'T BOTHER TO WIRE STOP PERHAPS WE
     SHALL SEE HER AGAIN

                                                       MERCER

I smiled at Mercer's frank opinion of my disposition and my importance
to my business. But I frowned over the admonition to make my will, and
the last telling statement in the wire: "Perhaps we shall see her
again." I knew whom he meant by "her."

Josef had my bags waiting for me. A few hurried instructions, most of
them shouted over my shoulder, and I was purring down the main drag,
my duffel in the rumble, and the roadster headed due south.

"Perhaps we shall see her again." Those words from the telegram kept
coming before my eyes. Mercer knew what he was about, if he wanted my
company, when he put that line in his wire.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have already told the story of our first meeting with the strange
being from the ocean's depths that, wounded and senseless, had been
flung up on the beach near Warren Mercer's Florida estate. In all the
history of civilization, no stranger bit of flotsam had ever been cast
up by a storm.

Neither of us would ever forget that slim white creature, swathed in
her veil of long, light golden hair, as she crouched on the bottom of
Mercer's swimming pool, and pictured for us, by means of Mercer's
thought-telegraph (my own name for the device; he has a long and
scientific title for it with as many joints as a centipede), the story
of her people.

They had lived in a country of steaming mist, when the world was very
young. They had been forced into the sea to obtain food, and after
many generations they had gone back to the sea as man once emerged
from it. They had grown webs on their hands and feet, and they
breathed oxygen dissolved in water, as fishes do, instead of taking it
from the atmosphere. And under the mighty Atlantic, somewhere, were
their villages.

The girl had pictured all these things for us, and then--nearly a year
ago, now--she had pleaded with us to let her return to her people. And
so we had put her back into the sea, and she had bade us farewell. But
just before she disappeared, she had done a strange thing.

       *       *       *       *       *

She had pointed, under the water, out towards the depth, and then,
with a broad, sweeping motion of her arm, she had indicated the shore,
as though to promise, it seemed to me, that she intended to return.

And now, Mercer said, we might see her again! How? Mercer,
conservative and scientific, was not the man to make rash promises.
But how...?

The best way to solve the riddle was to reach Mercer, and I broke the
speed laws of five states three days running.

I did not even stop at my own little shack. It was only four miles
from there to the huge, rather neglected estate, built in boom times
by some newly-rich promoter, and dubbed by Mercer "The Monstrosity."

Hardly bothering to slow down, I turned off the concrete onto the
long, weed-grown gravel drive, and shot between the two massive,
stuccoed pillars that guarded the drive. Their corroded bronze plates,
bearing the original title of the estate, "The Billows," were a
promise that my long, hard drive was nearly at an end.

       *       *       *       *       *

As soon as the huge, rambling structure was fairly in sight, I pressed
the flat of my hand on the horn button. By the time I came to a
locked-wheel halt, with the gravel rattling on my fenders, Mercer was
there to greet me.

"It's ten o'clock," he grinned as he shook hands. "I'd set noon as the
hour of your arrival. You certainly must have made time, Taylor!"

"I did!" I nodded rather grimly, recalling one or two narrow squeaks.
"But who wouldn't, with a wire like this?" I produced the crumpled
telegram rather dramatically. "You've got a lot to explain."

"I know it." Mercer was quite serious now. "Come on in and we'll mix
highballs with the story."

Locked arm in arm, we entered the house together, and settled
ourselves in the huge living room.

Mercer, I could see at a glance, was thinner and browner than when we
had parted, but otherwise, he was the same lithe, soft-mannered little
scientist I had known for years; dark-eyed, with an almost beautiful
mouth, outlined by a slim, closely cropped and very black moustache.

"Well, here's to our lady from the sea," proposed Mercer, when Carson,
his man, had brought the drinks and departed. I nodded, and we both
sipped our highballs.

"Briefly," said my friend, "this is the story. You and I know that
somewhere beneath the Atlantic there are a people who went back to
whence they came. We have seen one of those people. I propose that,
since they cannot come to us, we go to them. I have made preparations
to go to them, and I wanted you to have the opportunity of going with
me, if you wish."

"But how, Mercer? And what--"

       *       *       *       *       *

He interrupted with a quick, nervous gesture.

"I'll show you, presently. I believe it can be done. It will be a
dangerous adventure, though; I was not joking when I advised you to
make your will. An uncertain venture, too. But, I believe, most
wonderfully worth while." His eyes were shining now with all the
enthusiasm of the scientist, the dreamer.

"It sounds mighty appealing," I said. "But how...."

"Finish your drink and I'll show you."

I downed what was left of my highball in two mighty gulps.

"Lead me to it, Mercer!"

He smiled his quiet smile and led the way to what had been the
billiard room of "The Billows," but which was the laboratory of "The
Monstrosity." The first thing my eyes fell upon were two gleaming
metal objects suspended from chains let into the ceiling.

"Diving suits," explained Mercer. "Rather different from anything
you've ever seen."

They were different. The body was a perfect globe, as was the
head-piece. The legs were cylindrical, jointed at knee and thigh with
huge discs. The feet were solid metal, curved rocker-like on the
bottom, and at the ends of the arms were three hooked talons, the
concave sides of two talons facing the concave side of the third. The
arms were hinged at the elbow just as the legs were hinged, but there
was a huge ball-and-socket joint at the shoulder.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But Mercer!" I protested. "No human being could even stand up with
that weight of metal on and around him!"

"You're mistaken, Taylor," smiled Mercer. "That is not solid metal,
you see. And it is an aluminum alloy that is not nearly as heavy as it
looks. There are two walls, slightly over an inch apart, braced by
innumerable trusses. The fabric is nearly as strong as that much solid
metal, and infinitely lighter. They work all right, Taylor. I know,
because I've tried them."

"And this hump on the back?" I asked, walking around the odd, dangling
figures, hanging like bloated metal skeletons from their chains. I
had thought the bodies were perfect globes; I could see now that at
the rear there was a humplike excrescence across the shoulders.

"Air," explained Mercer. "There are two other tanks inside the
globular body. That shape was adopted, by the way, because a globe can
withstand more pressure than any other shape. And we may have to go
where pressures are high."

"And so," I said, "we don these things and stroll out into the
Atlantic looking for the girl and her friends?"

"Hardly. They're not quite the apparel for so long a stroll. You
haven't seen all the marvels yet. Come along!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He led the way through the patio, beside the pool in which our strange
visitor from the depths had lived during her brief stay with us, and
