The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rescue Squad, by Thomas J. O'Hara

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Rescue Squad

Author: Thomas J. O'Hara

Release Date: August 27, 2009 [EBook #29822]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RESCUE SQUAD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _When Mr. O'Hara won the prize story contest recently conducted by
    THE FANTASY WRITERS' WORKSHOP at the College of the City of New
    York, in conjunction with FANTASTIC UNIVERSE, it was the unanimous
    opinion of the judges that a second story by Mr. O'Hara, RESCUE
    SQUAD, deserved honorable mention. We think you'll agree with that
    decision when you've read this documentary-type science-fiction
    yarn, which so excitingly combines realistic characterization with
    the mystery, suspense and terror of the near future's exploration of
    space and a lone pilot's struggle to survive._


 rescue
  squad

 _by ... Thomas J. O'Hara_


 Stark disaster to a brave lad in space may--to the
 mind that loves--be a tragedy pridefully concealed.


The mail ship, MR4, spun crazily through space a million miles off her
trajectory. Her black-painted hull resembled a long thermonuclear
weapon, and below her and only a scant twenty million miles away burned
the hungry, flaming maw of the Sun.

The atomic-powered refrigeration units of the MR4 were working full
blast--and still her internal and external temperatures were slowly and
inexorably rising. Her atomic engines had been long since
silenced--beaten by the inexhaustible, fiery strength of the invincible
opponent waiting patiently a narrowing twenty million miles "below."

Hal Burnett twisted painfully on the narrow space-bunk, his tormented
body thrusting desperately against the restraining bands of the safety
straps that lashed him in against the dangers of non-gravity.

He moaned, and twisted sideways, while his half-asleep mind struggled on
an almost instinctive level against a dimly-remembered, utterly
intolerable reality.

It was a losing battle. He was suddenly wide awake, staring in horror at
the vibrating bulkheads of the deserted little mail ship. For a moment
his conscious barriers against reality were so completely down that he
felt mortally terrified and overwhelmed by the vast emptiness about him.
For a moment the mad idea swept into his mind that perhaps the universe
was just another illusion, an echo of man's own inner loneliness.

Realizing his danger, Burnett quickly undid the restraining safety
straps, sat up and propelled himself outward from the edge of his bunk.
The sudden surge of physical action swept the cobwebs from his mind.

He thought of his father--and there was bitterness in his heart and
frustration, and a rebellious, smouldering anger. The old man would
never know how close he had come to cracking up.

For a moment he wondered fearfully if his father's cold and precise
appraisal of his character and courage had been correct. Suppose he
_was_ unable to stand the rigid strains and pressures of a real
emergency. Suppose-- He tightened his lips in defiant self-justification.
What did they expect of a twenty-year-old kid anyway? He was, after all,
the youngest and probably the greenest mail pilot in the entire
Universal Run.

Suddenly the defensive barriers his mind had thrown up against the
grievous flaw in his character, which made him feel uncertain of himself
when he should have felt strong and capable, crumbled away completely.
