Project Gutenberg's Show Business, by William C. Boyd and Lyle G. Boyd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Show Business

Author: William C. Boyd
        Lyle G. Boyd

Illustrator: Mel Hunter

Release Date: October 6, 2009 [EBook #30189]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHOW BUSINESS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Here's the behind-the-scenes lowdown on Luna City life and a
    promoter of Martian dancing girls, vaudeville, and--other things.
    But remember: stop us if you've heard this one!_


SHOW BUSINESS

By Boyd Ellanby

Illustrated by Mel Hunter


Except for old Dworken, Kotha's bar was deserted when I dropped in
shortly after midnight. The ship from Earth was still two days away, and
the Martian flagship would get in next morning, with seven hundred
passengers for Earth on it. Dworken must have been waiting in Luna City
a whole week--at six thousand credits a day. That's as steep to me as it
is to you, but money never seemed to worry Dworken.

He raised the heavy green lids from his protruding brown eyes as I came
in. He waved his tail.

"Sit down and join me," he invited, in his guttural voice. "It is not
good for a man to drink alone. But I haf no combany in dis
by-de-gods-deserted hole. A man must somet'ing be doing, what?"

I sat down in the booth across from my Venusian friend, and stared at
him while he punched a new order into the drinkboard.

"For me, another _shchikh_," he announced. "And for you? De same?"

Against my better judgment, for I knew I'd have plenty to do handling
that mob of tourists--the first crowd of the season is always the
