The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dead Ringer, by Lester del Rey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dead Ringer

Author: Lester del Rey

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: October 11, 2009 [EBook #30234]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEAD RINGER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Dead Ringer

By LESTER DEL REY

Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


 _There was nothing, especially
 on Earth, which could set him
 free--the truth least of all!_


Dane Phillips slouched in the window seat, watching the morning crowds
on their way to work and carefully avoiding any attempt to read Jordan's
old face as the editor skimmed through the notes. He had learned to make
his tall, bony body seem all loose-jointed relaxation, no matter what he
felt. But the oversized hands in his pockets were clenched so tightly
that the nails were cutting into his palms.

Every tick of the old-fashioned clock sent a throb racing through his
brain. Every rustle of the pages seemed to release a fresh shot of
adrenalin into his blood stream. _This time_, his mind was pleading. _It
has to be right this time...._

Jordan finished his reading and shoved the folder back. He reached for
his pipe, sighed, and then nodded slowly. "A nice job of researching,
Phillips. And it might make a good feature for the Sunday section, at
that."

It took a second to realize that the words meant acceptance, for
Phillips had prepared himself too thoroughly against another failure.
Now he felt the tautened muscles release, so quickly that he would have
fallen if he hadn't been braced against the seat.

He groped in his mind, hunting for words, and finding none. There was
only the hot, sudden flame of unbelieving hope. And then an almost
blinding exultation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jordan didn't seem to notice his silence. The editor made a neat pile of
the notes, nodding again. "Sure. I like it. We've been short of shock
stuff lately and the readers go for it when we can get a fresh angle.
But naturally you'd have to leave out all that nonsense on Blanding.
Hell, the man's just buried, and his relatives and friends--"

"But that's the proof!" Phillips stared at the editor, trying to
penetrate through the haze of hope that had somehow grown chilled and
unreal. His thoughts were abruptly disorganized and out of his control.
Only the urgency remained. "It's the key evidence. And we've got to move
fast! I don't know how long it takes, but even one more day may be too
late!"
