Project Gutenberg's Fifty Per Cent Prophet, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fifty Per Cent Prophet

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: October 25, 2009 [EBook #30337]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTY PER CENT PROPHET ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction September
    1961. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.



                                FIFTY

                               PER CENT

                               PROPHET


                         By DARREL T. LANGART


     _That he was a phony Swami was beyond doubt. That he was a
      genuine prophet, though, seemed ... but then, what's the
      difference between a dictator and a true prophet? So was
      he...._


                      Illustrated by Schoenherr

       *       *       *       *       *




Dr. Joachim sat in the small room behind his reception hall and held
his fingers poised above the keys of the rather creaky electrotyper on
his desk. The hands seemed to hang there, long, slender, and pale,
like two gulls frozen suddenly in their long swoop towards some
precious tidbit floating on the writhing sea beneath, ready to begin
their drop instantly, as soon as time began again.

All of Dr. Joachim's body seemed to be held in that same stasis. Only
his lips moved as he silently framed the next sentence in his mind.

Physically, the good doctor could be called a big man: he was
broad-shouldered and well-muscled, but, hidden as his body was beneath
the folds of his blue, monkish robe, only his shortness of stature was
noticeable. He was only fifty-four, but the pale face, the full,
flowing beard, and the long white hair topped by a small blue skullcap
gave him an ageless look, as though centuries of time had flowed over
him to leave behind only the marks of experience and wisdom.

The timelessness of an idealized Methuselah as he approached his ninth
centennial, the God-given wisdom engraved on the face of Moses as he
came down from Sinai, the mystic power of mighty Merlin as he softly
intoned a spell of albamancy, all these seemed to have been blended
carefully together and infused into the man who sat behind the typer,
composing sentences in his head.

Those gull-hands swooped suddenly to the keyboard, and the aged
machine clattered rapidly for nearly a minute before Dr. Joachim
paused again to consider his next words.

A bell tinkled softly.

Dr. Joachim's brown eyes glanced quickly at the image on the
black-and-white TV screen set in the wall. It was connected to the
hidden camera in his front room, and showed a woman entering his front
door. He sighed and rose from his seat, adjusting his blue robes
carefully before he went to the door that led into the outer room.

He'd rather hoped it was a client, but--

"Hello, Susan, my dear," he said in a soft baritone, as he stepped
through the door. "What seems to be the trouble?"

It wasn't the same line that he'd have used with a client. You don't
ask a mark questions; you tell him. To a mark, he'd have said: "Ah,
you are troubled." It sounds much more authoritative and all-knowing.

But Cherrie Tart--_nee_ Sue Kowalski--was one of the best strippers on
the Boardwalk. Her winters were spent in Florida or Nevada or Puerto
Rico, but in summer she always returned to King Frankie's _Golden
Surf_, for the summer trade at Coney Island. She might be a big name
in show business now, but she had never forgotten her carny
background, and King Frankie, in spite of the ultra-ultra tone of the
_Golden Surf_, still stuck to the old Minsky traditions.

The worried look on her too-perfect face had been easily visible in
the TV screen, but it had been replaced by a bright smile as soon as
she had heard Dr. Joachim opening the door. The smile flickered for a
moment, then she said: "Gee, Doc; you give a girl the creepy feeling
that you really _can_ read her mind."

Dr. Joachim merely smiled. Susan might be with it, but a good mitt man
doesn't give away _all_ his little secrets. He had often wished that
he could really read minds--he had heard rumors of men who could--but
a little well-applied psychology is sometimes just as good.

"So how's everything been, Doc?" She smiled her best stage
smile--every tooth perfect in that perfect face, her hair framing the
whole like a perfect golden helmet. She looked like a girl in her
early twenties, but Dr. Joachim knew for a fact that she'd been born
in 1955, which made her thirty-two next January.

"Reasonably well, all things considered," Dr. Joachim admitted. "I'm
not starving to death, at least."

She looked around at the room--the heavy drapes, the signs of the
zodiac in gold and silver, the big, over-stuffed chairs, all designed
