The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Asses of Balaam, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Asses of Balaam

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: December 2, 2009 [EBook #30583]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ASSES OF BALAAM ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact Fiction October 1961.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.


                                 THE

                                ASSES

                                  OF

                                BALAAM



                          By DAVID GORDON


                      Illustrated by Schoenherr

       *       *       *       *       *




     _The remarkable characteristic of Balaam's ass was that it
      was more perceptive than its master. Sometimes a child is
      more perceptive--because more straightforward and
      logical--than an adult...._

      [Illustration]

     _It is written in the Book of Numbers that Balaam, a wise
      man of the Moabites, having been ordered by the King of Moab
      to put a curse upon the invading Israelites, mounted himself
      upon an ass and rode forth toward the camp of the Children
      of Israel. On the road, he met an angel with drawn sword,
      barring the way. Balaam, not seeing or recognizing the
      angel, kept urging his ass forward, but the ass recognized
      the angel and turned aside. Balaam smote the beast and
      forced it to return to the path, and again the angel blocked
      the way with drawn sword. And again the ass turned aside,
      despite the beating from Balaam, who, in his blindness, was
      unable to see the angel._

     _When the ass stopped for the third time and lay down,
      refusing to go further, Balaam waxed exceeding wrath and
      smote again the animal with a stick._

     _Then the ass spoke and said: "Why dost thou beat me? I have
      always obeyed thee and never have I failed thee. Have I ever
      been known to fail thee?_"

     _And Balaam answered: "No." And at that moment his eyes were
      opened and he saw the angel before him._

                                    --STUDIES IN SCRIPTURE

                                   by Ceggawynn of Eboricum


With the careful precision of controlled anger, Dodeth
Pell rippled a stomp along his right side.
_Clop_clopclop_clop_-clopclop-_clop_clop-clop_clop_clopclop....
Each of his twelve right feet came down in turn while he glared across the
business bench at Wygor Bedis. He started the ripple again, while he
waited for Wygor's answer. The ripple was a good deal more effective than
just tapping one's fingers, and equally as satisfying.

Wygor Bedis twitched his mouth and allowed his eyelids to slide up
over his eyeballs in a slow blink before answering. Dodeth had simply
asked, "Why wasn't this reported to me before?" But Wygor couldn't
find the answer as simply as that. Not that he didn't have a good
answer; it was just that he wanted to couch it in exactly the right
terms. Dodeth had a way with raking sarcasm that made a person tend
to cringe.

Dodeth was perfectly well aware of that. He hadn't been in the
Executive Office of Predator Council all these years for nothing; he
knew how to handle people--when to praise them, when to flatter them,
when to rebuke them, and when to drag them unmercifully over the
shell-bed.

He waited, his right legs marching out their steady rhythm.

"Well," said Wygor at last, "it was just that I couldn't see any point
in bothering you with it at that point. I mean, _one_ specimen--"

"Of an entirely new species!" snapped Dodeth in a sudden interruption.
His legs stopped their rhythmic tramp. His voice rose from its usual
eight-thousand-cycle rumble to a shrill squeak. "Fry it, Wygor, if you
weren't such a good field man, I'd have sacked you long ago! Your
trouble is that you have a penchant for bringing me problems that you
ought to be able to solve by yourself and then flipping right over on
your back and holding off on some information that ought to be brought
to my attention immediately!"

There wasn't much Wygor could say to that, so he didn't try. He simply
waited for the raking to come, and, sure enough, it came.

Dodeth's voice lowered itself to a soft purr. "The next time you have
to do anything as complicated as setting a snith-trap, you just hump
right down here and ask me, and I'll tell you all about it. On the
other hand, if the lower levels all suddenly become infested with
shelks at the same time, why, you just take care of that little detail
yourself, eh? The only other alternative is to learn to think."

Wygor winced a trifle and kept his mouth shut.

Having delivered himself of his jet of acid, Dodeth Pell looked down
at the data booklet that Wygor had handed him. "Fortunately," he said,
"there doesn't seem to be much to worry about. Only the Universal
Motivator knows how this thing could have spawned, but it doesn't
appear to be very efficient."

