The Project Gutenberg EBook of Writings in the United Amateur, 1915-1922, by
Howard Phillips Lovecraft

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Writings in the United Amateur, 1915-1922

Author: Howard Phillips Lovecraft

Contributor: Andrew Francis Lockhart
             Rheinhart Kleiner
             Frank Belknap Long

Release Date: December 9, 2009 [EBook #30637]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNITED AMATEUR ***




Produced by David Starner, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    Italic text has been marked by _underscores_, whilst bold text
    appears as =bold=. The following table of contents has been added
    for convenience:

      United Amateur Press Association:
        Exponent of Amateur Journalism                          4

      The United Amateur, January 1915
        Department of Public Criticism                          7

      The United Amateur, March 1915
        Department of Public Criticism                         10
        March                                                  14

      The United Amateur, May 1915
        Department of Public Criticism                         15

      The United Amateur, September 1915
        Department of Public Criticism                         21
        Little Journeys to the Homes of Prominent Amateurs     31

      The United Amateur, February 1916
        The Teuton's Battle-Song                               33

      The United Amateur, April 1916
        Department of Public Criticism                         35

      The United Amateur, June 1916
        Department of Public Criticism                         42
        The Poetry of the Month: Content                       49

      The United Amateur, August 1916
        Department of Public Criticism                         50

      The United Amateur, September 1916
        Department of Public Criticism                         54

      The United Amateur, November 1916
        The Alchemist                                          61

      The United Amateur, March 1917
        Department of Public Criticism                         65

      The United Amateur, May 1917
        Department of Public Criticism                         71

      The United Amateur, July 1917
        Ode for July Fourth, 1917                              80
        Department of Public Criticism                         81
        News Notes: To M. W. M.                                84

      The United Amateur, November 1917
        A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson                   84
        Department of Public Criticism                         87
        Reports of Officers: President's Message               90

      The United Amateur, January 1918
        Reports of Officers: President's Message               91

      The United Amateur, March 1918
        Reports of Officers: President's Message               92

      The United Amateur, May 1918
        Sunset                                                 92
        Department of Public Criticism                         93
        Reports of Officers: President's Message               98

      The United Amateur, June 1918
        Astrophobos                                            99

      The United Amateur, July 1918
        At the Root                                           100
        Reports of Officers: President's Message              101

      The United Amateur, November 1918
        Department of Literature: The Literature of Rome      102
        To Alan Seeger                                        106

      The United Amateur, January 1919
        Theodore Roosevelt                                    107

      The United Amateur, March 1919
        A Note on Howard P. Lovecraft's Verse                 108
        Official Reports: Department of Public Criticism      109

      The United Amateur, May 1919
        Helene Hoffman Cole--Litterateur                      113

      The United Amateur, July 1919
        Americanism                                           114

      The United Amateur, November 1919
        The White Ship                                        115
        To Mistress Sophia Simple, Queen of the Cinema        118

      The United Amateur, January 1920
        Literary Composition                                  119

      The United Amateur, May 1920
        For What Does the United Stand?                       123

      The United Amateur, September 1920
        Poetry and the Gods                                   124

      The United Amateur, November 1920
        Nyarlathotep                                          128
        Editorial                                             129
        Official Organ Fund                                   130

      The United Amateur, January 1921
        Official Organ Fund                                   130

      The United Amateur, March 1921
        Winifred Virginia Jackson: A "Different" Poetess      130
        Ex Oblivione                                          134
        Official Organ Fund                                   134

      The United Amateur, September 1921
        The United Amateur                                    135
        Editorial                                             136

      The United Amateur, November 1921
        The United Amateur                                    138
        Official Organ Fund                                   138

      The United Amateur, January 1922
        The United Amateur                                    139
        Editorial                                             139

      The United Amateur, March 1922
        Official Organ Fund                                   140

      The United Amateur, May 1922
        Official Organ Fund                                   140
        At the Home of Poe                                    140




                THE
           UNITED AMATEUR

           SEPTEMBER 1915

 [Illustration: HOWARD P. LOVECRAFT
 First Vice-President U. A. P. A.]




United Amateur Press Association

EXPONENT OF AMATEUR JOURNALISM


ITS OBJECT

The desire to write for publication is one which inheres strongly in
every human breast. From the proficient college graduate, storming the
gates of the high-grade literary magazines, to the raw schoolboy, vainly
endeavoring to place his first crude compositions in the local
newspapers, the whole intelligent public are today seeking expression
through the printed page, and yearning to behold their thoughts and
ideals permanently crystallized in the magic medium of type. But while a
few persons of exceptional talent manage eventually to gain a foothold
in the professional world of letters rising to celebrity through the
wide diffusion of their art, ideals, or opinions; the vast majority,
unless aided in their education by certain especial advantages, are
doomed to confine their expression to the necessarily restricted sphere
of ordinary conversation. To supply these especial educational
advantages which may enable the general public to achieve the
distinction of print, and which may prevent the talented but unknown
author from remaining forever in obscurity, has arisen that largest and
foremost of societies for literary education =The United Amateur Press
Association=.


ITS ORIGIN

Amateur journalism, or the composition and circulation of small,
privately printed magazines, is an instructive diversion which has
existed in the United States for over half a century. In the decade of
1866-1876 this practice first became an organized institution; a
short-lived society of amateur journalists, including the now famous
publisher, Charles Scribner, having existed from 1869 to 1874. In 1876 a
more lasting society was formed, which exists to this day as an exponent
of light dilettantism. Not until 1895, however, was amateur journalism
established as a serious branch of educational endeavour. On September
2nd of that year, Mr. William H. Greenfield, a gifted professional
author, of Philadelphia, founded =The United Amateur Press Association=,
which has grown to be the leader of its kind, and the representative of
amateur journalism in its best phases throughout the English-speaking
world.


ITS NATURE

In many respects the word "amateur" fails to do full credit to amateur
journalism and the association which best represents it. To some minds
the term conveys an idea of crudity and immaturity, yet the =United= can
boast of members and publications whose polish and scholarship are
well-nigh impeccable. In considering the adjective "amateur" as applied
to the press association, we must adhere to the more basic
interpretation, regarding the word as indicating the non-mercenary
nature of the membership. Our amateurs write purely for love of their
art, without the stultifying influence of commercialism. Many of them
are prominent professional authors in the outside world, but their
professionalism never creeps into their association work. The atmosphere
is wholly fraternal, and courtesy takes the place of currency.

The real essential of amateur journalism and =The United Amateur Press
Association= is the amateur paper or magazine, which somewhat resembles
the average high-school or college publication. These journals, varying
greatly in size and character, are issued by various members at their
own expense, and contain, besides the literary work of their several
editors or publishers, contributions from all the many members who do
not publish papers of their own. Their columns are open to every person
in the association, and it may be said with justice that no one will
find it impossible to secure the publication of any literary composition
of reasonable brevity. The papers thus published are sent free to all
our many members, who constitute a select and highly appreciative
reading public. Since each member receives the published work of every
other member, many active and brilliant minds are brought into close
contact, and questions of every sort, literary, historical, and
scientific, are debated both in the press and in personal
correspondence. The correspondence of members is one of the most
valuable features of the =United=, for through this medium a great
intellectual stimulus, friendly and informal in nature, is afforded.
Congenial members are in this way brought together in a lettered
companionship, which often grows into life-long friendship, while
persons of opposed ideas may mutually gain much breadth of mind by
hearing the other side of their respective opinions discussed in a
genial manner. In short, the =United= offers an exceptionally
well-proportioned mixture of instruction and fraternal cheer. There are
no limits of age, sex, education, position, or locality in this most
complete of democracies. Boys and girls of twelve and men and women of
sixty, parents and their sons and daughters, college professors and
grammar-school pupils, aristocrats and intelligent labourers, Easterners
and Westerners, are here given equal advantages, those of greater
education helping their cruder brethren until the common fund of culture
is as nearly level as it can be in any human organization. Members are
classified according to age; "A" meaning under sixteen, "B" from 16 to
21, and "C" over 21. The advantages offered to those of limited
acquirements are immense, many persons having gained practically all
their literary polish through membership in the =United=. A much
cherished goal is professional authorship or editorship, and numerous
indeed are the =United= members who have now become recognized authors,
poets, editors, and publishers. True, though trite, is the saying that
amateur journalism is an actual training school for professional
journalism.


ITS PUBLISHING ACTIVITIES

Members of the =United= may or may not publish little papers of their
own. This is a matter of choice, for there are always enough journals to
print the work of the non-publishing members. Youths who possess
printing presses will find publishing an immense but inexpensive
pleasure, whilst other publishers may have their printing done at very
reasonable rates by those who do own presses. The favorite size for
amateur papers is 5x7 inches, which can be printed at 55 or 60 cents per
page, each page containing about 250 words. Thus a four-page issue
containing 1000 words can be published for less than $2.50, if
arrangements are made, as is often the case, for its free mailing with
any other paper. Certain of the more pretentious journals affect the
7x10 size, which costs about $1.60 for each page of 700 words. These
figures allow for 250 copies, the most usual number to be mailed. Mr.
E. E. Ericson of Elroy, Wisconsin, is our Official Printer, and his work
is all that the most fastidious could demand. Other printers may be
found amongst the young men who print their own papers. In many cases
they can quote very satisfactory prices. Two or more members may issue a
paper co-operatively, the individual expense then being very slight.


ITS CONTRIBUTED LITERATURE

The =United= welcomes all literary contributions; poems, stories, and
essays, which the various members may submit. However, contribution is
by no means compulsory, and in case a member finds himself too busy for
activity, he may merely enjoy the free papers which reach him, without
taxing himself with literary labour. For those anxious to contribute,
every facility is provided. In some cases negotiations are made directly
between publisher and contributor, but the majority are accommodated by
the two Manuscript Bureaus, Eastern and Western, which receive
contributions in any quantity from the non-publishing members, and are
drawn upon for material by those who issue papers. These bureaus
practically guarantee on the one hand to find a place for each member's
manuscript, and on the other hand to keep each publisher well supplied
with matter for his journal.


ITS CRITICAL DEPARTMENTS

The two critical departments of the =United= are at present the most
substantial of its various educational advantages. The Department of
Private Criticism is composed exclusively of highly cultured members,
usually professors or teachers of English, who practically mould the
taste of the whole association, receiving and revising before
publication the work of all who choose to submit it to them. The service
furnished free by this department is in every way equal to that for
which professional critical bureaus charge about two dollars.
Manuscripts are carefully corrected and criticised in every detail, and
authors are given comprehensive advice designed to elevate their taste,
style, and grammar. Many a crude but naturally gifted writer has been
developed to polished fluency and set on the road to professional
authorship through the =United's= Department of Private Criticism.

The Department of Public Criticism reviews thoroughly and impartially
the various printed papers and their contents, offering precepts and
suggestions for improvement. Its reports are printed in the official
organ of the association, and serve as a record of our literary
achievement.


ITS LITERARY AWARDS

To encourage excellence amongst the members of the =United=, annual
honours or "laureateships" are awarded the authors of the best poems,
stories, essays, or editorials. Participation in these competitions is
not compulsory, since they apply only to pieces which have been
especially "entered for laureateship." The entries are judged not by the
members of the association, but by highly distinguished litterateurs of
the professional world, selected particularly for the occasion. Our
latest innovation is a laureateship for the best home-printed paper,
which will excite keen rivalry among our younger members, and bring out
some careful specimens of the typographical art. Besides the
laureateships there are other honours and prizes awarded by individual
publishers within the =United=, many of the amateur journals offering
excellent books for the best stories, reviews, or reports submitted to
them.


ITS OFFICIAL ORGAN

The association, as a whole, publishes a voluminous 7x10 monthly
magazine called =The United Amateur=, which serves as the official
organ. In this magazine may be found the complete revised list of
members, the reports of officers and committees, the ample reviews
issued by the Department of Public Criticism, a selection of the best
contemporary amateur literature, together with the latest news of
amateur journalists and their local clubs from all over the Anglo-Saxon
world. =The United Amateur= is published by an annually elected Official
Editor, and printed by the Official Publisher. It is sent free to all
members of the association.
