The Project Gutenberg EBook of Thin Edge, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Thin Edge

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: John Schoenherr

Release Date: January 6, 2010 [EBook #30869]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIN EDGE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction December
    1963. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                              THIN EDGE


     There are inventions of great value that one type of society
     can use--and that would, for another society, be most
     nastily deadly!


                    BY JOHNATHAN BLAKE MAC KENZIE


                    ILLUSTRATED BY JOHN SCHOENHERR

       *       *       *       *       *




I

"Beep!" said the radio smugly. "_Beep! Beep! Beep!_"

"There's one," said the man at the pickup controls of tugship 431. He
checked the numbers on the various dials of his instruments. Then he
carefully marked down in his log book the facts that the radio finder
was radiating its beep on such-and-such a frequency and that that
frequency and that rate-of-beep indicated that the asteroid had been
found and set with anchor by a Captain Jules St. Simon. The direction
and distance were duly noted.

That information on direction and distance had already been
transmitted to the instruments of the tugship's pilot. "Jazzy-o!" said
the pilot. "Got 'im."

He swiveled his ship around until the nose was in line with the beep
and then jammed down on the forward accelerator for a few seconds.
Then he took his foot off it and waited while the ship approached the
asteroid.

In the darkness of space, only points of light were visible. Off to
the left, the sun was a small, glaring spot of whiteness that couldn't
be looked at directly. Even out here in the Belt, between the orbits
of Mars and Jupiter, that massive stellar engine blasted out enough
energy to make it uncomfortable to look at with the naked eye. But it
could illuminate matter only; the hard vacuum of space remained dark.
The pilot could have located the planets easily, without looking
around. He knew where each and every one of them were. He had to.

A man can navigate in space by instrument, and he can take the time to
figure out where every planet ought to be. But if he does, he won't
really be able to navigate in the Asteroid Belt.

In the Nineteenth Century, Mark Twain pointed out that a steamboat
pilot who navigated a ship up and down the Mississippi had to be able
to identify every landmark and every changing sandbar along the river
before he would be allowed to take charge of the wheel. He not only
had to memorize the whole river, but be able to predict the changes in
its course and the variations in its eddies. He had to be able to know
exactly where he was at every moment, even in the blackest of moonless
nights, simply by glancing around him.

An asteroid man has to be able to do the same thing. The human mind is
capable of it, and one thing that the men and women of the Belt Cities
had learned was to use the human mind.

"Looks like a big 'un, Jack," said the instrument man. His eyes were
on the radar screen. It not only gave him a picture of the body of the
slowly spinning mountain, but the distance and the angular and radial
velocities. A duplicate of the instrument gave the same information to
the pilot.

The asteroid was fairly large as such planetary debris went--some five
hundred meters in diameter, with a mass of around one hundred
seventy-four million metric tons.

       *       *       *       *       *

Within twenty meters of the surface of the great mountain of stone,
the pilot brought the ship to a dead stop in relation to that surface.

"Looks like she's got a nice spin on her," he said. "We'll see."

He waited for what he knew would appear somewhere near the equator of
the slowly revolving mass. It did. A silvery splash of paint that had
originally been squirted on by the anchor man who had first spotted
the asteroid in order to check the rotational velocity.

The pilot of the space tug waited until the blotch was centered in the
crosshairs of his peeper and then punched the timer. When it came
around again, he would be able to compute the angular momentum of the
gigantic rock.

"Where's he got his anchor set?" the pilot asked his instrument man.

"The beep's from the North Pole," the instrument man reported
instantly. "How's her spin?"

"Wait a bit. The spot hasn't come round again yet. Looks like we'll
have some fun with her, though." He kept three stars fixed carefully
in his spotters to make sure he didn't drift enough to throw his
calculations off. And waited.

Meanwhile, the instrument man abandoned his radar panel and turned to
the locker where his vacuum suit waited at the ready. By the time the
pilot had seen the splotch of silver come round again and timed it,
the instrument man was ready in his vacuum suit.

"Sixteen minutes, forty seconds," the pilot reported. "Angular
momentum one point one times ten to the twenty-first gram centimeters
squared per second."

"So we play Ride 'Em Cowboy," the instrument man said "I'm evacuating.
Tell me when." He had already poised his finger over the switch that
would pull the air from his compartments, which had been sealed off
from the pilot's compartment when the timing had started.

"Start the pump," said the pilot.

The switch was pressed, and the pumps began to evacuate the air from
the compartment. At the same time, the pilot jockeyed the ship to a
position over the north pole of the asteroid.

"Over" isn't quite the right word. "Next to" is not much better, but
at least it has no implied up-and-down orientation. The surface
