The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Eyes Have It, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Eyes Have It

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: John Schoenherr

Release Date: January 2, 2010 [EBook #30833]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EYES HAVE IT ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction January 1964.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.


                           THE EYES HAVE IT


     In a sense, this is a story of here-and-now. This Earth,
     this year ... but on a history-line slipped slightly
     sidewise. A history in which a great man acted differently,
     and Magic, rather than physical science, was developed....


                           RANDALL GARRETT


                    Illustrated by John Schoenherr


                            [Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




Sir Pierre Morlaix, Chevalier of the Angevin Empire, Knight of the
Golden Leopard, and secretary-in-private to my lord, the Count
D'Evreux, pushed back the lace at his cuff for a glance at his wrist
watch--three minutes of seven. The Angelus had rung at six, as always,
and my lord D'Evreux had been awakened by it, as always. At least, Sir
Pierre could not remember any time in the past seventeen years when my
lord had not awakened at the Angelus. Once, he recalled, the sacristan
had failed to ring the bell, and the Count had been furious for a
week. Only the intercession of Father Bright, backed by the Bishop
himself, had saved the sacristan from doing a turn in the dungeons of
Castle D'Evreux.

Sir Pierre stepped out into the corridor, walked along the carpeted
flagstones, and cast a practiced eye around him as he walked. These
old castles were difficult to keep clean, and my lord the Count was
fussy about nitre collecting in the seams between the stones of the
walls. All appeared quite in order, which was a good thing. My lord
the Count had been making a night of it last evening, and that always
made him the more peevish in the morning. Though he always woke at the
Angelus, he did not always wake up sober.

Sir Pierre stopped before a heavy, polished, carved oak door, selected
a key from one of the many at his belt, and turned it in the lock.
Then he went into the elevator and the door locked automatically
behind him. He pressed the switch and waited in patient silence as he
was lifted up four floors to the Count's personal suite.

By now, my lord the Count would have bathed, shaved, and dressed. He
would also have poured down an eye-opener consisting of half a water
glass of fine Champagne brandy. He would not eat breakfast until
eight. The Count had no valet in the strict sense of the term. Sir
Reginald Beauvay held that title, but he was never called upon to
exercise the more personal functions of his office. The Count did not
like to be seen until he was thoroughly presentable.

The elevator stopped. Sir Pierre stepped out into the corridor and
walked along it toward the door at the far end. At exactly seven
o'clock, he rapped briskly on the great door which bore the
gilt-and-polychrome arms of the House D'Evreux.

For the first time in seventeen years, there was no answer.

Sir Pierre waited for the growled command to enter for a full minute,
unable to believe his ears. Then, almost timidly, he rapped again.

There was still no answer.

Then, bracing himself for the verbal onslaught that would follow if he
had erred, Sir Pierre turned the handle and opened the door just as if
he had heard the Count's voice telling him to come in.

"Good morning, my lord," he said, as he always had for seventeen
years.

But the room was empty, and there was no answer.

He looked around the huge room. The morning sunlight streamed in
through the high mullioned windows and spread a diamond-checkered
pattern across the tapestry on the far wall, lighting up the brilliant
hunting scene in a blaze of color.

"My lord?"

Nothing. Not a sound.

The bedroom door was open. Sir Pierre walked across to it and looked
in.

He saw immediately why my lord the Count had not answered, and that,
indeed, he would never answer again.

My lord the Count lay flat on his back, his arms spread wide, his eyes
staring at the ceiling. He was still clad in his gold and scarlet
evening clothes. But the great stain on the front of his coat was not
the same shade of scarlet as the rest of the cloth, and the stain had
a bullet hole in its center.

Sir Pierre looked at him without moving for a long moment. Then he
stepped over, knelt, and touched one of the Count's hands with the
back of his own. It was quite cool. He had been dead for hours.

"I knew someone would do you in sooner or later, my lord," said Sir
Pierre, almost regretfully.

Then he rose from his kneeling position and walked out without another
look at his dead lord. He locked the door of the suite, pocketed the
key, and went back downstairs in the elevator.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary, Lady Duncan stared out of the window at the morning sunlight and
wondered what to do. The Angelus bell had awakened her from a fitful
sleep in her chair, and she knew that, as a guest at Castle D'Evreux,
she would be expected to appear at Mass again this morning. But how
could she? How could she face the Sacramental Lord on the altar--to
say nothing of taking the Blessed Sacrament itself.

Still, it would look all the more conspicuous if she did not show up
this morning after having made it a point to attend every morning with
Lady Alice during the first four days of this visit.

She turned and glanced at the locked and barred door of the bedroom.
_He_ would not be expected to come. Laird Duncan used his wheelchair
as an excuse, but since he had taken up black magic as a hobby he had,
she suspected, been actually afraid to go anywhere near a church.

If only she hadn't lied to him! But how could she have told the truth?
That would have been worse--infinitely worse. And now, because of that
lie, he was locked in his bedroom doing only God and the Devil knew
what.

If only he would come out. If he would only stop whatever it was he
had been doing for all these long hours--or at least finish it! Then
they could leave Evreux, make some excuse--any excuse--to get away.
One of them could feign sickness. Anything, anything to get them out
of France, across the Channel, and back to Scotland, where they would
be safe!

She looked back out of the window, across the courtyard, at the
towering stone walls of the Great Keep and at the high window that
opened into the suite of Edouard, Count D'Evreux.

Last night she had hated him, but no longer. Now there was only room
in her heart for fear.

She buried her face in her hands and cursed herself for a fool. There
were no tears left for weeping--not after the long night.

Behind her, she heard the sudden noise of the door being unlocked, and
she turned.

Laird Duncan of Duncan opened the door and wheeled himself out. He was
followed by a malodorous gust of vapor from the room he had just left.
Lady Duncan stared at him.

He looked older than he had last night, more haggard and worn, and
there was something in his eyes she did not like. For a moment he said
nothing. Then he wet his lips with the tip of his tongue. When he
spoke, his voice sounded dazed.

"There is nothing to fear any more," he said. "Nothing to fear at
all."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Reverend Father James Valois Bright, Vicar of the Chapel of
Saint-Esprit, had as his flock the several hundred inhabitants of the
Castle D'Evreux. As such, he was the ranking priest--socially, not
hierarchically--in the country. Not counting the Bishop and the
Chapter at the Cathedral, of course. But such knowledge did little
good for the Father's peace of mind. The turnout of the flock was
abominably small for its size--especially for week-day Masses. The
Sunday Masses were well attended, of course; Count D'Evreux was there
punctually at nine every Sunday, and he had a habit of counting the
house. But he never showed up on weekdays, and his laxity had allowed
a certain further laxity to filter down through the ranks.

The great consolation was Lady Alice D'Evreux. She was a plain, simple
girl, nearly twenty years younger than her brother, the Count, and
quite his opposite in every way. She was quiet where he was
thundering, self-effacing where he was flamboyant, temperate where he
was drunken, and chaste where he was--

Father Bright brought his thoughts to a full halt for a moment. He
had, he reminded himself, no right to make judgments of that sort. He
was not, after all, the Count's confessor; the Bishop was.

Besides, he should have his mind on his prayers just now.

He paused and was rather surprised to notice that he had already put
on his alb, amice, and girdle, and he was aware that his lips had
formed the words of the prayer as he had donned each of them.

_Habit_, he thought, _can be destructive to the contemplative
faculty_.

He glanced around the sacristy. His server, the young son of the Count
of Saint Brieuc, sent here to complete his education as a gentleman
