Project Gutenberg's Industrial Revolution, by Poul William Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Industrial Revolution

Author: Poul William Anderson

Illustrator: Leo Summers

Release Date: January 15, 2010 [EBook #30971]
[This file last updated January 29, 2011]


Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction September
    1963. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            [Illustration]


                        INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION


                 Ever think how deadly a thing it is
                      if a machine has amnesia--
                 or how easily it can be arranged....


                        BY WINSTON P. SANDERS


                      ILLUSTRATED BY LEO SUMMERS

       *       *       *       *       *




"Well, yes," Amspaugh admitted, "it was a unique war in many ways,
including its origin. However, there are so many analogies to other
colonial revolutions--" His words trailed off as usual.

"I know. Earth's mercantile policies and so forth," said Lindgren. He
fancies himself a student of interplanetary history. This has led to
quite a few arguments since Amspaugh, who teaches in that field,
joined the Club. Mostly they're good. I went to the bar and got myself
another drink, listening as the mine owner's big voice went on:

"But what began it? When did the asterites first start realizing they
weren't pseudopods of a dozen Terrestrial nations, but a single nation
in their own right? There's the root of the revolution. And it can be
pinned down, too."

"'Ware metaphor!" cried someone at my elbow. I turned and saw Missy
Blades. She'd come quietly into the lounge and started mixing a gin
and bitters.

The view window framed her white head in Orion as she moved toward the
little cluster of seated men. She took a fat cigar from her pocket,
struck it on her shoe sole, and added her special contribution to the
blue cloud in the room after she sat down.

"Excuse me," she said. "I couldn't help that. Please go on." Which I
hope relieves you of any fear that she's an Unforgettable Character.
Oh, yes, she's old as Satan now; her toil and guts and conniving make
up half the biography of the Sword; she manned a gun turret at Ceres,
and was mate of the _Tyrfing_ on some of the earliest Saturn runs when
men took their lives between their teeth because they needed both
hands free; her sons and grandsons fill the Belt with their brawling
ventures; she can drink any ordinary man to the deck; she's one of the
three women ever admitted to the Club. But she's also one of the few
genuine ladies I've known in my life.

"Uh, well," Lindgren grinned at her. "I was saying, Missy, the germ of
the revolution was when the Stations armed themselves. You see, that
meant more than police powers. It implied a degree of sovereignty.
Over the years, the implication grew."

"Correct." Orloff nodded his bald head. "I remember how the Governing
Commission squalled when the Station managers first demanded the
right. They foresaw trouble. But if the Stations belonging to one
country put in space weapons, what else could the others do?"

"They should have stuck together and all been firm about refusing to
allow it," Amspaugh said. "From the standpoint of their own best
interests, I mean."

"They tried to," Orloff replied. "I hate to think how many
communications we sent home from our own office, and the others must
have done the same. But Earth was a long way off. The Station bosses
were close. Inverse square law of political pressure."

"I grant you, arming each new little settlement proved important,"
Amspaugh said. "But really, it expressed nothing more than the first
inchoate stirrings of asteroid nationalism. And the origins of that
are much more subtle and complex. For instance ... er...."

"You've got to have a key event somewhere," Lindgren insisted. "I say
that this was it."

A silence fell, as will happen in conversation. I came back from the
bar and settled myself beside Missy. She looked for a while into her
drink, and then out to the stars. The slow spin of our rock had now
brought the Dippers into view. Her faded eyes sought the Pole
Star--but it's Earth's, not our own any more--and I wondered what
memories they were sharing. She shook herself the least bit and said:

"I don't know about the sociological ins and outs. All I know is, a
lot of things happened, and there wasn't any pattern to them at the
time. We just slogged through as best we were able, which wasn't
really very good. But I can identify one of those wriggling roots for
you, Sigurd. I was there when the question of arming the Stations
first came up. Or, rather, when the incident occurred that led
directly to the question being raised."

Our whole attention went to her. She didn't dwell on the past as often
as we would have liked.

A slow, private smile crossed her lips. She looked beyond us again.
"As a matter of fact," she murmured, "I got my husband out of it."
Then quickly, as if to keep from remembering too much:

"Do you care to hear the story? It was when the Sword was just getting
started. They'd established themselves on SSC 45--oh, never mind the
catalogue number. Sword Enterprises, because Mike Blades' name
suggested it--what kind of name could you get out of Jimmy Chung, even
if he was the senior partner? It'd sound too much like a collision
with a meteorite--so naturally the asteroid also came to be called the
Sword. They began on the borrowed shoestring that was usual in those
days. Of course, in the Belt a shoestring has to be mighty long, and
finances got stretched to the limit. The older men here will know how
much had to be done by hand, in mortal danger, because machines were
too expensive. But in spite of everything, they succeeded. The Station
was functional and they were ready to start business when--"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was no coincidence that the Jupiter craft were arriving steadily
when the battleship came. Construction had been scheduled with this in
mind, that the Sword should be approaching conjunction with the king
planet, making direct shuttle service feasible, just as the chemical
plant went into service. We need not consider how much struggle and
heartbreak had gone into meeting that schedule. As for the battleship,
she appeared because the fact that a Station in just this orbit was
about to commence operations was news important enough to cross the
Solar System and push through many strata of bureaucracy. The heads of
the recently elected North American government became suddenly, fully
aware of what had been going on.

Michael Blades was outside, overseeing the installation of a receptor,
when his earplug buzzed. He thrust his chin against the tuning plate,
switching from gang to interoffice band. "Mike?" said Avis Page's
voice, "You're wanted up front."

"Now?" he objected. "Whatever for?"

"Courtesy visit from the NASS _Altair_. You've lost track of time, my
boy."

"What the ... the jumping blue blazes are you talking about? We've had
our courtesy visit. Jimmy and I both went over to pay our respects,
and we had Rear Admiral Hulse here to dinner. What more do they
expect, for Harry's sake?"

"Don't you remember? Since there wasn't room to entertain his
officers, you promised to take them on a personal guided tour later. I
made the appointment the very next watch. Now's the hour."

"Oh, yes, it comes back to me. Yeah. Hulse brought a magnum of
champagne with him, and after so long a time drinking recycled water,
my capacity was shot to pieces. I got a warm glow of good fellowship
on, and offered--Let Jimmy handle it, I'm busy."

"The party's too large, he says. You'll have to take half of them.
Their gig will dock in thirty minutes."

"Well, depute somebody else."

"That'd be rude, Mike. Have you forgotten how sensitive they are about
rank at home?" Avis hesitated. "If what I believe about the mood back
there is true, we can use the good will of high-level Navy personnel.
And any other influential people in sight."

Blades drew a deep breath. "You're too blinking sensible. Remind me to
fire you after I've made my first ten million bucks."

"What'll you do for your next ten million, then?" snipped his
secretary-file clerk-confidante-adviser-et cetera.

"Nothing. I'll just squander the first."

"Goody! Can I help?"

"Uh ... I'll be right along." Blades switched off. His ears felt hot,
as often of late when he tangled with Avis, and he unlimbered only a
few choice oaths.

"Troubles?" asked Carlos Odonaju.

Blades stood a moment, looking around, before he answered. He was on
the wide end of the Sword, which was shaped roughly like a truncated
pyramid. Beyond him and his half dozen men stretched a vista of pitted
rock, jutting crags, gulf-black shadows, under the glare of
floodlamps. A few kilometers away, the farthest horizon ended, chopped
off like a cliff. Beyond lay the stars, crowding that night which
never ends. It grew very still while the gang waited for his word. He
could listen to his own lungs and pulse, loud in the spacesuit; he
could even notice its interior smell, blend of plastic and oxygen
cycle chemicals, flesh and sweat. He was used to the sensation of
hanging upside down on the surface, grip-soled boots holding him
against that fractional gee by which the asteroid's rotation overcame
its feeble gravity. But it came to him that this was an eerie
bat-fashion way for an Oregon farm boy to stand.

Oregon was long behind him, though, not only the food factory where he
grew up but the coasts where he had fished and the woods where he had
tramped. No loss. There'd always been too many tourists. You couldn't
escape from people on Earth. Cold and vacuum and raw rock and
everything, the Belt was better. It annoyed him to be interrupted
here.

Could Carlos take over as foreman? N-no, Blades decided, not yet. A
gas receptor was an intricate piece of equipment. Carlos was a good
man of his hands. Every one of the hundred-odd in the Station
necessarily was. But he hadn't done this kind of work often enough.

"I have to quit," Blades said. "Secure the stuff and report back to
Buck Meyers over at the dock, the lot of you. His crew's putting in
another recoil pier, as I suppose you know. They'll find jobs for you.
I'll see you here again on your next watch."

       *       *       *       *       *

