The Project Gutenberg EBook of Collector's Item, by Evelyn E. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Collector's Item

Author: Evelyn E. Smith

Illustrator: EMSH

Release Date: March 18, 2010 [EBook #31686]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTOR'S ITEM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            Collector's Item

                           By EVELYN E. SMITH

                          Illustrated by EMSH

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
December 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Being trapped in the steaming h--l of Venus is no excuse for
forgetting one's manners--but anyone abducted, marooned, tricked, kept
from tea might well crack under the strain!_]

"What I should like to know," Professor Bernardi said, gazing pensively
after the lizard-man as he bore the shrieking form of Miss Anspacher off
in his scaly arms, "is whether he is planning to eat her or make love to
her. Because, in the latter instance, I'm not sure we should interfere.
It may be her only chance."

[Illustration]

"Carl!" his wife cried indignantly. "That's a horrid thing to say! You
must rescue her at once!"

"Oh, I suppose so," he said, then gave his wife a nasty little grin that
he knew would irritate her. "It isn't that she's unattractive, my dear,
in case you hadn't noticed, though she's pretty well past the bloom of
youth--"

"_Will_ you stop making leering noises and go save her or _not_?"

"I was coming to that. It's just that she persists in using her Ph.D. as
a club to beat men into respectful pulps. Men don't like being beaten
into respectful pulps, whether by a man or a woman. Now if she'd only
learned that other people have feelings--"

"If you don't stop lecturing and go, I will!" his wife threatened.

"All right, all right," he said wearily. "Come on, Mortland."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two scientists slogged through the steamy, odorous jungle of Venus
and soon reached the lizard-man, who, weighed down by his captive, had
not been able to travel as fast.

"You blast him," the professor told Mortland. "Try not to hit Miss
Anspacher, if you can manage it."

"Er--I've never fired one of these things before," Mortland said. "Can't
stand having my eardrums blasted. However, here goes." He pointed his
weapon at the lizardlike creature in a gingerly manner. "Ah--hands up,"
he ordered. "Only fair to give the--well, blighter a sporting chance,"
he explained to Professor Bernardi.

To their amazement, the lizard-man promptly dropped Miss Anspacher into
the lavender-colored mud and put up his hands. Miss Anspacher gave an
indignant yelp.

"Seems intelligent in spite of the kidnaping," Mortland commented. "But
how does he happen to understand English? We're the only expedition ever
to have reached Venus ... that I know of, anyway." He and the professor
stared at each other in consternation. "There may have been a secret
expedition previously and perhaps they left a--a base or something,
which would explain why--"

"If you two oafs would stop speculating, you might help me out of
here!" Miss Anspacher remarked in her customary snappish tone. Professor
Bernardi leaped forward to obey. "You don't have to pull quite so hard!
I haven't taken root yet!" She came out of the mud with a sound like two
whales kissing. She brushed hopelessly at her once-white blouse and
shorts. "Oh, dear, I look a mess!"

Professor Bernardi did not comment, being engaged in slapping at a small
winged creature--about the size of a bluejay, but looking like a cross
between a bat and a mosquito--that seemed interested in taking a bite
out of him. It escaped his flapping hand and flew to the top of
Mortland's sun helmet, where it glared at the professor.

"Since you seem to understand English," Miss Anspacher said to the
lizard-man through a mouthful of hairpins, "perhaps you will be so kind
as to explain the meaning of this outrage?"

"I was smitten," the alien replied suavely. "Passion made me forget
myself."

Professor Bernardi looked thoughtfully at him. "A prior expedition isn't
the answer. It wouldn't have troubled to educate you so thoroughly.
Therefore, the explanation is that you pick up English by reading our
minds. Correct?"

The lizard-man turned an embarrassed olive. "Yes."

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that he was able to give the creature a more thorough inspection,
Bernardi saw that he really didn't look too much like a lizard. He
definitely appeared to be wearing clothes of some kind, which, in the
Venusian heat, indicated a particularly refined degree of
civilization--unless, of course, the squamous skin protected him from
the heat as well as the humidity.

More than that, though, he was humanoid in almost a Hollywood way. He
had a particularly fine profile and an athletic physique, which, oddly,
his scales seemed to enhance, much like a movie idol dressed in
fine-meshed Medieval armor. Naturally, he had a tail, but it was as well
proportioned as a kangaroo's, though shorter and more graceful, and it
struck Professor Bernardi as a particularly handsome and useful gadget.

For one thing, the people from Earth were standing uncomfortably in the
slippery mud, while the lizard-man was using his tail much in the
fashion of a spectator stool, leaning back against it almost in a
sitting position, with his armor-shod feet supporting him comfortably.
For another, the tail undoubtedly served for balance and the added push
of a walking stick and perhaps for swift attack or getaway. Very
practical and attractive, the professor concluded--too bad Man had
relinquished his tail when climbing down from the trees.

"Thank you," the saurian said with uneasy modesty, looking at him. "Good
of you to think so. You are a fairly intelligent species, aren't you?"

"Fairly," the professor acknowledged, preoccupied with a clever idea.
Perhaps existence on Venus wasn't going to be as unpleasant as he had
anticipated. "From reading my mind, you know what this blaster can do,
don't you?"

"I'm afraid so."

"Then you know what I expect of you?"

"Yes, sahib. I'se comin', massa. To hear is to obey, effendi." The
creature turned and went briskly back toward the camp, leaving the
others to stumble after him.

Mrs. Bernardi gave a shriek as his handsome scaled form emerged from the
greenish-white underbrush, haloed in luminous yellow mist. Algol, the
ship's cat, prudently took sanctuary behind her, then peered out to see
what was going on and whether there was likely to be anything in it for
him.

"This is our native bearer," Professor Bernardi explained as the three
scientists burst out of the jungle.

"My name is Jrann-Pttt." The creature bowed low. "At your service,
madame."

"Oh, Carl!" Mrs. Bernardi clapped her hands. "He's just perfect! So
thoughtful of you to find one that speaks English! I do hope you can
cook, Pitt?"

"I will do my best, madame."

       *       *       *       *       *

Algol daintily picked his way through the mud toward the saurian,
sniffed him with judicial deliberation; then, deciding that anyone who
smelled so much like the better class of fish must be All Right, rubbed
against his legs.

"Well," remarked Miss Anspacher, using the side of the spaceship as a
mirror by which to redden her somewhat prissy lips, "that makes it
practically unanimous, doesn't it?"

"All except Professor Bernardi," said Jrann-Pttt, looking at the
scientist with what might have been a smile. "He doesn't like me."

"I see that your telepathic powers are not quite accurate," the
professor returned. "I do not dislike you; I distrust you."

"The fact that the two terms are not entirely synonymous in your
language would argue a certain degree of incipient civilization," the
lizard-man observed.

"You know, Carl," Mrs. Bernardi whispered, "he has an awfully funny way
of talking, for a native."

"Frankly I don't like this at all, Professor," Captain Greenfield said,
mopping his brow with a limp handkerchief. "If I hadn't been off looking
for a better berth for the ship--all this mud worries me--this'd never
have happened."

"You mean you would have let the lizard get away with Miss Anspacher?"

