The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ring Once for Death, by Robert Andrew Arthur

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Ring Once for Death

Author: Robert Andrew Arthur

Illustrator: Ernie Barth

Release Date: March 31, 2010 [EBook #31840]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RING ONCE FOR DEATH ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories March 1954. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


                         RING ONCE FOR DEATH


                           BY ROBERT ARTHUR


                       Illustrator: Ernie Barth


     _The power of the old gods was certainly nothing for Mark
      and Edith--a modern, twentieth-century couple--to worry
      about. After all--everybody dies!_

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration:]

Twenty years had left no trace inside Sam Kee's little shop on Mott
Street. There were the same dusty jars of ginseng root and tigers'
whiskers, the same little bronze Buddahs, the same gim-cracks mixed
with fine jade. Edith Williams gave a little murmur of pleasure as the
door shut behind them.

"Mark," she said, "it hasn't changed! It doesn't look as if a thing
had been sold since we were here on our honeymoon."

"It certainly doesn't," Dr. Mark Williams agreed, moving down the
narrow aisle behind her. "If someone hadn't told us Sam Kee was dead,
I'd believe we'd stepped back twenty years in time, like they do in
those scientific stories young David reads."

"We must buy something," his wife said. "For a twentieth anniversary
present for me. Perhaps a bell?"

From the shadowy depths of the shop a young man emerged, American in
dress and manner despite the Oriental contours of his face and eyes.

"Good evening," he said. "May I show you something?"

"We think we want a bell," Dr. Williams chuckled. "But we aren't quite
sure. You're Sam Kee's son?"

"Sam Kee, junior. My honored father passed to the halls of his
ancestors five years ago. I could just say that he died--" black eyes
twinkled--"but customers like the more flowery mode of speech. They
think it's quaint."

"I think it's just nice, and not quaint at all," Edith Williams
declared. "We're sorry your father is dead. We'd hoped to see him
again. Twenty years ago when we were a very broke young couple on a
honeymoon he sold us a wonderful rose-crystal necklace for half
price."

"I'm sure he still made a profit." The black eyes twinkled again. "But
