The Project Gutenberg EBook of Big Pill, by Raymond Zinke Gallun

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Big Pill

Author: Raymond Zinke Gallun

Release Date: April 9, 2010 [EBook #31929]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIG PILL ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Planet Stories September 1952. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


                               BIG PILL


                         By RAYMOND Z. GALLUN


     _Child, it was, of the now ancient H-bomb. New. Untested.
      Would its terrible power sweep the stark Saturnian moon of
      Titan from space ... or miraculously create a flourishing
      paradise-colony?_

       *       *       *       *       *




Under the glow of Saturn and his Rings, five of the airdomes of the
new colony on Titan were still inflated. They were enormous bubbles of
clear, flexible plastic. But the sixth airdome had flattened. And
beneath its collapsed roof, propped now by metal rods, a dozen men in
spacesuits had just lost all hope of rescuing the victims of the
accident.

Bert Kraskow, once of Oklahoma City, more recently a space-freighter
pilot, and now officially just a colonist, was among them. His small,
hard body sagged, as if by weariness. His lips curled. But his full
anger and bitterness didn't show.

"Nine dead," he remarked into the radio-phone of his oxygen helmet.
"No survivors." And then, inaudibly, inside his mind: "I'm a stinkin'
fool. Why didn't we act against Space Colonists' Supply Incorporated,
before this could happen?"

His gaze swung back to the great rent that had opened in a seam in the
airdome--under only normal Earthly atmospheric pressure, when it
should have been able to withstand much more. Instantly the warmed air
had rushed out into the near-vacuum of Titan, Saturn's largest moon.
Those who had been working the night-shift under the dome, to set up
prefabricated cottages, had discarded their spacesuits for better
freedom of movement. It was the regulation thing to do; always
considered safe. But they had been caught by the sudden dropping of
pressure around them to almost zero. And by the terrible cold of the
Titanian night.

For a grief-stricken second Bert Kraskow looked down again at the body
beside which he stood. You could hardly see that the face had been
young. The eyes popped. The pupils were white, like ice. The fluid
within had frozen. The mouth hung open. In the absence of normal
air-pressure, the blood in the body had boiled for a moment, before
the cold had congealed it.

"Your kid brother, Nick, eh, Bert?" an air-conditioning mechanic named
Lawler said, almost in a whisper. "About twenty years old, hunh?"

"Eighteen," Bert Kraskow answered into his helmet-phones as he spread
the youth's coat over the distorted face.

Old Stan Kraskow, metal-worker, was there, too. Bert's and Nick's dad.
He was blubbering. There wasn't much that anybody could do for him.
And for the other dead, there were other horrified mourners. Some of
them had been half nuts from homesickness, and the sight of harsh,
voidal stars, even before this tragedy had happened.

It was Lawler who first cut loose, cursing. He was a big, apish man,
with a certain fiery eloquence.

"Damned, lousy, stinkin' obsolete equipment!" he snarled. "Breathe on
it and it falls apart! Under old Bill Lauren, Space Colonists' Supply
used to make good, honest stuff. I worked with it on Mars and the
moons of Jupiter. But now look what the firm is turning out under
Trenton Lauren, old Bill's super-efficient son! He was so greedy for
quick profits in the new Titan colonization project, and so afraid of
being scooped by new methods of making these fizzled-out worlds
livable, that he didn't even take time to have his products decently
inspected! And that, after not being able to recognize progress! Hell!
Where is that dumb, crawlin' boob?"

[Illustration]

There was a moment of silence. Then somebody muttered: "Speak of the
devil!..."

       *       *       *       *       *

With eyes that had grown quietly wolfish, Bert Kraskow saw Trenton
Lauren arrive at last from the administration dome. He was plump,
maybe thirty-five, and somehow dapper even in a spacesuit. That he was
here on Titan at all, and not in a pressurized settlement on Mars, or
at the main office of his firm in Chicago, was a cocky gesture of
bravado, a leaf torn from the book of his more worthy sire, and
perhaps more particularly an attempt to counteract the consequences of
his bad business judgment, personally.

