The Project Gutenberg EBook of Second Variety, by Philip Kindred Dick

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Second Variety

Author: Philip Kindred Dick

Illustrator: Alex Ebel

Release Date: April 17, 2010 [EBook #32032]
[Last updated: May 4, 2011]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND VARIETY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    This etext was produced from Space Science Fiction May 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.




[Illustration]




SECOND VARIETY


BY PHILIP K. DICK


ILLUSTRATED BY EBEL

    The claws were bad enough in the first place--nasty, crawling
    little death-robots. But when they began to imitate their
    creators, it was time for the human race to make peace--if it
    could!


The Russian soldier made his way nervously up the ragged side of the
hill, holding his gun ready. He glanced around him, licking his dry
lips, his face set. From time to time he reached up a gloved hand and
wiped perspiration from his neck, pushing down his coat collar.

Eric turned to Corporal Leone. "Want him? Or can I have him?" He
adjusted the view sight so the Russian's features squarely filled the
glass, the lines cutting across his hard, somber features.

Leone considered. The Russian was close, moving rapidly, almost
running. "Don't fire. Wait." Leone tensed. "I don't think we're
needed."

The Russian increased his pace, kicking ash and piles of debris out of
his way. He reached the top of the hill and stopped, panting, staring
around him. The sky was overcast, drifting clouds of gray particles.
Bare trunks of trees jutted up occasionally; the ground was level and
bare, rubble-strewn, with the ruins of buildings standing out here and
there like yellowing skulls.

The Russian was uneasy. He knew something was wrong. He started down
the hill. Now he was only a few paces from the bunker. Eric was
getting fidgety. He played with his pistol, glancing at Leone.

"Don't worry," Leone said. "He won't get here. They'll take care of
him."

"Are you sure? He's got damn far."

"They hang around close to the bunker. He's getting into the bad part.
Get set!"

The Russian began to hurry, sliding down the hill, his boots sinking
into the heaps of gray ash, trying to keep his gun up. He stopped for
a moment, lifting his fieldglasses to his face.

"He's looking right at us," Eric said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Russian came on. They could see his eyes, like two blue stones.
His mouth was open a little. He needed a shave; his chin was stubbled.
On one bony cheek was a square of tape, showing blue at the edge. A
fungoid spot. His coat was muddy and torn. One glove was missing. As
he ran his belt counter bounced up and down against him.

Leone touched Eric's arm. "Here one comes."

Across the ground something small and metallic came, flashing in the
dull sunlight of mid-day. A metal sphere. It raced up the hill after
the Russian, its treads flying. It was small, one of the baby ones.
Its claws were out, two razor projections spinning in a blur of white
steel. The Russian heard it. He turned instantly, firing. The sphere
dissolved into particles. But already a second had emerged and was
following the first. The Russian fired again.

A third sphere leaped up the Russian's leg, clicking and whirring. It
jumped to the shoulder. The spinning blades disappeared into the
Russian's throat.

Eric relaxed. "Well, that's that. God, those damn things give me the
creeps. Sometimes I think we were better off before."

"If we hadn't invented them, they would have." Leone lit a cigarette
shakily. "I wonder why a Russian would come all this way alone. I
didn't see anyone covering him."

Lt. Scott came slipping up the tunnel, into the bunker. "What
happened? Something entered the screen."

"An Ivan."

"Just one?"

Eric brought the view screen around. Scott peered into it. Now there
were numerous metal spheres crawling over the prostrate body, dull
metal globes clicking and whirring, sawing up the Russian into small
parts to be carried away.

"What a lot of claws," Scott murmured.

"They come like flies. Not much game for them any more."

Scott pushed the sight away, disgusted. "Like flies. I wonder why he
was out there. They know we have claws all around."

A larger robot had joined the smaller spheres. It was directing
operations, a long blunt tube with projecting eyepieces. There was not
much left of the soldier. What remained was being brought down the
hillside by the host of claws.

"Sir," Leone said. "If it's all right, I'd like to go out there and
take a look at him."

"Why?"

"Maybe he came with something."

Scott considered. He shrugged. "All right. But be careful."

"I have my tab." Leone patted the metal band at his wrist. "I'll be
out of bounds."

       *       *       *       *       *

He picked up his rifle and stepped carefully up to the mouth of the
bunker, making his way between blocks of concrete and steel prongs,
twisted and bent. The air was cold at the top. He crossed over the
ground toward the remains of the soldier, striding across the soft
ash. A wind blew around him, swirling gray particles up in his face.
He squinted and pushed on.

The claws retreated as he came close, some of them stiffening into
immobility. He touched his tab. The Ivan would have given something
for that! Short hard radiation emitted from the tab neutralized the
claws, put them out of commission. Even the big robot with its two
waving eyestalks retreated respectfully as he approached.

He bent down over the remains of the soldier. The gloved hand was
closed tightly. There was something in it. Leone pried the fingers
apart. A sealed container, aluminum. Still shiny.

He put it in his pocket and made his way back to the bunker. Behind
him the claws came back to life, moving into operation again. The
procession resumed, metal spheres moving through the gray ash with
their loads. He could hear their treads scrabbling against the ground.
He shuddered.

Scott watched intently as he brought the shiny tube out of his pocket.
"He had that?"

"In his hand." Leone unscrewed the top. "Maybe you should look at it,
sir."

Scott took it. He emptied the contents out in the palm of his hand. A
small piece of silk paper, carefully folded. He sat down by the light
and unfolded it.

"What's it say, sir?" Eric said. Several officers came up the tunnel.
Major Hendricks appeared.

"Major," Scott said. "Look at this."

Hendricks read the slip. "This just come?"

"A single runner. Just now."

"Where is he?" Hendricks asked sharply.

"The claws got him."

Major Hendricks grunted. "Here." He passed it to his companions. "I
think this is what we've been waiting for. They certainly took their
time about it."

"So they want to talk terms," Scott said. "Are we going along with
them?"

"That's not for us to decide." Hendricks sat down. "Where's the
communications officer? I want the Moon Base."

Leone pondered as the communications officer raised the outside
antenna cautiously, scanning the sky above the bunker for any sign of
a watching Russian ship.

"Sir," Scott said to Hendricks. "It's sure strange they suddenly came
around. We've been using the claws for almost a year. Now all of a
sudden they start to fold."

"Maybe claws have been getting down in their bunkers."

"One of the big ones, the kind with stalks, got into an Ivan bunker
last week," Eric said. "It got a whole platoon of them before they got
their lid shut."

"How do you know?"

"A buddy told me. The thing came back with--with remains."

"Moon Base, sir," the communications officer said.

On the screen the face of the lunar monitor appeared. His crisp
uniform contrasted to the uniforms in the bunker. And he was clean
shaven. "Moon Base."

"This is forward command L-Whistle. On Terra. Let me have General
Thompson."

The monitor faded. Presently General Thompson's heavy features came
into focus. "What is it, Major?"

"Our claws got a single Russian runner with a message. We don't know
whether to act on it--there have been tricks like this in the past."

"What's the message?"

"The Russians want us to send a single officer on policy level over to
their lines. For a conference. They don't state the nature of the
conference. They say that matters of--" He consulted the slip.
"--Matters of grave urgency make it advisable that discussion be
opened between a representative of the UN forces and themselves."

He held the message up to the screen for the general to scan.
Thompson's eyes moved.

"What should we do?" Hendricks said.

"Send a man out."

"You don't think it's a trap?"

"It might be. But the location they give for their forward command is
correct. It's worth a try, at any rate."

"I'll send an officer out. And report the results to you as soon as he
returns."

"All right, Major." Thompson broke the connection. The screen died. Up
above, the antenna came slowly down.

Hendricks rolled up the paper, deep in thought.

"I'll go," Leone said.

"They want somebody at policy level." Hendricks rubbed his jaw.
"Policy level. I haven't been outside in months. Maybe I could use a
little air."

"Don't you think it's risky?"

Hendricks lifted the view sight and gazed into it. The remains of the
Russian were gone. Only a single claw was in sight. It was folding
itself back, disappearing into the ash, like a crab. Like some hideous
metal crab....

"That's the only thing that bothers me." Hendricks rubbed his wrist.
"I know I'm safe as long as I have this on me. But there's something
