The Project Gutenberg EBook of Seed of the Arctic Ice, by H. G. Winter

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Seed of the Arctic Ice

Author: H. G. Winter

Release Date: April 17, 2010 [EBook #32029]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEED OF THE ARCTIC ICE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          Seed of the Arctic Ice

                              By H. G. Winter

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Stories
February 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: Killer whales and seal-creatures tangle Ken Torrance in an
amazing adventure under the ice-roofed arctic sea.]


Sleepily the lookout stared at the scope-screen before him, wishing for
something that would break the monotony of the scene it pictured: the
schools of ghostly fish fleeting by, the occasional shafts of pale
sunlight filtering down through breaks in the ice-floes above, the long
snaky ropes of underwater growth. None of this was conducive to
wakefulness; nor did the half-speed drone of the electric engines aft
and the snores of some distant sleeper help him. The four other men on
duty in the submarine--the helmsman; the second mate, whose watch it
was; the quartermaster and the second engineer--might not have been
present, so motionless and silent were they.

The lookout man stifled another yawn and glanced at a clock to see how
much more time remained of his trick. Then suddenly something on the
screen brought him to alert attention. He blinked at it; stared
hard--and thrilled.

Far ahead, caught for an instant by the submarine _Narwhal's+
light-beams, a number of sleek bodies moved through the foggy murk, with
a flash of white bellies and an easy graceful thrust of flukes.

The watcher's hands cupped his mouth; he turned and sang out:

"K-i-i-ll-ers! I see killers!"

The cry rang in every corner, and immediately there was a feverish
response. Rubbing their eyes, men appeared as if from nowhere and jumped
to posts; with a clang, the telegraph under the second mate's hand went
over to full speed; Captain Streight rolled heavily out of his bunk,
flipped his feet mechanically into sea-boots and came stamping forward.
First Torpooner Kenneth Torrance, as he sat up and stretched, heard the
usual crisp question:

"Where away?"

"Five points off sta'b'd bow, sir; quarter-mile away; swimming slow."

"How large a school?"

"Couldn't say, sir. Looks around a dozen."

"Whew!" whistled Ken Torrance. "That's a strike!" He pulled on a sweater
and strode forward to the scope-screen to see for himself, even as
Captain Streight, all at once testy with eagerness, bawled:

"Sta'b'd five! Torpoon ready, Mister Torrance! Mister Torr--oh, here you
are. Take a look."

      *      *      *      *      *

Never in the two years of experience which had brought him to the
important post of first torpooner had Ken failed to thrill at the sight
which now met his eyes. Directly ahead, now that the _Narwhal's_ bow was
turned in pursuit, but veering slowly to port, swam a pack of the twenty
to thirty-foot dolphins which are called "killer whales," their bodies
so close-pressed that they seemed to be an undulating wave of black,
occasionally sliced with white as the fluke-thrusts brought their
bellies into view. Their speed through the shadowed, gloomy water was
equal to the submarine's; when alarmed, it would almost double.

"Three more of 'em will fill our tanks," grunted Streight, his chunky
face almost glowing. He bit on a plug of tobacco, his eyes never moving
from the screen. "Now, if only we hadn't lost Beddoes.... Y' think you
can bag three, Mister Torrance?"

"Well, if three'll fill our tanks--sure!" grinned Ken.

The other's eyebrows twitched suddenly. "They're speeding up!" he
shouted, and then: "That torpoon ready, there? Good." His voice lowered
again as Ken pulled his belt a notch tighter and snatched a last glimpse
of the fish before leaving. "I want you to try for three, son," he said
soberly: "but--be careful. Don't take fool chances, and keep alert.
Remember Beddoes."

Ken nodded and walked to the torpoon catapult, hearing Streight's
familiar send-off echoed by the men of the crew who were nearby:

"Good hunting!"

      *      *      *      *      *

The idea of an underwater craft for the pursuit of killer
whales--tremendously valuable since the discovery of valuable medicinal
qualities in their oil--had been scoffed at by the majority of the
Alaska Whaling Company's officials at the time of its suggestion, but
the _Narwhal_ after her first two months of service had decisively
proved her worth. She was not restricted to the open seas, now swept
almost clean of the highly prized killers; she could follow them to
their last refuge, right beneath the floe-edges of the Arctic Circle;
and as a result she could bring back more oil than any four surface
whalers.

With a cruising radius of twenty-five hundred miles, she stayed out from
the base until her torpoons had accounted for anywhere from sixty to
eighty killers. One by one these sea-animals would be taken to the
surface and there cut up and boiled down, until her tanks were full of
the precious blubber oil. Ever farther she pressed in her quest for the
fish schools, dipping for leagues into a silent sea that for ages had
been known only to the whale and the seal and their kindred; a sea
always dark and mysterious beneath its sheath of ice.

The inner catapult door closed behind Kenneth Torrance, and he slid into
his torpoon. Twelve feet long, and resembling in miniature a dirigible,
was this weapon that made practical an underwater whaling craft. The
tapered stern bore long directional rudders, which curved round the
squat high-speed propeller: its smooth flanks of burnished steel were
marked only by the lines of the entrance port, which the torpooner now
drew tight and locked. Twin eyes of light-beam projectors were set in
the bow, which was cut also by a vision-plate of fused quartz and the
nitro-shell gun's tube, successor to the gun-cast harpoon.

Ken lay full-length in the padded body compartment, his feet resting on
the controlling bars of the directional planes, hands on the torpoon's
engine levers. A harness was buckled all around him, to keep him in
place. His gray eyes, level and sober, peered through the vision-plate
at the outer catapult door.

Suddenly a spot of red light glowed in it; the door quivered, swung out.
A black tide swirled into the chamber. There came the hiss of released
air-pressure, and the slim undersea steed rocketed out into the exterior
gloom, her light-beams flashing on and propeller settling into a blur of
speed as she was flung.

      *      *      *      *      *

Ken turned on her full twenty-four knots, zoomed above the dark bulk of
the slower mother ship, whose light-beams flashed across him for a
second, and then straightened out in a long, slight-angled dive after
