The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wheels Within, by Charles V. De Vet

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Wheels Within

Author: Charles V. De Vet

Illustrator: Don Sibley

Release Date: April 24, 2010 [EBook #32127]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEELS WITHIN ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction May 1952.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            Wheels Within


                          By CHARLES DE VET


     Never ask "Who am I and where do I come from?" The answers
     may not be what you'd expect!

                      Illustrated by DON SIBLEY

       *       *       *       *       *




"When did the headaches first start?" asked the neurologist, Dr. Hall.

"About six months ago," Bennett replied.

"What is your occupation, Mr. Bennett?"

"I am a contractor."

"Are you happy in your work?"

"Very. I prefer it to any other occupation I know of."

"When your headaches become sufficiently severe, you say that you have
hallucinations," Hall said. "Can you describe what you see during
those hallucinations?"

"At first I had only the impression that I was in a place completely
unlike anything I had ever known," Bennett answered. "But each time my
impressions became sharper, and I carried a fairly clear picture when
my mind returned to normal the last time. I felt then that I had been
in a room in a tall building that towered thousands of feet over a
great city. I even remembered that the name of the city was Thone.
There were other people in the room with me--one person especially. I
remembered her very clearly."

"Her?" Hall asked.

"Yes."

"Was there anything unusual about this woman?"

"Well, yes, there was," Bennett said, after a brief and almost
embarrassed pause. "This will sound pretty adolescent, but--"

Hall leaned forward attentively. "It may be relevant. You're not here
to be judged, you know; I'm trying to help you."

Bennett nodded and spoke rapidly, as though trying to finish before he
could stop himself. "She was a woman who exactly fitted an image I've
had in mind for as long as I can remember. She was tall, fair--though
brunette--very beautiful, very vivid, very well poised. I seem to have
known her all my life, but only in my dreams, from my very earliest
ones to the present. She's never changed in all that time."

He halted as suddenly as he had begun to talk, either having nothing
more to say, or unwilling to say it.

"Have you ever married, Mr. Bennett?" Hall prodded gently.

"No, I never have." Again, Bennett stopped, adding nothing more to his
blunt answer.

"May I ask why not?"

Bennett turned his face away. "I was hoping you wouldn't ask that. It
makes me sound like a romantic kid." He looked at the doctor almost in
defiance. "I've always felt that some day I would meet this girl, or
at least someone very much like her. I know it's not a rational
feeling--maybe I've even used it as an excuse not to get married--but
it's like spilling salt and throwing a pinch over our shoulder; we
aren't superstitious, yet we don't take any chances."

Dr. Hall didn't comment. He ended the questioning period and put
Bennett through a series of tests. Then they sat down again and Hall
offered his diagnosis.
