The Project Gutenberg EBook of Prison of a Billion Years, by C.H. Thames

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Prison of a Billion Years

Author: C.H. Thames

Illustrator: H. W. McCauley

Release Date: April 27, 2010 [EBook #32150]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRISON OF A BILLION YEARS ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Imagination April 1956. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


                      Prison Of A Billion Years


                                 _by_

                            _C. H. Thames_


                    Illustrated by H. W. McCauley


     Adam Slade was a man who had nothing to lose by making a
     break for it. The trouble was, he knew that no one had ever
     escaped from  the--

       *       *       *       *       *




Adam Slade crushed the guard's skull with a two foot length of iron
pipe. No one ever knew where Slade got the iron pipe, but it did not
seem so important.

The guard was dead. That was important.

And Slade was on the loose. With a hostage.

That was even more important.

The hostage's name was Marcia Lawrence. She was twenty-two years old
and pretty and scared half out of her wits. She was, before she became
a hostage, a reporter for Interplanetary Video. She had been granted
the final pre-execution interview with Adam Slade and she had looked
forward to it a long time but it had not worked out as planned.

It had not worked out as planned because Slade, only hours from the
execution chamber with absolutely nothing to lose, had splattered the
guard's brains around the inside of his cell and marched outside with
a frightened Marcia Lawrence.

Outside. Outside the cell block while other condemned prisoners roared
and shouted and banged tin cups on bars and metal walls and
judas-hole-grills. Outside the prison compound and across the
dome-enclosed city which served the prison.
