The Project Gutenberg EBook of Assassin, by Jesse Franklin Bone

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Assassin

Author: Jesse Franklin Bone

Illustrator: Ed Emsh

Release Date: May 3, 2010 [EBook #32237]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASSASSIN ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction February
    1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                               ASSASSIN


                            BY J. F. BONE


                       _Illustrated by Ed Emsh_


     _The aliens wooed Earth with gifts, love, patience and
      peace._
     _Who could resist them? After all, no one shoots Santa
      Claus!_

       *       *       *       *       *




     The rifle lay comfortably in his hands, a gleaming precision
     instrument that exuded a faint odor of gun oil and powder
     solvent. It was a perfect specimen of the gunsmith's art, a
     semi-automatic rifle with a telescopic sight--a precisely
     engineered tool that could hurl death with pinpoint accuracy
     for better than half a mile.

Daniel Matson eyed the weapon with bleak gray eyes, the eyes of a
hunter framed in the passionless face of an executioner. His blunt
hands were steady as they lifted the gun and tried a dry shot at an
imaginary target. He nodded to himself. He was ready. Carefully he
laid the rifle down on the mattress which covered the floor of his
firing point, and looked out through the hole in the brickwork to the
narrow canyon of the street below.

The crowd had thickened. It had been gathering since early morning,
and the growing press of spectators had now become solid walls of
people lining the street, packed tightly together on the sidewalks.
Yet despite the fact that there were virtually no police, the crowd
did not overflow into the streets, nor was there any of the pushing
crowding impatience that once attended an assemblage of this sort.
Instead there was a placid tolerance, a spirit of friendly good will,
an ingenuous complaisance that grated on Matson's nerves like the
screeching rasp of a file drawn across the edge of thin metal. He
shivered uncontrollably. It was hard to be a free man in a world of
slaves.

It was a measure of the Aztlan's triumph that only a bare half-dozen
police 'copters patrolled the empty skies above the parade route. The
aliens had done this--had conquered the world without firing a shot or
speaking a word in anger. They had wooed Earth with understanding
patience and superlative guile--and Earth had fallen into their hands
like a lovesick virgin! There never had been any real opposition, and
what there was had been completely ineffective. Most of those who had
opposed the aliens were out of circulation, imprisoned in correctional
institutions, undergoing rehabilitation. Rehabilitation! a six bit
word for dehumanizing. When those poor devils finished their treatment
with Aztlan brain-washing techniques, they would be just like these
sheep below, with the difference that they would never be able to be
anything else. But these other stupid fools crowding the sidewalks,
waiting to hail their destruction--these were the ones who must be
saved. They--not the martyrs of the underground, were the important
part of humanity.

A police 'copter windmilled slowly down the avenue toward his hiding
place, the rotating vanes and insect body of the craft starkly
outlined against the jagged backdrop of the city's skyline. He laughed
soundlessly as the susurrating flutter of the rotor blades beat
overhead and died whispering in the distance down the long canyon of
the street. His position had been chosen with care, and was invisible
from air and ground alike. He had selected it months ago, and had
taken considerable pains to conceal its true purpose. But after today
concealment wouldn't matter. If things went as he hoped, the place
might someday become a shrine. The idea amused him.

Strange, he mused, how events conspire to change a man's career. Seven
years ago he had been a respected and important member of that far
different sort of crowd which had welcomed the visitors from space.
That was a human crowd--half afraid, wholly curious, jostling, noisy,
pushing--a teeming swarm that clustered in a thick disorderly ring
around the silver disc that lay in the center of the International
Airport overlooking Puget Sound. Then--he could have predicted his
career. And none of the predictions would have been true--for none
included a man with a rifle waiting in a blind for the game to
approach within range....

The Aztlan ship had landed early that July morning, dropping silently
through the overcast covering International Airport. It settled gently
to rest precisely in the center of the junction of the three main
runways of the field, effectively tying up the transcontinental and
transoceanic traffic. Fully five hundred feet in diameter, the giant
ship squatted massively on the runway junction, cracking and buckling
the thick concrete runways under its enormous weight.

By noon, after the first skepticism had died, and the unbelievable TV
pictures had been flashed to their waiting audience, the crowd began
to gather. All through that hot July morning they came, increasing by
the minute as farther outlying districts poured their curious into the
Airport. By early afternoon, literally hundreds of millions of eyes
were watching the great ship over a world-wide network of television
stations which cancelled their regular programs to give their viewers
an uninterrupted view of the enigmatic craft.

By mid-morning the sun had burned off the overcast and was shining
with brassy brilliance upon the squads of sweating soldiers from Fort
Lewis, and more sweating squads of blue-clad police from the
metropolitan area of Seattle-Tacoma. The police and soldiery quickly
formed a ring around the ship and cleared a narrow lane around the
