The Project Gutenberg EBook of Confidence Game, by James McKimmey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Confidence Game

Author: James McKimmey

Release Date: May 4, 2010 [EBook #32243]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONFIDENCE GAME ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | Transcriber's note:                                          |
  |                                                              |
  | This story was published in _If: Worlds of Science Fiction_, |
  | September, 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any      |
  | evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was     |
  | renewed.                                                     |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+





[Illustration]

_Illustrated by Ed Emsh_




CONFIDENCE GAME

    _Cutter demanded more and more and more efficiency--and got it! But,
    as in anything, enough is enough, and too much is..._

By JAMES McKIMMEY, JR.




George H. Cutter wheeled his big convertible into his reserved space in
the Company parking lot with a flourish. A bright California sun drove
its early brightness down on him as he strode toward the square,
four-story brick building which said _Cutter Products, Inc._ over its
front door. A two-ton truck was grinding backward, toward the loading
doors, the thick-shouldered driver craning his neck. Cutter moved
briskly forward, a thick-shouldered man himself, though not very tall. A
glint of light appeared in his eyes, as he saw Kurt, the truck driver,
fitting the truck's rear end into the tight opening.

"Get that junk out of the way!" he yelled, and his voice roared over the
noise of the truck's engine.

Kurt snapped his head around, his blue eyes thinning, then recognition
spread humor crinkles around his eyes and mouth. "All right, sir," he
said. "Just a second while I jump out, and I'll lift it out of your
way."

"With bare hands?" Cutter said.

"With bare hands," Kurt said.

Cutter's laugh boomed, and as he rounded the front of the truck, he
struck the right front fender with his fist. Kurt roared back from the
cab with his own laughter.

He liked joking harshly with Kurt and with the rest of the truck
drivers. They were simple, and they didn't have his mental strength. But
they had another kind of strength. They had muscle and energy, and most
important, they had guts. Twenty years before Cutter had driven a truck
himself. The drivers knew that, and there was a bond between them, the
drivers and himself, that seldom existed between employer and employee.

The guard at the door came to a reflex attention, and Cutter bobbed his
head curtly. Then, instead of taking the stairway that led up the front
to the second floor and his office, he strode down the hallway to the
left, angling through the shop on the first floor. He always walked
through the shop. He liked the heavy driving sound of the machines in
his ears, and the muscled look of the men, in their coarse work shirts
and heavy-soled shoes. Here again was strength, in the machines and in
the men.

[Illustration]

And here again too, the bond between Cutter and his employees was a
thing as real as the whir and grind and thump of the machines, as real
as the spray of metal dust, spitting away from a spinning saw blade. He
was able to drive himself through to them, through the hard wall of
unions and prejudices against business suits and white collars and soft
clean hands, because they knew that at one time he had also been a
machinist and then tool and die operator and then a shop foreman. He got
through to them, and they respected him. They were even inspired by him,
Cutter knew, by his energy and alertness and steel confidence. It was
one good reason why their production continually skimmed along near the
top level of efficiency.

Cutter turned abruptly and started up the metal-lipped concrete steps to
the second floor. He went up quickly, his square, almost chunky figure
moving smoothly, and there was not the faintest shortening in his breath
when he reached the level of his own office.

Coming up the back steps required him to cross the entire administration
office which contained the combined personnel of Production Control,
