The Project Gutenberg EBook of Big Stupe, by Charles V. De Vet

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Big Stupe

Author: Charles V. De Vet

Illustrator: KOSSIN

Release Date: May 27, 2010 [EBook #32551]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIG STUPE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                Big Stupe

                           By CHARLES V. DE VET

                           Illustrated by KOSSIN

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
March 1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Smart man, Bruckner--he knew how to handle natives ... but
they knew even better how to deal with smart terrestrials!_]


Bruckner was a man deeply imbued with a sense of his own worth. Now as
he rested his broad beam on the joined arms of Sweets and Majesky, he
winked to include them in a "this is necessary, but you and I see the
humor of the thing" understanding. Like most thoroughly disliked men, he
considered himself quite popular with "the boys."

The conceited ham's enjoying this, Sweets thought, as he staggered down
the aisle under the big man's weight. At the ship's entrance, he glanced
out across the red-sand plain to where the natives waited.

They wore little clothing, Sweets noted, except the chief. He sat on his
dais--carried on the shoulders of eight of his followers--dressed in
long streamers of multi-colored ribbons. Other ribbons, rolled into a
rope, formed a diadem on his head.

The only man more impressively dressed was Bruckner. He wore all the
ceremonial trappings of a second century Gallic king, complete with
jewel-studded gold crown.

As Sweets and Majesky grunted with their burden across the ten yards
separating the ship from the thronelike chair that had been brought out
earlier, their feet kicked up a cloud of red dust that coated their
clothing and clogged their nostrils.

The dust had originally been red ferric sand. But the action of winds
and storms had milled it together, grain against grain, through the
ages, until it had become a fine red powder that hung in the hot still
air after they had passed.

Most of Waterfield's Planet, they had discovered on their inspection
flight the day before, had been a desert for more centuries than they
could accurately estimate. Its oases, however, were large and plentiful
and, as observed from the air, followed a clear-cut, regular pattern.
The obvious conclusion was that they were fed by underground rivers.

       *       *       *       *       *

