The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Envoy, Her, by Horace Brown Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Envoy, Her

Author: Horace Brown Fyfe

Release Date: June 1, 2010 [EBook #32637]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENVOY, HER ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                          Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Planet Stories March 1951. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


    [Illustration: _Vyrtl weighed a pebble in his hand. "You expect to be
                    executed," he stated flatly._]


                           the envoy, _Her_


                            by H. B. Fyfe


     _The Emperor must be getting old, they thought, to deal so
      mercifully with the upstart Jursan Rebels--which was quite
      true. He was not too young to dream...._

       *       *       *       *       *




Despite the concentrated patrol defenses, the Emperor's space yacht
slipped down to the surface of Klo, second moon of Jursa, without
incident. Only recently, such a show of force would have drawn a
flight of torpedo rockets from the rebellious planet; but the Jursan
agitators for a scientific renaissance had at last been beaten to
their knees.

A landing tube was connected between the ship and the transparent dome
that had been constructed on this airless satellite for the
convenience of the lord of the system. Notables in military posts or
present on some other excuse gathered to greet their master.

"By Pollux!" gasped one onlooker. "Those guards must all be seven feet
tall!"

The file of magnificent soldiers, who gave the impression of being
almost entirely armor-plated, deployed on either side of the landing
tube exit. They were followed by a figure glittering enough to be an
emperor; but since he was attended by only four officials in bejeweled
scarlet the crowd recognized him for a chamberlain.

"His Illustrious Sublimity the Lord Vyrtl, Viceroy for Terra, Emperor
of Pollux, and of all its fourteen planets, and of all their
thirty-seven satellites, and of all the nations thereon, Co-ordinator
of the planet Hebryxid--"

It went on at some length, but the man who led the next little parade
out of the landing tube paid no heed. The part about Terra was a
vestige of centuries before communications had lapsed, and served no
purpose but to remind him that new contact with the original planet
was one of the Jursans' aims. The rest of his titles he could, by now,
recite backwards.

The crowd of officialdom gaped at him as he stood there. He was a tall
man, which conveniently helped conceal a tendency toward obesity.
Under the excess tissue, his face had a massive strength, with broad
bones and jutting chin and nose; but the gray eyes were weary and
cynical.

"Wilkins!" he ordered in a bored monotone. "Find which yokel is in
charge, and burn a jet under him!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A resplendent aide hustled forward to where the official in charge of
the dome was wetting his lips over his rehearsed greeting. It was
quickly made plain that His Illustrious Sublimity desired
transportation and a look at the quarters he would have to put up with
until the jackals on Jursa came to their senses.
