The Project Gutenberg EBook of Triplanetary, by Edward Elmer Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Triplanetary

Author: Edward Elmer Smith

Release Date: June 6, 2010 [EBook #32706]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRIPLANETARY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Graeme Mackreth and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







_ONE MAN DISCOVERED THE TRUTH_

   --The Fall of Rome, the Wars that racked the world, mass murder and
   horror....

   Men thought they were historical accidents, "human nature."

   But each one was a move in a Universe-wide battle--and the men who
   suffered and died were the big chessmen.

   Finally, one man discovered the truth--and faced his strange destiny
   in the ultimate struggle for control of the Universe.

_First of the Famous Lensman Series_




NOVELS OF SCIENCE FICTION by "DOC" SMITH


_The Lensman series_

  TRIPLANETARY
  FIRST LENSMAN
  GALACTIC PATROL
  GRAY LENSMAN
  SECOND STAGE LENSMAN
  CHILDREN OF THE LENS
  MASTERS OF THE VORTEX

_The Skylark series_

  THE SKYLARK OF SPACE
  SKYLARK THREE
  SKYLARK OF VALERON
  SKYLARK DU QUESNE




TRIPLANETARY

E.E. "DOC" SMITH

_PYRAMID BOOKS_       _NEW YORK_




TRIPLANETARY

A PYRAMID BOOK
Published by arrangement with the Author

Fantasy Press edition published 1948

Pyramid edition published August 1965
Eighth printing, January 1973

Copyright 1948 by Edward E. Smith, Ph.D.

No part of this book may be reprinted without
written permission of the publishers.

All Rights Reserved.

ISBN 0-515-02890-8

Printed in the United States of America

PYRAMID BOOKS are published by Pyramid Communications, Inc.
Its trademarks consisting of the word "Pyramid" and the portrayal
of a pyramid are registered in the United States Patent Office.

Pyramid Communications, Inc.
919 Third Avenue
New York, New York 10022

CONDITIONS OF SALE

"Any sale, lease, transfer or circulation of this book by way of trade or
in quantities of more than one copy, without the original cover bound
thereon, will be construed by the Publisher as evidence that the parties
to such transaction have illegal possession of the book, and will subject
them to claim by the Publisher and prosecution under law."

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcibers Note
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
this publication was renewed.

       *       *       *       *       *




_TO ROD_




CONTENTS


Chapter                                                Page


BOOK ONE: DAWN

I. Arisia and Eddore                                      11

II. The Fall of Atlantis                                  18

III. The Fall of Rome                                     36


BOOK TWO: THE WORLD WAR

IV.  1918                                                 53

V. 1941                                                   63

VI. 19--?                                                 80


BOOK THREE: TRIPLANETARY

VII. Pirates of Space                                     93

VIII. In Roger's Planetoid                               107

IX. Fleet Against Planetoid                              121

X. Within the Red Veil                                   130

XI. Nevian Strife                                        145

XII. Worm, Submarine, and Freedom                        159

XIII. The Hill                                           165

XIV. The Super-Ship Is Launched                          175

XV. Specimens                                            183

XVI. Super-Ship in Action                                187

XVII. Roger Carries On                                   199

XVIII. The Specimens Escape                              215

XIX. Giants Meet                                         229




BOOK ONE




DAWN




CHAPTER 1

ARISIA AND EDDORE


Two thousand million or so years ago two galaxies were colliding; or,
rather, were passing through each other. A couple of hundreds of
millions of years either way do not matter, since at least that much
time was required for the inter-passage. At about that same time--within
the same plus-or-minus ten percent margin of error, it is
believed--practically all of the suns of both those galaxies became
possessed of planets.

There is much evidence to support the belief that it was not merely a
coincidence that so many planets came into being at about the same time
as the galactic inter-passage. Another school of thought holds that it
was pure coincidence; that all suns have planets as naturally and as
inevitably as cats have kittens.

Be that as it may, Arisian records are clear upon the point that before
the two galaxies began to coalesce, there were never more than three
solar systems present in either; and usually only one. Thus, when the
sun of the planet upon which their race originated grew old and cool,
the Arisians were hard put to it to preserve their culture, since they
had to work against time in solving the engineering problems associated
with moving a planet from an older to a younger sun.

Since nothing material was destroyed when the Eddorians were forced into
the next plane of existence, their historical records also have become
available. Those records--folios and tapes and playable discs of
platinum alloy, resistant indefinitely even to Eddore's noxious
atmosphere--agree with those of the Arisians upon this point.
Immediately before the Coalescence began there was one, and only one,
planetary solar system in the Second Galaxy; and, until the advent of
Eddore, the Second Galaxy was entirely devoid of intelligent life.

Thus for millions upon untold millions of years the two races, each the
sole intelligent life of a galaxy, perhaps of an entire space-time
continuum, remained completely in ignorance of each other. Both were
already ancient at the time of the Coalescence. The only other respect
in which the two were similar, however, was in the possession of minds
of power.

Since Arisia was Earth-like in composition, atmosphere, and climate, the
Arisians were at that time distinctly humanoid. The Eddorians were not.
Eddore was and is large and dense; its liquid a poisonous, sludgy syrup;
its atmosphere a foul and corrosive fog. Eddore was and is unique; so
different from any other world of either galaxy that its very existence
was inexplicable until its own records revealed the fact that it did not
originate in normal space-time at all, but came to our universe from
some alien and horribly different other.

As differed the planets, so differed the peoples. The Arisians went
through the usual stages of savagery and barbarism on the way to
Civilization. The Age of Stone. The Ages of Bronze, of Iron, of Steel,
and of Electricity. Indeed, it is probable that it is because the
Arisians went through these various stages that all subsequent
Civilizations have done so, since the spores which burgeoned into life
upon the cooling surfaces of all the planets of the commingling galaxies
were Arisian, not Eddorian, in origin. Eddorian spores, while
undoubtedly present, must have been so alien that they could not develop
in any one of the environments, widely variant although they are,
existing naturally or coming naturally into being in normal space and
time.

The Arisians--especially after atomic energy freed them from physical
labor--devoted themselves more and ever more intensively to the
exploration of the limitless possibilities of the mind.

Even before the Coalescence, then, the Arisians had need neither of
space-ships nor of telescopes. By power of mind alone they watched the
lenticular aggregation of stars which was much later to be known to
Tellurian astronomers as Lundmark's Nebula approach their own galaxy.
They observed attentively and minutely and with high elation the
occurrence of mathematical impossibility; for the chance of two galaxies
ever meeting in direct, central, equatorial-plane impact and of passing
completely through each other is an infinitesimal of such a high order
as to be, even mathematically, practically indistinguishable from zero.

They observed the birth of numberless planets, recording minutely in
their perfect memories every detail of everything that happened; in the
hope that, as ages passed, either they or their descendants would be
able to develop a symbology and a methodology capable of explaining the
then inexplicable phenomenon. Carefree, busy, absorbedly intent, the
Arisian mentalities roamed throughout space--until one of them struck an
Eddorian mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

While any Eddorian could, if it chose, assume the form of a man, they
were in no sense man-like. Nor, since the term implies a softness and a
lack of organization, can they be described as being amoeboid. They were
both versatile and variant. Each Eddorian changed, not only its shape,
but also its texture, in accordance with the requirements of the moment.
Each produced--extruded--members whenever and wherever it needed them;
members uniquely appropriate to the task then in work. If hardness was
indicated, the members were hard; if softness, they were soft. Small or
large, rigid or flexible; joined or tentacular--all one. Filaments or
cables; fingers or feet; needles or mauls--equally simple. One thought
and the body fitted the job.

They were asexual: sexless to a degree unapproached by any form of
Tellurian life higher than the yeasts. They were not merely
hermaphroditic, nor androgynous, nor parthenogenetic. They were
completely without sex. They were also, to all intents and purposes and
except for death by violence, immortal. For each Eddorian, as its mind
approached the stagnation of saturation after a lifetime of millions of
years, simply divided into two new-old beings. New in capacity and in
zest; old in ability and in power, since each of the two "children"
possessed in toto the knowledges and the memories of their one "parent."

And if it is difficult to describe in words the physical aspects of the
Eddorians, it is virtually impossible to write or to draw, in any
symbology of Civilization, a true picture of an Eddorian's--_any_
Eddorian's--mind. They were intolerant, domineering, rapacious,
insatiable, cold, callous, and brutal. They were keen, capable,
persevering, analytical, and efficient. They had no trace of any of the
softer emotions or sensibilities possessed by races adherent to
Civilization. No Eddorian ever had anything even remotely resembling a
sense of humor.

While not essentially bloodthirsty--that is, not loving bloodshed for
its own sweet sake--they were no more averse to blood-letting than they
were in favor of it. Any amount of killing which would or which might
advance an Eddorian toward his goal was commendable; useless slaughter
was frowned upon, not because it was slaughter, but because it was
useless--and hence inefficient.

And, instead of the multiplicity of goals sought by the various entities
of any race of Civilization, each and every Eddorian had only one. The
same one: power. _Power!_ P-O-W-E-R!!

Since Eddore was peopled originally by various races, perhaps as similar
to each other as are the various human races of Earth, it is
understandable that the early history of the planet--while it was still
in its own space, that is--was one of continuous and ages-long war. And,
since war always was and probably always will be linked solidly to
technological advancement, the race now known simply as "The Eddorians"
became technologists supreme. All other races disappeared. So did all
other forms of life, however lowly, which interfered in any way with the
Masters of the Planet.

Then, all racial opposition liquidated and overmastering lust as
unquenched as ever, the surviving Eddorians fought among themselves:
"push-button" wars employing engines of destruction against which the
only possible defense was a fantastic thickness of planetary bedrock.

Finally, unable either to kill or to enslave each other, the
comparatively few survivors made a peace of sorts. Since their own space
was practically barren of planetary systems, they would move their
planet from space to space until they found one which so teemed with
planets that each living Eddorian could become the sole Master of an
ever increasing number of worlds. This was a program very much
worthwhile, promising as it did an outlet for even the recognizedly
insatiable Eddorian craving for power. Therefore the Eddorians, for the
first time in their prodigiously long history of fanatical
non-cooperation, decided to pool their resources of mind and of material
and to work as a group.

Union of a sort was accomplished eventually; neither peaceably nor
without highly lethal friction. They knew that a democracy, by its very
