The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mate in Two Moves, by Winston Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Mate in Two Moves

Author: Winston Marks

Illustrator: Ashman

Release Date: June 8, 2010 [EBook #32748]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MATE IN TWO MOVES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          MATE IN TWO MOVES

                           By WINSTON MARKS

                        Illustrated by ASHMAN

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
May 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Illustration]


[Sidenote: _Murt's Virus was catastrophically lethal, but it killed in a
way no disease had ever thought of--it loved its victims to death!_]


Love came somewhat late to Dr. Sylvester Murt. In fact, it took the
epidemic of 1961 to break down his resistance. A great many people fell
in love that year--just about every other person you talked to--so no
one thought much about Dr. Murt's particular distress, except a fellow
victim who was directly involved in this case.

High Dawn Hospital, where 38-year-old Dr. Murt was resident pathologist,
was not the first medical institution to take note of the "plague." The
symptoms first came to the attention of the general practitioners, then
to the little clinics where the G. P.s sent their patients. But long
before anything medical was done about it, the plague was sweeping North
and South America and infiltrating every continent and island in the
world.

Murt's assistant, Dr. Phyllis Sutton, spotted the first irregularity in
the _Times_ one morning and mentioned it to him. They were having coffee
in Murt's private office-lab, after completing reports on two rush
biopsies.

She looked up from the editorial page and remarked, "You know, someone
should do a research on the pathology of pantie raids."

       *       *       *       *       *

Murt spooned sugar into his mug of coffee and stared at her. In their
six months' association, it was the first facetious remark she had made
in his presence. To this moment, he had held an increasing regard for
her quiet efficiency, sobriety, professional dignity and decorum. True,
she wore her white coat more tightly belted than was necessary and,
likewise, she refused to wear the very low hospital heels that thickened
feminine ankles. But she wore a minimum of come-hither in both her
cosmetic and personality makeup. This startling remark, then, was most
unexpected.

"Pantie raids?" he inquired. "Whatever would justify an inquiry into
such a patently behavioristic problem?"

"The epidemic nature and its increasing virulence," she replied soberly.
"This spring, the thing has gotten out of hand, according to this
editorial. A harmless tradition at a few of the more uninhibited
campuses has turned into a national collegiate phenomenon. And now
secondary effects are turning up. Instructors say that intramural
romance is turning the halls of ivy into amatory rendezvous."

Murt sipped his coffee and said, "Be thankful you aren't a psychiatrist.
Bacterial mutations are enough of a problem, without pondering
unpredictable emotional disturbances."

His assistant pursued it further. "It says the classrooms are emptying
into the marriage bureaus, and graduation exercises this year will be a
mockery if something isn't done. What's more, statistics show a
startling increase in marriages at the high school level."

Murt shrugged broad shoulders that were slightly bent from long hours
over a microscope. "Then be thankful you aren't an overworked
obstetrician," he offered as an amendment.

She glanced up from the paper, with annoyance showing in her dark,
well-spaced eyes. "Is it of no interest to you that several hundred
thousand youngsters are leaving high school and college prematurely
because they can't control their glands?"

"Be glad, then," Murt said coldly, "that you aren't an
endocrinologist--now drink your coffee. I hear the microtome working.
We'll have some business in a minute."

Dr. Phyllis Sutton rustled the pages of the _Times_ together, folded it
up and threw it at the wastebasket with more vigor than was necessary.
The subject was momentarily closed.

       *       *       *       *       *

His staff position at High Dawn paid less, but the life suited Dr. Murt
better than the hectic, though lucrative, private practices of many of
his colleagues. He arrived at the hospital early, seven o'clock each
day, to be on hand for quick tissue examinations during the morning
operations. By ten, the biopsies were usually out of the way, and he
spent the rest of the morning and early afternoon checking material from
the bacteriology section and studying post-operative dissections of
tumorous tissues and organs removed in surgery.

It was engrossing, important work, and it could be accomplished in a
normal work-day, leaving the pathologist considerable leisure to study,
read and relax. Shortly after the pantie-raid conversation with Phyllis
Sutton, he found the evening paper attracting more than his usual quick
perusal.

This emotional fuss in the young human animal was beginning to preoccupy
the newspaper world. Writers were raising their eyebrows and a new crop
of metaphors at the statistics, which they described variously as
alarming, encouraging, disheartening, provocative, distressing, romantic
or revolting, depending upon the mood and point of view.

As June, the traditional mating month, wore into July, national
statistics were assembled to reveal that marriages were occurring at
almost double the highest previous rate, that the trend was accelerating
rather than diminishing.

Jewelers and wholesale diamond merchants chalked up fabulous increases
in the sale of engagement and wedding settings. Clergymen and qualified
public officials were swamped with requests for religious and civil
marriage ceremonies.

Parks, beaches and drive-in theaters were jammed with mooning and/or
honeymooning couples, and amusement parks began expanding their
over-patronized tunnel-of-love facilities.

The boom in houses, furniture, appliances and TV was on, and last year's
glut of consumer goods for the home was rapidly turning into a shortage.

