The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Woman's Place, by Mark Irvin Clifton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Woman's Place

Author: Mark Irvin Clifton

Illustrator: EMSH

Release Date: June 16, 2010 [EBook #32833]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WOMAN'S PLACE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          A Woman's Place

                          By MARK CLIFTON

                        Illustrated by EMSH

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
May 1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: Home is where you hang up your spaceship--that is, if you
have any Miss Kitty along!]


It was the speaking of Miss Kitty's name which half roused her from
sleep. She eased her angular body into a more comfortable position in
the sack. Still more asleep than awake, her mind reflected tartly that
in this lifeboat, hurtling away from their wrecked spaceship back to
Earth, the sleeping accommodation was quite appropriately named. On
another mental level, she tried to hear more of what was being said
about her. Naturally, hearing one's name spoken, one would.

"We're going to have to tell Miss Kitty as soon as she wakes up." It was
Sam Eade talking to Lt. Harper--the two men who had escaped with her.

"Yes, Sam," the lieutenant answered. "What we've suspected all along is
pretty definite now."

Still drowsing, she wondered, without any real interest, what they felt
they must tell her. But the other level of her mind was more real. She
wondered how she looked to these two young men while she slept. Did she
sleep with her mouth open? Did her tiara slip while she snored?

       *       *       *       *       *

Vividly, as in full dreaming, she slipped back into the remembered scene
which had given birth to the phrase. At some social gathering she had
been about to enter a room. She'd overheard her name spoken then, too.

"Miss Kitty is probably a cute enough name when you're young," the catty
woman was saying. "But at her age!"

"Well, I suppose you might say she's kept it for professional reasons,"
the other woman had answered with a false tolerance. "A school teacher,
wanting to be cozy with her kiddies, just a big sister." The tolerance
was too thin, it broke away. "Kind of pathetic, I think. She's so plain,
so very typical of an old maid school teacher. She's just the kind to
keep a name like Miss Kitty."

"What gets me," the first one scoffed, "is her pride in having such a
brilliant mind--if she really does have one. All those academic degrees.
She wears them on every occasion, like a tiara!"

She had drawn back from the door. But in her instant and habitual
introspection, she realized she was less offended than perversely
pleased because, obviously, they were jealous of her intellectual
accomplishments, her ability to meet men on their own ground,
intellectually as good a man as any man.

The half dream drowsiness was sharply washed away by the belated impact
of Sam Eade's question to Lt. Harper. Reality flashed on, and she was
suddenly wide awake in the lifeboat heading back to Earth.

[Illustration]

"What is it you must tell me?" She spoke loudly and crisply to the men's
broad backs where they sat in front of the instrument panel. The
implication of the question, itself, that they had been holding
something back....

Lt. Harper turned slowly around in his seat and looked at her with that
detested expression of amused tolerance which his kind of adult male
affected toward females. He was the dark, ruggedly handsome type, the
kind who took it for granted that women should fawn over him. The kind
who would speak the fatuous cliche that a woman's place was in the home,
not gallivanting off to teach colonists' children on the fourth planet
of Procyon. Still, perhaps she was unjust, she hardly knew the man.

"Oh, you awake, Miss Kitty?" he asked easily. His tone, as always, was
diffident, respectful toward her. Odd, she resented that respect from
him, when she would have resented lack of it even more.

"Certainly," she snapped. "What is it you must tell me?"

"When you're dressed, freshened up a bit," he answered, not evasively,
but as if it could wait.

       *       *       *       *       *

She started to insist, but he had already turned back to the nose window
to study the starry sky and the huge misty green ball of Earth in front
of them. Sam Eade, the radioman, was intently twisting the dials on his
set with a puckered frown between his blond eyebrows. He was an entirely
different type, tall, blond, but just as fatuously masculine, as
arrogantly handsome. Probably neither one of them had an ounce of
brains--handsome people so seldom needed to develop mental ability.

Sam, too, turned his face farther away from her. Both backs told her
plainly that she could dress, take care of her needs, with as much
privacy as the lifeboat could allow anybody.

Not that it would take her long. She'd worn coveralls since the
catastrophe, saving the dress she'd had on for landing on Earth. They'd
had to leave most of her luggage behind. The lieutenant had insisted on
taking up most of the spare space in the lifeboat with that dismantled
space warper from the wreck of their ship.

She combed her short graying hair back of her ears, and used a little
water sparingly to brush her teeth. Perhaps it had been a quixotic
thing, her giving up a secure teaching post on Earth to go out to
Procyon IV. Except that she'd dreamed about a new colony where the
rising generation, under her influence, would value intellect--with the
girls no different from the boys. Perhaps it had been even sillier to
take a cabin on a freighter, the only passenger with a crew of four men.
But men did not intimidate her, and on a regular passenger ship she'd
have been bored stiff by having to associate with the women.
