The Project Gutenberg EBook of Piper in the Woods, by Philip K. Dick

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Piper in the Woods

Author: Philip K. Dick

Release Date: June 16, 2010 [EBook #32832]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIPER IN THE WOODS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


                PIPER IN THE WOODS

                       _By
                 Philip K. Dick_


        Earth maintained an important garrison on
 Asteroid Y-3. Now suddenly it was imperiled with
 a biological impossibility--men becoming plants!


"Well, Corporal Westerburg," Doctor Henry Harris said gently, "just why
do you think you're a plant?"

As he spoke, Harris glanced down again at the card on his desk. It was
from the Base Commander himself, made out in Cox's heavy scrawl: _Doc,
this is the lad I told you about. Talk to him and try to find out how he
got this delusion. He's from the new Garrison, the new check-station on
Asteroid Y-3, and we don't want anything to go wrong there. Especially a
silly damn thing like this!_

Harris pushed the card aside and stared back up at the youth across the
desk from him. The young man seemed ill at ease and appeared to be
avoiding answering the question Harris had put to him. Harris frowned.
Westerburg was a good-looking chap, actually handsome in his Patrol
uniform, a shock of blond hair over one eye. He was tall, almost six
feet, a fine healthy lad, just two years out of Training, according to
the card. Born in Detroit. Had measles when he was nine. Interested in
jet engines, tennis, and girls. Twenty-six years old.

"Well, Corporal Westerburg," Doctor Harris said again. "Why do you think
you're a plant?"

The Corporal looked up shyly. He cleared his throat. "Sir, I _am_ a
plant, I don't just think so. I've been a plant for several days, now."

"I see." The Doctor nodded. "You mean that you weren't always a plant?"

"No, sir. I just became a plant recently."

"And what were you before you became a plant?"

"Well, sir, I was just like the rest of you."

There was silence. Doctor Harris took up his pen and scratched a few
lines, but nothing of importance came. A plant? And such a
healthy-looking lad! Harris removed his steel-rimmed glasses and
polished them with his handkerchief. He put them on again and leaned
back in his chair. "Care for a cigarette, Corporal?"

"No, sir."

The Doctor lit one himself, resting his arm on the edge of the chair.
"Corporal, you must realize that there are very few men who become
plants, especially on such short notice. I have to admit you are the
first person who has ever told me such a thing."

"Yes, sir, I realize it's quite rare."

"You can understand why I'm interested, then. When you say you're a
plant, you mean you're not capable of mobility? Or do you mean you're a
vegetable, as opposed to an animal? Or just what?"

The Corporal looked away. "I can't tell you any more," he murmured. "I'm
sorry, sir."

"Well, would you mind telling me _how_ you became a plant?"

Corporal Westerburg hesitated. He stared down at the floor, then out the
window at the spaceport, then at a fly on the desk. At last he stood up,
getting slowly to his feet. "I can't even tell you that, sir," he said.

"You can't? Why not?"

"Because--because I promised not to."

       *       *       *       *       *

The room was silent. Doctor Harris rose, too, and they both stood facing
each other. Harris frowned, rubbing his jaw. "Corporal, just _who_ did
you promise?"

"I can't even tell you that, sir. I'm sorry."

The Doctor considered this. At last he went to the door and opened it.
"All right, Corporal. You may go now. And thanks for your time."

"I'm sorry I'm not more helpful." The Corporal went slowly out and
Harris closed the door after him. Then he went across his office to the
vidphone. He rang Commander Cox's letter. A moment later the beefy
good-natured face of the Base Commander appeared.

"Cox, this is Harris. I talked to him, all right. All I could get is the
statement that he's a plant. What else is there? What kind of behavior
pattern?"

"Well," Cox said, "the first thing they noticed was that he wouldn't do
any work. The Garrison Chief reported that this Westerburg would wander
off outside the Garrison and just sit, all day long. Just sit."

"In the sun?"

"Yes. Just sit in the sun. Then at nightfall he would come back in. When
they asked why he wasn't working in the jet repair building he told them
he had to be out in the sun. Then he said--" Cox hesitated.

"Yes? Said what?"
