The Project Gutenberg EBook of World Beyond Pluto, by C. H. Thames

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: World Beyond Pluto

Author: C. H. Thames

Illustrator: NOVICK

Release Date: June 15, 2010 [EBook #32820]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORLD BEYOND PLUTO ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             WORLD BEYOND PLUTO

                         A "Johnny Mayhem" Adventure

                              By C. H. THAMES

                             ILLUSTRATOR NOVICK

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Amazing Stories November
1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: Johnny Mayhem, one of the most popular series characters
ever to appear in AMAZING, has been absent too long. So here's good
news for Mayhem fans; another great adventure of the Man of Many
Bodies.]


They loaded the over-age spaceship at night because Triton's one
spaceport was too busy with the oreships from Neptune during the day to
handle it.

"Symphonies!" Pitchblend Hardesty groaned. Pitchblend Hardesty was the
stevedore foreman and he had supervised upwards of a thousand loadings
on Triton's crowded blastways, everything from the standard mining
equipment to the innards of a new tavern for Triton City's so-called
Street of Sin to special anti-riot weapons for the Interstellar
Penitentiary not 54 miles from Triton City, but never a symphony
orchestra. And most assuredly never, never an all-girl symphony
orchestra.

"Symphonies!" Pitchblend Hardesty groaned again as several stevedores
came out on the blastway lugging a harp, a base fiddle and a kettle
drum.

"Come off it, Pitchblend," one of the stevedores said with a grin. "I
didn't see you staying away from the music hall."

That was true enough, Pitchblend Hardesty had to admit. He was a small,
wiry man with amazing strength in his slim body and the lore of a solar
system which had been bypassed by thirtieth century civilization for the
lures of interstellar exploration in his brain. While the symphony--the
all-girl symphony--had been playing its engagement at Triton's
make-shift music hall, Hardesty had visited the place three times.

"Well, it wasn't the music, sure as heck," he told his critic now. "Who
ever saw a hundred girls in one place at one time on Triton?"

The stevedore rolled his eyes and offered Pitchblend a suggestive
whistle. Hardesty booted him in the rump, and the stevedore had all he
could do to stop from falling into the kettle drum.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just then a loud bell set up a lonely tolling and Pitchblend Hardesty
exclaimed: "Prison break!"

The bell could be heard all over the two-hundred square miles of
inhabitable Triton, under the glassite dome which enclosed the small
city, the spaceport, the immigration station for nearby Neptune and the
Interstellar Penitentiary. The bell hadn't tolled for ten years; the
last time it had tolled, Pitchblend Hardesty had been a newcomer on
Neptune's big moon. That wasn't surprising, for Interstellar
Penitentiary was as close to escape-proof as a prison could be.

"All right, all right," Pitchblend snapped. "Hurry up and get her
loaded."

"What's the rush?" one of the stevedores asked. "The gals ain't even
arrived from the hotel yet."

"I'll tell you what the rush is," Pitchblend declared as the bell tolled
again. "If you were an escaped prisoner on Triton, just where would you
head?"

"Why, I don't know for sure, Pitchblend."

"Then I'll tell you where. You'd head for the spaceport, fast as your
legs could carry you. You'd head for an out-going spaceship, because it
would be your only hope. And how many out-going spaceships are there
tonight?"

"Why, just two or three."

"Because all our business is in the daytime. So if the convict was smart
enough to get out, he'll be smart enough to come here."

"We got no weapons," the stevedore said. "We ain't even got a
pea-shooter."

"Weapons on Triton? You kidding? A frontier moon like this, the place
would be blasted apart every night. Interstelpen couldn't hold all the
disturbers of the peace if we had us some guns."

"But the convict--"

"Yeah," Pitchblend said grimly. "He'll be armed, all right."

Pitchblend rushed back to the manifest shed as the bell tolled a third
time. He got on the phone and called the desk of the Hotel Triton.

"Hardesty over at the spaceport," he said. "Loading foreman."

"Loading foreman?" The mild, antiseptic voice at the other end of the
connection said it as you would say talking dinosaur.

"Yeah, loading foreman. At night I'm in charge here. Listen, you the
manager?"

