The Project Gutenberg EBook of Old Friends Are the Best, by Jack Sharkey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Old Friends Are the Best

Author: Jack Sharkey

Release Date: October 18, 2010 [EBook #33871]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD FRIENDS ARE THE BEST ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       OLD FRIENDS ARE THE BEST

                           By JACK SHARKEY


[Transcriber note: This etext was produced from Amazing Stories March
1960. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: Are you one of those people who save the best things for the
last ... who eat all the chocolate sundae away from under the maraschino
cherry? If so, you are very like the Peter W. Merrill Moonplant.]


It had no awareness of time, and so did not know nor concern itself with
the millennia that passed since it first drew up the dissolved silicates
from the shifting grey remnants of soil and arranged them inside the
walls of the thousand green pods that were its body cells, and settled
down to wait. Somewhere within its fragile cortex, a tiny pulse of life
beat. It was a feeble pulse, to be sure, and one that a man, unless he
could observe it for a thousand years without blinking, would not be
aware of. As the normal human heart beats seventy-two times a minute, so
did this tiny swelling of tube contract once each hundred years; fifty
tireless years of contraction, then fifty soothing years of relaxation,
bringing the walls of the slender tube together, then letting them ease
apart.

But it was sufficient for its life.

The pallid yellow sap was moved about inside the plant, once each
hundred years, and the plasm of the silicon-protected cellular structure
absorbed just the needed amount, bleeding off the waste products between
the very molecules of the silicon buttresses, and patiently waiting the
century out till the second helping came oozing around.

And so it lay dormant, through heat that could send a man into
convulsions of agony in seconds, through cold that fractional degree
lower than can be achieved in a scientific laboratory. It did not know
where it was, nor what it was, nor how precarious--by cosmic
standards--was its chance of survival, with sap enough stored in the
stiff, coarse roots for only a few more million years.

