The Project Gutenberg EBook of Riya's Foundling, by Algirdas Jonas Budrys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Riya's Foundling

Author: Algirdas Jonas Budrys

Release Date: November 23, 2010 [EBook #34420]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIYA'S FOUNDLING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Riya's Foundling

By ALGIS BUDRYS

[Transcriber note: This etext was produced Science Fiction Stories 1953.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Now, if the animal we know as a cow were to evolve into a
creature with near-human intelligence, so that she thought of herself as
a "person" ..._]


[Illustration]


The loft of the feed-house, with its stacked grainsacks, was a B-72, a
fort, a foxhole--any number of things, depending on Phildee's moods.

Today it was a jumping-off place.

Phildee slipped out of his dormitory and ran across the yard to the
feed-house. He dropped the big wooden latch behind him, and climbed up
the ladder to the loft, depending on the slight strength of his young
arms more than on his legs, which had to be lifted to straining heights
before they could negotiate the man-sized rungs.

He reached the loft and stood panting, looking out over the farm through
the loft door, at the light wooden fences around it, and the circling
antenna of the radar tower.

Usually, he spent at least a little time each day crouched behind the
grainsacks and being bigger and older, firing cooly and accurately into
charging companies of burly, thick-lipped UES soldiers, or going over on
one wing and whistling down on a flight of TT-34's that scattered like
frightened ducks before the fiery sleet of his wing rockets.

But today was different, today there was something he wanted to try.

He stood up on his toes and searched. He felt the touch of Miss Cowan's
mind, no different from that of anyone else--flat, unsystematic.

He sighed. Perhaps, somewhere, there was someone else like himself. For
a moment, the fright of loneliness invaded him, but then faded. He took
a last look at the farm, then moved away from the open door, letting his
mind slip into another way of thinking.

