The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sentiment, Inc., by Poul William Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sentiment, Inc.

Author: Poul William Anderson

Release Date: October 7, 2011 [EBook #37653]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SENTIMENT, INC. ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Dianna Adair and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  [Illustration: Cover]


  [Illustration: Dr. Kennedy's examination room]


  [Illustration: the machine]




     _The way we feel about another person, or about objects, is often
     bound up in associations that have no direct connection with the
     person or object at all. Often, what we call a "change of heart"
     comes about sheerly from a change in the many associations which
     make up our present viewpoint. Now, suppose that these associations
     could be altered artificially, at the option of the person who was
     in charge of the process...._




  _Sentiment, Inc._

  _by_ POUL ANDERSON


She was twenty-two years old, fresh out of college, full of life and
hope, and all set to conquer the world. Colin Fraser happened to be on
vacation on Cape Cod, where she was playing summer stock, and went to
more shows than he had planned. It wasn't hard to get an introduction,
and before long he and Judy Sanders were seeing a lot of each other.

"Of course," she told him one afternoon on the beach, "my real name is
Harkness."

He raised his arm, letting the sand run through his fingers. The beach
was big and dazzling white around them, the sea galloped in with a
steady roar, and a gull rode the breeze overhead. "What was wrong with
it?" he asked. "For a professional monicker, I mean."

She laughed and shook the long hair back over her shoulders. "I wanted
to live under the name of Sanders," she explained.

"Oh--oh, yes, of course. Winnie the Pooh." He grinned. "Soulmates,
that's what we are." It was about then that he decided he'd been a
bachelor long enough.

In the fall she went to New York to begin the upward grind--understudy,
walk-on parts, shoestring-theaters, and roles in outright turkeys.
Fraser returned to Boston for awhile, but his work suffered, he had to
keep dashing off to see her.

By spring she was beginning to get places; she had talent and everybody
enjoys looking at a brown-eyed blonde. His weekly proposals were also
beginning to show some real progress, and he thought that a month or two
of steady siege might finish the campaign. So he took leave from his job
and went down to New York himself. He'd saved up enough money, and was
good enough in his work, to afford it; anyway, he was his own
boss--consulting engineer, specializing in mathematical analysis.

He got a furnished room in Brooklyn, and filled in his leisure time--as
he thought of it--with some special math courses at Columbia. And he had
a lot of friends in town, in a curious variety of professions. Next to
Judy, he saw most of the physicist Sworsky, who was an entertaining
companion though most of his work was too top-secret even to be
mentioned. It was a happy period.

There is always a jarring note, to be sure. In this case, it was the
fact that Fraser had plenty of competition. He wasn't good-looking
himself--a tall gaunt man of twenty-eight, with a dark hatchet face and
perpetually-rumpled clothes. But still, Judy saw more of him than of
anyone else, and admitted she was seriously considering his proposal and
no other.

He called her up once for a date. "Sorry," she answered. "I'd love to,
Colin, but I've already promised tonight. Just so you won't worry, it's
Matthew Snyder."

"Hm--the industrialist?"

"Uh-huh. He asked me in such a way it was hard to refuse. But I don't
think you have to be jealous, honey. 'Bye now."

Fraser lit his pipe with a certain smugness. Snyder was several times a
millionaire, but he was close to sixty, a widower of notably dull
conversation. Judy wasn't--Well, no worries, as she'd said. He dropped
over to Sworsky's apartment for an evening of chess and bull-shooting.

             *       *       *       *       *

It was early in May, when the world was turning green again, that Judy
called Fraser up. "Hi," she said breathlessly. "Busy tonight?"

"Well, I was hoping I'd be, if you get what I mean," he said.

"Look, I want to take you out for a change. Just got some unexpected
money and dammit, I want to feel rich for one evening."

"Hmmm--" He scowled into the phone. "I dunno--"

"Oh, get off it, Galahad. I'll meet you in the Dixie lobby at seven.
Okay?" She blew him a kiss over the wires, and hung up before he could
argue further. He sighed and shrugged. Why not, if she wanted to?

They were in a little Hungarian restaurant, with a couple of Tzigani
strolling about playing for them alone, it seemed, when he asked for
details. "Did you get a bonus, or what?"

"No." She laughed at him over her drink. "I've turned guinea pig."

"I hope you quit _that_ job before we're married!"

"It's a funny deal," she said thoughtfully. "It'd interest you. I've
been out a couple of times with this Snyder, you know, and if anything
was needed to drive me into your arms, Colin, it's his political
lectures."

"Well, bless the Republican Party!" He laid his hand over hers, she
didn't withdraw it, but she frowned just a little.

"Colin, you know I want to get somewhere before I marry--see a bit of
the world, the theatrical world, before turning hausfrau. Don't be
so--Oh, never mind. I like you anyway."

Sipping her drink and setting it down again: "Well, to carry on with the
story. I finally gave Comrade Snyder the complete brush-off, and I must
say he took it very nicely. But today, this morning, he called asking me
to have lunch with him, and I did after he explained. It seems he's got
a psychiatrist friend doing research, measuring brain storms or
something, and--Do I mean storms? Waves, I guess. Anyway, he wants to
measure as many different kinds of people as possible, and Snyder had
suggested me. I was supposed to come in for three afternoons
running--about two hours each time--and I'd get a hundred dollars per
session."

"Hm," said Fraser. "I didn't know psych research was that well-heeled.
Who is this mad scientist?"

