The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American, Vol. XLIII.--No. 1.
[New Series.], July 3, 1880, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American, Vol. XLIII.--No. 1. [New Series.], July 3, 1880
       A Weekly Journal Of Practical Information, Art, Science,
       Mechanics, Chemistry, And Manufactures

Author: Various

Release Date: January 3, 2012 [EBook #38482]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Lesley Halamek, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration]


SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN


A WEEKLY JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL INFORMATION, ART, SCIENCE, MECHANICS,
CHEMISTRY, AND MANUFACTURES.


NEW YORK, JULY 3, 1880.

Vol. XLIII.--No. 1. [NEW SERIES.]

[$3.20 per Annum [POSTAGE PREPAID.]]

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

(Illustrated articles are marked with an asterisk.)

   1     Agricultural inventions              1
  40     Aspirator and compressor*           11
  38     Astronomical notes                  11
  25     Baby elephant takes a bath           7
  22     Bath, shower, portable, new*         6
  11     Boiler explosions, prevention of*    4
  38     Canal boat, improved                10
  17     Carpetings, etc., printing gold on   5
  30     Chloral hydrate, simple test for     7
  13     Chloroforming during sleep           5
  35     Corn magnets                        10
  14     Dipper, watering, improved*          5
  29     Drowned, perseverance with the       7
  15     Electric lamp, improved*             5
  25     Elephant, baby, takes a bath         7
  37     Engineering inventions              10
   6     Epidemic, strange, a                 2
  33     Exhibition, internation., Sydney*    8
  11     Explosions, boiler, prevention of*   4
  39     Fires in New York                   11
   8     Fogs, navigation in*                 3
  16     Fruit, preserving app. for*          5
   3     Gas machine, Maxim's*                1
   3     Gas making, simple process*          1
  20     Genessee Falls, utilization of       5
  34     Horology, report of judges*          8
  33     International exhibition, Sydney*    8
   1     Inventions, agricultural             1
  37     Inventions, engineering             10
  24     Inventions, mechanical               7
  12     Inventions, miscellaneous            4
  42     Inventions, new                     11
   9     Iron, effect of age on quality       3
  15     Lamp, electric, improved*            5
  23     Leadville mines and railroads*       6
  35     Magnets, corn                       10
  36     Materials, resistance of, exp. on   10
   3     Maxim's gas machine*                 1
  24     Mechanical inventions                7
  31     Natural history notes                7
   8     Navigation in fogs*                  3
   7     Oil tanks, cannonading of            3
  18     Ore separator, Edison                5
  41     Photoglyptic process, new           11
  26     Phyllirhoe Bucephala*                7
  32     Ruggles, S. P                        7
  22     Shower bath, portable, new*          6
  19     Slate washer, novel*                 5
   2     Specimen, rare, lost                 1
   5     Steamer, little, remarkable          2
  10     Steamers, large, collision between   3
  21     Stevens Institute of Technology      5
  33     Sydney Industrial Exhibition*        8
  28     Tree growth, force of*               7
  27     Trees and shrubs, care of            7
  19     Washer, slate, novel*                5
   4     Watches, Am., superiority of         2
  14     Watering dipper, improved*           5

       *       *       *       *       *




AGRICULTURAL INVENTIONS.

Mr. Sterling A. Millard, of Clayville, N. Y., has invented a scythe
blade that contains much less weight of metal and possesses equal or
greater strength than the ordinary scythe blades. It is made in the
usual manner from what is termed by scythe makers a "scythe rod," and
is wrought and shaped in such form that a proper thickness is left
to serve as the back of the blade. A longitudinal auxiliary rib or
supplementary back is formed on the blade, which stiffens the scythe
without requiring the same weight of metal as those of the usual
construction.

Mr. George C. Winslow, of Kalamazoo, Mich., has patented an
improvement in spring harrow teeth, which consists generally in
hinging the harrow tooth in the forward end of a rectangular frame
bolted to the harrow bar, and combining therewith a spring, which
at its back end is clamped to the harrow bar by the same bolts which
secure the rectangular frame, and which spring then curves upward and
forward, and then down through the slot or opening of the rectangular
frame, and is jointed at its extremity, near the bottom of the harrow
tooth, so that its tension serves to throw the harrow tooth forward,
but allows it to yield to obstruction.

       *       *       *       *       *




A RARE SPECIMEN LOST.

Captain Ingalls, of the schooner Chalcedony, has let slip an
opportunity to make a small fortune and at the same time settle the
long vexed question as to the reality of the elusive and possibly
mythical sea serpent. His story, as told in the _Argus_, of Portland,
Maine, June 8, runs as follows:

"Last Saturday, about one o'clock in the afternoon, we were slowly
sailing past Monhegan, there being very little wind, about twenty
miles southwest of the island, when we caught sight of what looked
like a large schooner floating bottom up. As the object lay almost
dead ahead, we made directly for it, but before we got very close a
Cape Ann schooner lay to and sent a boat's crew to inspect what now
plainly appeared to be a monstrous carcass of some species or other.
We finally hove to, about a ship's length off, and took a leisurely
survey of the thing. It was dead, and floated on the water, with its
belly, of a dirty brown color, up. It head was at least twenty feet
long, and about ten feet through at the thickest point. About midway
of the body, which was, I should guess, about forty feet long, were
two fins, of a clear white, each about twelve feet in length. The body
seemed to taper from the back of the head down to the size of a small
log, distinct from the whale tribe, as the end had nothing that looked
like a fluke. The shape of the creature's head was more like a tierce
than anything I can liken it to. I have seen almost all kinds of
shapes that can be found in these waters, but never saw the like of
this before.

Two years ago, off Seguin, I saw shooting through the water a thing
which, I think, resembled this creature considerably, but I didn't
get close enough to it to say for certain. The men from the Cape Ann
schooner got on this dead creature, and one of the boys cut a double
shuffle on its belly, which for all the world looked like the bottom
of a schooner covered with barnacles and seaweed by the weather. We
should have towed the thing to Portland had there been any wind,
but as there wasn't, we steered away and left it. What sort of a sea
monster this was I can't say for sure, but in my opinion it was the
original 'sea serpent,' which has been seen once in a while for years
past, and which, when alive, was too swift a swimmer for any sailing
vessel to get alongside of."

The report of the captain of the "Cape Ann schooner" will be in order
now.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: MAXIM'S NEW GAS MACHINE.]

SIMPLE AND CHEAP PROCESS OF GAS MAKING.

When a current of air is passed over the surface of gasoline it
becomes carbureted or charged with its vapors to saturation. Air thus
charged is somewhat heavier than pure air, and when passed through an
Argand or bat's wing burner, it burns with a brilliant white flame.
Nothing would seem easier than to make a machine that would force
a current of air through, over, or on some material saturated with
gasoline, and this apparently simple process has led many into
attempts to make a successful gas machine. Many fortunes have been
spent by the unscientific in the chase after this, to them, _ignis
fatuus_. The stumbling block which has wrecked so many enterprises
in this line has been the cold produced by the evaporation of the
gasoline. One pound of gasoline, in passing from a liquid to a vapor,
requires about as much heat as would be required to melt two pounds of
cast iron. It is therefore obvious that where no heat is supplied,
the gasoline, air, and machine must soon become very cold when any
considerable quantity of gas is being made. The heat must come from
somewhere, and as none is supplied, it is taken from the apparatus,
air, and gasoline, making them very cold. A beautiful and simple
experiment to illustrate this refrigeration can be made as follows:
Place a gill of water in a common washbasin, then pour over it
one pint of light gasoline; shake the basin, and blow the liquids
vigorously, when very soon the basin will become intensely cold--the
water will freeze, and may be taken out in the form of a snowball.
If the water and basin are hot, and the experiment performed in a hot
room or in the sun, it is much more striking.[1]

This refrigeration operates upon the gas as follows: Air will take up
and hold in suspension any volatile liquid in proportion to the square
of its temperature, so that when the temperature of the gasoline and
air have fallen off one half, the quantity of gasoline in the air has
fallen off three quarters, and the light is destroyed. The quality of
the gas in such machines varies from a rich smoky flame to a pale
blue and blowing flame in a short time. Every change of quality in the
liquid, temperature of the apparatus, or number of burners used causes
a vexatious change in the quality of the gas. If heat is applied at
the right time and in the right quantity it is not so bad, but too
much heat, or neglecting to regulate it properly, converts the machine
into a still, the condenser of which is the pipes of the building
lighted, when danger is added to vexation. About ten years ago a
machine was illustrated in these columns that obviated all these
troubles; it was the invention of the well known mechanical engineer,
Hiram S. Maxim, of this city. His machine was on an entirely new
principle, and has since gone into general use. It was intricate and
somewhat expensive, but it performed its work well. Messrs. A. T.
Stewart & Co. use them largely in their mills and hotels. Mr. Maxim
made one of six thousand burner capacity for the Grand Union Hotel,
Saratoga Springs, it being the largest gas machine ever built. It has
supplied gas of an unvarying quality for six years, and is as good as
new to-day.

To reduce the cost as far as possible, Mr. Maxim has designed a new
machine on another principle, which we herewith illustrate. Fig. 1
shows the machine in perspective, and Fig. 2 is a sectional view.
The vertical cylinder is a common gas holder of sheet brass. It is 36
inches in diameter for a thousand burner machine. The operative parts
of the machine are best shown in the sectional view, which represents
the portion of the machine called the injector. A is a steam chamber
supplied with four or more pounds of steam through the pipe, K. B is
the gasoline supply pipe, and C the air supply. D is an index valve.
The operation is as follows: Steam being in the chamber, A, the
descent of the holder opens the valve, M, and allows the steam to
[_Continued on page 4._]

[Footnote 1: This experiment should not be tried in the vicinity of
a gaslight or fire.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ESTABLISHED 1845

       *       *       *       *       *

MUNN & CO., EDITORS AND PROPRIETORS.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY AT NO. 37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

 O. D. MUNN. A. E. BEACH.


TERMS FOR THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

One copy, one year postage included     $3 20

One copy, six months, postage included   1 60

Clubs.--One extra copy of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN will be supplied
gratis for every club of five subscribers at $3.20 each; additional
copies at same proportionate rate. Postage prepaid.

Remit by postal order. Address
  MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, New York.

-->To Advertisers.--The regular circulation of the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN is now FIFTY THOUSAND COPIES weekly. For 1880 the publishers
anticipate a still larger circulation.

THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT

Is a distinct paper from the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. THE SUPPLEMENT is
issued weekly. Every number contains 16 octavo pages, uniform in size
with SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Terms of subscription for SUPPLEMENT, $5.00
a year, postage paid, to subscribers. Single copies, 10 cents. Sold by
all news dealers throughout the country.

COMBINED RATES.--The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and SUPPLEMENT will be sent
for one year, postage free, on receipt of _seven dollars_.

Both papers to one address or different addresses, as desired.

The safest way to remit is by draft, postal order, or registered
letter.

Address MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, N. Y.


SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN EXPORT EDITION.

The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition is a large and splendid
periodical, issued once a month. Each number contains about one
hundred large quarto pages, profusely illustrated, embracing: (1.)
Most of the plates and pages of the four preceding weekly issues of
the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, with its splendid engravings and valuable
information; (2.) Commercial, trade, and manufacturing announcements
of leading houses. Terms for Export Edition, $5.00 a year,
sent prepaid to any part of the world. Single copies 50 cents.
-->Manufacturers and others who desire to secure foreign trade may
have large, and handsomely displayed announcements published in this
edition at a very moderate cost.

The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition has a large guaranteed
circulation in all commercial places throughout the world. Address
MUNN & CO., 37 Park Row, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK, SATURDAY, JULY 3, 1880.

       *       *       *       *       *

TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT

No. 235,

For the Week ending July 3, 1880.

Price 10 cents. For sale by all newsdealers.


                                                                  PAGE
I.  ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--The New Railway up Mount
    Vesuvius. 6 illustrations. Plan of road.--General view of
    mountain and railway.--Side view and end view of passenger
    car.--Mount Vesuvius Railway.--Map showing railway,
    mountain, crater, and surrounding country.--The carriage
    road and railway                                              3735
    The St. Gothard Tunnel--Notes on the junction of the two
    galleries. By Dr. CALLADON                                    3736
    The St. Gothard Tunnel.--Conditions and causes of air
    currents in the tunnel                                        3736
    Protection of Ships from Loss by Fire and from Loss by
    Sinking. Recent improvements in the construction of ships
    and steamers                                                  3738
    Regenerative Stoves.--A Sketch of their History and Notes
    on their Use. By JOHN N. HARTMAN. An important paper read
    at the Pittsburg meeting of the American Institute of
    Mining Engineers. 1 figure                                    3738
    Cowper's Hot Blast Stoves. 2 full page illustrations of
    hot blast stoves for a pair of furnaces.--Plan and cross
    section of stove.--Plan and cross section of furnace.--Plan
    and cross section of gas downcomer.--Sectional elevation of
    stove and downcomer                                           3739
    Wilson's Lock-up Safety Valve. An important improvement.
    10 figures.                                                   3742
    Working Low Grade Ores                                        3742
    The Largest Concrete Tank in England                          3742

II. ELECTRICITY, ETC.--Siemens' Improvements in Electric
    Railways. 4 figures. Siemens' combined steam and electric
    railway.--Siemens' electric mail railway                      3743
    Difference in the Actions of Positive and Negative
    Electricity                                                   3743
    Forces Exciting Electricity                                   3743
    The New Electrical Middlings Purifier. By THOS. B. OSBORNE.
    5 figures                                                     3744
    Physical Society, London. Photo--electricity.--Electrometer
    key.--Air in water.--Steam thermometer                        3745
    Atmospheric polarization. Influence of terrestrial magnetism  3745

III. HYGIENE AND MEDICINE.--Lead Poisoning. Clinical lecture
    by Dr. WM. PEPPER. Effects of a cosmetic of carbonate of
    lead.--Symptoms of lead poisoning.--Affinity of lead for
    nerves and muscles.--Treatment of lead poisoning              3745
    Recent Investigations of the Blood                            3746
    The Pulse. Lecture on the pulse in health and disease,
    by Dr. T. A. McBRIDE                                          3746
    Some Early Symptoms of Insanity                               3747
    An Improved Method of Applying Antiseptic Vapors              3747
    Treatment of Phthisis by Inhalation of Borax and Salicylic
    Acid                                                          3747

IV. CHEMISTRY AND TECHNOLOGY.--Detection of Starch in Cane
    Sugar. By P. CASAMAJOR                                        3747
    Double Lever Cement Testing Apparatus. 1 figure               3748
    Prediction of Chemical Elements                               3748
    Oil of Sage                                                   3748
    Bronzing Iron                                                 3748
    Rust Preventing Compound                                      3748
    Argentine Sheep and Wool                                      3748

V.  NATURAL HISTORY, ETC.--Brain of Limulus Polyphemus.
    General anatomy of the brain.--Internal structure and
    histology of the brain.--Comparison of the Limulus brain
    with the brain of other arthropods                            3749
    An Unfortunate White Whale. A live whale with a broken neck   3749
    Ethereal Oil of California Bay Tree. By J. M. STILLMAN        3749
    Forest Trees of North America. Prof. Sargent's catalogue
    (continued from SUPPLEMENT No. 234). Cedars, Red Woods,
    Firs, Spruces, etc.                                           3750

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SUPERIORITY OF AMERICAN WATCHES.

The extract from the report of the judges in horology, at the Sydney
International Exhibition, with the diagrams showing the comparative
merit of the watches tested, given on other pages of the current issue
of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, cannot fail to interest our readers. There
were ten exhibitors, and the inherent and comparative merits of the
various exhibits were rated under ten heads on the basis of 100 points
"for the highest degree of excellence." There were British, German,
French, Swiss, and American competitors; and while the scores of the
nine European exhibitors footed up totals ranging from 76 to 686,
their average being 389-1/3, the total of the Waltham Watch Company
was 981. In detail this remarkable score stood thus: Originality,
98; invention and discovery, 95; utility and quality of material,
95; skill in workmanship, 93; fitness for purpose intended, 100;
adaptation to public wants, 100; economy, 100; cost, 100; finish and
elegance of cases, 100; timekeeping qualities, 100. Total, 981.

The timekeeping tests were made, as the report points out, by Prof.
H. C. Russell, Astronomer Royal at the Sydney Observatory; and it is
especially noted that while the majority of the watches tested had
been made for exhibition purposes, and specially prepared for that
end, the exhibit of the American company was the ordinary and regular
product of the factory, such as is finished every day. Another
evidence of the superiority of the American system, as emphasized in
the report, is the fact that a sixth grade Waltham watch, one of the
cheapest tested, showed a better performance than many very expensive
and otherwise first class watches of other makes.

The moral of the victory is happily drawn in the following editorial
review of the contest and its lessons, by the Sydney _Morning Herald_
of April 14, last:

"The report of the judges in horology, which we published on Saturday
last, was a document of more than ordinary interest. The slightest
glance at it will show that the judges brought no small amount of
ability and industry to their task. In many other classes of exhibits
judging must, to no small extent, be a matter of opinion. There is
no absolute test by which one photograph, for example, or one oil
painting can be decided to be superior to another. In exhibits of
this kind much must be left to the taste of the critic. Watches and
chronometers, on the other hand, can be submitted to the minutest
tests. The care and trouble which these require are not small, but
the issue is sufficiently important to warrant all the labor which
the judges in horology brought to their work. Time-keepers that can be
relied upon in all weathers and in all climates, and that are within
reach of all classes, are a luxury of no common order, but to a large
number of persons they are a necessity also. In these fast days, when
everything must be done to time, it is for a variety of purposes
found necessary to make accurate divisions, not merely of the days
and hours, but of the minutes and seconds also. The verdict which the
judges in our Exhibition have pronounced on the Waltham watches is
one of which any company might be proud; but the facts on which the
verdict is based are as interesting to the public at large as to the
parties immediately concerned. One of the secrets of American progress
lies first in the invention of machinery, and then in its application
to almost all descriptions of industry. It is the bringing of
machinery to every branch of watchmaking that is enabling Americans to
beat the world in this as well as in many other things.

"There has been a general belief that a machine-made watch is not to
be compared to one that is hand-made, and that on this account the
English watch must always hold its own against the American. This
belief will have to be given up, if it is not given up already. It has
now been established that machinery can be used for the purposes of
watchmaking with quite as much success as for those of agriculture.
The Americans are showing that they can make better watches than
the Swiss or the English, but, what is of equal importance, they
are showing that they can make them for less money. The boast of the
Yankees is that they can turn out work cheaper and better than anybody
else, and that for that reason the world must take their products.
It would be difficult to prove that in some departments the boast is
wholly without foundation. The American mechanic is paid better than
the English mechanic, and yet the work which he turns out can, as a
rule, be sold for less. The reason is, not only that he works harder,
but that the assistance of machinery enables him to produce the
largest result by the smallest amount of labor.

"Mr. Brassey, who believes that the workmen of his own country are
equal if not superior to any in the world, maintains that an English
mechanic can do more work than an American mechanic. The American
really does more, because the inducements to industry are greater, and
because he has better machinery. The success of the Waltham Company
has furnished a striking instance of this. This company has now not
