The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Butterfly Kiss, by Arthur Dekker Savage

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Butterfly Kiss

Author: Arthur Dekker Savage

Release Date: October 9, 2012 [EBook #40991]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BUTTERFLY KISS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                      The BUTTERFLY KISS

                   _by Arthur Dekker Savage_

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Orbit volume 1
number 2, 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: _THE WAR WAS ON, THE FINAL CATACLYSM HAD BEGUN. THOUSANDS
WOULD DIE, EONS OF HUMAN HISTORY WOULD BE WIPED OUT, CENTURIES OF
CULTURE BE DESTROYED ... UNLESS ONE MAN COULD CARRY OUT HIS PLAN._]

[Illustration]


When Sykin Supcel was kidnaped, no one on Earth was less surprised than
Dr. Horace Wilton, Chief Military Psychologist of the Solar Navy. And
since he had been Sy's mentor, and obviously responsible for his safety,
Dr. Wilton was the first high official sought by representatives of the
news syndicates.

"It has become increasingly difficult," said the psychologist carefully
to the group sitting in his office, "to ignore such actions by the
Sur-Malic." He gazed through an open window-wall to where the newsmen's
tiny jet-copters glinted beneath a summer sun at the forest's edge. "Of
course, I might have predicted it; Sy insisted upon browsing through old
city ruins for relaxation, and he seemed to delight in eluding his
guard escort."

A reporter with the long nose and narrow head of a Venusian--or, for
that matter, a Sur-Malic--raised his voice. "Y'mean he was all alone
when he was snatched?"

The doctor rested one hip on the edge of a gleaming alloy desk. Military
specifications, like civilian preference, demanded that every artifact
possible be of enduring, stainless metal. "I am afraid so," he answered
slowly.

"Then how," demanded the reporter, "d'you know it was the Sur-Malic that
got him?"

"Simple logic. The Sur-Malic have been sporadically making off with
first-class Earth scientists for a century--and Sy had recently
developed an important improvement in our so-called cosmic ray engine.
If he is forced to divulge the information, there may be tragic
repercussions to the Interstellar League." Pencils raced eagerly across
note pads. "Furthermore, Sy was well equipped to handle any ordinary
emergency. Nor would a League world commit such an act, while any member
of the Radical Alliance other than the Sur-Malic would be incapable of
it."

A stocky brown Martian glowered. "Why the hell, sir, don't we wipe out
the Sur-Malic? We all know they're straining every seam to get a war
fleet built on Pronuleon II, and that their attack's only a matter of
time. If we hit them where they are, they'd never recover--but if we
wait for them to strike first...."

Dr. Wilton held up his hand to stem the torrent. "I can't speak for the
government, young man, but I might point out that it has never been our
policy to foment war. We are making such preparations as allotted funds
permit, and the combined Solar Fleet is on the alert. Also, _knowing_
that the Sur-Malic stole our laboratory speci--er--Unique, and being
able to _prove_ it are two different matters."

"Excuse me, doctor." A keen-eyed Earth reporter stood up. "You started
to say 'specimen'. How about that? Are Sy and the other Uniques in the
special lab groups actually some kind of humanoid robots or something? I
know it's top-drawer stuff, but are these Uniques actually people? Do
you make 'em, or are they born, or what? What are they for, and why
their odd names?" He resumed his seat. The others maintained an
expectant silence. It was not often they found themselves in the
tropical, trackless forest area of the American Great Lakes region,
which was almost invisibly dotted with naval installations, and personal
interviews with military psychologists were rare events; but data
pertaining to the almost fabulous Uniques would take news precedence on
every video screen of the meadow, valley and woodland homes of Earth.

Dr. Wilton neatly snipped the legal filter from a cigarette, evoking
sympathetic grins from his audience. Many took immediate advantage of
the tacit permission to smoke. "I can answer those questions safely, I
am sure. First," he smiled, "your shrewd observation of the term
'specimen': in some respects the Uniques are specimens--but only to the
extent that in childhood some of them underwent certain surgical
operations, mainly brain and glandular. All were kept on special diets
during their early youth, and were meticulously trained by special
