The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mating of the Moons, by Kenneth O'Hara

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mating of the Moons

Author: Kenneth O'Hara

Release Date: October 7, 2012 [EBook #40969]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MATING OF THE MOONS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                    The Mating of the Moons

                      _by Kenneth O'Hara_

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Orbit volume 1
number 2, 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: _SHE CAME TO MARS IN SEARCH OF SOMETHING, SHE KNEW NOT WHAT,
TO GIVE HER LIFE MEANING. SHE FOUND IT ... IN A WAY...._]


The sun glared, fiercely detached. The thin air suddenly seemed
friendless, empty, a vast lake of poison and glassy water. All at once,
the stretching plains of sand began to waver with a terrible
insubstantiality before Madeleine's eyes.

[Illustration]

Even the Ruins of Taovahr were false. And for Madeleine, even if they
were not false, there was no sign of the outer garments of dream with
which, on a thousand lonely nights back home on the Earth, she had
clothed those dusty scattered skeletons of crumbled stone.

Don, one of the brightest and most handsomely uniformed of all the
bright young guide-hosts at Martian Haven, droned on to the finish of
his machine-tooled lecture about the Ruins of Taovahr. He, of course,
was the biggest chunk of falseness on Mars.

"And so folks, this is all that's left of a once great civilization. A
few columns and worn pieces of stone. And we can never know now how they
lived and loved and died--for no trace whatsoever of an ancient people
remain. The dim, dark seas of time have swept their age-old secrets into
the backwash of eternity--"

"Oh God," whispered Madeleine.

"Shhhh!" said her father. And her mother blinked at her with a resigned
tolerance.

"But he's a living cliche," she said, trying to control the faintness,
the dizziness, the dullness coming back as the last illusion drained
away. "Even if the ruins were real, he'd make them seem trite."

"Madeleine!" her mother gasped, but in a subdued way.

"But there ought to be something special about a Martian ruin, Mother."

Don had heard her. His smile was uneasy, though politely tolerant, as
all good hosts were to rich tourists. "You're hard to please, Miss
Ericson. Maybe too hard." His lingering glance stopped just short of
crudity. But the look made it clear that if she wanted the romance all
women were assumed to expect at Martian Haven, he could provide it, as
he did everything else--discreetly, efficiently and most memorably.

Mrs. Ericson giggled. She had long since abandoned any hope of Madeleine
being, even by stretching the norm, a well-adjusted girl. But much faith
had been placed in a Martian vacation, and hope that it would provide
Madeleine with some sort of emotional preoccupation, even an affair, if
need be--something, anything, that would at least make her seem faintly
capable of a normal relationship with a male. Even this fellow Don. For
Madeleine was past thirty-five--how far past no one discussed any
more--and was becoming more tightly withdrawn every day.

Don shouted. "All right, folks! Now we wend our way back to Martian
Haven, over a trail that's the oldest in the Solar System, a trail that
was once a mighty highway stretching from the inland city to the great
ocean that once rolled where now there is only thousands of miles of
wind-blown sands!"

The long line of exclaiming and sickeningly gullible tourists, either
too young and wide-eyed to know better, or too old and desperate to
admit the phoniness, ooohhhed and ahhhhed, and the rickshaws and camels,
plus a few hardy adventurers on foot, turned with him as Don twisted his
own beast toward Martian Haven.

Even the Ruins, she thought--they were like imported props lying in the
sand, like old abandoned bits of a set for a TV production.
