The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Revolt of the Star Men, by Raymond Gallun

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Revolt of the Star Men

Author: Raymond Gallun

Release Date: October 11, 2012 [EBook #41027]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REVOLT OF THE STAR MEN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        The Revolt of the Star Men

                            By RAYMOND GALLUN

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Wonder Stories
Quarterly Winter 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Illustration: A bulk dropped down on the nose of the craft. A pair of
hands gripped the barrels of the machine gun and tore them from the
mountings.]

       *       *       *       *       *


                        THE REVOLT OF THE STAR MEN

                  _By the Author of "The Space Dwellers"_


     [Illustration: RAYMOND GALLUN]

     The creatures that people this exciting story of Mr. Gallun, may
     seem at first blush to be impossible monstrosities. Yet, on
     consideration, we must realize that they are not so far-fetched.

     Even in our picayune little corner of the universe, we find in the
     insect kingdom a form of life that has survived through every
     possible earth catastrophe in the last 40,000,000 years. With their
     skeletons on the outside of their bodies instead of on the inside,
     insects are able to protect their bodies from heat, cold, and from
     accidents that would kill us. If the insect's shell were harder and
     thicker and made of heat-resisting material, it might conceivably
     be able to live in space without other protection.

     The point is that Mr. Gallun makes his Space Men so convincing that
     we can do nothing but believe in them. And he has woven about them
     such a thrilling story of adventure on two worlds that one will
     have to read and reread it, to get from it the fullest enjoyment.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was in the reading room of the Neilson-Aldebar space liner, _Ekova_,
that two young people came unexpectedly upon a third person who sat
alone, absently skimming through a copy of the _Interplanetarian_. When
the girl caught sight of him she uttered a little acclamation of
surprise. "Hekki-you!" she cried.

The one addressed looked up. A smile of greeting came over his swarthy,
aristocratic features. "Hello, Jan. It is I--none other," he said.
"Aren't you glad to see me?" Here he shot a quick glance at the girl's
companion.

"Why certainly I am, Hekki," she replied a trifle nervously. "But how
can it be? A week ago you left for the deepest, most mysterious part of
the Taraal desert on Mars, to collect objects of ancient art, and now
you are here. Where have you kept yourself during the voyage?"

The other smiled again--this time a cryptic, secretive smile.
"Business," he said mysteriously. "It called me to Earth at the last
moment, and since we left the docks at Taboor, it has kept me occupied
in my stateroom. This is but the third time I have ventured out of it.
Alka brought me my meals." Hekki arched his finely penciled eyebrows
slightly as he looked up at the lady's companion. "And you too have had
business, Janice," he added. "A new boy friend?" There was a hint of
something unpleasant in his tone, but the girl ignored it.

She nodded her golden head. "We met on the night of the departure from
Mars, and since then, we've had a happy week together. Austin," she
said, turning to the youth, "I want you to know Hekalu Selba of Taboor.
Hekki, this is Austin Shelby, who hails from Chicago. You ought to get
along well together, because you are both so interested in mechanics,"
she added. The men shook hands. For the past few moments Shelby had been
trying to analyze from the scanty data at hand the character of Hekki.
He saw the tapering, effeminate hands--one twiddled nervously a long
Martian cigarette--the dark straight hair and fine features; the mouth,
that could curl so insolently; the faultless, white silk clothing.

Shelby decided that he did not like Hekki. The reason at first seemed
obvious, but presently the young Earthman realized that his feeling
towards this child of the Red Planet was stronger than mere dislike.
What was the explanation? Was it because Hekki was a friend of Janice
Darell? Since he had met her aboard the _Ekova_ on this glorious return
to Earth, after having spent a whole Martian year at an engineering
school at Taboor, Shelby had learned to know love. Was he jealous of
this noble of another world? A little, perhaps. But this did not account
for the vague, sinister aura he sensed about Hekalu Selba.

Something in Shelby's brain was trying to surge its way to the surface
of his consciousness; he struggled with it, and it came out clear. Only
thirty-six hours before, during the period designated for sleep, he had
wandered into a seldom frequented passageway, high up in the hull of the
_Ekova_. Here there were portholes through which he could see the
curving metal expanse of the ship's huge form, gleaming dimly under the
stars of space. It had looked like the back of a great silver whale.

For a minute or two he had stared absently through the little circular
window, and then, hearing footsteps down the corridor, he had turned to
see two figures some hundred feet distant moving away from him. They had
obviously entered from a side passage and had probably not seen him. One
had been this very Hekalu Selba; Austin was sure of it. Beside him had
moved a shadow. The Earthman had not seen it clearly, for the
illuminating globes burning here during the sleep period were dim and
far between.

He had but a vague fleeting impression of a huge knotty form, bent and
grotesque. Its arms were so long that its big hands almost dragged on
the floor. Its head was very large and bulbous. The pair had seemed to
carry something heavy between them, but Austin had not seen what it was.
In a moment the Martian had opened a door in the side of the passage
and the two had vanished into it.

When Austin had returned to his stateroom, he was not quite sure he had
really seen the monstrous horror. Surely nothing like it was known to
exist within the orbit of Jupiter! Shelby had thought of reporting the
incident to the commander of the vessel, but he had dismissed the idea
as too pointless. Now, however, the memory of that vague black form was
haunting him. He knew that it was the key, in part at least, to his
feeling toward Hekalu Selba.

The Martian had cast his magazine aside. He was patting the soft
cushions of the divan on which he was lounging. "Sit here, my friends,"
he said in his smooth, precise English. "We shall talk, and then perhaps
we shall have a little refreshment." The two complied.

"It will be only for a moment," said the girl. "The ship lands in an
hour, and I haven't gathered my things together yet."

Shelby was intensely interested in this queer individual, about whose
personality there lingered a strangely indefinable web of mystery--of
evil, almost.

"So you too have a passion for mechanics," he said. "Somewhere I am sure
I have heard of you before. Kelang Aggar, an instructor of mine at
Taboor, spoke occasionally of a young Martian student--"

"Kelang Aggar is my friend," Hekki broke in. "He assisted me with
several experiments. But they were nothing--a new alloy, very hard, and
having a high point of fusion. The heads of the Space Ship Construction
Company said it was ideal for rocket nozzles, but they paid me a mere
pittance for the invention. This, and a few even lesser ones are my sole
accomplishments in the line of mechanics." Hekalu Selba laughed lightly.

"Let us talk of other things, my friends," he continued. "Let us allow
our minds to ramble. See those two beautiful potted palms over
there--children of the deserts of Earth, and beside them the slender
graceful stem of the purple Kelan, dug from the marshes along the Selgur
waterway of my own planet. I have seen them both in their native
habitat, waving their fronds as though in cadence with some great silent
symphony of the universe. See that tapestry over yonder, with the beast
woven into it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Here Janice Darell pointed up toward the flattened glass dome that
roofed the room. "There is old Mother Earth looking down at us, and the
sun is peeping around her rim," she said. "See how the light of Sol
sifts through the terrestrial atmosphere. There is a streak of red, of
gold, of opal, and beyond are the stars and the blackness of space."

"The contrast of the forces of darkness with those of light," Shelby put
in softly.

Hekki was smiling absently. "There are many contrasts," he mused. "The
contrast of life and death, of power and weakness, of nightmare and
reality."

Words popped into Austin Shelby's head, and, carelessly, he uttered them
without thinking: "You often walk with your nightmares, don't you,
Hekalu?"

A hard light came into the Martian's eyes as he stared straight at the
Earthman. "Perhaps," he said, "and you, Mr. Shelby, often walk in your
sleep!" But apparently the incident was immediately forgotten.

Austin wondered how much the girl knew about the luxurious Hekalu. A
quick glance of intelligence passed between them.

"I'll have to pack now," Janice said. "Won't you boys walk along with me
a little ways?" She took Austin's arm as they arose. Hekki fell in
beside them. At the entrance to the corridor which led to the girl's
stateroom they paused.

"My business will occupy me tonight and tomorrow," said Hekalu, "so I
shall bid you goodbye until, let us say, the following evening, Jan, but
if you like I shall have Alka take you home."

"Mr. Shelby has asked permission to perform that little service, you
industrious old business man," she replied mischievously. And again that
dark shadow flickered momentarily on the Martian's features.

"But you will let me see you the day after tomorrow?" he asked. "I have
found a little paradise out at Oak Park patterned after the fairy
palaces of my own planet, and besides, I have a new jewel to show you."

"Fie on your jewels, Hekki," she smiled, adopting the stiff trite speech
the Martians often fell into. "But anyway, perhaps I shall favor you
with my incomparable company. The time you mention is still a ways away.
_Sidi yadi_,[1] my friend. Remember I shall be expecting a view-phone
call from you soon." Then turning to Shelby: "I'll meet you in the
lounge right after the boat lands. Don't fail me!"

[Footnote 1: Martian farewell.]

"You needn't worry about that, Jan," he assured her.

In a moment she was hurrying up the corridor in the pink glow of the
lights. As Austin gazed after her, he could not help but think how
wonderful was this fluffy little wisp of blonde beauty. Was she for him?
Over her he felt there lurked a dark shadow, but this only strengthened
the spell she had cast over him, for it gave to him the pleasure which
virile males experience when they know that their loved one requires
protection.

Hekki cleared his throat to attract the attention of his companion. When
Shelby turned toward him he was fumbling in one of the voluminous sleeve
pockets of his blouse. Presently he drew forth a very thin rectangle of
a substance resembling ivory, and handed it to the Earthman. Shelby
glanced at it. It was one of the name cards commonly used by Martian
men. It bore the legend in the interplanetary symbols:

     Hekalu Selba, Akar
        414 Teldasa
       Taboor, P. 4.

Beneath in small letters appeared Hekki's Chicago address.

"I shall want to see you again soon, my friend," said the Martian
cordially. "There are many things at my establishment which I would like
to show you--much that we can talk about."

Austin Shelby accepted the card and handed Hekki his own. Here was an
opportunity to get some first hand information on the mysterious man of
Mars and his more mysterious, perhaps sinister doings. The idea that he
might be placing himself in a dangerous position, Shelby gave scarcely a
moment's thought, for he had in him the spirit of the adventurer.

"Thank you, Akar Hekalu. I shall get in touch with you. And in the
meanwhile you can reach me at my address through the view-phone at
almost any time for I shall be working on a new mechanism there. _Sidi
yadi._"

"_Sidi yadi_, my friend."

The two men parted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fifteen minutes later a rustling whisper was audible throughout the
_Ekova_, above the steady purr of the forward-pointing decelerating
rockets. It became a deep-toned soughing which rapidly increased in
volume to a loud roar, and then to a screeching hiss. The ship swayed
and rocked a little. It was tearing its way into the terrestrial
atmosphere.

In the conning tower forward, the pilot and his assistant were working
calmly and cooly over the bewildering array of controlling mechanisms.
Getting those thousands of tons of metal safely lowered into a space
ship's cradle on the landing stage, was a difficult task, but the
experience and efficiency of the two men was quite competent to cope
with it.

Far below was a vast sea of winking lights--Chicago, its colossal
skyscrapers looming up severe and white and beautiful in the glow.

The pilot's nimble fingers turned a small horizontal wheel at his side.
The liner dipped and dropped slowly earthward toward an area of white
light. A mass of cloud poured over the huge hull for an instant and then
passed by. The outer shell of the great silvery whale which had been
chilled to a degree from absolute zero, by the cold of space had been
warmed but slightly by the rapid passage through the atmosphere and now
gleamed with jewel-like hoar frost.

Down, down it floated until it was only three hundred feet above the
landing stage. A red signal light gleamed suddenly on a panel within the
control room, and the wizard of that eerie chamber shifted a tiny lever.
The space ship halted and hung motionless supported by its repulsion
plates. On the ground in the glare of floodlights white-clad men hurried
about. Four mighty arms of metal groped upward from a mass of heavy
framework. They clutched the craft with a grating noise, and then, with
the slow deliberation of a sleepy giant, they drew it gently down into
its cradle.

Within the _Ekova_ all was abustle. Its doors, built solidly like the
breeches of big cannons, swung open, permitting the cool night air to
enter the ship, which for seven days had been a world sufficient unto
itself. Gangplanks were let down, and the passengers, jesting gaily with
one another began their leisurely descent to the ground. Customs
officials worked feverishly. A webby derrick arm pointing out from an
opening in the side of the liner, was unloading mail and costly material
and equipment sent to Earth from the Red Planet.

The routine processes of debarkation over, Shelby and Janice Darell
entered the covered causeway which led to the great terminal building of
the Space Travel Company.

The two had caught but a fleeting glimpse of Hekki. He was talking
earnestly to a white-clad official, and had not seen them; nor had they
tried to attract his attention. Conspicuous among the Martian's numerous
possessions was a large basket of metal wickerwork, such as were
commonly used to convey dogs and similiar pets from place to place. The
sight of that basket had aroused again in Shelby's mind that peculiar
sense of the presence of something sinister. Was the monster he had seen
in Hekalu Selba's company hidden within that case of woven wire?

Within the causeway was a moving walk which carried Shelby and his
companion to the depot. Here the intermittent whirring of pneumatic
tube-cars operating in a vast network throughout the city was audible.
The young Earthian pair, and the two attendants bearing their light
luggage entered an elevator, which carried them swiftly to the landing
platform for atmospheric craft on the roof of the building.

Shelby presented his identification tag and gave the number of his plane
to the official in charge. The man led the way to a hangar at the side
of the platform. Shelby had sent an order by radio to the Sutherland
Aircraft Company a few hours before, and, complying with his request, a
