Project Gutenberg's The Metal Moon, by Everett C. Smith and R.F. Starzl

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Metal Moon

Author: Everett C. Smith
        R.F. Starzl

Release Date: October 17, 2012 [EBook #41084]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE METAL MOON ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             The Metal Moon

                  By EVERETT C. SMITH and R. F. STARZL

    Based upon the Fourth Prize ($10.00) winning plot of the
    Interplanetary Plot Contest won by Everett C. Smith, 116 East St.,
    Lawrence, Mass

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Wonder Stories
    Quarterly Winter 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any
    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Illustration: The ship was now coming close to the vast curve of the
crystal city. The earthmen became aware that the part below the city
level was a dull ugly black.]

       *       *       *       *       *

                  [Illustration: EVERETT C. SMITH]

                    [Illustration: R. F. STARZL]

    In this story, the joint product of two imaginative minds, we get a
    very unusual picture of some of the possibilities of interplanetary
    exploration.

    We know that as soon as interplanetary travel is possible,
    expeditions from the earth will be ranging the length and breadth of
    the solar system searching out the thousands of wonders that are to
    be discovered.

    It is quite possible that some of the explorers, whether through
    accident or desire, may colonize the other planets and develop under
    new and unusual conditions a new branch of the human race. It is
    doubtlessly true that if each of the solar planets were to be
    colonized, at the end of several hundred centuries there would be
    nine races of human beings who might differ radically from each
    other and in fact might not recognize each other as members of the
    same human stock.

    In this story we do not see nine races but we do see four of them
    and Mr. Starzl has united the four in a gripping narrative of the
    great spaces.




THE METAL MOON


The three men in the tiny space ship showed their apprehension as they
watched the gravity meters. Something was distinctly wrong with the
ship.

"Are you sure that there isn't some undiscovered moon of Jupiter?" asked
the youngest of them. He was only about 25, which was very young indeed
when his scientific attainments were considered, even for the human
race's stage of intellectual development in 1,000,144 A. D. His figure
was stocky, powerful, his face rather thin, bold, with piercing black
eyes. He was naked, save for short, brilliantly red trunks of metalsilk.
His name, "Sine," followed by a numerical identification code, was
tattooed indelibly in thin, sharp characters on his broad, bronze-hard
chest.

The man at the ampliscope removed his head from the eyepiece and shook
his head impatiently. His body was bronzed and spare, but the complete
absence of hair on his head made him look older than the 48 years
indicated by the code following the name on his chest, "Kass."

"I tell you, Sine, this pull is no gravity effect. No body of such mass
could be invisible, unless it were composed entirely of protons. And
even then it would yank Jupiter out of shape, making it look like a
pear, but there--"

Jupiter presented its usual appearance. The solar system's largest
planet seemed enormous at this distance of only a few million miles. It
showed its usual marked depression at the poles, but no distortion such
as might be caused by a nearby body of enormous mass.

"What do you think, Lents?" Kass turned to the third occupant of the
little space ship. Lents raised his broad placid face from the pad upon
which he had been figuring a complicated equation. He was a large man,
slow-moving, and fat. He was sensitive to that fact, so that, besides
the usual trunks, he also wore a toga-like garment. His brown eyes
blinked in folds of flesh.

"No doubt you're right, Kass," Lents rumbled in a deep voice. "I can't
see how such a body could exist without pulling all of Jupiter's moons
to itself. No, we seem to be specially honored by its attention."

They looked at one another soberly.

"The question is, can it out-pull us?" Sine remarked.

"You ought to know," Kass said. "You designed and built her."

Sine made his way forward. It was no longer necessary to use the
handholds, for the pull of the mysterious body was already so powerful
that it entirely eliminated the free floating so familiar to space
travelers. Sine looked through the grated outlook windows, past the
gracefully curved bow of the ship. At the very tip was the ether screw
of his invention, resembling the screws used for water propulsion in
ancient times, except that the pitch was extremely sharp. The tachometer
showed that the screw had slowed down to 50,000 revolutions a minute,
although the thermometer indicated that the molecular bearings were
still reasonably cool. But how long could she stand the strain? How
long, indeed, could the sturdy little atomic motor keep those blades
turning? It was designed to pull directly away at a distance of only a
million miles from the sun, and yet it was being beaten far out here in
space by an object as yet invisible.

"What a crash that'll be!" Sine murmured, watching the agony of tortured
metal.

Amidship, Kass was again studying the eyepiece of the ampliscope.
Suddenly he stiffened.

"I see it! Why, it can't be over a couple of hundred feet in diameter.
Cylindrical, I think. Head on to us now."

They crowded around him. Lents, with hasty computations, determined that
they were still about three thousand miles from the object.

"No chance to pull away from it, if we pull straight," and his heavy
voice was full of energy as his sleepiness vanished with the need for
action. "Set her over, Sine, about 40 degrees. Try for a circular orbit
around it--if we can get up enough speed centrifugal force will save
us!"

Sine did as he was told, and the ship heeled over so that it presented
its side to the sinister object, which was still invisible to the
unassisted eye. While Kass watched it through the ampliscope, his
companions stared through the thick ports at the velvet, gem-studded
firmament. They could feel the attraction growing with terrifying speed.

"It's turning with us," Kass announced, "and getting closer. If we can
swing around it, it will be a very sharp ellipse indeed!"

"Try and see if you can get a few more revs out of the screw," Lents
suggested, and Sine crept forward, his powerful muscles straining
against the pull. He lifted the leaden weight of his arm to the lever.
He _must_ get a little more power out of the motor, or they would crash
to their deaths in a few minutes! A fine ending for their daring dash to
Jupiter--the first space flight since the great comet swarm of 800,768
A. D.

Sine pulled back hard on the lever, and the motor gamely responded,
moaned and shuddered under the tremendous overload. The tachometer
needle quivered, began to climb, 52,000, 55,000, 56,000----

The ship gave a lurch--there was a dull grinding, a hollow, metallic
groan. The men picked themselves up from the floor--realizing at once
the fatal significance of the lack of effort required. Their movement
carried them off the floor--made them grasp handholds. Floating free!
That meant falling free!

Sine glanced at the tachometer. The dead needle stood at zero. Through
the forward window he could see one of the four screw blades, black,
motionless.

Lents, obeying the habits of a lifetime, elbow hooked in a handhold, was
figuring the time required for them to strike. He looked up with a
puzzled frown.

"We should have struck about right now! Check on that body's position,
will you, Kass?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The bald-headed scientist pulled himself to the ampliscope. But it was
possible to see the object through the ports now, quite plainly. It was
black, cylindrical, glinting dully in the sun's light. The space ship
was tumbling end over end, lazily, bringing the thing into view first at
one port--then another.

"No acceleration!" Kass reported, amazement mingling with hope. "Same
speed--we may still hit--but no evidence of gravity. We're falling
