The Project Gutenberg EBook of Futuria Fantasia, Summer 1939, by Ray Bradbury

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Futuria Fantasia, Summer 1939

Author: Ray Bradbury

Release Date: December 14, 2012 [EBook #41622]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FUTURIA FANTASIA, SUMMER 1939 ***


Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net












                                FUTURIA FANTASIA

                                  Summer 1939

                                  Vol.1 No.1

                                Ray D. Bradbury
                                    editor




GREETINGS! AT LONG LAST--FUTURIA FANTASIA!


The best laid plans of men, it seems, are destined for detours or
permanent and disappointing annihilation upon the road to
accomplishment. It was this way with Futuria Fantasia, planned for
publication last summer. Piles of archaic tomes towered on all sides of
the editorial desk. When the door to the office was opened unexpectedly
a white gusher of manuscripts and relatives spewed out. More than once
Ye Editor was suffocated unto death by the musty volumes that poured in
from all over Los Angeles. And then--someone turned off the financial
faucet--leaving us all soaped up, but with no water! And so, into an
inforced hibernation went FuFa. The manuscripts became intimate
acquaintances with all of the spiders in the family vaults--even the
writers could be seen lounging around in their caskets waiting for
Technocracy and their thirty doubloons every Thursday to come rolling
in.

But recently, awakening from the profound inactivity of spring fever,
your editor became interested in Technocracy. The more he heard about
it, the more he wanted everyone else to hear. So, turning the revolving
door on his crypt, he reached over and shook T. B. Yerke out of his
stupor and begged him to write an article, The Revolt Of The Scientists,
which appears herein. Not content with this he engaged Ron Reynolds, new
fan author who first appeared in Tucker's D'JOURNAL, to whip up a story
about the Technate and its effect upon the hack writer in the coming
decades. And Ackerman is here! Science Fiction's finest fan and friend
has turned in an interesting yarn that he wrote at the gentle age of
sixteen, some few years past. But best of all--there is nothing humorous
in the issue by the editor himself--which should cause huge, grateful
sighs of relief from Maine to Miske and back! Bradbury just has a poem,
and a serious one at that.

And so--here it is, for ten cents, out every other decade or so--Futuria
Fantasia--... hypoed into Life mainly because of the crying need for
more staunch Technocrats, mainly because of the New York Convention,
(with which it doesn't deal at all in subject matter ... but does so
whole-heartedly in spirit and thought), and mainly because it's been a
helluva long time since a large size mag came from our LASFL way, where
the natives are all sitting around and dreaming of the New York Canyon
Kiddies and praying, atheistically of course, that in the near future
they may wind up in Manhatten behind the pool-ball-perisphere--and I
don't mean the one numbered _eight_. None of the expectant tripsters
have ever seen New Yawk before and have already chewed their fingernails
down to the shoulder in exstatic anticipation.

I hope you like this brain-child, spawned from the womb of a year long
inanimation. If you do like it, how about a letter sent to the editorial
offices of F.F., at 1841 South Manhatten Place, Los Angeles, California?
Appoint yourself as A-l mourner and critic and pound away at the mag. It
will be appreciated. And if you have a dime in your pocket that hasn't
had a breath of air in a few days just drop that in, too. This is only
the first issue of FuFa ... if it succeeds there will be more, better
issues coming up. And your co-operation is needed.

GOOD LUCK TO THE NEW YORK SCIENTI-FAN CONVENTION--!!

I'LL MEET YOU IN MANHATTEN--!

Ray D. Bradbury,

