The Project Gutenberg EBook of Queen of the Black Coast, by Robert E. Howard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Queen of the Black Coast

Author: Robert E. Howard

Release Date: February 24, 2013 [EBook #42183]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK QUEEN OF THE BLACK COAST ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     QUEEN OF THE BLACK COAST

                       By Robert E. Howard

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was first published in Weird Tales
    May 1934. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




1 Conan Joins the Pirates

    _Believe green buds awaken in the spring,
      That autumn paints the leaves with somber fire;
    Believe I held my heart inviolate
      To lavish on one man my hot desire._

    THE SONG OF BELIT


Hoofs drummed down the street that sloped to the wharfs. The folk that
yelled and scattered had only a fleeting glimpse of a mailed figure on a
black stallion, a wide scarlet cloak flowing out on the wind. Far up the
street came the shout and clatter of pursuit, but the horseman did not
look back. He swept out onto the wharfs and jerked the plunging stallion
back on its haunches at the very lip of the pier. Seamen gaped up at
him, as they stood to the sweep and striped sail of a high-prowed,
broad-waisted galley. The master, sturdy and black-bearded, stood in the
bows, easing her away from the piles with a boat-hook. He yelled angrily
as the horseman sprang from the saddle and with a long leap landed
squarely on the mid-deck.

'Who invited you aboard?'

'Get under way!' roared the intruder with a fierce gesture that
spattered red drops from his broadsword.

'But we're bound for the coasts of Kush!' expostulated the master.

'Then I'm for Kush! Push off, I tell you!' The other cast a quick glance
up the street, along which a squad of horsemen were galloping; far
behind them toiled a group of archers, crossbows on their shoulders.

'Can you pay for your passage?' demanded the master.

'I pay my way with steel!' roared the man in armor, brandishing the
great sword that glittered bluely in the sun. 'By Crom, man, if you
don't get under way, I'll drench this galley in the blood of its crew!'

The shipmaster was a good judge of men. One glance at the dark scarred
face of the swordsman, hardened with passion, and he shouted a quick
order, thrusting strongly against the piles. The galley wallowed out
into clear water, the oars began to clack rhythmically; then a puff of
wind filled the shimmering sail, the light ship heeled to the gust, then
took her course like a swan, gathering headway as she skimmed along.

On the wharfs the riders were shaking their swords and shouting threats
and commands that the ship put about, and yelling for the bowmen to
hasten before the craft was out of arbalest range.

'Let them rave,' grinned the swordsman hardily. 'Do you keep her on her
course, master steersman.'

The master descended from the small deck between the bows, made his way
between the rows of oarsmen, and mounted the mid-deck. The stranger
stood there with his back to the mast, eyes narrowed alertly, sword
ready. The shipman eyed him steadily, careful not to make any move
toward the long knife in his belt. He saw a tall powerfully built figure
in a black scale-mail hauberk, burnished greaves and a blue-steel helmet
from which jutted bull's horns highly polished. From the mailed
shoulders fell the scarlet cloak, blowing in the sea-wind. A broad
shagreen belt with a golden buckle held the scabbard of the broadsword
he bore. Under the horned helmet a square-cut black mane contrasted with
smoldering blue eyes.

'If we must travel together,' said the master, 'we may as well be at
peace with each other. My name is Tito, licensed master-shipman of the
ports of Argos. I am bound for Kush, to trade beads and silks and sugar
and brass-hilted swords to the black kings for ivory, copra, copper ore,
slaves and pearls.'

The swordsman glanced back at the rapidly receding docks, where the
figures still gesticulated helplessly, evidently having trouble in
finding a boat swift enough to overhaul the fast-sailing galley.

'I am Conan, a Cimmerian,' he answered. 'I came into Argos seeking
employment, but with no wars forward, there was nothing to which I might
turn my hand.'

'Why do the guardsmen pursue you?' asked Tito. 'Not that it's any of my
business, but I thought perhaps----'

'I've nothing to conceal,' replied the Cimmerian. 'By Crom, though I've
spent considerable time among you civilized peoples, your ways are still
beyond my comprehension.

'Well, last night in a tavern, a captain in the king's guard offered
violence to the sweetheart of a young soldier, who naturally ran him
through. But it seems there is some cursed law against killing
guardsmen, and the boy and his girl fled away. It was bruited about that
I was seen with them, and so today I was haled into court, and a judge
asked me where the lad had gone. I replied that since he was a friend of
mine, I could not betray him. Then the court waxed wrath, and the judge
talked a great deal about my duty to the state, and society, and other
things I did not understand, and bade me tell where my friend had flown.
By this time I was becoming wrathful myself, for I had explained my
position.

'But I choked my ire and held my peace, and the judge squalled that I
had shown contempt for the court, and that I should be hurled into a
dungeon to rot until I betrayed my friend. So then, seeing they were all
mad, I drew my sword and cleft the judge's skull; then I cut my way out
of the court, and seeing the high constable's stallion tied near by, I
rode for the wharfs, where I thought to find a ship bound for foreign
parts.'

'Well,' said Tito hardily, 'the courts have fleeced me too often in
suits with rich merchants for me to owe them any love. I'll have
questions to answer if I ever anchor in that port again, but I can prove
I acted under compulsion. You may as well put up your sword. We're
peaceable sailors, and have nothing against you. Besides, it's as well
to have a fighting-man like yourself on board. Come up to the poop-deck
and we'll have a tankard of ale.'

'Good enough,' readily responded the Cimmerian, sheathing his sword.

The _Argus_ was a small sturdy ship, typical of those trading-craft
