The Project Gutenberg EBook of Double or Nothing, by Jack Sharkey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Double or Nothing

Author: Jack Sharkey

Release Date: June 26, 2013 [EBook #43041]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOUBLE OR NOTHING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          DOUBLE or NOTHING

                           By JACK SHARKEY

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Fantastic Stories
    of Imagination May 1962. Extensive research did not uncover any
    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




     _The mind quails before certain contemplations?_

     _The existence of infinity, for instance._

     _Or finity, for that matter._

     _Or 50,000 batches of cornflakes dumped from the sky._


I don't know why I listen to Artie Lindstrom. Maybe it's because at
times (though certainly not--I hope--on as permanent a basis as Artie)
I'm as screwy as he is. At least, I keep letting myself get sucked into
his plans, every time he's discovered the "invention that will change
the world". He discovers it quite a bit; something new every time.
And, Artie having a natural mechanical aptitude that would probably
rate as point-nine-nine-ad-infinitum on a scale where one-point-oh was
perfection, all his inventions work. Except--

Well, take the last thing we worked on. (He usually includes me in his
plans because, while he's the better cooker-upper of these gadgets,
I've got the knack for building them. Artie can't seem to slip a radio
tube into its socket without shattering the glass, twist a screwdriver
without gouging pieces out of his thumb, nor even solder an electrical
connection without needing skin-grafts for the hole he usually burns in
his hand.)

So we're a team, Artie and me. He does the planning, I do the
constructing. Like, as I mentioned, the last thing we worked on. He
invented it; I built it. A cap-remover (like for jars and ketchup
bottles). But not just a clamp-plus-handle, like most of the same
gadgets. Nope, this was electronic, worked on a tight-beam radio-wave,
plus something to do with the expansion coefficients of the metals
making up the caps, so that, from anyplace in line-of-sight of her home,
the housewife could shove a stud, and come home to find all the caps
unscrewed on her kitchen shelves, and the contents ready for getting at.
It did, I'll admit, have a nice name: The Teletwist.

Except, where's the point in unscrewing caps unless you're physically
present to make use of the contents of the jars? I mentioned this to
Artie when I was building the thing, but he said, "Wait and see. It'll
be a novelty, like hula hoops a couple of decades back. Novelties always
catch on."

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, he was wrong. When we finally found a manufacturer softheaded
enough to mass-produce a few thousand of the gadgets, total sales for
the entire country amounted to seventeen. Of course, the price was kind
of prohibitive: Thirteen-fifty per Teletwist. Why would a housewife
lay that kind of money on the line when she'd already, for a two-buck
license, gotten a husband who could be relied upon (well, most of the
time) to do the same thing for her?

Not, of course, that we didn't finally make money on the thing. It was
just about that time, you'll remember, that the Imperial Martian Fleet
decided that the third planet from Sol was getting a bit too powerful,
and they started orbiting our planet with ultimatums. And while they
were waiting for our answer, our government quietly purchased Artie's
patent, made a few little adjustments on his cap-twister, and the _next_
thing the Martians knew, all their airlocks were busily unscrewing
themselves with nothing outside them except hungry vacuum. It was also
the _last_ thing the Martians knew.

So Artie's ideas seem to have their uses, all right. Only, for some
reason, Artie never thinks of the proper application for his latest
newfound principle. That neat little disintegrator pistol carried by the
footsoldiers in the Three Day War (with Venus; remember Venus?) was a
variation on a cute little battery-powered device of Artie's, of which
the original function had been to rid one's house of roaches.

At any rate--at a damned _good_ rate, in fact--the government always
ended up paying Artie (and me, as his partner-confederate-cohort) an
anything-but-modest fee for his patents. We weren't in the millionaire
class, yet, but neither were we very far out of it. And we were much
better off than any millionaires, since Artie had persuaded the
government to let us, in lieu of payment for another patent of his
(for his Nixsal; the thing that was supposed to convert sea-water into
something drinkable, and did: Gin.), be tax-free for the rest of our
lives.

(It was quite a concession for the government to make. But then, the
government-produced "George Washington Gin" is quite a concession in
itself.)

So I guess you could say I keep listening to Artie Lindstrom because
of the financial rewards. I must admit they're nice. And it's kind of
adventurous, when I'm working on Artie's latest brainstorm, to let
myself wonder what--since I generally scrap Artie's prognosis for the
