The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ripeness is All, by Jesse Roarke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ripeness is All

Author: Jesse Roarke

Release Date: June 26, 2013 [EBook #43038]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIPENESS IS ALL ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          Ripeness Is All

                          By JESSE ROARKE

                        Illustrator SUMMERS

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Fantastic Stories
    of Imagination May 1962. Extensive research did not uncover any
    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


    _Shakespeare wrote it, in the tragedy of King Lear--a phrase
    to live by:

                      Men must endure
    Their going hence, even as their coming hither;_


He was disturbed, but he did not know it. Murky, agitated waters crept
up in his vast subconscious world, and sought the threshold, the mouth
of the pit, the slope of the clean shore; little rainbows of light
now and then flashed over the waters. They heaved, and against the
sluice-gates they beat, sullenly. There was a yielding, but the great
force was contained.

He left his Pad, curiously mopping his brow a little, and furrowing it
between the eyes. It came to him that he was hungry. He stepped to the
curb, pushed the button, and leaned against the post, as if waiting, or
in thought. Almost immediately a Car appeared, in a cheery orange and
green. He almost shuddered, and he almost knew that he did so. Then he
brightened, stepped into the car, and voiced his desire.

He was carried at a moderate pace through clean, broad streets and past
bright, shiny buildings and smiling parks and gardens. He came to the
top of a high hill, saw the sparkling blue bay in the distance, and
thought vaguely of sailing upon it. On his face he felt a brisk spray,
and the air was tanged with salt. Then a warmed, faintly perfumed
glow dried and composed him, and the Car shut off all its machinery
and glided to a stop. He got out, ever so comfortable, and entered a
luxurious Kitchen, in which he had not dined for several days.

The doors opened automatically, and a smiling android, gaily featured
and clothed, conducted him to a table. She was a soothing sight: yes,
that's what it was. He ordered a sumptuous meal, rubbing his ample
waistline in anticipation.

"Dig dig!" crooned the waitress.

He patted good-naturedly her well-moulded behind as she turned; she
glowed sweetly back over her soft and delicate shoulder. He wondered if
Meg was enough, and decided that, well, for the time being, he guessed
she was. No use hurrying things. The waitress returned and served the
meal. As always, it was excellent. He finished with a leisurely bottle
of wine and a cigar, pinched the waitress's firm yet ever so yielding
thigh, and departed.

Then a deep stirring almost took hold upon him. Yes, that was what
he needed. It had been several months now. He pushed another button,
and a rosy pink Car appeared to his service. "Take me to a House, you
know what I mean?" he said, as he arranged himself upon the pearl grey
cushions. The Car glided away.

       *       *       *       *       *

On and on along the shore of the ocean they pleasantly careened. At
length they turned into a rich garden bower, and stopped in front of
a great mansion overlooking the waves. He alighted; the Car departed.
Profusely bloomed scarlet and golden and azure flowers, everywhere;
succulent and bright was the lavish green. The doors opened, and a Woman
received him. She was past child-bearing, motherly, and smiling.

He smiled back, and said, "You got one, huh?"

"Of course," she answered.

He sat down to wait.

And while he waited, he almost thought. Meg was good, all right, but
why wasn't she enough, sometimes? He tapped his thumb-nail against his
teeth in a few moments of near perplexity, and then desisted. Soon a
bevy of charming Girls entered the room and paraded for him, laughing
and smiling. He settled upon a petite brunette with cherry lips. She
stripped him of his clothes, and they went walking in a private garden.

In an inner bower they sat down to a rustic table, and were served by
robot with a heady aphrodisiac wine. On the grasses and the petals
of flowers, overlooking the sea, they entwined their limbs and their
bodies, and he nearly enjoyed her. He thought that once he had enjoyed
this activity indeed, and wondered whether it were so.

He sat looking over the waters, trying to muse. The androids were
physically perfect, flesh meeting flesh, clinging to it, thrilling with
it. They were warm, they whispered, they strained and cried. They were
freely available, for every man and woman. None need be unsatisfied.

But he did not know all of this, history and psychology were lost to
him and he could never keep a connected train of thought; his being
unsatisfied could not penetrate to his consciousness. He did not quite
know that flesh cried out for something more than flesh, and had
always done so. He did know, more or less, that there was the matter
of population, and that real men and real women had, at mysterious
intervals, to copulate. That was the way it was. He had once spent some
time in a House himself, meeting the requirements of an endless variety
of Girls. He supposed that some of them had borne the issue of his seed,
though he did not suppose it in these terms. But it was better not to
know these things for certain, and not to have anything to do with
the rearing of children, after the early mother-feeling was over. The
