Project Gutenberg's Memorabilia Mathematica, by Robert Edouard Moritz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Memorabilia Mathematica
       or the Philomath's Quotation-Book

Author: Robert Edouard Moritz

Release Date: January 22, 2014 [EBook #44730]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORABILIA MATHEMATICA ***




Produced by Peter Vachuska, Richard Hulse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










  MEMORABILIA MATHEMATICA




  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  NEW YORK. BOSTON. CHICAGO. DALLAS
  ATLANTA. SAN FRANCISCO

  MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED

  LONDON. BOMBAY. CALCUTTA
  MELBOURNE

  THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.

  TORONTO




  MEMORABILIA MATHEMATICA

  OR

  THE PHILOMATH'S QUOTATION-BOOK




  BY

  ROBERT EDOUARD MORITZ, PH. D., PH. N. D.

  PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON

  New York
  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  1914

  _All rights reserved_

  COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY
  ROBERT EDOUARD MORITZ




  PREFACE


Every one knows that the fine phrase "God geometrizes" is attributed to
Plato, but few know where this famous passage is found, or the exact
words in which it was first expressed. Those who, like the author,
have spent hours and even days in the search of the exact statements,
or the exact references, of similar famous passages, will not question
the timeliness and usefulness of a book whose distinct purpose it is to
bring together into a single volume exact quotations, with their exact
references, bearing on one of the most time-honored, and even today the
most active and most fruitful of all the sciences, the queen-mother of
all the sciences, that is, mathematics.

It is hoped that the present volume will prove indispensable to every
teacher of mathematics, to every writer on mathematics, and that the
student of mathematics and the related sciences will find its perusal
not only a source of pleasure but of encouragement and inspiration
as well. The layman will find it a repository of useful information
covering a field of knowledge which, owing to the unfamiliar and hence
repellant character of the language employed by mathematicians, is
peculiarly inaccessible to the general reader. No technical processes
or technical facility is required to understand and appreciate the
wealth of ideas here set forth in the words of the world's great
thinkers.

No labor has been spared to make the present volume worthy of a place
among collections of a like kind in other fields. Ten years have been
devoted to its preparation, years, which if they could have been more
profitably, could scarcely have been more pleasurably employed. As a
result there have been brought together over one thousand more or less
familiar passages pertaining to mathematics, by poets, philosophers,
historians, statesmen, scientists, and mathematicians. These have been
gathered from over three hundred authors, and have been grouped under
twenty heads, and cross indexed under nearly seven hundred topics.

The author's original plan was to give foreign quotations both in the
original and in translation, but with the growth of material this
plan was abandoned as infeasible. It was thought to serve the best
interest of the greater number of English readers to give translations
only, while preserving the references to the original sources, so
that the student or critical reader may readily consult the original
of any given extract. In cases where the translation is borrowed the
translator's name is inserted in brackets [] immediately after the
author's name. Brackets are also used to indicate inserted words or
phrases made necessary to bring out the context.

The absence of similar English works has made the author's work largely
that of the pioneer. Rebiere's "Mathematiques et Mathematiciens"
and Ahrens' "Scherz und Ernst in der Mathematik" have indeed been
frequently consulted but rather with a view to avoid overlapping than
to receive aid. Thus certain topics as the correspondence of German and
French mathematicians, so excellently treated by Ahrens, have purposely
been omitted. The repetitions are limited to a small number of famous
utterances whose absence from a work of this kind could scarcely be
defended on any grounds.

No one can be more keenly aware of the shortcomings of a work than its
author, for none can have so intimate an acquaintance with it. Among
those of the present work is its incompleteness, but it should be
borne in mind that incompleteness is a necessary concomitant of every
collection of whatever kind. Much less can completeness be expected in
a first collection, made by a single individual, in his leisure hours,
and in a field which is already boundless and is yet expanding day by
day. A collection of great thoughts, even if complete today, would be
incomplete tomorrow. Again, if some authors are quoted more frequently
than others of greater fame and authority, the reason may be sought
not only in the fact that the writings of some authors peculiarly
lent themselves to quotation, a quality singularly absent in other
writers of the greatest merit and authority, but also in this, that
the greatest freedom has been exercised in the choice of selections.
The author has followed the bent of his own fancy in collecting
whatever seemed to him sufficiently valuable because of its content,
its beauty, its originality, or its terseness, to deserve a place in a
"Memorabilia."

Great pains has been taken to furnish exact readings and references.
In some cases where a passage could not be traced to its first source,
the secondary source has been given rather than the reputed source. For
the same reason many references are to later editions rather than to
inaccessible first editions.

The author feels confident that this work will be of assistance to
his co-workers in the field of mathematics and allied fields. If in
addition it should aid in a better appreciation of mathematicians and
their work on the part of laymen and students in other fields, the
author's foremost aim in the preparation of this work will have been
achieved.

                                   ROBERT EDOUARD MORITZ,
                                           _September, 1913_.





  CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                                             PAGE

       I. DEFINITIONS AND OBJECT OF MATHEMATICS          1

      II. THE NATURE OF MATHEMATICS                     10

     III. ESTIMATES OF MATHEMATICS                      39

      IV. THE VALUE OF MATHEMATICS                      49

       V. THE TEACHING OF MATHEMATICS                   72

      VI. STUDY AND RESEARCH IN MATHEMATICS             86

     VII. MODERN MATHEMATICS                           108

    VIII. THE MATHEMATICIAN                            121

      IX. PERSONS AND ANECDOTES (A-M)                  135

       X. PERSONS AND ANECDOTES (N-Z)                  166

      XI. MATHEMATICS AS A FINE ART                    181

     XII. MATHEMATICS AS A LANGUAGE                    194

    XIII. MATHEMATICS AND LOGIC                        201

     XIV. MATHEMATICS AND PHILOSOPHY                   209

      XV. MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE                      224

     XVI. ARITHMETIC                                   261

    XVII. ALGEBRA                                      275

   XVIII. GEOMETRY                                     292

     XIX. THE CALCULUS AND ALLIED TOPICS               323

      XX. THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS OF TIME AND SPACE   345

     XXI. PARADOXES AND CURIOSITIES                    364

          INDEX                                        385




  Alles Gescheite ist schon gedacht worden; man muss nur versuchen,
  es noch einmal zu denken.--GOETHE.

                      _Sprueche in Prosa, Ethisches, I. 1._


  A great man quotes bravely, and will not draw on his invention
  when his memory serves him with a word as good.--EMERSON.

                      _Letters and Social Aims, Quotation and
                      Originality._




  MEMORABILIA MATHEMATICA




  MEMORABILIA MATHEMATICA

  CHAPTER I

  DEFINITIONS AND OBJECT OF MATHEMATICS


=101.= I think it would be desirable that this form of word
[mathematics] should be reserved for the applications of the
science, and that we should use mathematic in the singular to
denote the science itself, in the same way as we speak of logic,
rhetoric, or (own sister to algebra) music.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Presidential Address to the British
                         Association, Exeter British Association
                         Report (1869); Collected Mathematical
                         Papers, Vol. 2, p. 659._


=102.= ... all the sciences which have for their end
investigations concerning order and measure, are related to
mathematics, it being of small importance whether this measure be
sought in numbers, forms, stars, sounds, or any other object;
that, accordingly, there ought to exist a general science which
should explain all that can be known about order and measure,
considered independently of any application to a particular
subject, and that, indeed, this science has its own proper name,
consecrated by long usage, to wit, _mathematics_. And a proof
that it far surpasses in facility and importance the sciences
which depend upon it is that it embraces at once all the objects
to which these are devoted and a great many others besides; ....

                                                     --DESCARTES.

                         _Rules for the Direction of the Mind,
                         Philosophy of D. [Torrey] (New York,
                         1892), p. 72._


=103.= [Mathematics] has for its object the _indirect_
measurement of magnitudes, and it _purposes to determine
magnitudes by each other, according to the precise relations
which exist between them_.--COMTE.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 1,
                         chap. 1._


=104.= The business of concrete mathematics is to discover the
equations which express the mathematical laws of the phenomenon
under consideration; and these equations are the starting-point
of the calculus, which must obtain from them certain quantities
by means of others.--COMTE.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 1,
                         chap. 2._


=105.= Mathematics is the science of the connection of
magnitudes. Magnitude is anything that can be put equal or
unequal to another thing. Two things are equal when in every
assertion each may be replaced by the other.--GRASSMANN, HERMANN.

                         _Stuecke aus dem Lehrbuche der
                         Arithmetik, Werke (Leipzig, 1904), Bd.
                         2, p. 298._


=106.= Mathematic is either Pure or Mixed: To Pure Mathematic
belong those sciences which handle Quantity entirely severed from
matter and from axioms of natural philosophy. These are two,
Geometry and Arithmetic; the one handling quantity continued, the
other dissevered.... Mixed Mathematic has for its subject some
axioms and parts of natural philosophy, and considers quantity in
so far as it assists to explain, demonstrate and actuate these.

                                                --BACON, FRANCIS.

                         _De Augmentis, Bk. 3; Advancement of
                         Learning, Bk. 2._


=107.= The ideas which these sciences, Geometry, Theoretical
Arithmetic and Algebra involve extend to all objects and changes
which we observe in the external world; and hence the consideration
of mathematical relations forms a large portion of many of the
sciences which treat of the phenomena and laws of external nature,
as Astronomy, Optics, and Mechanics. Such sciences are hence often
termed _Mixed Mathematics_, the relations of space and number
being, in these branches of knowledge, combined with principles
collected from special observation; while Geometry, Algebra, and
the like subjects, which involve no result of experience, are
called _Pure Mathematics_.--WHEWELL, WILLIAM.

                         _The Philosophy of the Inductive
                         Sciences, Part 1, Bk. 2, chap. I, sect.
                         4. (London, 1858)._


=108.= Higher Mathematics is the art of reasoning about numerical
relations between natural phenomena; and the several sections of
Higher Mathematics are different modes of viewing these
relations.--MELLOR, J. W.

                         _Higher Mathematics for Students of
                         Chemistry and Physics (New York, 1902),
                         Prologue._


=109.= Number, place, and combination ... the three intersecting
but distinct spheres of thought to which all mathematical ideas
admit of being referred.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Philosophical Magazine, Vol. 24 (1844),
                         p. 285; Collected Mathematical Papers,
                         Vol. 1, p. 91._


=110.= There are three ruling ideas, three so to say, spheres of
thought, which pervade the whole body of mathematical science, to
some one or other of which, or to two or all three of them
combined, every mathematical truth admits of being referred;
these are the three cardinal notions, of Number, Space and Order.

Arithmetic has for its object the properties of number in the
abstract. In algebra, viewed as a science of operations, order is
the predominating idea. The business of geometry is with the
evolution of the properties of space, or of bodies viewed as
existing in space.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _A Probationary Lecture on Geometry,
                         York British Association Report (1844),
                         Part 2; Collected Mathematical Papers,
                         Vol. 2, p. 5._


=111.= The object of pure mathematics is those relations which
may be conceptually established among any conceived elements
whatsoever by assuming them contained in some ordered manifold;
the law of order of this manifold must be subject to our choice;
the latter is the case in both of the only conceivable kinds of
manifolds, in the discrete as well as in the continuous.

                                                  --PAPPERITZ, E.

                         _Ueber das System der rein mathematischen
                         Wissenschaften, Jahresbericht der
                         Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, Bd.
                         1, p. 36._


=112.= Pure mathematics is not concerned with magnitude. It is
merely the doctrine of notation of relatively ordered thought
operations which have become mechanical.--NOVALIS.

                         _Schriften (Berlin, 1901), Zweiter Teil,
                         p. 282._


=113.= Any conception which is definitely and completely determined
by means of a finite number of specifications, say by assigning a
finite number of elements, is a mathematical conception. Mathematics
has for its function to develop the consequences involved in the
definition of a group of mathematical conceptions. Interdependence
and mutual logical consistency among the members of the group are
postulated, otherwise the group would either have to be treated as
several distinct groups, or would lie beyond the sphere of
mathematics.--CHRYSTAL, GEORGE.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica (9th edition),
                         Article "Mathematics."_


=114.= The purely formal sciences, logic and mathematics, deal
with those relations which are, or can be, independent of the
particular content or the substance of objects. To mathematics in
particular fall those relations between objects which involve the
concepts of magnitude, of measure and of number.--HANKEL, HERMANN.

                         _Theorie der Complexen Zahlensysteme,
                         (Leipzig, 1867), p. 1._


=115.= _Quantity is that which is operated with according to
fixed mutually consistent laws._ Both operator and operand must
derive their meaning from the laws of operation. In the case of
ordinary algebra these are the three laws already indicated [the
commutative, associative, and distributive laws], in the algebra
of quaternions the same save the law of commutation for
multiplication and division, and so on. It may be questioned
whether this definition is sufficient, and it may be objected
that it is vague; but the reader will do well to reflect that any
definition must include the linear algebras of Peirce, the
algebra of logic, and others that may be easily imagined,
although they have not yet been developed. This general
definition of quantity enables us to see how operators may be
treated as quantities, and thus to understand the rationale of
the so called symbolical methods.--CHRYSTAL, GEORGE.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica (9th edition),
                         Article "Mathematics."_


=116.= Mathematics--in a strict sense--is the abstract science
which investigates deductively the conclusions implicit in the
elementary conceptions of spatial and numerical relations.

                                               --MURRAY, J. A. H.

                         _A New English Dictionary._


=117.= Everything that the greatest minds of all times have
accomplished toward the _comprehension of forms_ by means of
concepts is gathered into one great science, _mathematics_.

                                                 --HERBART, J. F.

                         _Pestalozzi's Idee eines A B C der
                         Anschauung, Werke [Kehrbach],
                         (Langensalza, 1890), Bd. 1, p. 163._


=118.= Perhaps the least inadequate description of the general scope
of modern Pure Mathematics--I will not call it a definition--would
be to say that it deals with _form_, in a very general sense of the
term; this would include algebraic form, functional relationship,
the relations of order in any ordered set of entities such as
numbers, and the analysis of the peculiarities of form of groups
of operations.--HOBSON, E. W.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science (1910); Nature, Vol. 84, p.
                         287._


=119.= The ideal of mathematics should be to erect a calculus to
facilitate reasoning in connection with every province of
thought, or of external experience, in which the succession of
thoughts, or of events can be definitely ascertained and
precisely stated. So that all serious thought which is not
philosophy, or inductive reasoning, or imaginative literature,
shall be mathematics developed by means of a calculus.

                                               --WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _Universal Algebra (Cambridge, 1898),
                         Preface._


=120.= Mathematics is the science which draws necessary
conclusions.--PEIRCE, BENJAMIN.

                         _Linear Associative Algebra, American
                         Journal of Mathematics, Vol. 4 (1881),
                         p. 97._


=121.= Mathematics is the universal art apodictic.--SMITH, W. B.

                         _Quoted by Keyser, C. J. in Lectures on
                         Science, Philosophy and Art (New York,
                         1908), p. 13._


=122.= Mathematics in its widest signification is the development
of all types of formal, necessary, deductive reasoning.

                                               --WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _Universal Algebra (Cambridge, 1898),
                         Preface, p. vi._


=123.= Mathematics in general is fundamentally the science of
self-evident things.--KLEIN, FELIX.

                         _Anwendung der Differential- und
                         Integralrechnung auf Geometrie (Leipzig,
                         1902), p. 26._


=124.= A mathematical science is any body of propositions which
is capable of an abstract formulation and arrangement in such a
way that every proposition of the set after a certain one is a
formal logical consequence of some or all the preceding
propositions. Mathematics consists of all such mathematical
sciences.--YOUNG, CHARLES WESLEY.

                         _Fundamental Concepts of Algebra and
                         Geometry (New York, 1911), p. 222._


=125.= Pure mathematics is a collection of hypothetical,
deductive theories, each consisting of a definite system of
primitive, _undefined_, concepts or symbols and primitive,
_unproved_, but self-consistent assumptions (commonly called
axioms) together with their logically deducible consequences
following by rigidly deductive processes without appeal to
intuition.--FITCH, G. D.

                         _The Fourth Dimension simply Explained
                         (New York, 1910), p. 58._


=126.= The whole of Mathematics consists in the organization of a
series of aids to the imagination in the process of reasoning.

                                               --WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _Universal Algebra (Cambridge, 1898), p.
                         12._


=127.= Pure mathematics consists entirely of such asseverations
as that, if such and such a proposition is true of _anything_,
then such and such another proposition is true of that thing. It
is essential not to discuss whether the first proposition is
really true, and not to mention what the anything is of which it
is supposed to be true.... If our hypothesis is about _anything_
and not about some one or more particular things, then our
deductions constitute mathematics. Thus mathematics may be
defined as the subject in which we never know what we are talking
about, nor whether what we are saying is true.--RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _Recent Work on the Principles of
                         Mathematics, International Monthly, Vol.
                         4 (1901), p. 84._


=128.= Pure Mathematics is the class of all propositions of the form
"_p_ implies _q_," where _p_ and _q_ are propositions containing one
or more variables, the same in the two propositions, and neither _p_
nor _q_ contains any constants except logical constants. And logical
constants are all notions definable in terms of the following:
Implication, the relation of a term to a class of which it is a
member, the notion of _such that_, the notion of relation, and
such further notions as may be involved in the general notion of
propositions of the above form. In addition to these, Mathematics
_uses_ a notion which is not a constituent of the propositions
which it considers--namely, the notion of truth.--RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _Principles of Mathematics (Cambridge,
                         1903), p. 1._


=129.= The object of pure Physic is the unfolding of the laws of
the intelligible world; the object of pure Mathematic that of
unfolding the laws of human intelligence.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _On a theorem, connected with Newton's
                         Rule, etc., Collected Mathematical
                         Papers, Vol. 3, p. 424._


=130.= First of all, we ought to observe, that mathematical
propositions, properly so called, are always judgments _a
priori,_ and not empirical, because they carry along with them
necessity, which can never be deduced from experience. If people
should object to this, I am quite willing to confine my
statements to pure mathematics, the very concept of which implies
that it does not contain empirical, but only pure knowledge _a
priori_.--KANT, IMMANUEL.

                         _Critique of Pure Reason [Mueller], (New
                         York, 1900), p. 720._


=131.= Mathematics, the science of the ideal, becomes the means
of investigating, understanding and making known the world of the
real. The complex is expressed in terms of the simple. From one
point of view mathematics may be defined as the science of
successive substitutions of simpler concepts for more complex....

                                              --WHITE, WILLIAM F.

                         _A Scrap-book of Elementary Mathematics,
                         (Chicago, 1908), p. 215._


=132.= The critical mathematician has abandoned the search for
truth. He no longer flatters himself that his propositions are or
can be known to him or to any other human being to be true;
and he contents himself with aiming at the correct, or the
consistent. The distinction is not annulled nor even blurred by
the reflection that consistency contains immanently a kind of
truth. He is not absolutely certain, but he believes profoundly
that it is possible to find various sets of a few propositions
each such that the propositions of each set are compatible, that
the propositions of each such set imply other propositions, and
that the latter can be deduced from the former with certainty.
That is to say, he believes that there are systems of coherent or
consistent propositions, and he regards it his business to
discover such systems. Any such system is a branch of mathematics.

                                                  --KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Science, New Series, Vol. 35, p. 107._


=133.= [Mathematics is] the study of ideal constructions (often
applicable to real problems), and the discovery thereby of
relations between the parts of these constructions, before
unknown.--PEIRCE, C. S.

                         _Century Dictionary, Article
                         "Mathematics."_


=134.= Mathematics is that form of intelligence in which we bring
the objects of the phenomenal world under the control of the
conception of quantity. [Provisional definition.]--HOWISON, G. H.

                         _The Departments of Mathematics, and
                         their Mutual Relations; Journal of
                         Speculative Philosophy, Vol. 5, p. 164._


=135.= Mathematics is the science of the functional laws and
transformations which enable us to convert figured extension and
rated motion into number.--HOWISON, G. H.

                         _The Departments of Mathematics, and
                         their Mutual Relations; Journal of
                         Speculative Philosophy, Vol. 5, p. 170._




  CHAPTER II

  THE NATURE OF MATHEMATICS


=201.= Mathematics, from the earliest times to which the history
of human reason can reach, has followed, among that wonderful
people of the Greeks, the safe way of science. But it must not be
supposed that it was as easy for mathematics as for logic, in
which reason is concerned with itself alone, to find, or rather
to make for itself that royal road. I believe, on the contrary,
that there was a long period of tentative work (chiefly still
among the Egyptians), and that the change is to be ascribed to a
_revolution_, produced by the happy thought of a single man,
whose experiments pointed unmistakably to the path that had to be
followed, and opened and traced out for the most distant times
the safe way of a science. The history of that intellectual
revolution, which was far more important than the passage round
the celebrated Cape of Good Hope, and the name of its fortunate
author, have not been preserved to us.... A new light flashed on
the first man who demonstrated the properties of the isosceles
triangle (whether his name was _Thales_ or any other name), for
he found that he had not to investigate what he saw in the
figure, or the mere concepts of that figure, and thus to learn
its properties; but that he had to produce (by construction) what
he had himself, according to concepts _a priori_, placed into
that figure and represented in it, so that, in order to know
anything with certainty _a priori_, he must not attribute to that
figure anything beyond what necessarily follows from what he has
himself placed into it, in accordance with the concept.

                                                --KANT, IMMANUEL.

