Project Gutenberg's The Fantasy Fan November 1933, by Charles D. Hornig

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Fantasy Fan November 1933
       The Fans' Own Magazine

Author: Charles D. Hornig

Release Date: August 8, 2014 [EBook #46534]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FANTASY FAN NOVEMBER 1933 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






THE FANTASY FAN

The Fans' Own Magazine

Editor: Charles D. Hornig
(Managing Editor: Wonder Stories)

Published                     10 cents a copy
Monthly                       $1.00 per year

137 West Grand Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey

Volume 1      November, 1933      Number 3




OUR READERS SAY


"The second number looks to me even more interesting than the first.
Smith's tale was splendid. The remunerative editors were certainly
fools to turn it down. Glad to see that a number of readers are
showing up Ackerman. People like Ackerman are peculiarly
ridiculous--one can plainly see that this type of thing is merely
egotistic and a gesture to call attention to themselves. However, most
people out-grow this stage. Glad you were able to get something from
young Barlow--he's distinctly worth encouraging." H. P. Lovecraft

Clark Ashton Smith informs us that Astounding Stories has just
accepted one of his tales, "The Demon of the Flowers," and Weird Tales
has just taken "The Tomb Spawn." He tells us that we will find a
surprise in connection with his story, "The Weaver in the Vault" in
the January, 1934, Weird Tales.

"Your editorial was a corker, the various departments okay, and
Smith's yarn was worthy of Weird Tales." Allen Glasser. Mr. Glasser is
attempting to make a living at writing--and isn't doing so bad at it.
The editor prefers to call him "the Arthur J. Burks of the younger
generation." He has sold stories to dozens of magazines, including
science fiction.

"The second issue was swell. I'd like to see more stories by Clark
Ashton Smith in future issues of the mag. Yep, 20 pages of excellent
articles and stories."--Ted Lutwin. Clark Ashton Smith is a regular
contributor to THE FANTASY FAN.

Kenneth B. Pritchard, although he liked the second number immensely,
reminds us that we omitted several things that we promised in the
September issue. Here's the reason: many articles were crowded out of
this number, and others were postponed to make room for a number of
much better articles which came in the last minute. Everything
promised will be published in good time, though.

Lloyd Fowler wants us to keep using the grade of paper that we are,
instead of cutting down the number of pages in order to afford a
better grade.

"THE FANTASY FAN is starting out well."--Ralph Milne Farley

From A. Merritt, whom everybody knows, we hear that he had started a
sequel to "Thru The Dragon Glass," but abandoned it because he didn't
like to write sequels. Our belief is that great authors don't need to
write sequels.




SUPERNATURAL HORROR

IN LITERATURE

by H. P. Lovecraft

(Copyright 1927 by W. Paul Cook)

Part Two


Because we remember pain and the menace of death more vividly than
pleasure, and because our feelings toward the beneficent aspects of
the unknown have from the first been captured and formalised by
conventional religious rituals, it has fallen to the lot of the darker
and more maleficent side of cosmic mystery to figure chiefly in our
popular supernatural folklore. The tendency, too, is naturally
enhanced by the fact that uncertainty and danger are closely allied;
thus making any kind of an unknown world, a world of peril and evil
possibilities. When to this sense of fear and evil the inevitable
fascination of wonder and curiosity is superadded, there is born a
composite body of keen emotion and imaginative provocation whose
vitality must of necessity endure as long as the human race itself.
Children will always be afraid of the dark, and men with minds
sensitive to hereditary impulse will always tremble at the thought of
the hidden and fathomless worlds or strange life which may pulsate in
the gulfs beyond the stars, or press hideously upon our own globe in
unholy dimensions which only the dead and the moonstruck can glimpse.

With this foundation, no one need wonder at the existence of a
literature of cosmic fear. It has always existed, and always will
exist; and no better evidence of its tenacious vigour can be cited
than the impulse which now and then drives writers of totally opposite
leanings to try their hands at it in isolated tales, as if to
discharge from their minds certain phantasmal shapes which would
otherwise haunt them. Thus did Dickens write several eerie narratives;
Browning the hideous poem, "Childe Roland"; Henry James, "The Turn of
the Screw"; Dr. Holmes, the subtle novel "Elsie Venner"; F. Marion
Crawford, "The Upper Berth" and a number of other examples; Mrs.
Charlotte Perkins Gilman, social worker, "The Yellow Wall Paper";
whilst the humorist, W. W. Jacobs, produced that able melodramatic bit
called "The Monkey's Paw."


(Continued next month)




SEQUELS--BY POPULAR DEMAND

by Walt Z. Russjuchi
