The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fantasy Fan January 1934, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Fantasy Fan January 1934
       The Fans' Own Magazine

Author: Various

Editor: Charles D. Hornig

Release Date: August 18, 2014 [EBook #46615]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FANTASY FAN JANUARY 1934 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






THE FANTASY FAN

THE FANS' OWN MAGAZINE

Editor: Charles D. Hornig
(Managing Editor: Wonder Stories)

Published                     10 cents a copy
Monthly                       $1.00 per year

137 West Grand Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey

Volume 1        January, 1934       Number 5




IT'S UP TO YOU!


The time has come when we must ask you a very important question.
Do you want _The Fantasy Fan_ to remain a monthly, or would you
rather have a bi-monthly or a quarterly instead? Now, don't answer
this question by sending in a written reply. The only way you can
answer it is by mailing to us a dollar for a year's subscription.
Since the inception of _The Fantasy Fan_ it has been running at a
great loss. The cost of having the magazine printed is not small and
the subscriptions do not pay for one quarter of the total cost. This
fact may astound you, but it is the truth. _The Fantasy Fan_ is young
and not many of the fans know of its existence, chiefly because of the
lack of a good advertising mediums for the most part, and the refusal
of Weird Tales, the only really good medium for advertising such a fan
magazine, to accept our ad for the second time. Perhaps you do not
find our magazine worth a dollar a year, and that weird fiction would
get along just as well without a fan magazine. In this case, you need
pay no attention to this editorial. But there are those of us who
really like our magazine and would not like to see it go bi-monthly or
quarterly and yet have not subscribed. Of course, those of our readers
who have, have all done their part and are under no obligation. The
editor has created a considerable sinking fund for the cost of
publication, and although the sinking fund is practically exhausted,
we are not sunk! As long as he has an income, the editor is willing to
sacrifice a portion of it to keep _The Fantasy Fan_ alive--but he
alone cannot keep it a monthly. You cannot lose by the deal. You will
get full value for your money. Our magazine will not fail, but if it
did, every subscriber on our list would get back his money for those
numbers he would not receive. So if the success of our magazine means
anything to you, subscribe at once--each dollar sent in will insure a
shorter period between issues. If you have already subscribed, try to
get some of your friends interested. Give subscriptions for your
fantasy fan friends. If your subscription runs out in a month or
two, renew it now, ahead of time. Please send only dollar bills or
money orders--no checks or stamps. _Are you faithful to fantasy
fiction?_--then let's see action. I'm doing my part--are you doing
yours? The February number will be the regular monthly issue, and
probably March, but future numbers will be bi-monthly unless you who
have not sent in your subscriptions do so at once! If you could
foresee the many rare treats we have in store for you, you would not
hesitate a moment.

Here's hoping we have many faithful readers.

--The Editor




INFORMATION


Through the courtesy of Ralph Milne Farley, Donald A. Wollheim, David
Stolaroff, Ted Lutwin, and several other of our readers, we are able
to present this additional list of stories written by Edgar Rice
Burroughs as an addenda to the list presented last month:

    The Outlaw of Torm
    The War Chief
    The Mad King
    The Girl From Hollywood
    The Tarzan Twins
    The Girl From Farris's
    The Mucker
    The Man Without a Soul
    The Pirates of Venus
    Lost on Venus
    Tarzan and the Lion Man
    Tarzan and the City of Gold
    The Apache Devil
    The Bandit of Hell's Bend
    The Moon Men
    The Red Hawk
    HRH the Rider
    Efficiency Expert

All of the above stories are not fantasy fiction.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Come over to 'The Boiling Point' and join in the argument.




SCIENCE FICTION IN ENGLISH MAGAZINES

