The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fantasy Fan April 1934, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Fantasy Fan April 1934
       The Fan's Own Magazine

Author: Various

Editor: Charles D. Hornig

Release Date: July 23, 2015 [EBook #49511]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FANTASY FAN APRIL 1934 ***




Produced by Greg Weeks. Les Galloway and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







  THE FANTASY FAN

  THE FANS' OWN MAGAZINE


  Published      Editor: Charles D. Hornig      10 cents a copy
  Monthly    (Managing Editor: Wonder Stories)   $1.00 per year


  137 West Grand Street, Elizabeth, New Jersey


  Volume 1      April, 1934     Number 8




OUR READERS SAY


"Some of us have seen Paul's illustrations so long that we can't get
used to Morey's or Wesso's or anyone else's. I would suggest that THE
FANTASY FAN have a _different_ artist to illustrate a _different_ kind
of picture in a _different_ way. We don't want that stereotyped kind of
illustrating we are getting in the other magazines. And we don't want
that stereotyped kind of writing that is being done so much lately."

  --Art Skold

 It will probably be quite some time before THE FANTASY FAN can afford
 to have its stories illustrated, for it is an expensive proposition.
 Weird stories such as we print should have illustrations by artists
 who know how to draw _weird_ pictures such as Hugh Rankin and
 Brosnatch.

"The March THE FANTASY FAN looks like an excellent issue--typographical
impression improved. But may I ask that some extremely misleading
misprints in my letter be corrected? One is especially bad, giving
a direct contradiction of what I really wrote--this being the
substitution of AN for NO in the phrase meant to read '_no_ especial
morbidity.' (Your Views department). Other errors are 'prospection'
for 'perspective' and the omission of 'g' from the word judgment.

"Glad to see the interesting tale by Robert E. Howard and the powerful
poem by Clark Ashton Smith."

  --H. P. Lovecraft

 We are very sorry about the typographical errors in your article and
 our printer has promised to do better proofreading in the future.

"I enjoyed the February issue. 'Polaris' carries off the honours. I
liked very much the poem by William Lumley and hope you will print more
of his work. Barlow's fifth 'Annals of the Jinns' is another gem.

"I am sorry that the argument in 'The Boiling Point' has aroused any
ill-feeling. Perhaps you are wise to discontinue the column and start
one on a more abstract intellectual basis. Later on, I may have a
little to say on the problems broached for discussion.

"I look forward to seeing the stories announced for future publication.
More power to TFF!"

  --Clark Ashton Smith

"The 'Our Readers Say' is always interesting, and I'm glad you're
increasing the length of Lovecraft's article in the next issue. Lester
Anderson's article was good, as well as humorous, and so is Hoy Ping
Pong, as usual."

  --Kenneth B. Pritchard

"The March THE FANTASY FAN was a wow!--hope it keeps improving!"

  --Bob Tucker

"The March issue is very interesting. Howard's story is both unusual
and well-written, and any poetry of Smith's is predestined to
excellence."

  --R. H. Barlow

"I read 'Polaris' and especially liked the Pole Star's poetry--the
ten line rhyme in the center of the story. I found Miss Marianne
Ferguson's 'Visit to Jules de Grandin' the most interesting article in
the February issue, while the Spacehound's column was very good. I look
forward to the stories you forecast."

  --Forrest J. Ackerman

"The tales in TFF are clever and entertaining little things, and
now and then one is a classic, like 'Polaris' by Lovecraft in the
last issue. Also the other features of the magazine--entertaining,
provocative of thought, and withal interesting and divertive. Whatever
others thought of it, I thought the hot-fire 'debate' between Ackerman
and C. A. Smith highly amusing. Best wishes to TFF, and I hope your
dire predictions of bi-monthly-ism do not come true."

  --Eando Binder

"Glad you substituted 'Your Views' (a prosaic heading) for 'The Boiling
Point.' The readers' department is sometimes too long, but your stories
are short and excellent. Lovecraft's article has always been too short.
'The Ghoul' was _great_. Barlow is consistently good. About the best
thing in the February issue was Smith's article on M. R. James. I hope
you can persuade Smith to write some articles on Machen, Blackwood,
Bierce, etc. They are highly informative."

