The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tedric, by Edward Elmer Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Tedric

Author: Edward Elmer Smith

Release Date: August 8, 2015 [EBook #49651]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEDRIC ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










                                TEDRIC

                     _By E. E. SMITH, Ph. D._

                _Illustrated by J. Allen St. John_

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Other Worlds March
1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]




   Aided by Llosir, his strange, new god, Tedric enters into battle with
   Sarpedion, the sacrifice-demanding god of Lomarr in this story of
   science and swash-buckling adventure which marks the return of "Doc"
   Smith, author of the Skylark series, Lensman series, etc.


"_The critical point in time of mankind's whole existence is
there--RIGHT THERE!" Prime Physicist Skandos slashed his red pencil
across the black trace of the chronoviagram. "WHY must man be so
stupid? Anyone with three brain cells working should know that for
the strength of an individual he should be fed; not bled; that for
the strength of a race its virgins should be bred, not sacrificed to
propitiate figmental deities. And it would be so easy to straighten
things out--nowhere in all reachable time does any other one man occupy
such a tremendously--such a uniquely--key-stone position!_"

_"Easy, yes," his assistant Furmin agreed. "It_ is _a shame to
let Tedric die with not one of his tremendous potentialities realized.
It would be easy and simple to have him discover carburization and
the necessary techniques of heat-treating. That freak meteorite need
not lie there unsmelted for another seventy years. However, simple
carburization was not actually discovered until two generations later,
by another smith in another nation; and you know, Skandos, that
there can be no such thing as a minor interference with the physical
events of the past. Any such, however small-seeming, is bound to be
catastrophically major."_

_"I know that." Skandos scowled blackly. "We don't know enough about
time. We don't know what would happen. We have known how to do it for a
hundred years, but have been afraid to act because in all that time no
progress whatever has been made on the theory."_

_He paused, then went on savagely: "But which is better, to have
our entire time-track snapped painlessly out of existence--if the
extremists are right--or to sit helplessly on our fat rumps wringing
our hands while we watch civilization build up to its own total
destruction by lithium-tritiide bombs? Look at the slope of that
curve--ultimate catastrophe is only one hundred eighty seven years
away!"_

"_But the Council would not permit it. Nor would the School._"

"_I know that, too. That is why I am not going to ask them. Instead, I
am asking you. We two know more of time than any others. Over the years
I have found your judgment good. With your approval I will act now.
Without it, we will continue our futile testing--number eight hundred
eleven is running now, I believe?--and our aimless drifting._"

"_You are throwing the entire weight of such a decision on_ me?"

"_In one sense, yes. In another, only half, since I have already
decided._"

"_Go ahead._"

"_So be it._"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Tedric, awaken!"

The Lomarrian ironmaster woke up; not gradually and partially, like one
of our soft modern urbanites, but instantaneously and completely, as
does the mountain wild-cat. At one instant he lay, completely relaxed,
sound asleep; at the next he had sprung out of bed, seized his sword
and leaped half-way across the room. Head thrown back, hard blue eyes
keenly alert, sword-arm rock-steady he stood there, poised and ready.
Beautifully poised, upon the balls of both feet; supremely ready to
throw into action every inch of his six-feet-four, every pound of his
two-hundred-plus of hard meat, gristle, and bone. So standing, the
smith stared motionlessly at the shimmering, almost invisible thing
hanging motionless in the air of his room, and at its equally tenuous
occupant.

"I approve of you, Tedric." The thing--apparition--whatever it was--did
not speak, and the Lomarrian did not hear; the words formed themselves
in the innermost depths of his brain. "While you perhaps are a little
frightened, you are and have been completely in control. Any other man
of your nation--yes, of your world--would have been scared out of what
few wits he has."

"You are not one of ours, Lord." Tedric went to one knee. He knew, of
course, that gods and devils existed; and, while this was the first
