The Project Gutenberg EBook of Publicity Stunt, by Robert Moore Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Publicity Stunt

Author: Robert Moore Williams

Release Date: August 24, 2015 [EBook #49779]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUBLICITY STUNT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            PUBLICITY STUNT

                      _By Robert Moore Williams_

                   _Illustrated by Joe W. Tillotson_

     [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Other Worlds
     March 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
     the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




     The orders were to build up Venus, make it sound like the gateway
     to Paradise for the average Earthman--fog-flies, flying snakes and
     "tame" Venusians included.


"Just go right ahead and start chewing on me!" Molock briskly invited
the Venusian, Shad Brisbee. "When you get a square meal, I'll get a
lunch!"

Rita Morgan didn't turn a hair at the challenge but I thought Captain
Wilkerson, who was officially in charge of us, was going to faint.
"No, no, NO!" Wilkerson screamed. "Molock, you're getting us all into
trouble. You're--"

"Sheddap!" Molock said to Wilkerson. He turned again to the Venusian,
Shad Brisbee. "You heard what I said. If you want to try to start
carving on me with one of those frog stickers you've got stuck in your
belt, hop right to it. But remember, by Harry, while you're doing your
carving, I'm going to be doing a little light whittling myself."

Except for the needle pistol in his pocket, Molock was unarmed. Lifting
hands as big as hams, he looked Shad Brisbee square in all of the
Venusian's eyes that happened to be turned toward him at the moment.
Molock had the full attention of all six of those eyes. The expression
on Shad Brisbee's face indicated that if he had had six more eyes, he
would have been concentrating all of them on the antics of this mad
human.

Shad Brisbee was seven feet tall, he must have weighed close to 300
pounds. Molock's six feet, 185 pound frame was a pygmy beside the
Venusian. Shad Brisbee fingered the knives in his belt as if he was
considering accepting Molock's invitation, then suddenly spread his
hands. Protesting sound bellowed out of him.

"But you 'ave landed right in the middle of our dancing ground!"

"Then by Harry! dance somewhere else!" Molock shouted.

I thought at first that Shad Brisbee was going to explode. He puffed
himself up until he looked to be eight feet tall. Indignation turned
him green. Each of his six eyes turned yellow and he glared at Molock
out of all of them.

"Molock, his dancing ground is sacred!" Wilkerson croaked.

"And to me, staying alive is sacred," Molock answered. "Which is the
sacredest, my staying alive or his dancing ground?"

"But the way you're acting now, you're going to get us all killed!"
Wilkerson screamed.

"Am I?" Molock answered. "Watch this!" He turned again to Shad Brisbee.
"Listen, you six-eyed baboon. We landed in the middle of your dancing
ground by accident but we're going to stay right where we are as long
as we damn well please. Get it? _We're going to stay here as long as we
damn well please._ And neither you nor any other of your six-eyed tribe
is going to do anything about it."

I was holding my breath. Wilkerson looked as if he was about to faint.
Only Rita seemed to be enjoying this scene. Perhaps she had illusions
that two brawny giants were battling for her, which was a big mistake
on her part. Shad Brisbee wouldn't have had her, or any other human
