The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diagnosis, by R. A. Palmer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Diagnosis

Author: R. A. Palmer

Release Date: August 23, 2015 [EBook #49762]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIAGNOSIS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                               DIAGNOSIS

                           _By R. A. Palmer_

                    _Illustrated by H. W. McCauley_

     [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Other Worlds
     March 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
     the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     Take two men and one girl--the eternal triangle--and mix well with
     an oscilloscope gone haywire. What comes out? With ingredients
     like these, the result is adventure, terror and, of course,
     romance.


"What time did you get to bed last night?"

"Oh, about ... well, fairly early."

"Who were you out with?"

"Brannan."

"Then you didn't get to bed early! If you got in by three, it would be
early, if I know Brannan."

"I got in _much_ before three!"

"How much?"

"Oh ... enough. You'd be surprised...."

"I'm sure I would! Mary, how do you expect us to get anywhere with this
experiment if you come in dog-tired?"

"Donald Jensen, I'm not dog-tired. It's _you_ who's got me in bed in
the wee hours, not me! I came in early."

"Then why won't you state the exact time?" he was exasperated.

She smiled at him archly. "I don't remember, exactly."

"You don't seem to have much of a memory for anything when it comes to
Brannan. What you see in a guy like that, I don't know."

"What's wrong with him?"

"Not a thing. He's a nice guy. Quiet, respectable, deep--and only one
thing on his mind."

"What?"

He glared at her. "You're a smart girl," he said. "You work with me in
this laboratory eight hours a day. You are engaged in a very complex
experiment with the human brain, registering its waves and emanations
in relation to thought, emotions and purely psychological relations.
You've got a degree in psychology, another in psychiatry, a third in
biology. You have written several advanced papers on the functions of
the subconscious mind and its effect on the conscious mind. You have
