The Project Gutenberg EBook of Business For the Lawyers, by Ralph Robin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Business For the Lawyers

Author: Ralph Robin

Release Date: August 23, 2015 [EBook #49767]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BUSINESS FOR THE LAWYERS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









     Bump-Arch had to complete his experiment or spend five more years
     as an apprentice Scientist--and if successful, his feat would
     provide plenty of

                       BUSINESS for the LAWYERS

                           _By Ralph Robin_

                     _Illustration by Sam Kweskin_

     [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Other Worlds
     March 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
     the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"Time," said the Grandmaster of the Guild.

It was the formal word, and the scientists were silent; except
Proudwalk, a biologist, who laughed at something whispered in her ear
by a physicist named Snubnose, her brother.

"Time," the Grandmaster repeated, and in a moment even Proudwalk was
quiet, and Snubnose folded his arms.

"I do not need to tell you that today is the Day of the Candidate,"
said the Grandmaster, supporting himself with an air of great age on
his ceremonial staff of polished copper.

"But he will tell us--in many words," Snubnose whispered now. "Next
winter solstice I am going to propose we double the offering."

Proudwalk sniggered.

It was the practice in the Guild of Scientists that a grandmaster, once
elected, served for life or until he voluntarily retired. Every year
the body formally offered its grandmaster a lump sum to retire. Popular
incumbents were offered one tilsin, an obsolete unit worth less than
the smallest real coin. Others were sometimes offered large amounts.

This system did not encourage elderly grandmasters to be laconic.

Unnecessarily consulting his notes, the Grandmaster declaimed, "On
this Day of the Candidate, the 155th day of the year 1712, Dynastic
Reckoning Corrected--"

Snubnose muttered, "Anybody else would say DRC."

Proudwalk patted his lips. "Hush," she said.

"--we are initiating the consideration of the candidature of Bump-arch
apprentice physicist in the service of Crookback, a master physicist
beloved and esteemed by us all. The candidature of Bump-arch will
be governed by the Principles, by the Laws of the Guild, and by
Acknowledged Custom. The procedure--"

While the Grandmaster talked, Snubnose pondered the familiar
procedure--and some implications the venerable bore didn't concern
himself with.

To become a journeyman scientist, an apprentice had to do two things.
He had to complete his term of service. And he had to perform on a Day
of the Candidate a successful demonstration in his own branch of the
scientific art.

The demonstration always took place on the Field of Proof before the
whole body. It could be either an original experiment or a "restored
experiment"--one reconstructed from fragments of ancient texts.
Standards were low and almost anything was accepted, so long as the
candidate accomplished what he said he would. If a conceited or, as
occasionally happened, a gifted young man attempted a very complicated
demonstration, and it didn't come off--well, it was just too bad.

The unfortunate candidate could either serve another five years of
apprenticeship and try again, or give up all connection with the Guild.
If he left the Guild of Scientists, he couldn't be admitted in any
other Guild.

Which was no laughing matter.
