The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lights on Precipice Peak, by Stephen Tall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Lights on Precipice Peak

Author: Stephen Tall

Illustrator: Newman

Release Date: August 30, 2015 [EBook #49826]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIGHTS ON PRECIPICE PEAK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Adam Buchbinder, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                      The Light on Precipice Peak

                            By STEPHEN TALL

                         Illustrated by NEWMAN

     [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy October
     1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
     copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     _How warm should a handshake be? The answer may be more vital than
     you could guess!_


The three young men sat quietly and watched the faint eerie glow. It
was ruddy and small, a spot of dull red color. For perhaps five or six
minutes it showed, moving slowly along what seemed to be the lip of
Bighorn Glacier, six miles away and seven thousand feet up in the thin
cold air. Then it vanished.

John Drinkard lowered his binoculars. "Well, that's that. You can see
it, but still you can't. The glasses don't help a bit."

"Spooks!" said Chuck Evers. He wriggled his muscular shoulders, slipped
down onto the small of his back in the chair, and propped long legs on
the porch railing.

"Spooks?" Carl Royston's brow wrinkled puzzledly. Drinkard and Evers
both watched with suppressed amusement as his face suddenly cleared and
he almost smiled. "Ah, yes, apparitions."

"Haunts," Chuck said. "Hobgoblins. Ghosts. Banshees."

"Banshees wail," said Drinkard.

Royston's pale eyes glowed with interest. "This you can say for the
lights of Precipice Peak--they are quiet."

"Are you sure?" John Drinkard asked. "How do you know that every coyote
you hear is a coyote?"

"At any rate," said Royston, "if they make sounds, they are the sounds
of the country." He shivered slightly. "A miserable country," he added.

John Drinkard was thick and blocky, with big hands and a square chin.
Chuck Evers was long and sinewy. Beside them, Royston seemed a pale,
slight figure, his thin face sallow, his shoulders ever hunched against
the crisp western air.

"You are speaking of the land I love," said Chuck Evers. "If you don't
like it, why stay around?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Royston shrugged. "It is supposed to make me a man of vigor, with red
corpuscles and a need for cold shower baths. Actually, there is nothing
wrong with me. I was simply born to sit and watch while great louts
like you run and wrestle and climb and sweat." He shifted his gaze to
the peak, now a dark silhouette against the ice-clear stars. "There,
the light shows again."

Slowly the red glow progressed along a cliff face, much higher than it
