The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Snare, by Richard R. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Snare

Author: Richard R. Smith

Illustrator: Weiss

Release Date: September 7, 2015 [EBook #49901]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SNARE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Adam Buchbinder, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










                               The Snare

                          By RICHARD R. SMITH

                         Illustrated by WEISS

     [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy January
     1956. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
     copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     _It's easy to find a solution when there is one--the trick is to
     do it if there is none!_


I glanced at the path we had made across the _Mare Serenitatis_. The
Latin translated as "the Sea of Serenity." It was well named because,
as far as the eye could see in every direction, there was a smooth
layer of pumice that resembled the surface of a calm sea. Scattered
across the quiet sea of virgin Moon dust were occasional islands
of rock that jutted abruptly toward the infinity of stars above.
Considering everything, our surroundings conveyed a sense of serenity
like none I had ever felt.

Our bounding path across the level expanse was clearly marked. Because
of the light gravity, we had leaped high into the air with each step
and every time we struck the ground, the impact had raised a cloud of
dustlike pumice. Now the clouds of dust were slowly settling in the
light gravity.

Above us, the stars were cold, motionless and crystal-clear.
Indifferently, they sprayed a faint light on our surroundings ... a
dim glow that was hardly sufficient for normal vision and was too weak
to be reflected toward Earth.

We turned our head-lamps on the strange object before us. Five beams
of light illuminated the smooth shape that protruded from the Moon's
surface.

The incongruity was so awesome that for several minutes, we remained
motionless and quiet. Miller broke the silence with his quavering
voice, "Strange someone didn't notice it before."

       *       *       *       *       *

Strange? The object rose a quarter of a mile above us, a huge, curving
hulk of smooth metal. It was featureless and yet conveyed a sense
of _alienness_. It was alien and yet it wasn't a natural formation.
Something had made the thing, whatever it was. But was it strange that
it hadn't been noticed before? Men had lived on the Moon for over a
year, but the Moon was vast and the _Mare Serenitatis_ covered three
hundred and forty thousand square miles.

"What is it?" Marie asked breathlessly.

Her husband grunted his bafflement. "Who knows? But see how it curves?
If it's a perfect sphere, it must be at least two miles in diameter!"

"If it's a perfect sphere," Miller suggested, "most of it must be
beneath the Moon's surface."

"Maybe it isn't a sphere," my wife said. "Maybe this is all of it."

"Let's call Lunar City and tell the authorities about it." I reached
for the radio controls on my suit.

Kane grabbed my arm. "No. Let's find out whatever we can by ourselves.
If we tell the authorities, they'll order us to leave it alone. If we
discover something really important, we'll be famous!"

I lowered my arm. His outburst seemed faintly childish to me. And yet
it carried a good measure of common sense. If we discovered proof of
an alien race, we would indeed be famous. The more we discovered for
ourselves, the more famous we'd be. Fame was practically a synonym for
prestige and wealth.

"All right," I conceded.

