Project Gutenberg's Scientific American Supplement, No. 286, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 286
       June 25, 1881

Author: Various

Posting Date: October 10, 2012 [EBook #8297]
Release Date: June, 2005
First Posted: July 4, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPL., NO. 286 ***




Produced by Olaf Voss, Don Kretz, Juliet Sutherland, Charles
Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 286




NEW YORK, JUNE 25, 1881

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XI, No. 286.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.


       *       *       *       *       *

     TABLE OF CONTENTS.

I.   ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--One Thousand Horse Power Corliss Engine.
     5 figures, to scale, illustrating the construction of the new one
     thousand horse power Corliss engine, by Hitch, Hargreaves & Co.

     Opening of the New Workshop of the Stevens Institute of Technology.
     Speech of Prof. R.W. Raymond, speech of Mr. Horatio Allen.

     Light Steam Engine for Aeronautical Purposes. Constructed for Capt.
     Mojoisky, of the Russian Navy.

     Complete Prevention of Incrustation in Boilers. Arrangement for
     purifying boiler water with lime and carbonate of soda.--The
     purification of the water.--Examination of the purified
     water.--Results of water purification.

     Eddystone Lighthouse. Progress of the work.

     Rolling Mill for Making Corrugated Iron. 1 figure. The new mill of
     Schultz, Knaudt & Co., of Essen, Germany.

     Railway Turntable in the Time of Louis XIV. 1 figure. Pleasure car.
     Railway and turntable at Mary-le-Roy Chateau, France, in 1714.

     New Signal Wire Compensator. Communication from A. Lyle, describing
     compensators in use on the Nizam State Railway, East India.

     Tangye's Hydraulic Hoist. 2 figures.

     Power Loom for Delicate Fabrics. 1 figure.

     How Veneering is Made.

II.  TECHNOLOGY AND CHEMISTRY.--The Constituent Parts of Leather. The
     composition of different leathers exhibited at the Paris
     Exhibition.--Amount of leather produced by different tonnages of 100
     pounds of hides.--Percentage of tannin absorbed under different
     methods of tanning.--Amounts of gelatine and tannin in leather of
     different tonnages, etc.

     Progress in American Pottery.

     Photographic Notes.--Mr. Waruerke's New Discovery.--Method of
     converting negatives directly into positives.--Experiments of Capt.
     Bing on the sensitiveness of coal oil--Bitumen plates.--Method of
     topographic engraving. By Commandant DE LA NOE.--Succinate of Iron
     Developer.--Method of making friable hydro-cellulose.

     Photo-Tracings in Black and Color.

     Dyeing Reds with Artificial Alizarin. By M. MAURICE PRUD'HOMME.

III. ELECTRICITY, PHYSICAL SCIENCE, ETC.--On Faure's Secondary Battery.

     Physical Science in Our Common Schools.--An exceptionally strong
     argument for the teaching of physical science by the experimental
     method in elementary schools, with an outline of the method and the
     results of such teaching.

     On the Law of Avogadro and Ampere. By E. VOGEL.

IV.  GEOGRAPHY, GEOLOGY, ETC.--Petroleum and Coal in Venezuela.

     Geographical Society of the Pacific.

     The Behring's Straits Currents.--Proofs of their existence.

     Experimental Geology.--Artificial production of calcareous pisolites
     and oolites.--On crystals of anhydrous lime.--4 figures.

V.   NATURAL HISTORY, ETC.--Coccidae. By Dr. H. BEHR.--An important paper
     read before the California Academy of Sciences.--The marvelous
     fecundity of scale bugs.--Their uses.--Their ravages.--Methods of
     destroying them.

     Agricultural Items.

     Timber Trees.

     Blood Rains.

VI.  MEDICINE AND HYGIENE.--Medical Uses of Figs.

     Topical Medication in Phthisis.

VII. ARCHITECTURE, ETC.--Suggestions in Architecture.--Large
     illustration.--The New High School for Girls, Oxford, England.

       *       *       *       *       *




PETROLEUM AND COAL IN VENEZUELA.


MR. E. H. PLUMACHER, U. S. Consul at Maracaibo, sends to the State
Department the following information touching the wealth of coal and
petroleum probable in Venezuela:

The asphalt mines and petroleum fountains are most abundant in that part
of the country lying between the River Zulia and the River Catatumbo,
and the Cordilleras. The wonderful sand-bank is about seven kilometers
from the confluence of the Rivers Tara and Sardinarte. It is ten meters
high and thirty meters long. On its surface can be seen several round
holes, out of which rises the petroleum and water with a noise like that
made by steam vessels when blowing off steam, and above there ascends a
column of vapor. There is a dense forest around this sand-bank, and the
place has been called "El Inferno." Dr. Edward McGregor visited the
sand-bank, and reported to the Government that by experiment he had
ascertained that one of the fountains spurted petroleum and water at the
rate of 240 gallons per hour. Mr. Plumacher says that the petroleum is
of very good quality, its density being that which the British market
requires in petroleum imported from the United States. The river, up to
the junction of the Tara and Sardinarte, is navigable during the entire
year for flat-bottomed craft of forty or fifty tons.

Mr. Plumacher has been unable to discover that there are any deposits
of asphalt or petroleum in the upper part of the Department of Colon,
beyond the Zulia, but he has been told that the valleys of Cucuta and
the territories of the State of Tachira abound in coal mines. There are
coal mines near San Antonia, in a ravine called "La Carbonera," and
these supply coal for the smiths' forges in that place. Coal and asphalt
are also found in large quantities in the Department of Sucre. Mr.
Plumacher has seen, while residing in the State of Zulia, but one true
specimen of "lignite," which was given to him by a rich land-owner,
who is a Spanish subject. In the section where it was found there are
several fountains of a peculiar substance. It is a black liquid, of
little density, strongly impregnated with carbonic acid which it
transmits to the water which invariably accompanies it. Deposits of this
substance are found at the foot of the spurs of the Cordilleras, and are
believed to indicate the presence of great deposits of anthracite.

There are many petroleum wells of inferior quality between Escuque and
Bettijoque, in the town of Columbia. Laborers gather the petroleum in
handkerchiefs. After these become saturated, the oil is pressed out by
wringing. It is burned in the houses of the poor. The people thought, in
1824, that it was a substance unknown elsewhere, and they called it
the "oil of Columbia." At that time they hoped to establish a valuable
industry by working it, and they sent to England, France, and this
country samples which attracted much attention. But in those days no
method of refining the crude oil had been discovered, and therefore
these efforts to introduce petroleum to the world soon failed.

The plains of Ceniza abound in asphalt and petroleum. There is a large
lake of these substances about twelve kilometers east of St. Timoteo,
and from it some asphalt is taken to Maracaibo. Many deposits of asphalt
are found between these plains and the River Mene. The largest is that
of Cienega de Mene, which is shallow. At the bottom lies a compact
bed of asphalt, which is not used at present, except for painting
the bottoms of vessels to keep off the barnacles. There are wells of
petroleum in the State of Falcon.

Mr. Plumacher says that all the samples of coal submitted to him in
Venezuela for examination, with the exception of the "lignite" before
mentioned, were, in his opinion, asphalt in various degrees of
condensation. The sample which came from Tule he ranks with the coals
of the best quality. He believes that the innumerable fountains and
deposits of petroleum, bitumen, and asphalt that are apparent on the
surface of the region around Lake Maracaibo are proof of the existence
below of immense deposits of coal. These deposits have not been
uncovered because the territory remains for the most part as wild as it
was at the conquest.

       *       *       *       *       *




ONE THOUSAND HORSE-POWER CORLISS ENGINE.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.

DIA. OF CYLINDER = 40''
STROKE = 10 ft.
REVS = 41
SCALE OF DIAGRAMS 40 LBS = 1 INCH

FIG. 2.]

We illustrate one of the largest Corliss engines ever constructed. It is
of the single cylinder, horizontal, condensing type, with one cylinder
40 inches diameter, and 10 feet stroke, and makes forty-five revolutions
per minute, corresponding to a piston speed of 900 feet per minute. At
mid stroke the velocity of the piston is 1,402 feet per minute nearly,
and its energy in foot pounds amounts to about 8.6 times its weight.
The cylinder is steam jacketed on the body and ends, and is fitted with
Corliss valves and Inglis & Spencer's automatic Corliss valve expansion
gear. Referring to the general drawing of the engine, it will be seen
that the cylinder is bolted directly to the end of the massive cast iron
frame, and the piston coupled direct to the crank by the steel piston
rod and crosshead and the connecting rod. The connecting rod is 28
feet long center to center, and 12 inches diameter at the middle. The
crankshaft is made of forged Bolton steel, and is 21 inches diameter at
the part where the fly-wheel is carried. The fly driving wheel is 35
feet in diameter, and grooved for twenty-seven ropes, which transmit the
power direct to the various line shafts in the mill. The rope grooves
are made on Hick, Hargreaves & Co.'s standard pattern of deep groove,
and the wheel, which is built up, is constructed on their improved plan
with separate arms and boss, and twelve segments in the rim with joints
planed to the true angle by a special machine designed and made by
themselves. The weight of the fly-wheel is about 60 tons. The condensing
apparatus is arranged below, so that there is complete drainage from the
cylinder to the condenser. The air pump, which is 36 inches diameter and
2 feet 6 inches stroke, is a vertical pump worked by wrought iron
plate levers and two side links, shown by dotted lines, from the main
crosshead. The engine is fenced off by neat railing, and a platform with
access from one side is fitted round the top of the cylinder for getting
conveniently to the valve spindles and lubricators. The above engraving,
which is a side elevation of the cylinder, shows the valve gear
complete. There are two central disk plates worked by separate
eccentrics, which give separate motion to the steam and exhaust valves.
The eccentrics are mounted on a small cross shaft, which is driven by a
line shaft and gear wheels. The piston rod passes out at the back end of
the cylinder and is carried by a shoe slide and guide bar, as shown more
fully in the detailed sectional elevation through the cylinder, showing
also the covers and jackets in section. The cylinder, made in four
pieces, is built up on Mr. W. Inglis's patent arrangement, with separate
liner and steam jacket casing and separate end valve chambers. This
arrangement simplifies the castings and secures good and sound ones. The
liner has face joints, which are carefully scraped up to bed truly to
the end valve chambers. The crosshead slides are each 3 feet 3 inches
long and I foot 3 inches wide. The engine was started last year, and
has worked beautifully from the first, without heating of bearings or
trouble of any kind, and it gives most uniform and steady turning. It is
worked now at forty-one revolutions per minute, or only 820 feet piston
speed, but will be worked regularly at the intended 900 feet piston
speed per minute when the spinning machinery is adapted for the increase
which the four extra revolutions per minute of the engine will give; the
load driven is over 1,000 horsepower, the steam pressure being 50 lb.
to 55 lb., which, however, will be increased when the existing boilers,
which are old, come to be replaced by new. Indicator diagrams from the
engines are given on page 309. The engine is very economical in steam
consumption, but no special trials or tests have been made with it. An
exactly similar engine, but of smaller size, with a cylinder 30 inches
diameter and 8 feet stroke, working at forty-five revolutions per
minute, made by Messrs. Hick, Hargreaves & Co. for Sir Titus Salt,
Sons & Co.'s mill at Saltaire, was tested about two years ago by Mr.
Fletcher, chief engineer of the Manchester Steam Users' Association, and
the results which are given below pretty fairly represent the results
obtained from this class of engine. Messrs. Hick, Hargreaves & Co. are
now constructing a single engine of the same type for 1,800 indicated
horse-power for a cotton mill at Bolton; and they have an order for a
pair of horizontal compound Corliss engines intended to indicate 3,000
horse-power. These engines will be the largest cotton mill engines in
the world.--_The Engineer_.

[Illustration: 1000 HORSE POWER CORLISS ENGINE.--BY HICK. HARGREAVES &
CO.]

_Result of Trials with Saltaire Horizontal Engine on February 14th and
15th, 1878. Trials made by Mr. L.E. Fletcher, Chief Engineer Steam
Users' Association, Manchester._

Engine single-cylinder, with Corliss valves. Inglis and Spencer's valve
gear. Diameter of cylinder. 30in.; stroke, 8ft.; 45 revolutions per
minute.

No. of trials
Total 1.H.P.
[MB] Mean boiler pressure.
[MP] Mean pressure on piston at beginning of stroke.
[ML] Mean loss between boiler pressure and cylinder.
[MA] Mean average pressure on piston.
[W]  Water Per I.H.P. per hour.
[C]  Coal per I.H.P. per hour.

No. of trials  Total  MB     MP     ML     MA     W      C
               I.H.P. lb     lb     lb     lb     lb     lb
Trial No. 1.  301.89  46.6   44.11   2.53  21.23  18.373  2.699
Trial No. 2.  309.66  47.63  44.45   3.18  21.67  17.599  2.561
Means.        305.775 47.115 44.28   2.855 21.45  17.986  2.630

[Illustration: 1000 HORSE POWER CORLISS ENGINE.--BY HICK, HARGREAVES
& CO.] [Illustration: 1000 HORSE POWER CORLISS ENGINE.--BY HICK,
HARGREAVES & CO.]

       *       *       *       *       *




OPENING OF THE NEW WORKSHOP OF THE STEVENS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY.


In our SUPPLEMENT No. 283 we gave reports of some of the addresses of
the distinguished speakers, and we now present the remarks of Prof.
Raymond and Horatio Allen, Esq.:


SPEECH OF PROF. R. W. RAYMOND.

A few years ago, at one of the meetings of our Society of Civil
Engineers we spent a day or so in discussing the proper mode of
educating young men so as to fit them for that profession. It is a
question that is reopened for us as soon as we arrive at the age when
we begin to consider what career to lay out for our sons. When we were
young, the only question with parents in the better walks of life was,
whether their sons should be lawyers, physicians, or ministers. Anything
less than a professional career was looked upon as a loss of caste, a
lowering in the social scale. These things have changed, now that we
engineers are beginning to hold up our heads, as we have every reason to
do; for the prosperity and well-being of the great nations of the world
are attributable, perhaps, more to our efforts than to those of any
other class. When, in the past, the man of letters, the poet, the
orator, succeeded, by some fit expression, by some winged word, to
engage the attention of the world concerning some subject he had at
heart, the highest praise his fellow man could bestow was to cry out
to him, "Well said, well said!" But now, when, by our achievements,
commerce and industry are increased to gigantic proportions, when the
remotest peoples are brought in ever closer communication with us, when
the progress of the human race has become a mighty torrent, rushing
onward with ever accelerating speed, we glory in the yet higher praise,
"Well done, well done!" Under these circumstances, the question how a
young man is best fitted for our profession has become one of increasing
importance, and three methods have been proposed for its solution.
Formerly the only point in debate was whether the candidate should go
first to the schools and then to the workshop, or first to the shop and
then to the schools. It was difficult to arrive at any decision; for of
the many who had risen to eminence as engineers, some had adopted
one order and some the other. There remained a third course, that of
