The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American, Vol. 17, No. 26
December 28, 1867, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American, Vol. 17, No. 26 December 28, 1867
       Journal Of Practical Information, Art, Science, Mechanics,
       Chemistry, And Manufactures

Author: Various

Posting Date: April 8, 2014 [EBook #8951]
Release Date: September, 2005
First Posted: August 29, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, DEC 28, 1867 ***




Produced by Don Kretz, Juliet Sutherland, and Distributed Proofreaders









[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN




A WEEKLY JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL INFORMATION, ART, SCIENCE, MECHANICS,
CHEMISTRY, AND MANUFACTURES.




NEW YORK, DECEMBER 28, 1867.

Vol. XVII.--No. 26. [NEW SERIES.]

$3 per Annum [IN ADVANCE.]


       *       *       *       *       *

Contents: (Illustrated articles are marked with an asterisk.)

  *Improvement in Hulling and Cleansing Hominy

  Nitro Glycerin

  *Hisert's Adjustable Cultivator Tooth

  Remedy for Cold Feet in City Cars

  Getting Your Money Back

  Patent Claims

  Pending Applications for Reissues

  The Last Number of Volume XVII

  Commencement of a New Volume

  A Change at the Patent Office

  Obituary

  How to Make Intelligent Workmen--Go and Do Likewise

  The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN as a Medium of Business

  *Hunt's Improved Steam Packing Piston

  The Iron Clads at Sea

  *Improvement in Hand Drills

  *Improved Method of Securing Cutters on Boring Bars

  Tides and Their Causes

  The Great Hoosac Tunnel

  Horse-hair Snakes--Wonderful Transformation

  Man Proposes, but God Disposes

  Extraordinary Effects of an Earthquake

  Recent American and Foreign Patents

  Answers to Correspondents

  Business and Personal

  Manufacturing, Mining, and Railroad Items

  Patent Office Decision

       *       *       *       *       *




Improvement in Hulling and Cleansing Hominy.


Many of our readers well remember when "hulled corn" was a standing
winter dish. This was corn or maize the kernels of which were denuded
of their "hulls" by the chemical action of alkalies, which, however,
impaired the sweetness of the food. Hominy is corn deprived of the
hulls by mechanical means leaving the corn with all its original flavor
unimpaired. Hominy is a favorite dish throughout the country, but is not
always entirely free from particles of the outer skin of the kernels.
The mill shown in perspective in the engraving is intended to obviate
this objection.

[Illustration: DONALDSON'S PATENT HOMINY MILL.]

The corn is placed in the hopper, A, from which it is fed to the hulling
cylinder contained in the case, B. The hulling machinery is driven by
a belt on the pulley, C, the other end of the shaft of which carries
a pinion which gives motion to the gear wheel, D. This, by means of a
pinion on the shaft of the blower, E, drives the fans of the blower. On
the other, or front end of the shaft which carries the gear, D, is a
bevel gear by which another bevel gear and worm is turned. The worm
rotates the worm gear, F, in two opposite arms of which are slots that
carry pins projecting inwards, which may be moved toward or away from
the center. This gear wheel turns free on the shaft that carries the
pulley, C, and is intended for opening, by means of the pins in the
arms and levers, a cover in the bottom of the hopper and a valve in the
bottom of the hulling cylinder. Coiled or bent springs return these
levers or valves to place when the pin which moves them has passed.

A wrist-pin on the gear, D, forms a crank which is connected to a bar
at the rear end of the sieves, G, pivoted to an arm at H, by which the
sieves have a shaking or reciprocating motion as the machine operates.
The blower drives out the hulls and the motion of the sieves with their
inclined position insure access of the air to every portion of the
hominy.

It will be noticed that the connection of all the parts is absolute. The
motion of the sieves, the speed of the blower, and the action of the
inlet hopper valve and the delivery hulling valve are always exactly
proportioned to the speed of the hulling cylinder, whether fast or slow.
The upper or feed valve opens upward and has a downward projecting lip
that shuts into a recess in its seat which insures security against
leakage from the hopper to the hulling cylinder during the intervals of
its being raised; a great advantage in hominy making, as no grain ought
to get into the batch until that in the cylinder is done.

Patented Oct. 15, 1867, by John Donaldson, who may be addressed for
further information at Rockford, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *




Nitro-Glycerin.


Professor Doremus of this city was called as a witness at the inquest
upon the bodies of the unfortunate persons killed by the recent
explosion at Bergen, N.J. The Professor having previously analyzed some
of the explosive mixture, testified as follows:--"I have subjected it
to chemical analysis, and find it to correspond to the formula C_{6},
H_{3}, O_{3}, and NO_{5}; it is well made nitro-glycerin; the substance
freezes at about 46; it is made to decompose in a very peculiar way; on
moistening paper with it it burns with rapidity; it does not explode
when red-hot copper is placed in it; we tried it with the most intense
heat--we can produce with a galvanic battery with two hundred cells
holding a gallon and a half each; some nitro-glycerin was placed in a
cup and connected with one of the poles of the battery; through a pencil
of gas carbon the other poles of the battery were connected with the
glycerin, no explosion ensued; but when the point touched the britannia
vessel the nitro-glycerin took fire, a portion burning and the rest
scattering about; this is as severe a test as we can submit it to in the
way of heat under the pressure of the air; we therefore would conclude
that nitro-glycerin carried about exposed cannot explode, even if you
drop a coal of fire into it; if the liquid is confined, or is under
pressure, then an explosion will ensue; if paper be moistened with
it and put on an anvil and a smart blow given with a hammer, a sharp
detonation ensues; if gunpowder or the fulminates of mercury, silver or
gun-cotton be ignited in a vacuum by a galvanic battery, none of them
will explode; if any gas be introduced so as to produce a gentle
pressure during the decomposition, then a rapid evolution of gases will
result; the results of decomposition in a vacuum differ from those under
atmospheric pressure or when they are burnt in a pistol, musket,
a cannon, or in a mine; where we have little or no pressure it is
difficult to get these substances to burn rapidly; nitro-glycerin is
more difficult to explode than powder; in many respects it resembles
gun-cotton which is made in a similar way; if gun-cotton be immersed
in the proto-chloride of iron it turns into common cotton; the
same experiment was tried with nitro-glycerin by mixing it with
proto-chloride of iron, and it reverted into common glycerin; there
are four well known varieties of gun-cotton made by employing acids of
different strengths; they differ in chemical composition and properties,
as well as in their explosive qualities; the late Minister of War in
Austria in 1862 stated to me that he had ordered four hundred cannon for
gun-cotton, and six months after he stated that he had ordered all
the cannon to be changed and adapted to powder, in consequence of
spontaneous combustions; much less is known of nitro-glycerin than of
gun-cotton, and probably several varieties of this article may be formed
as of gun cotton; this would explain cases of spontaneous explosion; if
the nitro-glycerin is not carefully washed to get rid of the acid, a
gradual decomposition will ensue, producing gases, which, if the vessel
be closed, will explode; my opinion is that nitro-glycerin should be
used in the most careful hands; do not think I would put it in the hands
of a common laborer for blasting purposes; it is less dangerous in a
frozen than a liquid state; I think concussion would explode frozen
nitro-glycerin.

       *       *       *       *       *




HISERT'S ADJUSTABLE CULTIVATOR TOOTH.


The object of the device exhibited in the engraving is to allow the
teeth of a cultivator to turn slightly and avoid obstructions, while
they will follow at all times the line of draft, so that in turning the
cultivator there is no risk of breaking the teeth or their shanks, or
of overturning the implement. The cultivator blade, A, may be of any
desired form, and it is secured to the curved shank, B, which is pivoted
by a bolt to the beam, C. On the under or lower side of the beam is an
iron plate, D, having a projecting socket, E, which is the stud or pin
on which the eye of the shank turns. A bolt passing through the socket
and beam holds the shank in place. Farmers will readily perceive the
advantages of this device. It may be applied to any or all of the
different cultivators now in use. Patented Sept 3, 1867, by B.F. Hisert
who may be addressed for rights to make or sell at Norton Hill, Green
Co., N.Y., or address G.W. King, Scoharie, N.Y.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




Remedy for Cold Feet in City Cars.


"Riding down town these cold mornings in the horse cars, the unpleasant
sensation of chilled feet reminds us of the plan adopted in France and
other parts of Europe to keep the feet of car passengers warm. This is
accomplished by inserting a flattened iron tube along the bottom of the
car lengthwise in the center, between the rows of seats. This tube is
raised a little above the floor level of the car to afford a rest for
the feet, yet, not enough to make a stumbling block. When the car leaves
the depot this tube is filled with hot water from a boiler kept heated
for the purpose, and this water retains its heat and gives a pleasant
warmth to the feet of the passengers and the car generally, for about
two hours, after which the tube is refilled at a convenient station on
the road. In the case of our city cars this might easily be done, and be
a cheap and exceedingly comfortable improvement."--_Evening Post_.

It should be understood that the French cars are arranged with small
compartments like stage coaches, and the passengers sit face to face,
with the warming tube above described under their feet. One tube
for every six persons. We should be glad, indeed, to see this plan
introduced here. But it is not to be expected that our city railroad
companies will do anything for the comfort of their passsengers, while
without such trouble they continue to reap rich harvests. Very likely
the idea of loading a lot of hot water upon their cars, for passengers
to stand upon, would strike them as a good joke. Their poor, broken
down, spavined horses, could not stand any additional load.

       *       *       *       *       *




Getting Your Money Back.


The French are a curious people and one of the novelties of Parisian
enterprises is a large warehouse, in which are sold, at retail, all
manner of goods, from a diamond necklace to a shoe brush. The purchaser,
having paid the price, receives not only the goods, but a bond for the
whole amount of his purchase money, payable, after thirty years, and
guaranteed by the Credit Foncier and other moneyed corporations. The
prices charged are said to be no greater than in any other retail shops.
This is really eating your cake in order to keep it; the more you
spend the richer you will be; indeed it sets at defiance the whole of
Franklin's code of proverbs, and proves "Poor Richard" a silly fellow.
Imagine Jones lecturing his wife on her economy, and reproaching her for
a spirit of saving, "My dear, if you had bought this camel's hair shawl
thirty years ago, it would now be a source of income to us; if you
had not been so close we should now be wealthy." Smith acquires an
independence by giving his children an expensive education, and sees in
every new dress or costly jewel which his growing daughters wear, a new
mine of wealth for himself. If he can only persuade them to spend money
enough he is sure of a support in his old age.

       *       *       *       *       *

