The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 433,
April 19, 1884, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 433, April 19, 1884

Author: Various

Posting Date: October 10, 2012 [EBook #9076]
Release Date: October, 2005
First Posted: September 3, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPL., NO. 433 ***




Produced by J. Niehof, D. Kretz, J. Sutherland, and
Distributed Proofreaders











[Illustration]




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 433




NEW YORK, APRIL 19, 1884

Scientific American Supplement. Vol. XVII, No. 433.

Scientific American established 1845

Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.

Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.


       *       *       *       *       *

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

I.    CHEMISTRY, METALLURGY, ETC.--New Analogy between
      Solids, Liquids, and Gases.

      Hydrogen Amalgam.

      Treatment of Ores by Electrolysis.--By M. KILIANI.

II.   ENGINEERING, AND MECHANICS.--Electric Railway at Vienna.--With
      engraving.

      Instruction in Mechanical Engineering.--Technical and trade
      education.--A course of study sketched out.--By Prof. R.H.
      THURSTON.

      Improved Double Boiler.--3 figures.

      The Gardner Machine Gun.--With three engravings showing the
      single barrel, two barrel, and five barrel guns.

      Climbing Tricycles.

      Submarine Explorations.--Voyage of the Talisman.--The Thibaudier
      sounding apparatus.--With map, diagrams, and engravings.

      Jamieson's Cable Grapnel.--With engraving.

      A Threaded Set Collar.

III.  TECHNOLOGY.--Wretched Boiler Making.

      Pneumatic Malting.--With full description of the most improved
      methods and apparatus.--Numerous figures.

      Reducing and Enlarging Plaster Casts.

      Stripping the Film from Gelatine Negatives.

IV.   ELECTRICITY.--Non-sparking Key.

      New Instruments for Measuring Electric Currents and Electromotive
      Force.--By MESSRS. K.E. CROMPTON and GISBERT
      KAPP.--Paper read before the Society of Telegraph Engineers.--With
      several engravings.

      When Does the Electric Shock Become Fatal?

V.    ART AND ARCHAEOLOGY.--Robert Cauer's Statute of Lorelei.--With
      engraving.

      The Pyramids of Meroe.--With engraving.

VI.   ASTRONOMY AND METEOROLOGY.--The Red Sky.--Cause of
      the same explained by the Department of Meteorology.

      A Theory of Cometary Phenomena.

      On Comets.--By FURMAN LEAMING, M.D.

VII.  NATURAL HISTORY.--The Prolificness of the Oyster.

      Coarse Food for Pigs.

VIII. BOTANY, HORTICULTURE, ETC.--Forms of Ivy.--With
      several engravings.

      Propagating Roses.

      A Few of the Best Inulas.--With engraving.

      Fruit Growing.--By P.H. FOSTER.

IX.   MEDICINE, HYGIENE, ETC.--A People without Consumption,
      and Some Account of Their Country, the Cumberland Tableland.
      --By E.M. WIGHT.

      The Treatment of Habitual Constipation.

X.    MISCELLANEOUS.--The French Scientific Station at Cape Horn.

XI.   BIOGRAPHY.--The Late Maori Chief, Mete Kingi.--With portrait.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FRENCH SCIENTIFIC STATION AT CAPE HORN.


In 1875 Lieutenant Weyprecht of the Austrian navy called the attention
of scientific men to the desirability of having an organized and
continual system of hourly meteorological and magnetic observations
around the poles. In 1879 the first conference of what was termed the
International Polar Congress was held at Hamburg. Delegates from eight
nations were present--Germany, Austria, Denmark, France, Holland,
Norway, Russia, and Sweden.

The congress then settled upon a programme whose features were: 1. To
establish general principles and fixed laws in regard to the pressure
of the atmosphere, the distribution and variation of temperature,
atmospheric currents, climatic characteristics. 2. To assist the
prediction of the course and occurrence of storms. 3. To assist the
study of the disturbances of the magnetic elements and their relations
to the auroral light and sun spots. 4. To study the distribution of
the magnetic force and its secular and other changes. 5. To study the
distribution of heat and submarine currents in the polar regions. 6. To
obtain certain dimensions in accord with recent methods. Finally, to
collect observations and specimens in the domain of zoology, botany,
geology, etc.

The representatives of the various nations had several conferences
later, and by the 1st of May, 1881, there were sufficient subscribers to
justify the establishment of eight Arctic stations.

France entered actively in this work later, and its first expedition was
to Orange Bay and Cape Horn, under the surveillance and direction of
the Academy of Sciences, Paris, and responsible to the Secretary of the
Navy. On the 6th of September, 1882, this scientific corps established
itself in Orange Bay, near Cape Horn, and energetically began its
serious labors, and by October 22 the greater part of their preliminary
preparations was completed, comprising the erection of a magnetic
observatory, an astronomic observatory, a room for the determination of
the carbonic anhydride of the air, another for the sea register, and
a bridge 92 feet long, photographic laboratory, barometer room, and
buildings for the men, food, and appurtenances, together with a
laboratory of natural history.

In short, in spite of persistent rains and the difficulties of the
situation, from September 8 to October 22 they erected an establishment
of which the different parts, fastened, as it were, to the flank of a
steep hill, covered 450 square meters (4,823 square feet), and rested
upon 200 wooden piles.

From September 26, 1882, to September 1, 1883, night and day
uninterruptedly, a watch was kept, in which the officers took part, so
that the observations might be regularly made and recorded. Every four
hours a series of direct magnetic and meteorological observations was
made, from hour to hour meteorological notes were taken, the rise and
fall of the sea recorded, and these were frequently multiplied by
observations every quarter of an hour; the longitude and latitude were
exactly determined, a number of additions to the catalogue of the fixed
stars for the southern heavens made, and numerous specimens in natural
history collected.

The apparatus employed by the expedition for the registration of the
magnetic elements was devised by M. Mascart, by which the variations
of the three elements are inscribed upon a sheet of paper covered with
gelatine bromide, inclination, vertical and horizontal components, with
a certainty which is shown by the 330 diurnal curves brought back from
the Cape.

The register proper is composed of a clock and a photographic frame
which descends its entire length in twenty-four hours, thus causing the
sensitized paper to pass behind a horizontal window upon which falls the
light reflected by the mirrors of the magnetic instruments. One of those
mirrors is fixed, and gives a line of reference; the other is attached
to the magnetic bar, whose slightest movements it reproduces upon the
sensitized paper. The moments when direct observations were taken were
carefully recorded. The magnetic _pavilion_ was made of wood and copper,
placed at about fifty-three feet from the dwellings or camp, near the
sea, against a wooded hill which shaded it completely; the interior
was covered with felt upon all its sides, in order to avoid as much as
possible the varying temperatures.

The diurnal amplitude of the declination increased uniformly from the
time of their arrival in September up to December, when it obtained
its maximum of 7'40", then diminished to June, when it is no more than
2'20"; from this it increased up to the day of departure. The maximum
declination takes place toward 1 P.M., the minimum at 8:50 A.M. The
night maxima and minima are not clearly shown except in the southern
winter.

The mean diurnal curve brings into prominence the constant diminution
of the declination and the much greater importance of the perturbations
during the summer months. These means, combined with the 300 absolute
determinations, give 4' as the annual change of the declination.

M. Mascart's apparatus proved to be wonderfully useful in recording the
rapid and slight perturbations of the magnet. Comparisons between the
magnetic and atmospheric perturbations gave no result. There was,
however, little stormy weather and no auroral displays. This latter
phenomenon, according to the English missionaries, is rarely observed in
Tierra del Fuego.

The electrometer used at the Cape was founded upon the principle
developed by Sir William Thomson. The atmospheric electricity is
gathered up by means of a thin thread of water, which flows from a
large brass reservoir furnished with a metallic tube 6.5 feet long. The
reservoir is placed upon glass supports isolated by sulphuric acid, and
is connected to the electrometer by a thread of metal which enters a
glass vessel containing sulphuric acid; into the same vessel enters a
platinum wire coming from the aluminum needle. Only 3,000 observations
were given by the photographic register, due to the fact that the
instruments were not fully protected against constant wet and cold.

Besides these observations direct observations of the magnetometer were
made, and the absolute determination of the elements of terrestrial
magnetism attempted.

On the 17th of November, 1882, a severe magnetic disturbance occurred,
lasting from 12 M. until 3 P.M., which in three hours changed the
declination 42'. The same perturbation was felt in Europe, and the
comparison of the observations in the two hemispheres will prove
instructive.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ELECTRIC RAILWAY AT VIENNA.


The total length of this railway, which extended from the Eiskeller in
the Schwimmschul-Allee to the northern entrance of the Rotunda, was
1528.3 meters; the gauge was 1 meter, and 60 per cent. of the length
consisted of tangents, the remaining 40 per cent. being mostly curves
of 250 meters radius. The gradients, three in number, were very small,
averaging about 1:750.

Two generating dynamos were used, which were coupled in parallel
circuit, but in such a manner that the difference of potential in both
machines remained the same at all times. This was accomplished by the
well known method of coupling introduced by Siemens and Halske, in which
the current of one machine excites the field of the other.

Although the railroad was not built with a view of obtaining a high
efficiency, an electro-motive force of only 150 volts being used, a
mechanical efficiency of 50 per cent. was nevertheless obtained, both
with one generator and one car with thirty passengers, as well as with
two generators and two cars with sixty passengers; while with two
generators and three cars (two of them having motors) the same result
was shown.

[Illustration: THE ELECTRIC RAILWAY AT VIENNA.]

The curves obtained by the apparatus that recorded the current showed
very plainly the action within the machines when the cars were started
or set in motion; at first, the current rose rapidly to a very high
figure, and then declined gradually to a fixed point, which corresponded
to the regular rate of speed. The tractive power, therefore, increases
rapidly to a value far exceeding the frictional resistances, but this
surplus energy serves to increase the velocity, and disappears as soon
as a uniform velocity is reached.

The average speed, both with one and three cars, was 30 kilometers per
hour.--_Zeitsch. f. Elektrotechnik_.

       *       *       *       *       *




INSTRUCTION IN MECHANICAL ENGINEERING.

By Professor R. H. THURSTON.


The writer has often been asked by correspondents interested in
the matter of technical and trade education to outline a course of
instruction in mechanical engineering, such as would represent his
idea of a tolerably complete system of preparation for entrance into
practice. The synopsis given at the end of this article was prepared
in the spring of 1871, when the writer was on duty at the U.S. Naval
Academy, as Assistant Professor of Natural and Experimental Philosophy,
and, being printed, was submitted to nearly all of the then leading
mechanical engineers of the United States, for criticism, and with a
request that they would suggest such alterations and improvements as
might seem to them best. The result was general approval of the course,
substantially as here written. This outline was soon after proposed as a
basis for the course of instruction adopted at the Stevens Institute of
Technology, at Hoboken, to which institution the writer was at about
that time called. He takes pleasure in accepting a suggestion that its
publication in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN would be of some advantage to
many who are interested in the subject.

The course here sketched, as will be evident on examination, includes
not only the usual preparatory studies pursued in schools of mechanical
engineering, but also advanced courses, such as can only be taught in
special schools, and only there when an unusual amount of time can be
given to the professional branches, or when post graduate courses can be
given supplementary to the general course. The complete course, as here
planned, is not taught in any existing school, so far as the writer is
aware. In his own lecture room the principal subjects, and especially
those of the first part of the work, are presented with tolerable
thoroughness; but many of the less essential portions are necessarily
greatly abridged. As time can be found for the extension of the course,
and as students come forward better prepared for their work, the earlier
part of the subject is more and more completely developed, and the
advanced portions are taken up in greater and greater detail, each year
giving opportunity to advance beyond the limits set during the preceding
year.

Some parts of this scheme are evidently introductory to advanced courses
of study which are to be taken up by specialists, each one being adapted
to the special instruction of a class of students who, while pursuing
it, do not usually take up the other and parallel courses. Thus, a
course of instruction in Railroad Engineering, a course in Marine
Engineering, or a course of study in the engineering of textile
manufactures, may be arranged to follow the general course, and the
student will enter upon one or another of these advanced courses as his
talents, interests, or personal inclinations may dictate. At the Stevens
Institute of Technology, two such courses--Electrical and Marine
Engineering--are now organized as supplementary of the general course,
and are pursued by all students taking the degree of Mechanical
Engineer. These courses, as there given, however, are not fairly
representative of the idea of the writer, as above expressed, since the
time available in general course is far too limited to permit them to be
developed beyond the elements, or to be made, in the true sense of the
term, advanced professional courses. Such advanced courses as the writer
has proposed must be far more extended, and should occupy the whole
attention of the student for the time. Such courses should be given in
separate departments under the direction of a General Director of the
professional courses, who should be competent to determine the extent of
each, and to prevent the encroachment of the one upon another; but they
should each be under the immediate charge of a specialist capable
of giving instruction in the branch assigned to him, in both the
theoretical and purely scientific, and the practical and constructive
sides of the work. Every such school should be organized in such a
manner that one mind, familiar with the theory and the practice of the
professional branches taught, should be charged with the duty of giving
general direction to the policy of the institution and of directing
the several lines of work confided to specialists in the different
departments. It is only by careful and complete organization in this, as
in every business, that the best work can be done at least expense in
time and capital.

In this course of instruction in Mechanical Engineering it will be
observed that the writer has incorporated the scheme of a workshop
course. This is done, not at all with the idea that a school of
mechanical engineering is to be regarded as a "trade school," but that
every engineer should have some acquaintance with the tools and the
methods of work upon which the success of his own work is so largely
dependent. If the mechanical engineer can acquire such knowledge in the
more complete course of instruction of the trade school, either before
or after his attendance at the technical school, it will be greatly to
his advantage. The technical school has, however, a distinct field; and
its province is not to be confounded with that of the trade school.
The former is devoted to instruction in the theory and practice of a
profession which calls for service upon the men from the latter--which
makes demand upon a hundred trades--in the prosecution of its designs.
The latter teaches, simply, the practical methods of either of the
trades subsidiary to the several branches of engineering, with only so
much of science as is essential to the intelligent use of the tools and
the successful application of the methods of work of the trade taught.
The distinction between the two departments of education, both of which
are of comparatively modern date, is not always appreciated in the
United States, although always observed in those countries of Europe
in which technical and trade education have been longest pursued as
essential branches of popular instruction. Throughout France and
Germany, every large town has its trade schools, in which the trades
most generally pursued in the place are systematically taught; and every
large city has its technical school, in which the several professions
allied to engineering are studied with special development of those to
which the conditions prevailing at the place give most prominence and
local importance.

A course of trade instruction, as the writer would organize it, would
consist, first, in the teaching of the apprentice the use of the tools
of his trade, the nature of its materials, and the construction and
operation of the machinery employed in its prosecution. He would next be
taught how to shape the simpler geometrical forms in the materials of
