As she rose quickly to her feet she saw for the first time the cause of
the interruption of Luud's plans. A red warrior! Her heart leaped in
rejoicing and thanksgiving. What miracle of fate had sent him to her?
She did not recognize him, though, this travel-worn warrior in the
plain harness which showed no single jewel. How could she have guessed
him the same as the scintillant creature of platinum and diamonds that
she had seen for a brief hour under such different circumstances at the
court of her august sire?

Luud saw Ghek following the strange warrior into the chamber. "Strike
him down, Ghek!" commanded the king. "Strike down the stranger and your
life shall be yours."

Gahan glanced at the hideous face of the king.

"Seek not his eyes," screamed Tara in warning; but it was too late.
Already the horrid hypnotic gaze of the king kaldane had seized upon
the eyes of Gahan. The red warrior hesitated in his stride. His sword
point drooped slowly toward the floor. Tara glanced toward Ghek. She
saw the creature glaring with his expressionless eyes upon the broad
back of the stranger. She saw the hand of the creature's rykor creeping
stealthily toward the hilt of its dagger.

And then Tara of Helium raised her eyes aloft and poured forth the
notes of Mars' most beautiful melody, The Song of Love.

Ghek drew his dagger from its sheath. His eyes turned toward the
singing girl. Luud's glance wavered from the eyes of the man to the
face of Tara, and the instant that the latter's song distracted his
attention from his victim, Gahan of Gathol shook himself and as with a
supreme effort of will forced his eyes to the wall above Luud's hideous
head. Ghek raised his dagger above his right shoulder, took a single
quick step forward, and struck. The girl's song ended in a stifled
scream as she leaped forward with the evident intention of frustrating
the kaldane's purpose; but she was too late, and well it was, for an
instant later she realized the purpose of Ghek's act as she saw the
dagger fly from his hand, pass Gahan's shoulder, and sink full to the
guard in the soft face of Luud.

"Come!" cried the assassin, "we have no time to lose," and started for
the aperture through which they had entered the chamber; but in his
stride he paused as his glance was arrested by the form of the mighty
rykor lying prone upon the floor--a king's rykor; the most beautiful,
the most powerful, that the breeders of Bantoom could produce. Ghek
realized that in his escape he could take with him but a single rykor,
and there was none in Bantoom that could give him better service than
this giant lying here. Quickly he transferred himself to the shoulders
of the great, inert hulk. Instantly the latter was transformed to a
sentient creature, filled with pulsing life and alert energy.

"Now," said the kaldane, "we are ready. Let whoso would revert to
nothingness impede me." Even as he spoke he stooped and crawled into
the chamber beyond, while Gahan, taking Tara by the arm, motioned her
to follow. The girl looked him full in the eyes for the first time.
"The Gods of my people have been kind," she said; "you came just in
time. To the thanks of Tara of Helium shall be added those of The
Warlord of Barsoom and his people. Thy reward shall surpass thy
greatest desires."

Gahan of Gathol saw that she did not recognize him, and quickly he
checked the warm greeting that had been upon his lips.

"Be thou Tara of Helium or another," he replied, "is immaterial, to
serve thus a red woman of Barsoom is in itself sufficient reward."

As they spoke the girl was making her way through the aperture after
Ghek, and presently all three had quitted the apartments of Luud and
were moving rapidly along the winding corridors toward the tower. Ghek
repeatedly urged them to greater speed, but the red men of Barsoom were
never keen for retreat, and so the two that followed him moved all too
slowly for the kaldane.

"There are none to impede our progress," urged Gahan, "so why tax the
strength of the Princess by needless haste?"

"I fear not so much opposition ahead, for there are none there who know
the thing that has been done in Luud's chambers this night; but the
kaldane of one of the warriors who stood guard before Luud's apartment
escaped, and you may count it a truth that he lost no time in seeking
aid. That it did not come before we left is due solely to the rapidity
with which events transpired in the king's* room. Long before we reach
the tower they will be upon us from behind, and that they will come in
numbers far superior to ours and with great and powerful rykors I well
know."

* I have used the word king in describing the rulers or chiefs of the
Bantoomian swarms, since the word itself is unpronounceable in English,
nor does jed or jeddak of the red Martian tongue have quite the same
meaning as the Bantoomian word, which has practically the same
significance as the English word queen as applied to the leader of a
swarm of bees.--J. C.


Nor was Ghek's prophecy long in fulfilment. Presently the sounds of
pursuit became audible in the distant clanking of accouterments and the
whistling call to arms of the kaldanes.

"The tower is but a short distance now," cried Ghek. "Make haste while
yet you may, and if we can barricade it until the sun rises we may yet
escape."

"We shall need no barricades for we shall not linger in the tower,"
replied Gahan, moving more rapidly as he realized from the volume of
sound behind them the great number of their pursuers.

"But we may not go further than the tower tonight," insisted Ghek.
"Beyond the tower await the banths and certain death."

Gahan smiled. "Fear not the banths," he assured them. "Can we but reach
the enclosure a little ahead of our pursuers we have naught to fear
from any evil power within this accursed valley."

Ghek made no reply, nor did his expressionless face denote either
belief or skepticism. The girl looked into the face of the man
questioningly. She did not understand.

"Your flier," he said. "It is moored before the tower."

Her face lighted with pleasure and relief. "You found it!" she
exclaimed. "What fortune!"

"It was fortune indeed," he replied. "Since it not only told that you
were a prisoner here; but it saved me from the banths as I was crossing
the valley from the hills to this tower into which I saw them take you
this afternoon after your brave attempt at escape."

"How did you know it was I?" she asked, her puzzled brows scanning his
face as though she sought to recall from past memories some scene in
which he figured.

"Who is there but knows of the loss of the Princess Tara of Helium?" he
replied. "And when I saw the device upon your flier I knew at once,
though I had not known when I saw you among them in the fields a short
time earlier. Too great was the distance for me to make certain whether
the captive was man or woman. Had chance not divulged the hiding place
of your flier I had gone my way, Tara of Helium. I shudder to think how
close was the chance at that. But for the momentary shining of the sun
upon the emblazoned device on the prow of your craft, I had passed on
unknowing."

The girl shuddered. "The Gods sent you," she whispered reverently.

"The Gods sent me, Tara of Helium," he replied.

"But I do not recognize you," she said. "I have tried to recall you,
but I have failed. Your name, what may it be?"

"It is not strange that so great a princess should not recall the face
of every roving panthan of Barsoom," he replied with a smile.

"But your name?" insisted the girl.

"Call me Turan," replied the man, for it had come to him that if Tara
of Helium recognized him as the man whose impetuous avowal of love had
angered her that day in the gardens of The Warlord, her situation might
be rendered infinitely less bearable than were she to believe him a
total stranger. Then, too, as a simple panthan* he might win a greater
degree of her confidence by his loyalty and faithfulness and a place in
her esteem that seemed to have been closed to the resplendent Jed of
Gathol.

* Soldier of Fortune; free-lance warrior.


They had reached the tower now, and as they entered it from the
subterranean corridor a backward glance revealed the van of their
pursuers--hideous kaldanes mounted upon swift and powerful rykors. As
rapidly as might be the three ascended the stairways leading to the
ground level, but after them, even more rapidly, came the minions of
Luud. Ghek led the way, grasping one of Tara's hands the more easily to
guide and assist her, while Gahan of Gathol followed a few paces in
their rear, his bared sword ready for the assault that all realized
must come upon them now before ever they reached the enclosure and the
flier.

"Let Ghek drop behind to your side," said Tara, "and fight with you."

"There is but room for a single blade in these narrow corridors,"
replied the Gatholian. "Hasten on with Ghek and win to the deck of the
flier. Have your hand upon the control, and if I come far enough ahead
of these to reach the dangling cable you can rise at my word and I can
clamber to the deck at my leisure; but if one of them emerges first
into the enclosure you will know that I shall never come, and you will
rise quickly and trust to the Gods of our ancestors to give you a fair
breeze in the direction of a more hospitable people."

Tara of Helium shook her head. "We will not desert you, panthan," she
said.

Gahan, ignoring her reply, spoke above her head to Ghek. "Take her to
the craft moored within the enclosure," he commanded. "It is our only
hope. Alone, I may win to its deck; but have I to wait upon you two at
the last moment the chances are that none of us will escape. Do as I
bid." His tone was haughty and arrogant--the tone of a man who has
commanded other men from birth, and whose will has been law. Tara of
Helium was both angered and vexed. She was not accustomed to being
either commanded or ignored, but with all her royal pride she was no
fool, and she knew the man was right, that he was risking his life to
save hers, so she hastened on with Ghek as she was bid, and after the
first flush of anger she smiled, for the realization came to her that
this fellow was but a rough untutored warrior, skilled not in the finer
usages of cultured courts. His heart was right, though; a brave and
loyal heart, and gladly she forgave him the offense of his tone and
manner. But what a tone! Recollection of it gave her sudden pause.
Panthans were rough and ready men. Often they rose to positions of high
command, so it was not the note of authority in the fellow's voice that
seemed remarkable; but something else--a quality that was indefinable,
yet as distinct as it was familiar. She had heard it before when the
voice of her great-grandsire, Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium, had risen
in command; and in the voice of her grandfather, Mors Kajak, the jed;
and in the ringing tones of her illustrious sire, John Carter, Warlord
of Barsoom, when he addressed his warriors.

But now she had no time to speculate upon so trivial a thing, for
behind her came the sudden clash of arms and she knew that Turan, the
panthan, had crossed swords with the first of their pursuers. As she
glanced back he was still visible beyond a turn in the stairway, so
that she could see the quick swordplay that ensued. Daughter of a
world's greatest swordsman, she knew well the finest points of the art.
She saw the clumsy attack of the kaldane and the quick, sure return of
the panthan. As she looked down from above upon his almost naked body,
trapped only in the simplest of unadorned harness, and saw the play of
the lithe muscles beneath the red-bronze skin, and witnessed the quick
and delicate play of his sword point, to her sense of obligation was
added a spontaneous admission of admiration that was but the natural
tribute of a woman to skill and bravery and, perchance, some trifle to
manly symmetry and strength.

Three times the panthan's blade changed its position--once to fend a
savage cut; once to feint; and once to thrust. And as he withdrew it
from the last position the kaldane rolled lifeless from its stumbling
rykor and Turan sprang quickly down the steps to engage the next
behind, and then Ghek had drawn Tara upward and a turn in the stairway
shut the battling panthan from her view; but still she heard the ring
of steel on steel, the clank of accouterments and the shrill whistling
of the kaldanes. Her heart moved her to turn back to the side of her
brave defender; but her judgment told her that she could serve him best
by being ready at the control of the flier at the moment he reached the
enclosure.



CHAPTER IX

ADRIFT OVER STRANGE REGIONS

Presently Ghek pushed aside a door that opened from the stairway, and
before them Tara saw the moonlight flooding the walled court where the
headless rykors lay beside their feeding-troughs. She saw the perfect
bodies, muscled as the best of her father's fighting men, and the
females whose figures would have been the envy of many of Helium's most
beautiful women. Ah, if she could but endow these with the power to
act! Then indeed might the safety of the panthan be assured; but they
were only poor lumps of clay, nor had she the power to quicken them to
life. Ever must they lie thus until dominated by the cold, heartless
brain of the kaldane. The girl sighed in pity even as she shuddered in
disgust as she picked her way over and among the sprawled creatures
toward the flier.

Quickly she and Ghek mounted to the deck after the latter had cast off
the moorings. Tara tested the control, raising and lowering the ship a
few feet within the walled space. It responded perfectly. Then she
lowered it to the ground again and waited. From the open doorway came
the sounds of conflict, now nearing them, now receding. The girl,
having witnessed her champion's skill, had little fear of the outcome.
Only a single antagonist could face him at a time upon the narrow
stairway, he had the advantage of position and of the defensive, and he
was a master of the sword while they were clumsy bunglers by
comparison. Their sole advantage was in their numbers, unless they
might find a way to come upon him from behind.

She paled at the thought. Could she have seen him she might have been
further perturbed, for he took no advantage of many opportunities to
win nearer the enclosure. He fought coolly, but with a savage
persistence that bore little semblance to purely defensive action.
Often he clambered over the body of a fallen foe to leap against the
next behind, and once there lay five dead kaldanes behind him, so far
had he pushed back his antagonists. They did not know it; these
kaldanes that he fought, nor did the girl awaiting him upon the flier,
but Gahan of Gathol was engaged in a more alluring sport than winning
to freedom, for he was avenging the indignities that had been put upon
the woman he loved; but presently he realized that he might be
jeopardizing her safety uselessly, and so he struck down another before
him and turning leaped quickly up the stairway, while the leading
kaldanes slipped upon the brain-covered floor and stumbled in pursuit.

Gahan reached the enclosure twenty paces ahead of them and raced toward
the flier. "Rise!" he shouted to the girl. "I will ascend the cable."

Slowly the small craft rose from the ground as Gahan leaped the inert
bodies of the rykors lying in his path. The first of the pursuers
sprang from the tower just as Gahan seized the trailing rope.

"Faster!" he shouted to the girl above, "or they will drag us down!"
But the ship seemed scarcely to move, though in reality she was rising
as rapidly as might have been expected of a one-man flier carrying a
load of three. Gahan swung free above the top of the wall, but the end
of the rope still dragged the ground as the kaldanes reached it. They
were pouring in a steady stream from the tower into the enclosure. The
leader seized the rope.

"Quick!" he cried. "Lay hold and we will drag them down."

It needed but the weight of a few to accomplish his design. The ship
was stopped in its flight and then, to the horror of the girl, she felt
it being dragged steadily downward. Gahan, too, realized the danger and
the necessity for instant action. Clinging to the rope with his left
hand, he had wound a leg about it, leaving his right hand free for his
long-sword which he had not sheathed. A downward cut clove the soft
head of a kaldane, and another severed the taut rope beneath the
panthan's feet. The girl heard a sudden renewal of the shrill whistling
of her foes, and at the same time she realized that the craft was
rising again. Slowly it drifted upward, out of reach of the enemy, and
a moment later she saw the figure of Turan clamber over the side. For
the first time in many weeks her heart was filled with the joy of
thanksgiving; but her first thought was of another.

"You are not wounded?" she asked.

"No, Tara of Helium," he replied. "They were scarce worth the effort of
