
Indeed the roaring of the wind was less now. The ship was no longer
violently tossed. In a few minutes the wind died away almost completely,
and, aside from the rising motion, and a slight swaying, the _Monarch_
rode on an even keel. The danger was over.

"Is the ship safe?" called Professor Henderson from his bunk.

"All safe!" exclaimed the hunter cheerfully. "We had a little blow, but
it is all over, and the _Monarch_ behaved like the King she is--or,
perhaps I ought to say Queen, seeing that all ships are ladies. But how
do you feel, professor?"

"I am much better," was the answer, showing that the medicine had done
its work. "I feel hungry," he went on. "What time is it?"

"Six o'clock," answered Jack, looking at the dial.

"Night or morning?"

"Morning, I guess."

"Then we'll have breakfast," said the professor with a smile.

He stepped from the bunk. As he did so there was a sudden lurch to the
ship. Then it began to sink suddenly.

"We are going down!" cried the captain. "What has happened?"

"The gas bag is leaking again!" shouted Washington from the engine room.




CHAPTER XV

PRISONERS OF THE ESQUIMAUX


The hearts of all were filled with new terror. They had just come safely
through one danger only to fall into another.

The professor limped to the engine room. A glance confirmed his fears.
The gas was escaping from the bag in large quantities.

"I am afraid the patch we put on has come loose," he said. "The tornado
must have unfastened it. Are we over land or sea?" he asked anxiously.

Jack hurried to where the sheet of thick glass was set into the floor of
the cabin. He peered down toward the ground.

"We are over land, or, at least, a big ice field," he said, looking up."
We must have crossed some arm of the sea, or, perhaps, a bay." Then, as
he looked down through the window again, he gave a frightened start.
"There are people below us!" he cried. "I can see hundreds of them! They
are waiting for us to land!"

The ship was fast settling, and, because of that fact, and for the
reason that the propeller was sending it ahead, the _Monarch_ was
approaching the ice at a sharp angle.

"Stop the engines!" commanded the professor. "Our only hope is in coming
down easily. If we strike the ice hard we are lost!"

Lower and lower sank the _Monarch_, like a bird with a broken wing. In a
few minutes there came a sudden jar that told the ship had struck the
ice. Then, with a swish and rustle the silk bag, emptied of gas fell on
the roof of the cabins. The _Monarch_ had come down between two big
hummocks of ice, and rested almost in a level position.

The adventurers peered from the windows. At first they could see nothing
but a vast expanse of frozen whiteness. Then the ship, in an instant,
seemed to be surrounded by men, women and children, all dressed in furs,
only their faces showing.

"Here they come!" cried Andy.

The Esquimaux showed no fear of the airship nor the strange beings that
inhabited it. They advanced boldly, many of them bearing rude weapons,
spears, stone axes, and bows and arrows of bone. They were a fierce
looking crowd.

"I can't have them come inside the ship," spoke the professor, "they
will tear the machinery apart."

"Shall I fire on them?" asked Andy, getting his rifle ready.

"Not for the world!" cried the captain. "They are ten to our one, and
probably this is but a small part of the tribe. Our only safety lies in
peaceful means. Come, we must put on our fur garments and go outside.
That may induce them to let the ship alone."

"They may take us prisoners," objected Jack.

"Better be prisoners with the airship safe than with it all broken so we
can never use it," said the old inventor. "If we lose the ship then we
are lost indeed. If we go out to them, they may be afraid to venture in
alone. Come, we must hurry!"

Obeying the captain's advice, they all donned their fur garments, and
each took a revolver and several rounds of ammunition. These small
weapons could be concealed about them without much trouble.

Then the whole party emerged from the cabins out on the forward deck of
the _Monarch_. It was high time, for several of the Esquimaux, with
their big stone axes, were advancing to batter in the doors. At the
sight of the adventurers, who had only been dimly observed through the
windows, there arose a great shout among the savages.

Rapidly the air-travelers climbed over the ship's rail, down on to the
ice, and walked boldly among the Esquimaux.

"Show a brave front!" exclaimed the captain, in a low voice. "Perhaps
they mean no harm after all."

But this idea was soon dismissed. With a shout the foremost of the
natives rushed on the party of whites, surrounded them, and, before any
one had a chance to draw his revolver, had he desired to do so, each
member of the _Monarch's_ crew was seized and bound with strong thongs
of walrus hide.

"Well, they've got us," groaned old Andy. "I wish I'd taken a few shots
at them first!"

The old inventor watched narrowly every move the Esquimaux made. At
first several of the natives showed a desire to penetrate the interior
of the _Monarch_. But the commands of one big man, evidently the chief,
who was clad entirely in white furs, deterred them. Scores crawled up
the ice hummock and looked the strange craft over with wondering eyes,
but none molested it.

Suddenly the man in the white furs uttered a loud cry. It was answered
from a dozen throats, and then great activity was manifested. Big
sledges, made of bone for a framework, with laced thongs for a body,
were brought up, and dogs were harnessed to the vehicles. While some
natives were attending to this, others scattered in different
directions, returning presently with large supplies of dead fish, seals,
and a large polar bear.

"This is evidently a hunting party," said Mr. Henderson. "They have been
away from their main town or camp for several days, and were on their
way back when they saw our airship. I wonder what they will do with us."

He was not long left in doubt. The chief of the Esquimaux approached
the adventurers, who, bound with thongs, were sitting on the ice. He
addressed Washington in a strange language, but Washington, with a
motion of his head nodded toward Captain Henderson, to indicate that he
was the commander of the party. To the old inventor, therefore, did the
native in the white furs speak next.

He made a motion of a person reclining on a sledge and indicated that
the captives were to be taken away in that fashion. Then the chief
motioned to his mouth and pretended to chew.

"He seems to want us to take a sleigh ride and get something to eat,"
said Mr. Henderson. "I suppose we might as well go along."

He nodded an assent to the Esquimaux chief, thinking the sign for that
would be understood. It was, evidently, for the chief nodded back and
smiled.

The rude sleds were brought close to the party from the _Monarch_. Then
the captives were bundled on the vehicles like so many logs of wood, and
bound to the runners with hide thongs. Next a fur robe was thrown over
each one, a hole being left for them to breathe, and a dog driver took
his position at the front of each sled.

With cracks of the whips and wild shouts the natives started off at a
rapid speed. Then it was the prisoners appreciated the extra fur
coverings, for when the vehicles were in motion the keen wind cut like
a knife on the little portion of the face left exposed.

A sharp pang of regret struck the professor's heart as he realized that
he was being carried away from his beloved airship, which was left in
the hands of the enemy. They might wreck it he realized, to get the
valuable wood and metal in the different parts. If they did, it would
mean that the adventurers would be doomed to remain in the land of
perpetual ice and snow forever.

For several hours the journey was continued. The dogs drawing the sleds
never seemed to slacken their speed, but, urged by voice and whip, sped
on over ice and snow.

Suddenly a loud cry sounded. The sleds, as if in obedience to a command,
came to a halt. The captives raised their heads and saw that the whole
party had come to a stop. Several of the Esquimaux began opening bundles
and took out pieces of frozen fat meat. With this they went from team to
team among the dogs, and fed the brutes that seemed ravenous from
hunger.

The animals provided with a meal, the Esquimaux fed themselves. It was a
primitive feast. The men simply bit off chunks of fat and blubber and
swallowed them almost whole.

"I'm pretty hungry, but I don't believe I could eat that," observed
Jack.

"Wait until you get a chance," advised Mark. "Maybe they are not going
to offer us any. As for me, I am starved enough to tackle most
anything."

Presently the Esquimaux chief approached the captives, who had been
drawn close together on their sleds. The leader of the natives had in
his hands some queer looking stuff. At a sign from him several of the
other Esquimaux loosened the bonds that bound the prisoners.

"Um!" grunted the chief. "Um! Um!" At least his words sounded like that.

"I guess he wants us to eat," said the professor.

He took some of the food the Esquimaux chief held out. The stuff did
not look very inviting, about as much like cold fat as anything. The
professor bit into it.

"It's good!" he exclaimed. "It's chopped up meat and suet, and it's
cooked! Eat it!"

They all did, for they were very hungry and cold. Then the captives were
bound again, the dogs were harnessed, and the journey was resumed. The
sun still shone, though it was getting late, but the prisoners were all
sleepy, for, by the run of hours, it was now night.

On and on went the sleds. Jack had dozed off, when he was aroused by a
shout. He raised his head to look about him, and was filled with terror
at what he saw.

The sled he was on, as well as all the others, was coasting down a great
hill of ice at fearful speed! The dogs were gone, and the fleet of
sleighs, under their own weight, were dashing down the Mountainous side
of a great glacier!




CHAPTER XVI

THE STRANGE WOMAN AIDS


"Professor! Professor!" cried Jack. He saw the sled on which the old
inventor was lashed close to him.

"Eh! Yes! What is it?" asked the old man, sticking his head out from
under the fur robe.

"They have set us adrift down the mountain and we'll be killed!"

The boy struggled to free himself from his bonds. The professor, raising
his head and realizing the danger, did likewise.

But the tough walrus hide was too tightly drawn. The captives, if they
went to their deaths, would go bound and unable to help themselves. In
terror Jack glanced on either side of him. To his surprise he noticed
that not only were the sleds of himself and his comrades going down the
hill, but the vehicles of all the Esquimaux as well.

"Can an accident have happened?" he asked himself. "Or have they all
gone crazy? This beats me."

Faster and faster went the sleighs. Showers of ice splinters flew up on
either side of the bone runners. The wind whistled past Jack's face.
Then, as a sled of one of the natives shot near to Jack's, the boy
noticed that the Esquimaux's face was calm, and he was smiling a bit.

"This doesn't look as if he was going to be killed," reasoned the boy.
But the speed of the sleds never slackened and Jack was much afraid, as
were the other prisoners.

But at length, with a swish and a whizz, the sleighs shot around a
curve, and slid out on a broad expanse of smooth ice. Off jumped the
natives, laughing and chatting. Then Jack realized the truth.

The Esquimaux, instead of trusting to their dogs to draw them down the
steep hill, had simply coasted, just as Jack had done many a time at
home.

In a little while the dogs, that had been led by a number of the natives
down an easier path than that which the steep hill offered, came up,
barking and yelping. They were again harnessed to the sledges, and the
journey commenced once more.

This time it did not last more than an hour. It was along a level
stretch of ice, and soon they were in the midst of an Esquimaux village.

Huts of ice, with rounded tops, were on every side, with here and there
a tent made of seal skins stretched over poles. There were several
hundred inhabitants, who mingled with the members of the hunting party,
that included men, women and children, for, when the Esquimaux go for a
several days' stay after fish they take their families along.

"We seem to have struck camp at last," remarked the professor to Andy.
"I wonder what they are going to do with us now."

"The least they could do would be to untie us and give us a good meal,"
growled the old hunter, who was stiff from being bound so long on the
sled.

"Who said dinner?" broke in Washington from his sled. "I jest wish I had
a chicken pot-pie!"

"I'd willingly go without a meal if I was sure the airship was safe,"
sighed the professor.

At this mention of their craft all the adventurers became silent and a
feeling of sadness came over them. But they had little time to indulge
in gloomy thoughts.

As soon as the inhabitants of the camp had greeted the fishing party the
captives were surrounded by a group of curious ones, who followed the
chief, in his white furs, to where the prisoners' sleds had been drawn
up. The white men, who must have seemed strange beings to the Esquimaux,
were still fastened to the vehicles. At a word from the leader the bonds
were cut.

"I guess they want us to get up," said Jack.

He rose from his sleigh, and his example was followed by the others. The
Esquimaux closed around them. Then, before any of the prisoners could
raise a hand in their defense, they were seized by a score of the dark
natives and hurried off across the snow.
