the phenomena of the transport of ions, the fine experiments of M.
Bouty, those of Professor Kohlrausch and of Professor Ostwald on
various points in electrolytic conduction, all support the theory. The
verifications of it can even be quantitative, and we can foresee
numerical relations between conductivity and other phenomena. The
measurement of the conductivity permits the number of molecules
dissociated in a given solution to be calculated, and the number is
thus found to be precisely the same as that arrived at if it is wished
to remove the disagreement between reality and the anticipations which
result from the theory of Professor Van t' Hoff. The laws of
cryoscopy, of tonometry, and of osmosis thus again become strict, and
no exception to them remains.

If the dissociation of salts is a reality and is complete in a dilute
solution, any of the properties of a saline solution whatever should
be represented numerically as the sum of three values, of which one
concerns the positive ion, a second the negative ion, and the third
the solvent. The properties of the solutions would then be what are
called additive properties. Numerous verifications may be attempted by
very different roads. They generally succeed very well; and whether we
measure the electric conductivity, the density, the specific heats,
the index of refraction, the power of rotatory polarization, the
colour, or the absorption spectrum, the additive property will
everywhere be found in the solution.

The hypothesis, so contested at the outset by the chemists, is,
moreover, assuring its triumph by important conquests in the domain of
chemistry itself. It permits us to give a vivid explanation of
chemical reaction, and for the old motto of the chemists, "Corpora non
agunt, nisi soluta," it substitutes a modern one, "It is especially
the ions which react." Thus, for example, all salts of iron, which
contain iron in the state of ions, give similar reactions; but salts
such as ferrocyanide of potassium, in which iron does not play the
part of an ion, never give the characteristic reactions of iron.

Professor Ostwald and his pupils have drawn from the hypothesis of
Arrhenius manifold consequences which have been the cause of
considerable progress in physical chemistry. Professor Ostwald has
shown, in particular, how this hypothesis permits the quantitative
calculation of the conditions of equilibrium of electrolytes and
solutions, and especially of the phenomena of neutralization. If a
dissolved salt is partly dissociated into ions, this solution must be
limited by an equilibrium between the non-dissociated molecule and the
two ions resulting from the dissociation; and, assimilating the
phenomenon to the case of gases, we may take for its study the laws of
Gibbs and of Guldberg and Waage. The results are generally very
satisfactory, and new researches daily furnish new checks.

Professor Nernst, who before gave, as has been said, a remarkable
interpretation of the diffusion of electrolytes, has, in the direction
pointed out by M. Arrhenius, developed a theory of the entire
phenomena of electrolysis, which, in particular, furnishes a striking
explanation of the mechanism of the production of electromotive force
in galvanic batteries.

Extending the analogy, already so happily invoked, between the
phenomena met with in solutions and those produced in gases, Professor
Nernst supposes that metals tend, as it were, to vaporize when in
presence of a liquid. A piece of zinc introduced, for example, into
pure water gives birth to a few metallic ions. These ions become
positively charged, while the metal naturally takes an equal charge,
but of contrary sign. Thus the solution and the metal are both
electrified; but this sort of vaporization is hindered by
electrostatic attraction, and as the charges borne by the ions are
considerable, an equilibrium will be established, although the number
of ions which enter the solution will be very small.

If the liquid, instead of being a solvent like pure water, contains an
electrolyte, it already contains metallic ions, the osmotic pressure
of which will be opposite to that of the solution. Three cases may
then present themselves--either there will be equilibrium, or the
electrostatic attraction will oppose itself to the pressure of
solution and the metal will be negatively charged, or, finally, the
attraction will act in the same direction as the pressure, and the
metal will become positively and the solution negatively charged.
Developing this idea, Professor Nernst calculates, by means of the
action of the osmotic pressures, the variations of energy brought into
play and the value of the differences of potential by the contact of
the electrodes and electrolytes. He deduces this from the
electromotive force of a single battery cell which becomes thus
connected with the values of the osmotic pressures, or, if you will,
thanks to the relation discovered by Van t' Hoff, with the
concentrations. Some particularly interesting electrical phenomena
thus become connected with an already very important group, and a new
bridge is built which unites two regions long considered foreign to
each other.

The recent discoveries on the phenomena produced in gases when
rendered conductors of electricity almost force upon us, as we shall
see, the idea that there exist in these gases electrified centres
moving through the field, and this idea gives still greater
probability to the analogous theory explaining the mechanism of the
conductivity of liquids. It will also be useful, in order to avoid
confusion, to restate with precision this notion of electrolytic ions,
and to ascertain their magnitude, charge, and velocity.

The two classic laws of Faraday will supply us with important
information. The first indicates that the quantity of electricity
passing through the liquid is proportional to the quantity of matter
deposited on the electrodes. This leads us at once to the
consideration that, in any given solution, all the ions possess
individual charges equal in absolute value.

The second law may be stated in these terms: an atom-gramme of metal
carries with it into electrolysis a quantity of electricity
proportionate to its valency.[19]

[Footnote 19: The valency or atomicity of an element may be defined as
the power it possesses of entering into compounds in a certain fixed
proportion. As hydrogen is generally taken as the standard, in
practice the valency of an atom is the number of hydrogen atoms it
will combine with or replace. Thus chlorine and the rest of the
halogens, the atoms of which combine with one atom of hydrogen, are
called univalent, oxygen a bivalent element, and so on.--ED.]

Numerous experiments have made known the total mass of hydrogen
capable of carrying one coulomb, and it will therefore be possible to
estimate the charge of an ion of hydrogen if the number of atoms of
hydrogen in a given mass be known. This last figure is already
furnished by considerations derived from the kinetic theory, and
agrees with the one which can be deduced from the study of various
phenomena. The result is that an ion of hydrogen having a mass of 1.3
x 10^{-20} grammes bears a charge of 1.3 X 10^{-20} electromagnetic
units; and the second law will immediately enable the charge of any
other ion to be similarly estimated.

The measurements of conductivity, joined to certain considerations
relating to the differences of concentration which appear round the
electrode in electrolysis, allow the speed of the ions to be
calculated. Thus, in a liquid containing 1/10th of a hydrogen-ion per
litre, the absolute speed of an ion would be 3/10ths of a millimetre
per second in a field where the fall of potential would be 1 volt per
centimetre. Sir Oliver Lodge, who has made direct experiments to
measure this speed, has obtained a figure very approximate to this.
This value is very small compared to that which we shall meet with in
gases.

Another consequence of the laws of Faraday, to which, as early as 1881,
Helmholtz drew attention, may be considered as the starting-point of
certain new doctrines we shall come across later.

Helmholtz says: "If we accept the hypothesis that simple bodies are
composed of atoms, we are obliged to admit that, in the same way,
electricity, whether positive or negative, is composed of elementary
parts which behave like atoms of electricity."

The second law seems, in fact, analogous to the law of multiple
proportions in chemistry, and it shows us that the quantities of
electricity carried vary from the simple to the double or treble,
according as it is a question of a uni-, bi-, or trivalent metal; and
as the chemical law leads up to the conception of the material atom,
so does the electrolytic law suggest the idea of an electric atom.




CHAPTER VI

THE ETHER


Sec. 1. THE LUMINIFEROUS ETHER

It is in the works of Descartes that we find the first idea of
attributing those physical phenomena which the properties of matter
fail to explain to some subtle matter which is the receptacle of the
energy of the universe.

In our times this idea has had extraordinary luck. After having been
eclipsed for two hundred years by the success of the immortal
synthesis of Newton, it gained an entirely new splendour with Fresnel
and his followers. Thanks to their admirable discoveries, the first
stage seemed accomplished, the laws of optics were represented by a
single hypothesis, marvellously fitted to allow us to anticipate
unknown phenomena, and all these anticipations were subsequently fully
verified by experiment. But the researches of Faraday, Maxwell, and
Hertz authorized still greater ambitions; and it really seemed that
this medium, to which it was agreed to give the ancient name of ether,
and which had already explained light and radiant heat, would also be
sufficient to explain electricity. Thus the hope began to take form
that we might succeed in demonstrating the unity of all physical
forces. It was thought that the knowledge of the laws relating to the
inmost movements of this ether might give us the key to all phenomena,
and might make us acquainted with the method in which energy is stored
up, transmitted, and parcelled out in its external manifestations.

We cannot study here all the problems which are connected with the
physics of the ether. To do this a complete treatise on optics would
have to be written and a very lengthy one on electricity. I shall
simply endeavour to show rapidly how in the last few years the ideas
relative to the constitution of this ether have evolved, and we shall
see if it be possible without self-delusion to imagine that a single
medium can really allow us to group all the known facts in one
comprehensive arrangement.

As constructed by Fresnel, the hypothesis of the luminous ether, which
had so great a struggle at the outset to overcome the stubborn
resistance of the partisans of the then classic theory of emission,
seemed, on the contrary, to possess in the sequel an unshakable
strength. Lame, though a prudent mathematician, wrote: "_The
existence_ of the ethereal fluid is _incontestably demonstrated_ by
the propagation of light through the planetary spaces, and by the
explanation, so simple and so complete, of the phenomena of
diffraction in the wave theory of light"; and he adds: "The laws of
double refraction prove with no less certainty that the _ether exists_
in all diaphanous media." Thus the ether was no longer an hypothesis,
but in some sort a tangible reality. But the ethereal fluid of which
the existence was thus proclaimed has some singular properties.

Were it only a question of explaining rectilinear propagation,
reflexion, refraction, diffraction, and interferences notwithstanding
grave difficulties at the outset and the objections formulated by
Laplace and Poisson (some of which, though treated somewhat lightly at
the present day, have not lost all value), we should be under no
obligation to make any hypothesis other than that of the undulations
of an elastic medium, without deciding in advance anything as to the
nature and direction of the vibrations.

This medium would, naturally--since it exists in what we call the
void--be considered as imponderable. It may be compared to a fluid of
negligible mass--since it offers no appreciable resistance to the
motion of the planets--but is endowed with an enormous elasticity,
because the velocity of the propagation of light is considerable. It
must be capable of penetrating into all transparent bodies, and of
retaining there, so to speak, a constant elasticity, but must there
become condensed, since the speed of propagation in these bodies is
less than in a vacuum. Such properties belong to no material gas, even
the most rarefied, but they admit of no essential contradiction, and
that is the important point.[20]

[Footnote 20: Since this was written, however, men of science have
become less unanimous than they formerly were on this point. The
veteran chemist Professor Mendeleeff has given reasons for thinking
that the ether is an inert gas with an atomic weight a million times
less than that of hydrogen, and a velocity of 2250 kilometres per
second (_Principles of Chemistry_, Eng. ed., 1905, vol. ii. p. 526).
On the other hand, the well-known physicist Dr A.H. Bucherer, speaking
at the Naturforscherversammlung, held at Stuttgart in 1906, declared
his disbelief in the existence of the ether, which he thought could
not be reconciled at once with the Maxwellian theory and the known
facts.--ED.]

It was the study of the phenomena of polarization which led Fresnel to
his bold conception of transverse vibrations, and subsequently induced
him to penetrate further into the constitution of the ether. We know
the experiment of Arago on the noninterference of polarized rays in
rectangular planes. While two systems of waves, proceeding from the
same source of natural light and propagating themselves in nearly
parallel directions, increase or become destroyed according to whether
the nature of the superposed waves are of the same or of contrary
signs, the waves of the rays polarized in perpendicular planes, on the
other hand, can never interfere with each other. Whatever the
difference of their course, the intensity of the light is always the
sum of the intensity of the two rays.

Fresnel perceived that this experiment absolutely compels us to reject
the hypothesis of longitudinal vibrations acting along the line of
propagation in the direction of the rays. To explain it, it must of
necessity be admitted, on the contrary, that the vibrations are
transverse and perpendicular to the ray. Verdet could say, in all
truth, "It is not possible to deny the transverse direction of
luminous vibrations, without at the same time denying that light
consists of an undulatory movement."

Such vibrations do not and cannot exist in any medium resembling a
fluid. The characteristic of a fluid is that its different parts can
displace themselves with regard to one another without any reaction
appearing so long as a variation of volume is not produced. There
certainly may exist, as we have seen, certain traces of rigidity in a
liquid, but we cannot conceive such a thing in a body infinitely more
subtle than rarefied gas. Among material bodies, a solid alone really
possesses the rigidity sufficient for the production within it of
transverse vibrations and for their maintenance during their
propagation.

Since we have to attribute such a property to the ether, we may add
that on this point it resembles a solid, and Lord Kelvin has shown
that this solid, would be much more rigid than steel. This conclusion
produces great surprise in all who hear it for the first time, and it
is not rare to hear it appealed to as an argument against the actual
existence of the ether. It does not seem, however, that such an
argument can be decisive. There is no reason for supposing that the
ether ought to be a sort of extension of the bodies we are accustomed
to handle. Its properties may astonish our ordinary way of thinking,
but this rather unscientific astonishment is not a reason for doubting
its existence. Real difficulties would appear only if we were led to
attribute to the ether, not singular properties which are seldom found
united in the same substance, but properties logically contradictory.
In short, however odd such a medium may appear to us, it cannot be
said that there is any absolute incompatibility between its
attributes.

It would even be possible, if we wished, to suggest images capable of
representing these contrary appearances. Various authors have done so.
Thus, M. Boussinesq assumes that the ether behaves like a very
rarefied gas in respect of the celestial bodies, because these last
move, while bathed in it, in all directions and relatively slowly,
while they permit it to retain, so to speak, its perfect homogeneity.
On the other hand, its own undulations are so rapid that so far as
they are concerned the conditions become very different, and its
fluidity has, one might say, no longer the time to come in. Hence its
rigidity alone appears.

Another consequence, very important in principle, of the fact that
vibrations of light are transverse, has been well put in evidence by
Fresnel. He showed how we have, in order to understand the action
which excites without condensation the sliding of successive layers of
the ether during the propagation of a vibration, to consider the
vibrating medium as being composed of molecules separated by finite
distances. Certain authors, it is true, have proposed theories in
which the action at a distance of these molecules are replaced by
actions of contact between parallelepipeds sliding over one another;
but, at bottom, these two points of view both lead us to conceive the
ether as a discontinuous medium, like matter itself. The ideas
gathered from the most recent experiments also bring us to the same
conclusion.


Sec. 2. RADIATIONS

In the ether thus constituted there are therefore propagated
transverse vibrations, regarding which all experiments in optics
furnish very precise information. The amplitude of these vibrations is
exceedingly small, even in relation to the wave-length, small as these
last are. If, in fact, the amplitude of the vibrations acquired a
noticeable value in comparison with the wave-length, the speed of
propagation should increase with the amplitude. Yet, in spite of some
curious experiments which seem to establish that the speed of light
does alter a little with its intensity, we have reason to believe
that, as regards light, the amplitude of the oscillations in relation
to the wave-length is incomparably less than in the case of sound.

It has become the custom to characterise each vibration by the path
which the vibratory movement traverses during the space of a
vibration--by the length of wave, in a word--rather than by the
duration of the vibration itself. To measure wave-lengths, the methods
must be employed to which I have already alluded on the subject of
measurements of length. Professor Michelson, on the one hand, and MM.
Perot and Fabry, on the other, have devised exceedingly ingenious
processes, which have led to results of really unhoped-for precision.
The very exact knowledge also of the speed of the propagation of light
allows the duration of a vibration to be calculated when once the
wave-length is known. It is thus found that, in the case of visible
light, the number of the vibrations from the end of the violet to the
infra-red varies from four hundred to two hundred billions per second.
This gamut is not, however, the only one the ether can give. For a
long time we have known ultra-violet radiations still more rapid, and,
on the other hand, infra-red ones more slow, while in the last few
years the field of known radiations has been singularly extended in
both directions.

It is to M. Rubens and his fellow-workers that are due the most
brilliant conquests in the matter of great wave-lengths. He had
remarked that, in their study, the difficulty of research proceeds
from the fact that the extreme waves of the infra-red spectrum only
contain a small part of the total energy emitted by an incandescent
body; so that if, for the purpose of study, they are further dispersed
by a prism or a grating, the intensity at any one point becomes so
slight as to be no longer observable. His original idea was to obtain,
without prism or grating, a homogeneous pencil of great wave-length
sufficiently intense to be examined. For this purpose the radiant
source used was a strip of platinum covered with fluorine or powdered
quartz, which emits numerous radiations close to two bands of linear
absorption in the absorption spectra of fluorine and quartz, one of
which is situated in the infra-red. The radiations thus emitted are
several times reflected on fluorine or on quartz, as the case may be;
and as, in proximity to the bands, the absorption is of the order of
that of metallic bodies for luminous rays, we no longer meet in the
pencil several times reflected or in the rays _remaining_ after this
kind of filtration, with any but radiations of great wave-length.
Thus, for instance, in the case of the quartz, in the neighbourhood of
a radiation corresponding to a wave-length of 8.5 microns, the
absorption is thirty times greater in the region of the band than in
the neighbouring region, and consequently, after three reflexions,
while the corresponding radiations will not have been weakened, the
neighbouring waves will be so, on the contrary, in the proportion of 1
to 27,000.

With mirrors of rock salt and of sylvine[21] there have been obtained,
by taking an incandescent gas light (Auer) as source, radiations
extending as far as 70 microns; and these last are the greatest
wave-lengths observed in optical phenomena. These radiations are
largely absorbed by the vapour of water, and it is no doubt owing to
this absorption that they are not found in the solar spectrum. On the
other hand, they easily pass through gutta-percha, india-rubber, and
insulating substances in general.

[Footnote 21: A natural chlorate of potassium, generally of volcanic
origin.--ED.]

At the opposite end of the spectrum the knowledge of the ultra-violet
regions has been greatly extended by the researches of Lenard. These
extremely rapid radiations have been shown by that eminent physicist
to occur in the light of the electric sparks which flash between two
metal points, and which are produced by a large induction coil with
condenser and a Wehnelt break. Professor Schumann has succeeded in
photographing them by depositing bromide of silver directly on glass
plates without fixing it with gelatine; and he has, by the same
process, photographed in the spectrum of hydrogen a ray with a
wave-length of only 0.1 micron.

The spectroscope was formed entirely of fluor-spar, and a vacuum had
been created in it, for these radiations are extremely absorbable by
the air.

Notwithstanding the extreme smallness of the luminous wave-lengths, it
has been possible, after numerous fruitless trials, to obtain
stationary waves analogous to those which, in the case of sound, are
produced in organ pipes. The marvellous application M. Lippmann has
made of these waves to completely solve the problem of photography in
colours is well known. This discovery, so important in itself and so
instructive, since it shows us how the most delicate anticipations of
theory may be verified in all their consequences, and lead the
physicist to the solution of the problems occurring in practice, has
justly become popular, and there is, therefore, no need to describe it
here in detail.

Professor Wiener obtained stationary waves some little while before M.
Lippmann's discovery, in a layer of a sensitive substance having a
grain sufficiently small in relation to the length of wave. His aim
was to solve a question of great importance to a complete knowledge of
the ether. Fresnel founded his theory of double refraction and
reflexion by transparent surfaces, on the hypothesis that the
vibration of a ray of polarized light is perpendicular to the plane of
polarization. But Neumann has proposed, on the contrary, a theory in
which he recognizes that the luminous vibration is in this very plane.
He rather supposes, in opposition to Fresnel's idea, that the density
of the ether remains the same in all media, while its coefficient of
elasticity is variable.

Very remarkable experiments on dispersion by M. Carvallo prove indeed
that the idea of Fresnel was, if not necessary for us to adopt, at
least the more probable of the two; but apart from this indication,
and contrary to the hypothesis of Neumann, the two theories, from the
point of view of the explanation of all known facts, really appear to
be equivalent. Are we then in presence of two mechanical explanations,
different indeed, but nevertheless both adaptable to all the facts,
and between which it will always be impossible to make a choice? Or,
on the contrary, shall we succeed in realising an _experimentum
crucis_, an experiment at the point where the two theories cross,
which will definitely settle the question?
