of cavity _b_ to the bottom; mountain _c_. comes directly under
the sun and casts no shadow, and mountain _d_ casts its long shadow
over the plain. Knowing the time of revolution, and observing the
change of [Page 156] illumination, we can easily measure the height
of mountain and depth of crater. An apple, with excavations and
added prominences, revolved on its axis toward the light of a
candle, admirably illustrates the crescent light that fills either
side of the cavities and the shadows of the mountains on the plain.
Notice in Fig. 58 the crescent forms to the right, showing cavities
in abundance.

[Illustration: Fig. 60.--Lunar Crater "Copernicus," after Secchi.]

The selenography of one side of the moon is much better known to
us than the geography of the earth. Our maps of the moon are far
more perfect than those of the earth; and the photographs of lunar
objects by Messrs. Draper and De la Rue are wonderfully perfect,
[Page 157] and the drawings of Padre Secchi equally so (Fig. 60).
The least change recognizable from the earth must be speedily
detected. There are frequently reports of discoveries of volcanoes
on the moon, but they prove to be illusions. The moon will probably
look the same to observers a thousand years hence as it does to-day.

This little orb, that is only 1/81 of the mass of the earth, has
twenty-eight mountains that are higher than Mont Blanc, that "monarch
of mountains," in Europe.

_Eclipses._

[Illustration: Fig. 61.--Eclipses; Shadows of Earth and Moon.]

It is evident that if the plane of the moon's orbit were to correspond
with that of the earth, as they all lie in the plane of the page
(Fig. 61), the moon must pass between the centres of the earth
and sun, and exactly behind the earth at every revolution. Such
successive and total darkenings would greatly derange all affairs
dependent on light. It is easily avoided. Venus does [Page 158] not
cross the disk of the sun at every revolution, because of the
inclination of the plane of its orbit to that of the earth (see Fig.
41, p. 107). So the plane of the orbit of the moon is inclined to
the orbit of the earth 5 deg. 8' 39"; hence the full-moon is often above
or below the earth's shadow, and the earth is below or above the
moon's shadow at new moon. It is as if the moon's orbit were pulled
up one-quarter of an inch from the page behind the earth, and
depressed as much below it between the earth and the sun. The point
where the orbit of the moon penetrates the plane of the ecliptic is
called a node. If a new moon occur when the line of intersection of
the planes of orbits points to the sun, the sun must be eclipsed; if
the full-moon occur, the moon must be eclipsed. In any other
position the sun or moon will only be partially hidden, or no
eclipse will occur.

If the new moon be near the earth it will completely obscure the
sun. A dime covers it if held close to the eye. It may be so far
from the earth as to only partially hide the sun; and, if it cover
the centre, leave a ring of sunlight on every side. This is called
an annular eclipse. Two such eclipses will occur this year (1879).
If the full-moon passes near the earth, or is at perigee, it finds
the cone of shadow cast by the earth larger, and hence the eclipse
is greater; if it is far from the earth, or near apogee, the earth's
shadow is smaller, and the eclipse less, or is escaped altogether.

There is a certain periodicity in eclipses. Whenever the sun, moon,
and earth are in a line, as in the total eclipse of July 29th,
1878, they will be in the same position after the earth has made
about eighteen revolutions, [Page 159] and the moon two hundred and
sixteen--that is, eighteen years after. This period, however, is
disregarded by astronomers, and each eclipse calculated by itself to
the accuracy of a second.

How terrible is the fear of ignorance and superstition when the sun
or moon appear to be in the process of destruction! how delightful
are the joys of knowledge when its prophesies in regard to the
heavenly bodies are being fulfilled!


MARS.

The god or war; Its sign [Symbol], spear and shield.

MEAN DISTANCE FROM THE SUN, 141,000,000 MILES. DIAMETER, 4211 MILES.
REVOLUTION, AXIAL, 24H. 37M. 22.7S.; ORBITAL, 686.98 DAYS. VELOCITY
PER MINUTE, 899 MILES. SATELLITES, TWO.

[Illustration: Fig. 62.--Apparent Size of Mars at Mean and Extreme
Distances.]

At intervals, on an average of two years one month and nineteen
days, we find rising, as the sun goes down, the reddest star in
the heavens. Its brightness is exceedingly variable; sometimes
it scintillates, and sometimes it shines with a steady light. Its
marked peculiarities demand a close study. We find it to be Mars,
the fiery god of war. Its orbit is far from circular. At perihelion
it is 128,000,000 miles from the sun, and at aphelion 154,000,000;
hence its mean distance is about 141,000,000. So great a change
in its distance from the sun easily accounts for the change in
its brilliancy. Now, if Mars and the earth revolved in circular
orbits, the one 141,000,000 miles from the sun, and the other
92,000,000, they would approach at conjunction within 49,000,000
miles of each other, and at opposition be 233,000,000 miles apart.
But Mars at perihelion may be only 128,000,000 miles from the sun,
and earth at [Page 160] aphelion may be 94,000,000 miles from the
sun. They are, then, but 34,000,000 miles apart. This favorable
opportunity occurs about once in seventy-nine years. At its last
occurrence, in 1877, Mars introduced to us his two satellites, that
had never before been seen by man. In consequence of this greatly
varying distance, the apparent size of Mars differs very much (Fig.
62). Take a favorable time when the planet is near, also as near
overhead as it ever comes, so as to have as little atmosphere as
possible to penetrate, and study the planet. The first thing that
strikes the observer is a dazzling spot of white near the pole which
happens to be toward him, or at both poles when the planet is so
situated that they can be seen. When the north pole is turned toward
the sun the size of the spot sensibly diminishes, and the spot at
the south pole enlarges, and _vice versa_. Clearly they are
ice-fields. Hence Mars has water, and air to carry it, and heat to
melt ice. It is winter at the south pole when Mars is farthest from
the sun; therefore the ice-fields are larger than at the north pole.
It is summer at the south pole when Mars is nearest the sun. Hence
its ice-fields grow smaller [Page 161] than those of the north pole
in its summer. This carrying of water from pole to pole, and melting
of ice over such large areas, might give rise to uncomfortable
currents in ocean and air; but very likely an inhabitant of earth
might be transported to the surface of Mars, and be no more
surprised at what he observed there than if he went to some point of
the earth to him unknown. Day and night would be nearly of the same
length; winter would linger longer in the lap of spring; summer
would be one hundred and eighty-one days long; but as the seas are
more intermingled with the land, and the divisions of land have less
of continental magnitude, it may be conjectured that Mars might be a
comfortable place of residence to beings like men. Perhaps the
greatest surprise to the earthly visitor would be to find himself
weighing only four-tenths as much as usual, able to leap twice as
high, and lift considerable bowlders.

_Satellites of Mars._

The night of August 11th, 1877, is famous in modern astronomy.
Mars has been a special object of study in all ages; but on that
evening Professor Hall, of Washington, discovered a satellite of
Mars. On the 16th it was seen again, and its orbital motion followed.
On the following night it was hidden behind the body of the planet
when the observation began, but at the calculated time--at four
o'clock in the morning--it emerged, and established its character as
a true moon, and not a fixed star or asteroid. Blessings, however,
never come singly, for another object soon emerged which proved
to be an inner satellite. This is extraordinarily near [Page 162]
the planet--only four thousand miles from the surface--and its
revolution is exceedingly rapid. The shortest period hitherto known
is that of the inner satellite of Saturn, 22h. 37m. The inner
satellite of Mars makes its revolution in 7h. 39m.--a rapidity so
much surpassing the axial revolution of the planet itself, that it
rises in the west and sets in the east, showing all phases of our
moon in one night. The outer satellite is 12,579 miles from Mars,
and makes its revolution in 30h. 18m. Its diameter is six and a
quarter miles; that of the inner one is seven and a half miles. This
can be estimated only by the amount of light given.


ASTEROIDS.

ALREADY DISCOVERED (1879), 192. DISTANCES FROM THE SUN, FROM 200,000,000
TO 315,000,000 MILES. DIAMETERS, FROM 20 TO 400 MILES. MASS OF ALL,
LESS THAN ONE-QUARTER OF THE EARTH.

The sense of infinite variety among the countless number of celestial
orbs has been growing rapidly upon us for half a century, and doubtless
will grow much more in half a century to come. Just as we paused
in the consideration of planets to consider meteors and comets,
at first thought so different, so must we now pause to consider a
ring of bodies, some of which are as small in comparison to Jupiter,
the next planet, as aerolites are compared to the earth.

In 1800 an association of astronomers, suspecting that a planet
might be found in the great distance between Mars and Jupiter,
divided the zodiac into twenty-four parts, and assigned one part to
each astronomer for a thorough search; but, before their organization
could commence work, Piazzi, an Italian astronomer of Palermo, [Page
163] found in Taurus a star behaving like a planet. In six weeks it
was lost in the rays of the sun. It was rediscovered on its
emergence, and named Ceres. In March, 1802, a second planet was
discovered by Olbers in the same gap between Mars and Jupiter, and
named Pallas. Here was an embarrassment of richness. Olbers
suggested that an original planet had exploded, and that more pieces
could be found. More were found, but the theory is exploded into
more pieces than a planet could possibly be. Up to 1879 one hundred
and ninety-two have been discovered, with a prospect of more.
Between 1871-75 forty-five were discovered, showing that they are
sought for with great skill. In the discovery of these bodies, our
American astronomers, Professors Watson and Peters, are without
peers.

Between Mars and Jupiter is a distance of some 339,000,000 miles.
Subtract 35,000,000 miles next to Mars and 50,000,000 miles next
to Jupiter, and there is left a zone 254,000,000 miles wide outside
of which the asteroids never wander. If any ever did, the attraction
of Mars or Jupiter may have prevented their return.

Since the orbits of Mars and Jupiter show no sign of being affected
by these bodies for a century past, it is probable that their number
is limited, or at least that their combined mass does not approximate
the size of a planet. Professor Newcomb estimates that if all that
are now discovered were put into one planet, it would not be over
four hundred miles in diameter; and if a thousand more should exist,
of the average size of those discovered since 1850, their addition
would not increase the diameter to more than five hundred miles.

[Page 164]
That all these bodies, which differ from each other in no respect
except in brilliancy, can be noted and fixed so as not to be mistaken
one for another, and instantly recognized though not seen for a
dozen years, is one of the highest exemplifications of the accuracy
of astronomical observation.


JUPITER.

The king of the gods; sign [Symbol], the bird of Jove.

DISTANCE FROM THE SUN, PERIHELION, 457,000,000 MILES; APHELION,
503,000,000 MILES. DIAMETER, EQUATORIAL, 87,500 MILES; POLAR, 82,500
MILES. VOLUME, 1300 EARTHS. MASS, 213 EARTHS. AXIAL REVOLUTION, 9H.
55M 20S. ORBITAL REVOLUTION, 11 YEARS 317 DAYS. VELOCITY, 483.6
MILES PER MINUTE.

[Illustration: Fig. 63.--Jupiter as seen by the great Washington
Telescope. Drawn by Mr. Holden.]

Jupiter rightly wears the name of the "giant planet." His orbit
is more nearly circular than most smaller planets. He could not
turn short corners with facility. We know little of his surface.
His spots and belts are [Page 165] changeable as clouds, which they
probably are. Some spots may be slightly self-luminous, but not the
part of the planet we see. It is covered with an enormous depth of
atmosphere. Since the markings in the belts move about one hundred
miles a day, the Jovian tempests are probably not violent. It is,
however, a singular and unaccountable fact, as remarked by Arago,
that its trade-winds move in an opposite direction from ours.
Jupiter receives only one twenty-seventh as much light and heat from
the sun as the earth receives. Its lighter density, being about that
of water, indicates that it still has internal heat of its own.
Indeed, it is likely that this planet has not yet cooled so as to
have any solid crust, and if its dense vapors could be deposited on
the surface, its appearance might be more suggestive of the sun than
of the earth.

_Satellites of Jupiter._

In one respect Jupiter seems like a minor sun--he is royally attended
by a group of planets: we call them moons. This system is a favorite
object of study to everyone possessing a telescope. Indeed, I have
known a man who could see these moons with the naked eye, and give
their various positions without mistake. Galileo first revealed
them to ordinary men. We see their orbits so nearly on the edge
that the moons seem to be sliding back and forth across and behind
the disk, and to varying distances on either side. Fig. 64 is the
representation of their appearance at successive observations in
November, 1878. Their motion is so swift, and the means of comparison
by one another and the planet so excellent, that they can be seen
to change their places, [Page 166] be occulted, emerge from shadow,
and eclipse the planet, in an hour's watching.

[Illustration: Fig. 64.--_a._ Various Positions of Jupiter's Moons;
_b._ Greatest Elongation of each Satellite.]

                ELEMENTS OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES.
 +-------------------------------------------------------------+
 |               | Mean Distance |                  |          |
 |               | from Jupiter. | Sidereal Period. | Diameter.|
 |               |---------------+------------------+----------|
 |               |     Miles.    |  Days Hrs. Min.  |  Miles.  |
 |   I. Io       |     260,000   |    1   18   28   |   2,352  |
 |  II. Europa   |     414,000   |    3   13   43   |   2,099  |
 | III. Ganymede |     661,000   |    7    3   59   |   3,436  |
 |  IV. Callisto |   1,162,000   |   16   18    5   |   2,929  |
 +-------------------------------------------------------------+

It is seen by the above table that all these moons are larger than
ours, one larger than Mercury, and the asteroids are hardly large
enough to make respectable moons for them. They differ in color:
I. and II. have a bluish tinge; III. a yellow; and IV. is red.
The amount of light given by these satellites varies in the most
sudden and inexplicable manner. Perhaps it may be owing to the
different distributions of land and water on them. The mass of all
of them is .000171 of Jupiter.

[Page 167]
If the Jovian system were the only one in existence, it would be
a surprising object of wonder and study. A monster planet, 85,000
miles in diameter, hung on nothing, revolving its equatorial surface
forty-five miles a minute, holding four other worlds in steady
orbits, some of them at a speed of seven hundred miles a minute,
and the whole system carried through space at five hundred miles
a minute. Yet the discovery of all this display of power, skill,
and stability is only reading the easiest syllables of the vast
literature of wisdom and power.


SATURN.

The god or time; sign [Symbol], his scythe.

MEAN DISTANCE FROM THE SUN, 881,000,000 MILES. DIAMETER, POLAR,
66,500 MILES; EQUATORIAL, 73,300 MILES. AXIAL REVOLUTION, 10H.
14M. PERIODIC TIME, 29T YEARS. MOONS, EIGHT.

The human mind has used Saturn and the two known planets beyond
for the last 200 years as a gymnasium. It has exercised itself
in comprehending their enormous distances in order to clear those
greater spaces, to where the stars are set; it has exercised its
ingenuity at interpreting appearances which signify something other
than they seem, in order that it may no longer be deluded by any
sunrises into a belief that the heavenly dome goes round the earth.
That a wandering point of light should develop into such amazing
grandeurs under the telescope, is as unexpected as that every tiny
seed should show peculiar markings and colors under the microscope.

[Illustration: Fig. 65.--View of Saturn and his Rings.]

There are certain things that are easy to determine, such as size,
density, periodic time, velocity, etc.; but other things are exceedingly
difficult to determine. It requires long sight to read when the
book is held [Page 168] 800,000,000 miles away. Only very few, if
more than two, opportunities have been found to determine the time
of Saturn's rotation. On the evening of December 7th, 1870,
Professor Hall observed a brilliant white spot suddenly show itself
on the body of this planet. It was as if an eruption of white hot
matter burst up from the interior. It spread eastward, and remained
bright till January, when it faded. No such opportunity for getting
a basis on which to found a calculation of the time of the rotation
of Saturn has occurred since Sir William Herschel's observations;
and, very singularly, the two times deduced wonderfully
coincide--that of Herschel being 10h. 16m., that of Mr. Hall being
10h. 14m.

[Page 169]
The density of Saturn is less than that of water, and its velocity
of rotation so great that centrifugal force antagonizes gravitation
to such an extent that bodies weigh on it about the same as on the
earth. All the fine fancies of the habitability of this vaporous
world, all the calculations of the number of people that could
live on the square miles of the planet and its enormous rings,
are only fancy. Nothing could live there with more brains than a
fish, at most. It is a world in formative processes. We cannot hear
the voice of the Creator there, but we can see matter responsive
to the voice, and moulded by his word.

_Rings of Saturn._

The eye and mind of man have worked out a problem of marvellous
difficulty in finding a true solution of the strange appearance
of the rings. Galileo has the immortal honor of first having seen
something peculiar about this planet. He wrote to the Duke of Tuscany,
"When I view Saturn it seems _tricorps_. The central body seems the
largest. The two others, situated, the one on the east, and the
other on the west, seem to touch it. They are like two supporters,
who help old Saturn on his way, and always remain at his side."
Looking a few years later, the rings having turned from view, he
said, "It is possible that some demon mocked me;" and he refused
to look any more.

Huyghens, in March, 1655, solved the problem of the triform appearance
of Saturn. He saw them as handles on the two sides. In a year they
had disappeared, and the planet was as round as it seemed to Galileo
in 1612. He did not, however, despair; and in October, [Page 170]
1656, he was rewarded by seeing them appear again. He wrote of
Saturn, "It is girdled by a thin plain ring, nowhere touching,
inclined to the ecliptic."

Since that time discoveries have succeeded one another rapidly.
"We have seen by degrees a ring evolved out of a triform planet,
and the great division of the ring and the irregularities on it
brought to light. Enceladus, and coy Mimas, faintest of twinklers,
are caught by Herschel's giant mirrors. And he, too, first of men,
realizes the wonderful tenuity of the ring, along which he saw
those satellites travelling like pearls strung on a silver thread.
Then Bond comes on the field, and furnishes evidence to show that
we must multiply the number of separate rings we know not how many
fold. And here we reach the golden age of Saturnian discovery,
when Bond, with the giant refractor of Cambridge, and Dawes, with
his 6-1/3-inch Munich glass, first beheld that wonderful dark
semi-transparent ring, which still remains one of the wonders of
our system. But the end is not yet: on the southern surface of
the ring, ere summer fades into autumn, Otto Struve in turn comes
upon the field, detects, as Dawes had previously done, a division
even in the dark ring, and measures it, while it is invisible to
Lassell's mirror--a proof, if one were needed, of the enormous
superiority possessed by refractors in such inquiries. Then we
approach 1861, when the ring plane again passes through the earth,
and Struve and Wray observe curious nebulous appearances."[*]

[Footnote *: Lockyer.]

