
1. Caterpillar. 2. Male moth. 3. Female moth laying eggs. 4 Cocoons. 5.
Cast skins of caterpillar. 6. Work of young caterpillar. 7. Male pupa. 8
and 9. Girdled branches.]


THE GIPSY MOTH

Life history: This insect, imported from Europe to this country in 1868,
    has ever since proved a serious enemy of most shade, forest, and
    fruit trees in the New England States. It even feeds on
    evergreens, killing the trees by a single defoliation.

    The insect appears in the caterpillar stage from April to July. It
    feeds at night and rests by day. The mature caterpillar, which is
    dark in color, may be recognized by rows of blue and red spots along
    its back. After July, egg masses are deposited by the female moths
    on the bark of trees, and on leaves, fences, and other neighboring
    objects. Here they remain over the winter until they hatch in the
    spring. The flat egg masses are round or oval in shape, and are
    yellowish-brown in color. See Fig. 102.

Remedies: Spray for the caterpillars in June with arsenate of lead and
    apply creosote to the egg masses whenever found.


THE BROWN-TAIL MOTH

Life history: This insect was introduced here from Europe in 1890 and
    has since done serious damage to shade, forest, and fruit trees, and
    to shrubs in the New England States.

    It appears in the caterpillar stage in the early spring and
    continues to feed on the leaves and buds until the last of June.
    Then the caterpillars pupate, the moths come out, and in July and
    August the egg clusters appear. These hatch into caterpillars which
    form nests for themselves by drawing the leaves together. Here they
    remain protected until the spring. See Fig. 103.

Remedies: Collect the winter nests from October to April and burn them.
    Also spray the trees for caterpillars in early May and especially in
    August with arsenate of lead.

[Illustration: FIG. 102.--The Gipsy Moth. (After F.W. Rane Mass. State
Forester.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 103.--The Brown-tail Moth. (After F.W. Rane, Mass.
State Forester.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 104.--Larva of the Leopard Moth.]


THE FALL WEBWORM

The caterpillars of this insect congregate in colonies and surround
themselves with a web which often reaches the size of a foot or more in
diameter. These webs are common on trees in July and August. Cutting off
the webs or burning them on the twigs is the most practical remedy.

[Illustration: FIG. 105.--Branch Showing Work of the Leopard Moth Larva.]


THE LEOPARD MOTH

Life history: This insect does its serious damage in the grub form. The
    grubs which are whitish in color with brown heads, and which vary in
    size from 3/8 of an inch to 3 inches in length (Fig. 104), may be
    found boring in the wood of the branches and trunk of the tree all
    winter. Fig. 105. The leopard moth requires two years to complete
    its round of life. The mature moths are marked with dark spots
    resembling a leopard's skin, hence the name. Fig. 106. It is one of
    the commonest and most destructive insects in the East and is
    responsible for the recent death of thousands of the famous elm
    trees in New Haven and Boston. Fig. 107.

[Illustration: FIG. 106.--The Leopard Moth.]

Remedies: Trees likely to be infested with this insect should be
    examined three or four times a year for wilted twigs, dead branches,
    and strings of expelled frass; all of which may indicate the
    presence of this borer. Badly infested branches should be cut off
    and burned. Trees so badly infested that treatment becomes too
    complicated should be cut down and destroyed. Where the insects are
    few and can be readily reached, an injection of carbon bisulphide
    into the burrow, the orifice of which is then immediately closed
    with soap or putty, will often destroy the insects within.

[Illustration: FIG. 107.--Elm Tree Attacked by the Leopard Moth.]


THE HICKORY BARK BORER

Life history: This insect is a small brown or black beetle in its mature
    form and a small legless white grub in its winter stage. The beetles
    appear from June to August. In July they deposit their eggs in the
    outer sapwood, immediately under the bark of the trunk and larger
    branches. The eggs soon hatch and the grubs feed on the living
    tissue of the tree, forming numerous galleries. The grubs pass the
    winter in a nearly full-grown condition, transform to pupae in May,
    and emerge as beetles in June.

Remedies: The presence of the insect can be detected by the small holes
    in the bark of the trees and the fine sawdust which is ejected from
    these holes, when the insects are active. It is important to
    emphasize the advisability of detecting the fine sawdust because
    that is the best indication of the actual operations of the hickory
    bark borer. These holes, however, will not be noticeable until the
    insect has completed its transformation. In summer, the infested
    trees show wilted leaves and many dead twigs. Holes in the base of
    the petioles of these leaves are also signs of the working of the
    insect. Since the insect works underneath the bark, it is
    inaccessible for treatment and all infested trees should be cut down
    and burned, or the bark removed and the insects destroyed. This
    should be done before the beetles emerge from the tree in June.


PLANT LICE OR APHIDES

These often appear on the under side of the leaves of the beech, Norway
maple, tulip tree, etc. They excrete a sweet, sticky liquid called
"honey-dew," and cause the leaves to curl or drop. Spraying with
whale-oil soap solution formed by adding one pound of the soap to five
gallons of water is the remedy.



STUDY II. TREE DISEASES

Because trees have wants analogous to those of human beings, they also
have diseases similar to those which afflict human beings. In many cases
these diseases act like cancerous growths upon the human body; in some
instances the ailment may be a general failing due to improper feeding,
and in other cases it may be due to interference with the life processes
of the tree.

How to tell an ailing tree: Whatever the cause, an ailing tree will
    manifest its ailment by one or more symptoms.

    A change of color in the leaves at a time when they should be
    perfectly green indicates that the tree is not growing under normal
    conditions, possibly because of an insufficiency of moisture or
    light or an overdose of foreign gases or salts. Withering of the
    leaves is another sign of irregularity in water supply. Dead tops
    point to some difficulty in the soil conditions or to some disease
    of the roots or branches. Spotted leaves and mushroom-like growths
    or brackets protruding from the bark as in Fig. 108, are sure signs
    of disease.

    In attempting to find out whether a tree is healthy or not, one
    would therefore do well to consider whether the conditions under
    which it is growing are normal or not; whether the tree is suitable
    for the location; whether the soil is too dry or too wet; whether
    the roots are deprived of their necessary water and air by an
    impenetrable cover of concrete or soil; whether the soil is well
    drained and free from foreign gases and salts; whether the tree is
    receiving plenty of light or is too much exposed; and whether it is
    free from insects and fungi.

    If, after a thorough examination, it is found that the ailment has
    gone too far, it may not be wise to try to save the tree. A timely
    removal of a tree badly infested with insects or fungi may often be
    the best procedure and may save many neighboring trees from
    contagious infection. For this, however, no rules can be laid down
    and much will depend on the local conditions and the judgment and
    knowledge of the person concerned.

[Illustration: FIG. 108.--A Bracket Fungus (_Elfvingia megaloma_) on a
Tulip Tree.]

Fungi as factors of disease: The trees, the shrubs and the flowers with
    which we are familiar are rooted in the ground and derive their food
    both from the soil and from the air. There is, however, another
    group of plants,--_the fungi_,--the roots of which grow in trees and
    other plants and which obtain their food entirely from the trees or
    plants upon which they grow. The fungi cannot manufacture their own
    food as other plants do and consequently absorb the food of their
    host, eventually reducing it to dust. The fungi are thus
    disease-producing factors and the source of most of the diseases of
    trees.

    When we can see fungi growing on a tree we may safely assume that
    they are already in an advanced state of development. We generally
    discover their presence when their fruiting bodies appear on the
    surface of the tree as shown in Fig 109. These fruiting bodies are
    the familiar mushrooms, puffballs, toadstools or shelf-like brackets
    that one often sees on trees. In some cases they spread over the
    surface of the wood in thin patches. They vary in size from large
    bodies to mere pustules barely visible to the naked eye. Their
    variation in color is also significant, ranging from colorless to
    black and red but never green. They often emulate the color of the
    bark, Fig. 110.

    Radiating from these fruiting bodies into the tissues of the tree
    are a large number of minute fibers, comprising the _mycelium_ of
    the fungus. These fibers penetrate the body of the tree in all
    directions and absorb its food. The mycelium is the most important
    part of the fungous growth. If the fruiting body is removed, another
    soon takes its place, but if the entire mycelium is cut out, the
    fungus will never come back. The fruiting body of the fungus bears
    the seed or _spores_. These spores are carried by the wind or
    insects to other trees where they take root in some wound or crevice
    of the bark and start a new infestation.

[Illustration: FIG. 109.--The Fruiting Body of a Fungus.]

    The infestation will be favored in its growth if the spore can find
    plenty of food, water, warmth and darkness. As these conditions
    generally exist in wounds and cavities of trees, it is wise to keep
    all wounds well covered with coal tar and to so drain the cavities
    that moisture cannot lodge in them. This subject will be gone into
    more fully in the following two studies on "Pruning Trees" and "Tree
    Repair."

[Illustration: FIG. 110.--The Birch-fungus rot. (_Polyponis betulinus_
Fr.) Note the similarity in the color of the fruiting body and bark of
the tree.]

    While the majority of the fungi grow on the trunks and limbs of
    trees, some attack the leaves, some the twigs and others the roots.
    Some fungi grow on living wood some on dead wood and some on both.
    Those that attack the living trees are the most dangerous from the
    standpoint of disease.

The chestnut disease: The disease which is threatening the destruction
    of all the chestnut trees in America is a fungus which has, within
    recent years, assumed such vast proportions that it deserves special
    comment. The fungus is known as _Diaporthe parasitica_ (Murrill),
    and was first observed in the vicinity of New York in 1905. At that
    time only a few trees were known to have been killed by this
    disease, but now the disease has advanced over the whole chestnut
    area in the United States, reaching as far south as Virginia and as
    far west as Buffalo. Fig. 111 shows the result of the chestnut
    disease.

    The fungus attacks the cambium tissue underneath the bark. It enters
    through a wound in the bark and sends its fungous threads from the
    point of infection all around the trunk until the latter is girdled
    and killed. This may all happen within one season. It is not until
    the tree has practically been destroyed that the disease makes its
    appearance on the surface of the bark in the form of brown patches
    studded with little pustules that carry the spores. When once
    girdled, the tree is killed above the point of infection and
    everything above dies, while some of the twigs below may live until
    they are attacked individually by the disease or until the trunk
    below their origin is infected.

    All species of chestnut trees are subject to the disease. The
    Japanese and Spanish varieties appear to be highly resistant, but
    are not immune. Other species of trees besides chestnuts are not
    subject to the disease.

[Illustration: FIG. 111.--Chestnut Trees Killed by the Chestnut
Disease.]

    There is no remedy or preventive for this disease. From the nature
    of its attack, which is on the inner layer of the tree, it is
    evident that all applications of fungicides, which must necessarily
    be applied to the outside of the tree, will not reach the disease.
    Injections are impossible and other suggested remedies, such as
    boring holes in the wood for the purpose of inserting chemicals, are
    futile.

    The wood of the chestnut tree, within three or four years after its
    death, is still sound and may be used for telephone and telegraph
    poles, posts, railroad ties, lumber and firewood.

Spraying for fungous diseases: Where a fungous disease is attacking the
    leaves, fruit, or twigs, spraying with Bordeaux mixture may prove
    effective. The application of Bordeaux mixture is deterrent rather
    than remedial, and should therefore be made immediately before the
    disease appears. The nature of the disease and the time of treatment
    can be determined without cost, by submitting specimens of affected
    portions of the plant for analysis and advice to the State
    Agricultural Experiment Station or to the United States Department
    of Agriculture.

    Bordeaux mixture, the standard fungicide material, consists of a
    solution of 6 pounds of copper sulphate (blue vitriol) with 4 pounds
    of slaked lime in 50 gallons of water. It may be purchased in
    prepared form in the open market, and when properly made, has a
    brilliant sky-blue color. Spraying with Bordeaux mixture should be
    done in the fall, early spring, or early summer, but never during
    the period when the trees are in bloom.



STUDY III. PRUNING TREES


FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES

Trees are very much like human beings in their requirements, mode of
life and diseases, and the general principles applicable to the care of
one are equally important to the intelligent treatment of the other. The
removal of limbs from trees, as well as from human beings, must be done
sparingly and judiciously. Wounds, in both trees and human beings, must
be disinfected and dressed to keep out all fungus or disease germs.
Fungous growths of trees are similar to human cancers, both in the
manner of their development and the surgical treatment which they
require. Improper pruning will invite fungi and insects to the tree,
hence the importance of a knowledge of fundamental principles in this
branch of tree care.

[Illustration: FIG. 112.--A Tree Pruned Improperly and too Severely.]

Time: Too much pruning at one time should never be practiced (Fig. 112),
    and no branch should be removed from a tree without good reason for
    so doing. Dead and broken branches should be removed as soon as
    observed, regardless of any special pruning season, because they are
    dangerous, unsightly and carry insects and disease into the heart of
    the tree. But all other pruning, whether it be for the purpose of
    perfecting the form in shade trees, or for increasing the production
    of fruit in orchard trees, should be confined to certain seasons.
    Shade and ornamental trees can best be pruned in the fall, while the
    leaves are still on the tree and while the tree itself is in
    practically a dormant state.

Proper cutting: All pruning should be commenced at the top of the tree
    and finished at the bottom. A shortened branch (excepting in poplars
    and willows, which should be cut in closely) should terminate in
    small twigs which may draw the sap to the freshly cut wound; where a
    branch is removed entirely, the cut should be made-close and even
    with the trunk, as in Fig. 113. Wherever there is a stub left after
