James Hobbs, second lieutenant of the Union of Calcutta, after landing
on an island situated 8 deg. 18' S. lat., and 156 deg. 30' E. long.,
had seen some iron bars and red stuffs used by the natives of these
parts.  Dumont d'Urville, much perplexed, and not knowing how to credit
the reports of low-class journals, decided to follow Dillon's track.

On the 10th of February, 1828, the Astrolabe appeared off Tikopia, and
took as guide and interpreter a deserter found on the island; made his
way to Vanikoro, sighted it on the 12th inst., lay among the reefs
until the 14th, and not until the 20th did he cast anchor within the
barrier in the harbour of Vanou.

On the 23rd, several officers went round the island and brought back
some unimportant trifles.  The natives, adopting a system of denials
and evasions, refused to take them to the unlucky place.  This
ambiguous conduct led them to believe that the natives had ill-treated
the castaways, and indeed they seemed to fear that Dumont d'Urville had
come to avenge La Perouse and his unfortunate crew.

However, on the 26th, appeased by some presents, and understanding that
they had no reprisals to fear, they led M. Jacquireot to the scene of
the wreck.

There, in three or four fathoms of water, between the reefs of Pacou
and Vanou, lay anchors, cannons, pigs of lead and iron, embedded in the
limy concretions.  The large boat and the whaler belonging to the
Astrolabe were sent to this place, and, not without some difficulty,
their crews hauled up an anchor weighing 1,800 lbs., a brass gun, some
pigs of iron, and two copper swivel-guns.

Dumont d'Urville, questioning the natives, learned too that La Perouse,
after losing both his vessels on the reefs of this island, had
constructed a smaller boat, only to be lost a second time.  Where, no
one knew.

But the French Government, fearing that Dumont d'Urville was not
acquainted with Dillon's movements, had sent the sloop Bayonnaise,
commanded by Legoarant de Tromelin, to Vanikoro, which had been
stationed on the west coast of America.  The Bayonnaise cast her anchor
before Vanikoro some months after the departure of the Astrolabe, but
found no new document; but stated that the savages had respected the
monument to La Perouse.  That is the substance of what I told Captain
Nemo.

"So," he said, "no one knows now where the third vessel perished that
was constructed by the castaways on the island of Vanikoro?"

"No one knows."

Captain Nemo said nothing, but signed to me to follow him into the
large saloon.  The Nautilus sank several yards below the waves, and the
panels were opened.

I hastened to the aperture, and under the crustations of coral, covered
with fungi, syphonules, alcyons, madrepores, through myriads of
charming fish--girelles, glyphisidri, pompherides, diacopes, and
holocentres--I recognised certain debris that the drags had not been
able to tear up--iron stirrups, anchors, cannons, bullets, capstan
fittings, the stem of a ship, all objects clearly proving the wreck of
some vessel, and now carpeted with living flowers. While I was looking
on this desolate scene, Captain Nemo said, in a sad voice:

"Commander La Perouse set out 7th December, 1785, with his vessels La
Boussole and the Astrolabe.  He first cast anchor at Botany Bay,
visited the Friendly Isles, New Caledonia, then directed his course
towards Santa Cruz, and put into Namouka, one of the Hapai group.  Then
his vessels struck on the unknown reefs of Vanikoro.  The Boussole,
which went first, ran aground on the southerly coast.  The Astrolabe
went to its help, and ran aground too.  The first vessel was destroyed
almost immediately.  The second, stranded under the wind, resisted some
days.  The natives made the castaways welcome.  They installed
themselves in the island, and constructed a smaller boat with the
debris of the two large ones.  Some sailors stayed willingly at
Vanikoro; the others, weak and ill, set out with La Perouse.  They
directed their course towards the Solomon Islands, and there perished,
with everything, on the westerly coast of the chief island of the
group, between Capes Deception and Satisfaction."

"How do you know that?"

"By this, that I found on the spot where was the last wreck."

Captain Nemo showed me a tin-plate box, stamped with the French arms,
and corroded by the salt water.  He opened it, and I saw a bundle of
papers, yellow but still readable.

They were the instructions of the naval minister to Commander La
Perouse, annotated in the margin in Louis XVI's handwriting.

"Ah! it is a fine death for a sailor!" said Captain Nemo, at last.  "A
coral tomb makes a quiet grave; and I trust that I and my comrades will
find no other."



CHAPTER XIX

TORRES STRAITS

During the night of the 27th or 28th of December, the Nautilus left the
shores of Vanikoro with great speed.  Her course was south-westerly,
and in three days she had gone over the 750 leagues that separated it
from La Perouse's group and the south-east point of Papua.

Early on the 1st of January, 1863, Conseil joined me on the platform.

"Master, will you permit me to wish you a happy New Year?"

"What!  Conseil; exactly as if I was at Paris in my study at the Jardin
des Plantes?  Well, I accept your good wishes, and thank you for them.
Only, I will ask you what you mean by a `Happy New Year' under our
circumstances?  Do you mean the year that will bring us to the end of
our imprisonment, or the year that sees us continue this strange
voyage?"

"Really, I do not know how to answer, master.  We are sure to see
curious things, and for the last two months we have not had time for
dullness.  The last marvel is always the most astonishing; and, if we
continue this progression, I do not know how it will end.  It is my
opinion that we shall never again see the like.  I think then, with no
offence to master, that a happy year would be one in which we could see
everything."

On 2nd January we had made 11,340 miles, or 5,250 French leagues, since
our starting-point in the Japan Seas.  Before the ship's head stretched
the dangerous shores of the coral sea, on the north-east coast of
Australia.  Our boat lay along some miles from the redoubtable bank on
which Cook's vessel was lost, 10th June, 1770.  The boat in which Cook
was struck on a rock, and, if it did not sink, it was owing to a piece
of coral that was broken by the shock, and fixed itself in the broken
keel.

I had wished to visit the reef, 360 leagues long, against which the
sea, always rough, broke with great violence, with a noise like
thunder.  But just then the inclined planes drew the Nautilus down to a
great depth, and I could see nothing of the high coral walls.  I had to
content myself with the different specimens of fish brought up by the
nets.  I remarked, among others, some germons, a species of mackerel as
large as a tunny, with bluish sides, and striped with transverse bands,
that disappear with the animal's life.

These fish followed us in shoals, and furnished us with very delicate
food. We took also a large number of gilt-heads, about one and a half
inches long, tasting like dorys; and flying pyrapeds like submarine
swallows, which, in dark nights, light alternately the air and water
with their phosphorescent light. Among the molluscs and zoophytes, I
found in the meshes of the net several species of alcyonarians, echini,
hammers, spurs, dials, cerites, and hyalleae. The flora was represented
by beautiful floating seaweeds, laminariae, and macrocystes,
impregnated with the mucilage that transudes through their pores; and
among which I gathered an admirable Nemastoma Geliniarois, that was
classed among the natural curiosities of the museum.

Two days after crossing the coral sea, 4th January, we sighted the
Papuan coasts.  On this occasion, Captain Nemo informed me that his
intention was to get into the Indian Ocean by the Strait of Torres.
His communication ended there.

The Torres Straits are nearly thirty-four leagues wide; but they are
obstructed by an innumerable quantity of islands, islets, breakers, and
rocks, that make its navigation almost impracticable; so that Captain
Nemo took all needful precautions to cross them.  The Nautilus,
floating betwixt wind and water, went at a moderate pace.  Her screw,
like a cetacean's tail, beat the waves slowly.

Profiting by this, I and my two companions went up on to the deserted
platform.  Before us was the steersman's cage, and I expected that
Captain Nemo was there directing the course of the Nautilus.  I had
before me the excellent charts of the Straits of Torres, and I
consulted them attentively.  Round the Nautilus the sea dashed
furiously.  The course of the waves, that went from south-east to
north-west at the rate of two and a half miles, broke on the coral that
showed itself here and there.

"This is a bad sea!" remarked Ned Land.

"Detestable indeed, and one that does not suit a boat like the
Nautilus."

"The Captain must be very sure of his route, for I see there pieces of
coral that would do for its keel if it only touched them slightly."

Indeed the situation was dangerous, but the Nautilus seemed to slide
like magic off these rocks.  It did not follow the routes of the
Astrolabe and the Zelee exactly, for they proved fatal to Dumont
d'Urville. It bore more northwards, coasted the Islands of Murray, and
came back to the south-west towards Cumberland Passage.  I thought it
was going to pass it by, when, going back to north-west, it went
through a large quantity of islands and islets little known, towards
the Island Sound and Canal Mauvais.

I wondered if Captain Nemo, foolishly imprudent, would steer his vessel
into that pass where Dumont d'Urville's two corvettes touched; when,
swerving again, and cutting straight through to the west, he steered
for the Island of Gilboa.

It was then three in the afternoon.  The tide began to recede, being
quite full.  The Nautilus approached the island, that I still saw, with
its remarkable border of screw-pines. He stood off it at about two
miles distant.  Suddenly a shock overthrew me.  The Nautilus just
touched a rock, and stayed immovable, laying lightly to port side.

When I rose, I perceived Captain Nemo and his lieutenant on the
platform.  They were examining the situation of the vessel, and
exchanging words in their incomprehensible dialect.

She was situated thus:  Two miles, on the starboard side, appeared
Gilboa, stretching from north to west like an immense arm.  Towards the
south and east some coral showed itself, left by the ebb.  We had run
aground, and in one of those seas where the tides are middling--a sorry
matter for the floating of the Nautilus.  However, the vessel had not
suffered, for her keel was solidly joined.  But, if she could neither
glide off nor move, she ran the risk of being for ever fastened to
these rocks, and then Captain Nemo's submarine vessel would be done for.

I was reflecting thus, when the Captain, cool and calm, always master
of himself, approached me.

"An accident?"  I asked.

"No; an incident."

"But an incident that will oblige you perhaps to become an inhabitant
of this land from which you flee?"

Captain Nemo looked at me curiously, and made a negative gesture, as
much as to say that nothing would force him to set foot on terra firma
again.  Then he said:

"Besides, M. Aronnax, the Nautilus is not lost; it will carry you yet
into the midst of the marvels of the ocean.  Our voyage is only begun,
and I do not wish to be deprived so soon of the honour of your company."

"However, Captain Nemo," I replied, without noticing the ironical turn
of his phrase, "the Nautilus ran aground in open sea.  Now the tides
are not strong in the Pacific; and, if you cannot lighten the Nautilus,
I do not see how it will be reinflated."

"The tides are not strong in the Pacific:  you are right there,
Professor; but in Torres Straits one finds still a difference of a yard
and a half between the level of high and low seas.  To-day is 4th
January, and in five days the moon will be full.  Now, I shall be very
much astonished if that satellite does not raise these masses of water
sufficiently, and render me a service that I should be indebted to her
for."

Having said this, Captain Nemo, followed by his lieutenant, redescended
to the interior of the Nautilus.  As to the vessel, it moved not, and
was immovable, as if the coralline polypi had already walled it up with
their in destructible cement.

"Well, sir?" said Ned Land, who came up to me after the departure of
the Captain.

"Well, friend Ned, we will wait patiently for the tide on the 9th
instant; for it appears that the moon will have the goodness to put it
off again."

"Really?"

"Really."

"And this Captain is not going to cast anchor at all since the tide
will suffice?" said Conseil, simply.

The Canadian looked at Conseil, then shrugged his shoulders.

"Sir, you may believe me when I tell you that this piece of iron will
navigate neither on nor under the sea again; it is only fit to be sold
for its weight.  I think, therefore, that the time has come to part
company with Captain Nemo."

"Friend Ned, I do not despair of this stout Nautilus, as you do; and in
four days we shall know what to hold to on the Pacific tides.  Besides,
flight might be possible if we were in sight of the English or
Provencal coast; but on the Papuan shores, it is another thing; and it
will be time enough to come to that extremity if the Nautilus does not
recover itself again, which I look upon as a grave event."

"But do they know, at least, how to act circumspectly?  There is an
island; on that island there are trees; under those trees, terrestrial
animals, bearers of cutlets and roast beef, to which I would willingly
give a trial."

"In this, friend Ned is right," said Conseil, "and I agree with him.
Could not master obtain permission from his friend Captain Nemo to put
us on land, if only so as not to lose the habit of treading on the
solid parts of our planet?"

"I can ask him, but he will refuse."

"Will master risk it?" asked Conseil, "and we shall know how to rely
upon the Captain's amiability."

To my great surprise, Captain Nemo gave me the permission I asked for,
and he gave it very agreeably, without even exacting from me a promise
to return to the vessel; but flight across New Guinea might be very
perilous, and I should not have counselled Ned Land to attempt it.
Better to be a prisoner on board the Nautilus than to fall into the
hands of the natives.

At eight o'clock, armed with guns and hatchets, we got off the
Nautilus.  The sea was pretty calm; a slight breeze blew on land.
Conseil and I rowing, we sped along quickly, and Ned steered in the
straight passage that the breakers left between them.  The boat was
well handled, and moved rapidly.

Ned Land could not restrain his joy.  He was like a prisoner that had
escaped from prison, and knew not that it was necessary to re-enter it.

"Meat!  We are going to eat some meat; and what meat!" he replied.
"Real game! no, bread, indeed."

"I do not say that fish is not good; we must not abuse it; but a piece
of fresh venison, grilled on live coals, will agreeably vary our
ordinary course."

"Glutton!" said Conseil, "he makes my mouth water."

"It remains to be seen," I said, "if these forests are full of game,
and if the game is not such as will hunt the hunter himself."

"Well said, M. Aronnax," replied the Canadian, whose teeth seemed
sharpened like the edge of a hatchet; "but I will eat tiger--loin of
tiger--if there is no other quadruped on this island."

"Friend Ned is uneasy about it," said Conseil.

"Whatever it may be," continued Ned Land, "every animal with four paws
without feathers, or with two paws without feathers, will be saluted by
my first shot."

"Very well!  Master Land's imprudences are beginning."

"Never fear, M. Aronnax," replied the Canadian; "I do not want
twenty-five minutes to offer you a dish, of my sort."

At half-past eight the Nautilus boat ran softly aground on a heavy
sand, after having happily passed the coral reef that surrounds the
Island of Gilboa.



CHAPTER XX

A FEW DAYS ON LAND

I was much impressed on touching land.  Ned Land tried the soil with
his feet, as if to take possession of it.  However, it was only two
months before that we had become, according to Captain Nemo,
"passengers on board the Nautilus," but, in reality, prisoners of its
commander.

In a few minutes we were within musket-shot of the coast.  The whole
horizon was hidden behind a beautiful curtain of forests.  Enormous
trees, the trunks of which attained a height of 200 feet, were tied to
each other by garlands of bindweed, real natural hammocks, which a
light breeze rocked.  They were mimosas, figs, hibisci, and palm trees,
mingled together in profusion; and under the shelter of their verdant
vault grew orchids, leguminous plants, and ferns.

But, without noticing all these beautiful specimens of Papuan flora,
the Canadian abandoned the agreeable for the useful.  He discovered a
coco-tree, beat down some of the fruit, broke them, and we drunk the
milk and ate the nut with a satisfaction that protested against the
ordinary food on the Nautilus.

"Excellent!" said Ned Land.

"Exquisite!" replied Conseil.

"And I do not think," said the Canadian, "that he would object to our
introducing a cargo of coco-nuts on board."

"I do not think he would, but he would not taste them."

"So much the worse for him," said Conseil.

"And so much the better for us," replied Ned Land.  "There will be more
for us."

"One word only, Master Land," I said to the harpooner, who was
beginning to ravage another coco-nut tree.  "Coco-nuts are good things,
but before filling the canoe with them it would be wise to reconnoitre
and see if the island does not produce some substance not less useful.
Fresh vegetables would be welcome on board the Nautilus."

"Master is right," replied Conseil; "and I propose to reserve three
places in our vessel, one for fruits, the other for vegetables, and the
third for the venison, of which I have not yet seen the smallest
specimen."

"Conseil, we must not despair," said the Canadian.

"Let us continue," I returned, "and lie in wait.  Although the island
seems uninhabited, it might still contain some individuals that would
be less hard than we on the nature of game."

"Ho! ho!" said Ned Land, moving his jaws significantly.

"Well, Ned!" said Conseil.

"My word!" returned the Canadian, "I begin to understand the charms of
anthropophagy."

"Ned!  Ned! what are you saying?  You, a man-eater? I should not feel
safe with you, especially as I share your cabin.  I might perhaps wake
one day to find myself half devoured."

"Friend Conseil, I like you much, but not enough to eat you
unnecessarily."

"I would not trust you," replied Conseil.  "But enough.  We must
absolutely bring down some game to satisfy this cannibal, or else one
of these fine mornings, master will find only pieces of his servant to
serve him."

While we were talking thus, we were penetrating the sombre arches of
