back against solid protection. Loketh came up, his limp making him
awkward so that he clutched at the rail for support. In his other hand
was one of the hooked swords bared and ready.

"Get the murderers!" Someone in the back line of the massing crew yipped
that.

Ross drew his diver's knife. Shaken at this sudden change in the crew's
attitude, he was warily on the defensive. Loketh was beside him now and
the Hawaikan nodded to the sea.

"Better go there," he cried. "Over before they try to gut you!"

"Kill!" The word shrilled into a roar from the Rovers. They started up
the deck toward Ross and Loketh. Then someone leaped between, and Vistur
fronted his own comrades.

"Stand away--" One of the others ran forward, thrusting at the tall
Rover with a stiffened out-held arm to fend him out of their path.

Vistur rolled a shoulder, sending the fellow shunting away. He went down
while two more, unable to halt, thudded on him. Vistur stamped on an
outstretched hand and sent a sword spinning.

"What goes here!" Torgul's demand was loud enough to be heard. It
stopped a few of the crew and two more went down as the Captain struck
out with his fists. Then he was facing Ross, and the chill in his eyes
was the threat the others had voiced.

"I told you, sea stranger, that if I found you were a danger to me or
mine, you would meet the Justice of Phutka!"

"You did," Ross returned. "And in what way am I now a danger, Captain?"

"Kyn Add has been taken by those who are not Wreckers, not Rovers, not
those who serve the Foanna--but strangers out of the sea!"

Ross could only stare back, confused. And then the full force of his
danger struck home. Who those raiding sea strangers could be, he had no
idea, but that he was now condemned out of his own mouth was true and he
realized that these men were not going to listen to any argument from
him in their present state of mind.

The growl of the crew was that of a hungry animal. Ross saw the wisdom
in Loketh's choice. Far better chance the open sea than the mob before
them.

But his time for choice had passed. Out of nowhere whirled a lacy
gray-white net, slapping him back against a bulkhead to glue him there.
Ross tried to twist loose, got his head around in time to see Loketh
scramble to the top of the rail, turn as if to launch himself at the men
speeding for the now helpless Terran. But the Hawaikan's crippled leg
failed him and he toppled back overside.

"No!" Again Torgul's shout halted the crew. "He shall take the Black
Curse with him when he goes to meet the Shadow--and only one can speak
that curse. Bring him!"

Helpless, reeling under their blows, dragged along, Ross was thrown into
the Captain's cabin, confronted by a figure braced up by coverings and
cushions in Torgul's own chair.

A woman, her face a drawn death's head of skin pulled tight upon bone,
yet a fiery inner strength holding her mind above the suffering of her
body, looked at the Terran with narrowed eyes. She nursed a bandaged arm
against her, and now and then her mouth quivered as if she could not
altogether control some emotion or physical pain.

"Yours is the cursing, Lady Jazia. Make it heavy to bear for him as his
kind has laid the burden of pain and remembering on all of us."

She brought her good hand up to her mouth, wiping its back across her
lips as if to temper their quiver. And all the time her eyes held upon
Ross.

"Why do you bring me this man?" Her voice was strained, high. "He is not
of those who brought the Shadow to Kyn Add."

"What--?" Torgul began and then schooled his voice to a more normal
tone. "Those were from the sea?" He was gentle in his questioning. "They
came out of the sea, using weapons against which we had no defense?"

She nodded. "Yes, they made very sure that only the dead remained. But I
had gone to the Shrine of Phutka, since it was my day of duty, and
Phutka's power threw its shade over me. So I did not die, but I
saw--yes, I saw!"

"Not those like me?" Ross dared to speak to her directly.

"No, not those like you. There were few ... only so many--" She spread
out her five fingers. "And they were all of one like as if born in one
birth. They had no hair on their heads, and their bodies were of this
hue--" She plucked at one of the coverings they had heaped around her;
it was a lavender-blue mixture.

Ross sucked in his breath, and Torgul was fast to pounce upon the
understanding he read in the Terran's face.

"Not your kind--but still you know them!"

"I know them," Ross agreed. "They are the enemy!"

The Baldies from the ancient spaceships, that wholly alien race with
whom he had once fought a desperate encounter on the edge of an unnamed
sea in the far past of his own world. The galactic voyagers were
here--and in active, if secret, conflict with the natives!




11

Weapon from the Depths


Jazia told her story with an attention to time and detail which amazed
Ross and won his admiration for her breed. She had witnessed the death
and destruction of all which was her life, and yet she had the wit to
note and record mentally for possible future use all that she had been
able to see of the raiders.

They had come out of the sea at dawn, walking with supreme confidence
and lack of any fear. Axes flung when they did not reply to the
sentries' challenges had never touched them, and a bombardment of
heavier missiles had been turned aside. They proved invulnerable to any
weapon the Rovers had. Men who made suicidal rushes to use sword or
battle ax hand-to-hand had fallen, before they were in striking
distance, under spraying tongues of fire from tubes the aliens carried.

Rovers were not fearful or easily cowed, but in the end they had fled
from the five invaders, gone to ground in their halls, tried to reach
their beached ships, only to die as they ran and hid. The slaughter had
been remorseless and entire, leaving Jazia in the hill shrine as the
only survivor. She had hidden for the rest of the day, seen the killing
of a few fugitives, and that night had stolen to the shore, launched one
of the ship's boats which was in a cove well away from the main harbor
of the fairing, heading out to sea in hope of meeting the homing
cruisers with her warning.

"They stayed there on the island?" Ross asked. That point of her story
puzzled him. If the object of that murderous raid had been only to stir
up trouble among the Hawaikan Rovers, perhaps turning one clan against
the other, as he had deduced when he had listened to Torgul's report of
similar happenings, then the star men should have withdrawn as soon as
their mission was complete, leaving the dead to call for vengeance in
the wrong direction. There would be no reason to court discovery of
their true identity by lingering.

"When the boat was asea there were still lights at the fairing hall, and
they were not our lights, nor did the dead carry them," she said slowly.
"What have those to fear? They can not be killed!"

"If they are still there, that we can put to the test," Torgul replied
grimly, and a murmur from his officers bore out his determination.

"And lose all the rest of you?" Ross retorted coldly. "I have met these
before; they can will a man to obey them. Look you--" He slammed his
left hand flat on the table. The ridges of scar tissue were plain
against his tanned skin. He knew no better way of driving home the
dangers of dealing with the star men than providing this graphic
example. "I held my own hand in fire so that the hurt of it would work
against their pull upon my thoughts, against their willing that I come
and be easy meat for their butchering."

Jazia's fingers flickered out, smoothed across his old scars lightly as
she gazed into his eyes.

"This, too, is true," she said slowly. "For it was also pain of body
which kept me from their last snare. They stood by the hall and I saw
Prahad, Okun, Mosaji, come out to them to be killed as if they were in a
hold net and were drawn. And there was that which called me also so that
I would go to them though I called upon the Power of Phutka to save. And
the answer to that plea came in a strange way, for I fell as I went from
the shrine and cut my arm on the rocks. The pain of that hurt was as a
knife severing the net. Then I crawled for the wood and that calling did
not come again--"

"If you know so much about them, tell us what weapons we may use to pull
them down!" That demand came from Vistur.

Ross shook his head. "I do not know."

"Yet," Jazia mused, "all things which live must also die sooner or
later. And it is in my mind that these have also a fate they dread and
fear. Perhaps we may find and use it."

"They came from the sea--by a ship, then?" Ross asked. She shook her
head.

"No, there was no ship; they came walking through the breaking waves as
if they had followed some road across the sea bottom."

"A sub!"

"What is that?" Torgul demanded.

"A type of ship which goes under the waves, not through them, carrying
air within its hull for the breathing of the crew."

Torgul's eyes narrowed. One of the other captains who had been summoned
from the two companion cruisers gave a snort of disbelief.

"There are no such ships--" he began, to be silenced by a gesture from
Torgul.

"We know of no such ships," the other corrected. "But then we know of no
such devices as Jazia saw in operation either. How does one war upon
these under-the-seas ships, Ross?"

The Terran hesitated. To describe to men who knew nothing of explosives
the classic way of dealing with a sub via depth charges was close to
impossible. But he did his best.

"Among my people one imprisons in a container a great power. Then the
container is dropped near the sub and--"

"And how," broke in the skeptical captain, "do you know where such a
ship lies? Can you see it through the water?"

"In a way--not see, but hear. There is a machine which makes for the
captain of the above-seas ship a picture of where the sub lies or moves
so that he may follow its course. Then when he is near enough he drops
the container and the power breaks free--to also break apart the sub."

"Yet the making of such containers and the imprisoning of the power
within them," Torgul said, "this is the result of a knowledge which is
greater than any save the Foanna may possess. You do not have it?" His
conclusion was half statement, half question.

"No. It took many years and the combined knowledge of many men among my
people to make such containers, such a listening device. I do not have
it."

"Why then think of what we do not have?" Torgul's return was decisive.
"What _do_ we have?"

Ross's head came up. He was listening, not to anything in that cabin,
but to a sound which had come through the port just behind his head.
There--it had come again! He was on his feet.

"What--?" Vistur's hand hovered over the ax at his belt. Ross saw their
gaze centered on him.

"We may have reinforcements now!" The Terran was already on his way to
the deck.

He hurried to the rail and whistled, the thin, shrill summons he had
practiced for weeks before he had ever begun this fantastic adventure.

A sleek dark body broke water and the dolphin grin was exposed as
Tino-rau answered his call. Though Ross's communication powers with the
two finned scouts was very far from Karara's, he caught the message in
part and swung around to face the Rovers who had crowded after him.

"We have a way now of learning more about your enemies."

"A boat--it comes without sail or oars!" One of the crew pointed.

Ross waved vigorously, but no hand replied from the skiff. Though it
came steadily onward, the three cruisers its apparent goal.

"Karara!" Ross called.

Then side by side with Tino-rau were two wet heads, two masked faces
showing as the swimmers trod water--Karara and Loketh.

"Drop ropes!" Ross gave that order as if he rather than Torgul
commanded. And the Captain himself was one of those who moved to obey.

Loketh came out of the sea first and as he scrambled over the rail he
had his sword ready, looking from Ross to Torgul. The Terran held up
empty hands and smiled.

"No trouble now."

Loketh snapped up his mask. "So the Sea Maid said the finned ones
reported. Yet before, these thirsted for your blood on their blades.
What magic have you worked?"

"None. Just the truth has been discovered." Ross reached for Karara's
hand as she came nimbly up the rope, swung her across the rail to the
deck where she stood unmasked, brushing back her hair and looking around
with a lively curiosity.

"Karara, this is Captain Torgul," Ross introduced the Rover commander
who was staring round-eyed at the girl. "Karara is she who swims with
the finned ones, and they obey her." Ross gestured to Tino-rau. "It is
Taua who brings the skiff?" he asked the Polynesian.

She nodded. "We followed from the gate. Then Loketh came and said that
... that...." She paused and then added, "But you do not seem to be in
danger. What has happened?"

"Much. Listen--this is important. There is trouble at an island ahead.
The Baldies were there; they murdered the kin of these men. The odds are
they reached there by some form of sub. Send one of the dolphins to see
what is happening and if they are still there...."

Karara asked no more questions, but whistled to the dolphin. With a flip
of tail Tino-rau took off.

Since they could make no concrete plan of action, the cruiser captains
agreed to wait for Tino-rau's report and to cruise well out of sight of
the fairing harbor until it came.

"This belief in magic," Ross remarked to Karara, "has one advantage. The
natives seem able to take in their stride the fact the dolphins will
scout for us."

"They have lived their lives on the sea; for it they must have a vast
respect. Perhaps they know, as did my people, that the ocean has many
secrets, some of which are never revealed except to the forms of life
which claim their homes there. But, even if you discover this Baldy sub,
what will the Rovers be able to do about it?"

"I don't know--yet." Ross could not tell why he clung to the idea that
they could do anything to strike back at the superior alien force. He
only knew that he was not yet willing to relinquish the thought that in
some way they could.

"And Ashe?"

Yes, Ashe....

"I don't know." It hurt Ross to admit that.

"Back there, what really happened at the gate?" he asked Karara. "All at
once the dolphins seemed to go crazy."

"I think for a moment or two they did. You felt nothing?"

"No."

"It was like a fire slashing through the head. Some protective device of
the Foanna, I think."

A mental defense to which he was not sensitive. Which meant that he
might be able to breach that gate if none of the others could. But he
had to be there first. Suppose, just suppose Torgul could be persuaded
that this attack on the gutted Kyn Add was useless. Would the Rover
commander take them back to the Foanna keep? Or with the dolphins and
the skiff could Ross himself return to make the try?

That he could make it on his own, Ross doubted. Excitement and will
power had buoyed him up throughout the past Hawaikan day and night. Now
fatigue closed in, past his conditioning and the built-in stimulant of
the Terran rations, to enclose him in a groggy haze. He had been warned
against this reaction, but that was just another item he had pushed out
of his conscious mind. The last thing he remembered now was seeing
Karara move through a fuzzy cloud.

Voices argued somewhere beyond, the force of that argument carried more
by tone than any words Ross could understand. He was pulled sluggishly
out of a slumber too deep for any dream to trouble, and lifted heavy
eyelids to see Karara once again. There was a prick in his arm--or was
that part of the unreality about him?

"--four--five--six--" she was counting, and Ross found himself joining
in:
