
"Let's go ashore and take a run," suggested Mark. "I've almost forgotten
how to walk on dry land."

"Go ahead," answered Jack. "I'm with you."

"All right."

The boys lost no time in getting down to the beach. They found it hard
and firm, and made their way to the strip of grass-covered land lying
beyond. Up and down they wandered, finding many curious and beautifully
marked shells where the waves had washed them.

Suddenly Jack gave a big jump and let out a yell.

"What's the matter?" asked Mark.

"I thought I saw one of those cocoanuts move," answered Jack, pointing
to where several of the big shaggy fruits lay under a tree from which
they had fallen.

"I guess you're right," spoke Mark. "I certainly saw one of them take a
little side step. I wonder what does it."

As the boys watched they were surprised, to see one of the cocoanuts
come toward them, apparently advancing without any visible means of
locomotion.

"This is a queer country," remarked Jack, getting ready to run in case
the strangely moving cocoanut might be a warning of danger.

"Look! There's a whole lot of them moving," cried Mark.

Sure enough a dozen or more of the nuts began to advance toward the
lads. The boys were not so much afraid as they were surprised. But a few
seconds later the reason for the strange sight was made plain.

As they looked they saw one of the nuts roll down a little mound of
sand. Then they noticed that a big land crab was on the tiny hill and it
was evident that the nut had fallen from his claws.

"It's the crabs!" exclaimed Mark. "I remember reading about them now.
They come ashore from the water where they live part of the time and get
the cocoanuts. Then they smash the shells by pounding the nuts on a
stone and eat the white meat inside. They are called cocoanut crabs."

"I was beginning to think we were in some enchanted land," spoke Jack.

"Well, it certainly looked queer," agreed Mark.

For some time the boys watched the strange sight. Then they walked along
the beach, seeing several large star fish, and some big horse-shoe crabs
that had been stranded by the tide.

"Look at that immense turtle!" exclaimed Mark, as one of the creatures
scuttled over the sand toward the sea. "I'll bet she's been laying
eggs!"

"Perhaps so."

They made a rush for the tortoise but were not quick enough, for she
slid into the water and made off.

"Here's her nest, anyhow," called Jack, as he pointed to some eggs,
thinly covered with sand. "Let's go back and take them with us. I've
heard they are good eating."

Jack and Mark started to gather up as many of the eggs as they could in
their hats. While they were thus engaged they heard a call from the ship
and looked up to see coming toward them, all of the ship's company
except Washington.

"I wonder if anything could have happened," spoke Mark.

He and Jack dropped the eggs and started on a run toward the stranded
ship. They were reassured, however, when they saw the professor waving
his hand at them. When he got within hailing distance the inventor
called:

"It's all right, boys. We're just taking a little walk, before
breakfast, for an appetizer. It's been some time since we were on land.
Washington says he'll have some fine fried ham for us in a little
while."

"And here are the eggs to go with it," spoke Jack.

"Have you found a hen house?" asked Mr. Henderson in some wonder.

"No, but we discovered a turtle, which is just as good," replied Mark.
The professor agreed with him, and called for Washington to come and get
the eggs.

"Wall I 'clare to goodness!" exclaimed the colored man as he gathered
the product of the turtle up in his cook's apron. "Dis suttinly am a
queer contraption of a country to find eggs growin' in de sand."

He shuffled back to the ship, while the others walked up and down on the
beach. In about half an hour the professor suggested that they return.

"Washington must have breakfast ready by now," he said, "and I, for one,
am hungry enough to enjoy it."

They turned toward the stranded _Porpoise_ but no sooner had their eyes
taken in the sweep of the ocean that lay before them than they uttered
cries of fear.

Spreading out from the beach in a big half circle that enclosed within
its curve the submarine, were three score of canoes, each one filled
with half naked savages.

"The natives are going to attack the ship!" cried the professor. "We
must hurry back or we are lost!"

He started on the run, accompanied by the boys and men. Mrs. Johnson and
her daughter brought up the rear. The adventurers had gone from one
misfortune into another.

At the top of their speed they approached the stranded ship. The natives
saw them coming and the next instant hundreds of paddles broke the waves
into a mass of sparkling water as the wily savages urged their canoes
swiftly toward the submarine.

"If we can only reach it first we can hold them off until the tide
floats us, and then we can escape," said the professor.

He increased his pace though the run was beginning to tell on his aged
frame. The adventurers were now within an eighth of a mile of the ship,
but the savages were closer, and had the advantage of being able to make
greater speed. The two forces approached nearer and nearer. Finally the
first of the canoes reached the submerged end of the _Porpoise_.

With wild shouts a score of the brown men leaped from the boats and
scrambled up the steel sides. An instant later they were joined by
several canoe loads of their companions. They swarmed up on the deck,
and some peered down the winding stairs that led to the interior of the
ship.

"Too late!" cried the professor. "They have captured the _Porpoise_!"

"But Washington is aboard!" shouted Jack.

As he spoke the colored man was seen clambering up out of the companion
way. He gave one look at the wild natives who swarmed over the ship, and
then, with a yell to be heard a long way off, disappeared below.

The shouts and cries of the savages grew louder and they seemed to be
doing a sort of war dance.

"We must make one effort to drive them away," said the professor in
desperation.

"We haven't even a revolver," spoke Andy.

"Let's use stones," suggested Jack, grabbing up a handful from the
beach.

"Look out!" yelled Mark. "They are going to shoot some arrows!"

A second later a flight of the weapons filled the air. Fortunately the
natives were too far away to permit the shots taking effect, but it
showed that they intend to fight and take possession of the ship.

Even this did not frighten Mr. Henderson. His vessel was more than life
to him and he kept on. Several arrows fell dangerously close and he
might have been hurt had not old Andy run after him and induced him to
go farther up the beach and out of harm's way.

"They will kill Washington!" cried Jack as he thought of the colored man
at the mercy of the savages.

"There he comes!" yelled Mark.

He pointed toward the ship and as they all looked in that direction they
saw the colored man climbing out on the deck. Under one arm he bore a
long narrow box, and in the other hand he carried one of the electric
guns.

"He's goin' to fight 'em!" exclaimed Andy. "He's got a gun and he will
show 'em what's what!"

But Washington did not seem to have any such intentions. With a yell
that equalled the savage cries of the natives, he sprang over the side
of the ship, onto the sand and ran toward the group of adventurers. A
flight of arrows followed him, but he was not hit.




CHAPTER XVIII

ON LAND


"Why don't he shoot his gun at 'em?" demanded Andy, capering about on
the sand. "He could soon scare 'em off!"

"I'm afraid Washington is too frightened to do anything like that,"
answered Professor Henderson. "He is lucky to have escaped alive."

"Wait until he gets here with that gun, an' I'll do some huntin' that
will make them savages skip!" exclaimed Andy.

In a little while Washington came up to where the others from the
_Porpoise_ stood on the beach. The colored man was panting from his run.

"De most monstrous disproportionately extradition ob circumstantial
occurrances dat ever transpositioned on my optical vasionariness!" he
exclaimed as he laid his gun and the black box carefully down on the
sand. "Ten thousand naked imps of darkness swarmin' ober de ship an' not
a pusson to say what dey ought to do an' where dey ought t' go! It am
suttinly terrible!"

"Why didn't you shoot some of 'em?" demanded Andy.

"Me?" exclaimed Washington. "What for I want t' shoot 'em? S'pose I want
'em t' git mad at me?"

"Well, you're a great one," went on Andy, picking up the gun. "I guess
I'll have to take a few shots myself."

"Yes, sah."

From Washington the adventurers learned how the savages had silently
come up in their canoes and surrounded the ship, gaining possession of
it before he could make any effort at defense, even had he so desired.

"What are we to do now?" asked Mrs. Johnson, when they had retreated out
of sight of the savages. "The natives have possession of the boat, and
how are we to regain her when there are so many of them?"

"It certainly is a hard nut to crack," admitted the professor. "We will
have to camp out on the beach for a while and see what happens. Perhaps
they may leave the vessel when they find it will do them no good. They
can't run her."

"But they can tear her all apart and damage the machinery," said Jack.
"Then we would be in a pickle."

"Well, we won't hope for any such bad luck as that," interrupted the
professor. "We will look for the best."

"When are we going to have breakfast?" asked the little girl, after a
long wait. "I'm hungry, mother."

"We will have it pretty soon," replied Mrs. Johnson in order to quiet
her daughter's mind.

"But I want it now," continued Nellie. "I'm very hungry."

"Hush!" said Mrs. Johnson.

"An' I had de finest brekfust what was ever invented," said Washington,
rolling his big eyes. "Mud turkle eggs, ham, preserves, coffee--"

"That will do, Washington," said the professor. "It only makes our
mouths water to think about such things."

At the mention of the turtle eggs Jack nudged Mark, and signalled him to
walk to one side. When they were out of earshot of the others Jack said:

"What's the matter with cooking some of the eggs that are left on the
sand? There are plenty of them, and there is no sense in our going
hungry."

"How you going to cook 'em?" asked Mark.

"I'll show you," replied Jack.

He scooped a hollow place out in the sand until he had quite a hole.
This he banked up with stones until he had a small oven. By arching the
stones over toward the top there was left a sort of circular opening.
Over this Jack fitted a monster clam shell, with the concave side
uppermost.

This made an improvised stew pan. Underneath was piled small bits of dry
drift-wood, which a match soon set on fire. In a little while the water
in the big shell was boiling.

"Now get some other shells for dishes," said Jack to Mark.

Soon Mark had piled up a lot of smaller shells.

"Help me gather some eggs now," said Jack, "and we'll put them in to
boil. Then we'll invite the rest of the folks to breakfast."

The two boys soon uncovered from the sand a pile of the eggs, and in a
little while they were steaming in the hot water. Then Jack arranged the
shell-dishes on the sand. He went over to where the others were gloomily
considering their plight.

"Breakfast is ready," he announced.

"This isn't any time for joking," spoke Professor Henderson, rather
sternly.

"But I mean it," went on Jack. "Just come over and see. I'm not fooling
you."

Wondering what he had done they all followed him.

"Welcome to Hotel Terra del Fuego!" cried Mark. "We haven't much of a
variety, but what there is we can recommend."

He began to dip the eggs out of the water with a bit of shell and placed
them on the improvised dishes.

"Everyone sit down," commanded Jack. "The bill of fare is ready."

They all joined in the short laugh that followed, and soon were seated
in a circle about the beach-oven. The eggs proved to be very good, even
though there was no pepper. The salt of the sea water they were boiled
in was more than sufficient.

"Now if there was only bread in that ammunition bag Washington brought
with the gun," said Andy, "we wouldn't want a better meal."

"He'p yo'se'f!" exclaimed the colored man with a grin as he extended a
canvas bag that was tied to the stock of the electric gun.

The old hunter opened it and found it filled with ship biscuits.

"Well I am stumped!" he exclaimed.

"I grabbed up de wrong thing in my haste," Washington explained. "I
thought I had de electrical lightning bullets, but I didn't. Howsomever
de gun's got some in de chamber."

"It's a lucky mistake," commented the professor as he munched a biscuit
and an egg. "Bullets are good but these are better, when one is
hungry."

They managed to make a fairly good meal, so that even hungry Nellie was
satisfied. The boys found a spring of fresh water up on shore, and this
furnished something to drink, for which they were grateful.

They sat about on the beach, after the breakfast and discussed what they
had better do. It was evident that an attempt to regain possession of
the ship, with their small force and only one weapon, was out of the
question.

"We've got to use strategy," said Andy. "If we could play some trick on
the savages we might scare them away. Otherwise I don't see what we are
to do."

"It's a bad state of affairs," replied professor Henderson. "Even if we
got the ship we might find it so badly damaged that it would be
impossible to run it. It is a terrible thing," and he heaved a deep
sigh.

The hours passed with no change in the situation. The savages remained
in possession of the submarine, and did not seem inclined to quit the
vessel. Most of them were inside, but quite a number paddled about the
stranded craft in their canoes.

There was nothing for the adventurers to do but to await developments.
With no chance of attacking the force of natives, they might consider
themselves lucky if the savages did not come ashore to give battle.

The sun was high in the heavens when, in the shade of a big tree where
they had all taken refuge from the heat, Nellie again announced that she
was hungry.

"I guess the boys will have to provide another meal," said Mr.
Henderson.

Jack and Mark said they guessed they could find some more turtle eggs,
and Washington volunteered to accompany them. As they were looking for a
nest in the sand they saw one of the tortoises scurrying down to the
ocean.

"Git her, quick!" cried the colored man. "Turn her ober on her back!"
