We had poked the hornet's nest with a vengeance!

As yet there had been no sting, but we might quickly expect to feel it
if we did not get out of range.


Escaping Danger.

Quickly instructions were flashed throughout the squadron to instantly
reverse polarities and rise as swiftly as possible to a great height.

It was evident that this manoeuvre would save us from danger if it were
quickly effected, because the airships of the Martians were simply
airships and nothing more. They could only float in the atmosphere,
and had no means of rising above it, or of navigating empty space.

To have turned our disintegrators upon them, and to have begun a battle
then and there, would have been folly.

They overwhelmingly outnumbered us, the majority of them were yet at a
considerable distance and we could not have done battle, even with our
entire squadron acting together, with more than one-quarter of them
simultaneously. In the meantime the others would have surrounded and
might have destroyed us. We must first get some idea of the planet's
means of defence before we ventured to assail it.

Having risen rapidly to a height of twenty-five or thirty miles, so that
we could feel confident that our ships had vanished at least from the
naked eye view of our enemies beneath, a brief consultation was held.

It was determined to adhere to our original programme and to
circumnavigate Mars in every direction before proceeding to open the war.


Intimidated by the Enemy.

The overwhelming forces shown by the enemy had intimidated even some of
the most courageous of our men, but still it was universally felt that
it would not do to retreat without a blow struck.

The more we saw of the power of the Martians, the more we became
convinced that there would be no hope for the earth, if these enemies
ever again effected a landing upon its surface, the more especially
since our squadron contained nearly all of the earth's force that would
be effective in such a contest.

With Mr. Edison and the other men of science away, they would not be
able at home to construct such engines as we possessed, or to manage
them even if they were constructed.

Our planet had staked everything on a single throw.

These considerations again steeled our hearts, and made us bear up as
bravely as possible in the face of the terrible odds that confronted us.

Turning the noses of our electrical ships toward the west, we began
our circumnavigation.




Chapter X.


At first we rose to a still greater height, in order more effectually
to escape the watchful eyes of our enemies, and then, after having
moved rapidly several hundred miles toward the west, we dropped down
again within easy eyeshot of the surface of the planet, and commenced
our inspection.

When we originally reached Mars, as I have related, it was at a point in
its southern hemisphere, in latitude 45 degrees south, and longitude 75
degrees east, that we first closely approached its surface. Underneath
us was the land called "Hellas," and it was over this land of Hellas
that the Martian air fleet had suddenly made its appearance.

Our westward motion, while at a great height above the planet, had
brought us over another oval-shaped land called "Noachia," surrounded by
the dark ocean, the "Mare Erytraeum." Now approaching nearer the surface
our course was changed so as to carry us toward the equator of Mars.

We passed over the curious, half-drowned continent known to terrestrial
astronomers as the Region of Deucalion, then across another sea, or gulf,
until we found ourselves floating, at a height of perhaps five miles,
above a great continental land, at least three thousand miles broad
from east to west, and which I immediately recognized as that to which
astronomers had given the various names of "Aeria," "Edom," "Arabia,"
and "Eden."

Here the spectacle became of breathless interest.

"Wonderful! Wonderful!"

"Who could have believed it!"

Such were the exclamations heard on all sides.

When at first we were suspended above Hellas, looking toward the north,
the northeast and the northwest, we had seen at a distance some of these
great red regions, and had perceived the curious network of canals by
which they were intersected. But that was a far-off and imperfect view.

Now, when we were near at hand and straight above one of these singular
lands, the magnificence of the panorama surpassed belief.

From the earth about a dozen of the principal canals crossing the
continent beneath us had been perceived, but we saw hundreds, nay,
thousands of them!

It was a double system, intended both for irrigation and for protection,
and far more marvellous in its completeness than the boldest speculative
minds among our astronomers had ever dared to imagine.

"Ha! that's what I always said," exclaimed a veteran from one of our great
observatories. "Mars is red because its soil and vegetation are red."

And certainly appearances indicated that he was right.

There were no green trees, and there was no green grass. Both were red,
not of a uniform red tint, but presenting an immense variety of shades
which produced a most brilliant effect, fairly dazzling our eyes.

But what trees! And what grass! And what flowers!


Gigantic Vegetation.

Our telescopes showed that even the smaller trees must be 200 or 300
feet in height, and there were forests of giants, whose average height
was evidently at least 1,000 feet.

"That's all right," exclaimed the enthusiast I have just quoted. "I knew
it would be so. The trees are big, for the same reason that the men are,
because the planet is small, and they can grow big without becoming too
heavy to stand."

Flashing in the sun on all sides were the roofs of metallic buildings,
which were evidently the only kind of edifices that Mars possessed. At
any rate, if stone or wood were employed in their construction both were
completely covered with metallic plates.

This added immensely to the warlike aspect of the planet. For warlike
it was. Everywhere we recognized fortified stations, glittering with an
array of the polished knobs of the lightning machines, such as we had
seen in the land of Hellas.

From the land of Edom, directly over the equator of the planet, we turned
our faces westward, and, skirting the Mare Erytraeum, arrived above the
place where the broad canal known as the Indus empties into the sea.

Before us, and stretching away toward the northwest, now lay the continent
of Chryse, a vast red land, oval in outline, and surrounded and crossed
by innumerable canals. Chryse was not less than 1,600 miles across,
and it, too, evidently swarmed with giant inhabitants.

But the shadow of night lay upon the greater portion of the land of
Chryse. In our rapid motion westward we had out-stripped the sun and
had now arrived at a point where day and night met upon the surface of
the planet beneath us.

Behind all was brilliant with sunshine, but before us the face of Mars
gradually disappeared in the deepening gloom. Through the darkness,
far away, we could behold magnificent beams of electric light darting
across the curtain of night, and evidently serving to illuminate towns
and cities that lay beneath.

We pushed on into the night for two or three hundred miles over that part
of the continent of Chryse whose inhabitants were doubtless enjoying
the deep sleep that accompanies the dark hours immediately preceding
the dawn. Still everywhere splendid clusters of light lay like fallen
constellations upon the ground, indicating the sites of great towns,
which, like those of the earth, never sleep.

But this scene, although weird and beautiful, could give us little of
the kind of information we were in search of.

Accordingly it was resolved to turn back eastward until we had arrived
in the twilight space separating day and night, and then hover over
the planet at that point, allowing it to turn beneath us so that, as
we looked down, we should see in succession the entire circuit of the
globe of Mars while it rolled under our eyes.

The rotation of Mars on its axis is performed in a period very little
longer than that of the earth's rotation, so that the length of the day
and night in the world of Mars is only some forty minutes longer than
their length upon the earth.

In thus remaining suspended over the planet, on the line of daybreak, so
to speak, we believed that we should be peculiarly safe from detection
by the eyes of the inhabitants. Even astronomers are not likely to be
wide awake just at the peep of dawn. Almost all of the inhabitants,
we confidently believed, would still be sound asleep upon that part of
the planet passing directly beneath us, and those who were awake would
not be likely to watch for unexpected appearances in the sky.

Besides, our height was so great that notwithstanding the numbers of the
squadron, we could not easily be seen from the surface of the planet,
and if seen at all we might be mistaken for high-flying birds.


Mars Passes Below Us.

Here we remained then through the entire course of twenty-four hours and
saw in succession as they passed from night into day beneath our feet
the land of Chryse, the great continent of Tharsis, the curious region of
intersecting canals which puzzled astronomers on the earth had named the
"Gordian Knot," the continental lands of Memnonia, Amazonia and Aeolia,
the mysterious centre where hundreds of vast canals came together from
every direction, called the Trivium Charontis; the vast circle of Elysium,
a thousand miles across, and completely surrounded by a broad green canal;
the continent of Libya, which, as I remembered, had been half covered
by a tremendous inundation whose effects were visible from the earth
in the year 1889, and finally the long, dark sea of the Syrtis Major,
lying directly south of the land of Hellas.

The excitement and interest which we all experienced were so great that
not one of us took a wink of sleep during the entire twenty-four hours
of our marvellous watch.

There are one or two things of special interest amid the multitude of
wonderful observations that we made which I must mention here on account
of their connection with the important events that followed soon after.

Just west of the land of Chryse we saw the smaller land of Ophir,
in the midst of which is a singular spot called the Juventae Fons,
and this Fountain of Youth, as our astronomers, by a sort of prophetic
inspiration, had named it, proved later to be one of the most incredible
marvels on the planet Mars.

Further to the west, and north from the great continent of Tharsis, we
beheld the immense oval-shaped land of Thaumasia containing in its centre
the celebrated "Lake of the Sun," a circular body of water not less than
500 miles in diameter, with dozens of great canals running away from it
like the spokes of a wheel in every direction, thus connecting it with
the ocean which surrounds it on the south and east, and with the still
larger canals that encircle it toward the north and west.

This Lake of the Sun came to play a great part in our subsequent
adventures. It was evident to us from the beginning that it was the
chief centre of population on the planet. It lies in latitude 25 degrees
South and longitude about 90 degrees west.


Completing the Circuit.

Having completed the circuit of the Martian globe, we were moved by
the same feeling which every discoverer of new lands experiences, and
immediately returned to our original place above the land of Hellas,
because since that was the first part of Mars that we had seen, we felt
a greater degree of familiarity with it than with any other portion of
the planet, and there, in a certain sense, we felt "at home."

But, as it proved, our enemies were on the watch for us there. We had
almost forgotten them, so absorbed were we by the great spectacles that
had been unrolling themselves beneath our feet.

We ought, of course, to have been a little more cautious in approaching
the place where they first caught sight of us, since we might have known
that they would remain on the watch near that spot.

But at any rate they had seen us, and it was now too late to think of
taking them again by surprise.

They on their part had a surprise in store for us, which was greater
than any we had yet experienced.

We saw their ships assembling once more far down in the atmosphere beneath
us, and we thought we could detect evidences of something unusual going
on upon the surface of the planet.

Suddenly from the ships, and from various points on the ground beneath,
there rose high in the air, and carried by invisible currents in every
direction, immense volumes of black smoke, or vapor, which blotted out
of sight everything below them!

South, north, west and east, the curtain of blackness rapidly spread,
until the whole face of the planet as far as our eyes could reach,
and the airships thronging under us, were all concealed from sight!

Mars had played the game of the cuttlefish, which, when pursued by its
enemies, darkens the water behind it by a sudden outgush of inky fluid,
and thus escapes the eye of its foe.


The Great Smoke Cloud.

Our Warriors Find the Martians to Be Foes Worth Fearing.

The eyes of man had never beheld such a spectacle!

Where a few minutes before the sunny face of a beautiful and populous
planet had been shining beneath us, there was now to be seen nothing but
black, billowing clouds, swelling up everywhere like the mouse-colored
smoke that pours from a great transatlantic liner when fresh coal has
just been heaped upon her fires.

In some places the smoke spouted upward in huge jets to the height of
several miles; elsewhere it eddied in vast whirlpools of inky blackness.

Not a glimpse of the hidden world beneath was anywhere to be seen.


Mars Wears Its War Mask.

Mars had put on its war mask, and fearful indeed was the aspect of it!

After the first pause of surprise the squadron quickly backed away
into the sky, rising rapidly, because, from one of the swirling eddies
beneath us the smoke began suddenly to pile itself up in an enormous
aerial mountain, whose peaks shot higher and higher, with apparently
increasing velocity, until they seemed about to engulf us with their
tumbling ebon masses.

Unaware what the nature of this mysterious smoke might be, and fearing it
was something more than a shield for the planet, and might be destructive
to life, we fled before it, as before the onward sweep of a pestilence.

Directly underneath the flagship, one of the aspiring smoke peaks grew
with most portentous swiftness, and, notwithstanding all our efforts,
in a little while it had enveloped us.


The Stifling Smoke.

Several of us were standing on the deck of the electrical ship. We were
almost stifled by the smoke, and were compelled to take refuge within
the car, where, until the electric lights had been turned on, darkness
so black that it oppressed the strained eyeballs prevailed.

But in this brief experience, terrifying though it was, we had learned
one thing. The smoke would kill by strangulation, but evidently there
was nothing especially poisonous in its nature. This fact might be of
use to us in our subsequent proceedings.

"This spoils our plans," said the commander. "There is no use of
remaining here for the present; let us see how far this thing extends."

At first we rose straight away to a height of 200 or 300 miles, thus
passing entirely beyond the sensible limits of the atmosphere, and far
above the highest point that the smoke could reach.

From this commanding point of view our line of sight extended to an
immense distance over the surface of Mars in all directions. Everywhere
the same appearance; the whole planet was evidently covered with the
smoke.


A Wonderful System.

A complete telegraphic system evidently connected all the strategic points
upon Mars, so that, at a signal from the central station, the wonderful
curtain could be instantaneously drawn over the entire face of the planet.

In order to make certain that no part of Mars remained uncovered,
we dropped down again nearer to the upper level of the smoke clouds,
and then completely circumnavigated the planet. It was thought possible
that on the night side no smoke would be found and that it would be
practicable for us to make a descent there.

But when we had arrived on that side of Mars which was turned away from
the sun, we no longer saw beneath us, as we had done on our previous visit
to the night hemisphere of the planet, brilliant groups and clusters of
electric lights beneath us. All was dark.

In fact, so completely did the great shell of smoke conceal the planet
that the place occupied by the latter seemed to be simply a vast black
hole in the firmament.

The sun was hidden behind it, and so dense was the smoke that even the
solar rays were unable to penetrate it, and consequently there was no
atmospheric halo visible around the concealed planet.

All the sky around was filled with stars, but their countless host
suddenly disappeared when our eyes turned in the direction of Mars. The
great black globe blotted them out without being visible itself.


Attempts to Attack Baffled.

"Apparently we can do nothing here," said Mr. Edison. "Let us return to
the daylight side."

When we had arrived near the point where we had been when the wonderful
phenomenon first made its appearance, we paused, and then, at the
suggestion of one of the chemists, dropped close to the surface of the
smoke curtain which had now settled down into comparative quiescence,
in order that we might examine it a little more critically.

The flagship was driven into the smoke cloud so deeply that for a minute
we were again enveloped in night. A quantity of the smoke was entrapped
in a glass jar.


Examining the Smoke.

Rising again into the sunlight, the chemists began an examination of
the constitution of the smoke. They were unable to determine its precise
character, but they found that its density was astonishingly slight. This
accounted for the rapidity with which it had risen, and the great height
which it had attained in the comparatively light atmosphere of Mars.

"It is evident," said one of the chemists, "that this smoke does not
extend down to the surface of the planet. From what the astronomers
say as to the density of the air on Mars, it is probable that a clear
space of at least a mile in height exists between the surface of Mars
and the lower limit of the smoke curtain. Just how deep the latter is
we can only determine by experiment, but it would not be surprising if
the thickness of this great blanket which Mars has thrown around itself
should prove to be a quarter or half a mile."

"Anyhow," said one of the United States army officers, "they have dodged
out of sight, and I don't see why we should not dodge in and get at
them. If there is clear air under the smoke, as you think, why couldn't
the ships dart down through the curtain and come to a close tackle with
the Martians?"

"It would not do at all," said the commander. "We might simply run
ourselves into an ambush. No; we must stay outside, and if possible
fight them from here."


Strategic Measures Employed.

