The _Solarite_ gave a violent lurch as it shot vertically aloft at
tremendous acceleration. Arcot reached over swiftly and snapped the
switch of the microphone. There burst in upon them the familiar roaring
drone of a hundred huge propellers. No slightest hum of motor, only the
vast whining roar of the mighty props.

"Another one! They must have been following the first by a few minutes.
We'll get this one!" Arcot worked swiftly at his switches. "Wade--strap
yourself in the seat where you are--don't take time to come up here."

They followed the same plan which had worked so well before. Suddenly
invisible, the _Solarite_ flashed ahead of the great plane. The titanic
wave of rushing sound engulfed them--then again came the little hiss of
the gas. Now there were no hills in sight, as far as the eye could see.
In the dim light that seemed always to filter through these gray clouds
they could see the distant, level horizon.

Several dragging minutes passed before there was any evident effect; the
men from Earth were waiting for that great ship to waver, to wobble from
its course. Suddenly Arcot gave a cry of surprise. Startled amazement
was written all over his face, as his companions turned in wonderment to
see that he was partially visible! The _Solarite_, too, had become a
misty ghost ship about them; they were becoming visible! Then in an
instant it was gone--and they saw that the huge black bulk behind them
was wavering, turning; the thunderous roar of the propellers fell to a
whistling whine; the ship was losing speed! It dipped, and shot down a
bit--gained speed, then step by step it glided down--down--down to the
surface below. The engines were idling now, the plane running more and
more slowly.

They were near the ground now--and the watchers scarcely breathed. Would
this ship, too, crash? It glided to within a half mile of the
plain--then it dipped once more, and Arcot breathed his relief as it
made a perfect landing, the long series of rollers on the base of the
gigantic hull absorbing the shock of the landing. There were small
streams in the way--a tree or two, but these were obstacles unnoticed by
the gargantuan machine. Its mighty propellers still idling slowly, the
huge plane rolled to a standstill.

Swooping down, the _Solarite_ landed beside it, to be lost in the vast
shadows of the mighty metal walls.

Arcot had left a small radio receiver with Tonlos in Sonor before he
started on this trip, and had given him directions on how to tune in on
the _Solarite_. Now he sent a message to him, telling that the plane had
been brought down, and asking that a squadron of planes be sent at once.

Wade and Arcot were elected to make the first inspection of the Kaxorian
plane, and clad in their cooling suits, they stepped from the
_Solarite_, each carrying, for emergency use, a small hand torch,
burning atomic hydrogen, capable of melting its way through even the
heavy armor of the great plane.

As they stood beside it, looking up at the gigantic wall of metal that
rose sheer beside them hundreds of feet straight up, it seemed
impossible that this mighty thing could fly, that it could be propelled
through the air. In awed silence they gazed at its vast bulk.

Then, like pygmies beside some mighty prehistoric monster, they made
their way along its side, seeking a door. Suddenly Wade stopped short
and exclaimed: "Arcot, this is senseless--we can't do this! The machine
is so big that it'll take us half an hour of steady walking to go around
it. We'll have to use the _Solarite_ to find an entrance!"

It was well that they followed Wade's plan, for the only entrance, as
they later learned, was from the top. There, on the back of the giant,
the _Solarite_ landed--its great weight having no slightest effect on
the Kaxorian craft. They found a trap-door leading down inside. However,
the apparatus for opening it was evidently within the hull, so they had
to burn a hole in the door before they could enter.

What a sight there was for these men of Earth. The low rumble of the
idling engines was barely audible as they descended the long ladder.

There was no resemblance whatever to the interior of a flying machine;
rather, it suggested some great power house, where the energies of half
a nation were generated. They entered directly into a vast hall that
extended for a quarter of a mile back through the great hull, and
completely across the fuselage. To the extreme nose it ran, and
throughout there were scattered little globes that gave off an intense
white light, illuminating all of the interior. Translucent bull's-eyes
obscured the few windows.

All about, among the machines, lay Venerians. Dead they seemed, the
illusion intensified by their strangely blue complexions. The two
Terrestrians knew, however, that they could readily be restored to life.
The great machines they had been operating were humming softly, almost
inaudibly. There were two long rows of them, extending to the end of
the great hall. They suggested mighty generators twenty feet high. From
their tops projected two-feet-thick cylinders of solid fused quartz.
From these extended other rods of fused quartz, rods that led down
through the floor; but these were less bulky, scarcely over eight inches
thick.

The huge generator-like machines were disc-shaped. From these, too, a
quartz rod ran down through the floor. The machines on the further row
were in some way different; those in the front half of the row had the
tubes leading to the floor below, but had no tubes jutting into the
ceiling. Instead, there were many slender rods connected with a vast
switchboard that covered all of one side of the great room. But
everywhere were the great quartz rods, suggesting some complicated water
system. Most of them were painted black, though the main rods leading
from the roof above were as clear as crystal.

Arcot and Wade looked at these gigantic machines in hushed awe. They
seemed impossibly huge; it was inconceivable that all this was but the
power room of an airplane!

Without speaking, they descended to the level below, using a quite
earthly appearing escalator. Despite the motionless figures everywhere,
they felt no fear of their encountering resistance. They knew the
effectiveness of Wade's anesthetic.

The hall they entered was evidently the main room of the plane. It was
as long as the one above, and higher, yet all that vast space was taken
by one single, titanic coil that stretched from wall to wall! Into it,
and from it there led two gigantic columns of fused quartz. That these
were rods, such as those smaller ones above was obvious, but each was
over eight feet thick!

Short they were, for they led from one mighty generator such as they had
seen above, but magnified on a scale inconceivable! At the end of it,
its driving power, its motor, was a great cylindrical case, into which
led a single quartz bar ten inches thick. This bar was alive with
pulsing, glowing fires, that changed and maneuvered and died out over
all its surface and through all its volume. The motor was but five feet
in diameter and a scant seven feet long, yet obviously it was driving
the great machine, for there came from it a constant low hum, a deep
pitched song of awful power. And the huge quartz rod that led from the
titanic coil-cylinder was alive with the same glowing fires that played
through the motor rod. From one side of the generator, ran two objects
that were familiar, copper bus bars. But even these were _three feet
thick_!

The scores of quartz tubes that come down from the floor above joined,
coalesced, and ran down to the great generator, and into it.

They descended to another level. Here were other quartz tubes, but these
led down still further, for this floor contained individual sleeping
bunks, most of them unoccupied, unready for occupancy, though some were
made up.

Down another level; again the bunks, the little individual rooms.

At last they reached the bottom level, and here the great quartz tubes
terminated in a hundred smaller ones, each of these leading into some
strange mechanism. There were sighting devices on it, and there were
ports that opened in the floor. This was evidently the bombing room.

With an occasional hushed word, the Terrestrians walked through what
seemed to be a vast city of the dead, passing sleeping officers, and
crewmen by the hundreds. On the third level they came at last to the
control room. Here were switchboards, control panels, and dozens of
officers, sleeping now, beside their instruments. A sudden dull thudding
sound spun Arcot and Wade around, nerves taut. They relaxed and
exchanged apologetic smiles. An automatic relay had adjusted some
mechanism.

They noted one man stationed apart from the rest. He sat at the very
bow, protected behind eight-inch coronium plates in which were set
masses of fused quartz that were nearly as strong as the metal itself.
These gave him a view in every direction except directly behind him.
Obviously, here was the pilot.

Returning to the top level, they entered the long passages that led out
into the titanic wings. Here, as elsewhere, the ship was brightly
lighted. They came to a small room, another bunk room. There were great
numbers of these down both sides of the long corridor, and along the two
parallel corridors down the wing. In the fourth corridor near the back
edge of the wing, there were bunk rooms on one side, and on the other
were bombing posts.

As they continued walking down the first corridor, they came to a small
room, whence issued the low hum of one of the motors. Entering, they
found the crew sleeping, and the motor idling.

"Good Lord!" Wade exclaimed. "Look at that motor, Arcot! No bigger than
the trunk of a man's body. Yet a battery of these sends the ship along
at a mile a second! What power!"

Slowly they proceeded down the long hall. At each of the fifty engine
mountings they found the same conditions. At the end of the hall there
was an escalator that led one level higher, into the upper wing. Here
they found long rows of the bombing posts and the corresponding quartz
rods.

They returned finally to the control room. Here Arcot spent a long time
looking over the many instruments, the controls, and the piloting
apparatus.

"Wade," he said at last, "I think I can see how this is done. I am going
to stop those engines, start them, then accelerate them till the ship
rolls a bit!" Arcot stepped quickly over to the pilots seat, lifted the
sleeping pilot out, and settled in his place.

"Now, you go over to that board there--that one--and when I ask you to,
please turn on that control--no, the one below--yes--turn it on about
one notch at a time."

Wade shook his head dubiously, a one-sided grin on his face. "All right,
Arcot--just as you say--but when I think of the powers you're playing
with--well, a mistake might be unhealthy!"

"I'm going to stop the motors now," Arcot announced quietly. All the
time they had been on board, they had been aware of the barely inaudible
whine of the motors. Now suddenly, it was gone, and the plane was still
as death!

Arcot's voice sounded unnaturally loud. "I did it without blowing the
ship up after all! Now we're going to try turning the power on!"

Suddenly there was a throaty hum; then quickly it became the low whine;
then, as Arcot turned on the throttle before him, he heard the tens of
thousands of horsepower spring into life--and suddenly the whine was a
low roar--the mighty propellers out there had became a blur--then with
majestic slowness the huge machine moved off across the field!

Arcot shut off the motors and rose with a broad, relieved smile, "Easy!"
he said. They made their way again up through the ship, up through the
room of the tremendous cylinder coil, and then into the power room. Now
the machines were quiet, for the motors were no longer working.

"Arcot, you didn't shut off the biggest machine of all down there. How
come?"

"I couldn't, Wade. It has no shut-off control, and if it did have, I
wouldn't use it. I will tell you why when we get back to the
_Solarite_."

At last they left the mighty machine; walked once more across its broad
metal top. Here and there they now saw the ends of those quartz
cylinders. Once more they entered the _Solarite_, through the air lock,
and took off the cumbersome insulating suits.

As quickly as possible Arcot outlined to the two who had stayed with the
_Solarite_, the things they had seen, and the layout of the great ship.

"I think I can understand the secret of all that power, and it's not so
different from the _Solarite_, at that. It, too, draws its power from
the sun, though in a different way, and it stores it within itself,
which the _Solarite_ does not try to do.

"Light of course, is energy, and therefore, has mass. It exerts
pressure, the impact of its moving units of energy--photons. We have
electrons and protons of matter, and photons of light. Now we know that
the mass of protons and electrons will attract other protons and
electrons, and hold them near--as in a stone, or in a solar system. The
new idea here is that the photons will attract each other ever more and
more powerfully, the closer they get. The Kaxorians have developed a
method of getting them so close together, that they will, for a while at
least, hold themselves there, and with a little 'pressure', will stay
there indefinitely.

"In that huge coil and cylinder we found there we saw the main power
storage tank. That was full of gaseous light-energy held together by its
own attraction, plus a little help of the generator!"

"A little help?" Wade exclaimed. "Quite a little! I'll bet that thing
had a million horsepower in its motor!"

"Yes--but I'll bet they have nearly fifty pounds of light condensed
there--so why worry about a little thing like a million horsepower? They
have plenty more where that comes from.

"I think they go up above the clouds in some way and collect the sun's
energy. Remember that Venus gets twice as much as Earth. They focus it
on those tubes on the roof there, and they, like all quartz tubes,
conduct the light down into the condensers where it is first collected.
Then it is led to the big condenser downstairs, where the final power is
added, and the condensed light is stored.

"Quartz conducts light just as copper conducts electricity--those are
bus bars we saw running around there.

"The bombs we've been meeting recently are, of course, little knots of
this light energy thrown out by that projector mechanism we saw. When
they hit anything, the object absorbs their energy--and is very promptly
volatilized by the heat of the absorption.

"Do you remember that column of hissing radiance we saw shooting out of
the wrecked plane just before it blew up? That was the motor connection,
broken, and discharging free energy. That would ordinarily have
supplied all fifty motors at about full speed. Naturally, when it cut
loose, it was rather violent.

"The main generator had been damaged, no doubt, so it stopped working,
and the gravitational attraction of the photons wasn't enough, without
its influence to hold them bound too long. All those floods of energy
were released instantaneously, of course.

"Look--there come the Lanorians now. I want to go back to Sonor and
think over this problem. Perhaps we can find something that will release
all that energy--though honestly, I doubt it."

Arcot seemed depressed, overawed perhaps, by the sheer magnitude of the
force that lay bound up in the Kaxorian ship. It seemed inconceivable
that the little _Solarite_ could in any way be effective against the
incredible machine.

The Lanorian planes were landing almost like a flock of birds, on the
wings, the fuselage, the ground all about the gigantic ship. Arcot
dropped into a chair, gazing moodily into emptiness, his thoughts on the
mighty giant, stricken now, but only sleeping. In its vast hulk lay such
energies as intelligence had never before controlled; within it he knew
there were locked the powers of the sun itself. What could the
_Solarite_ do against it?

"Oh, I almost forgot to mention it." Arcot spoke slowly, dejectedly. "In
the heat of the attack back there it went practically unnoticed. Our
only weapon beside the gas is useless now. Do you remember how the ship
seemed to lose its invisibility for an instant? I learned why when we
investigated the ship. Those men are physicists of the highest order. We
must realize the terrible forces, both physical and mental that we are
to meet. They've solved the secret of our invisibility, and now they can
neutralize it. They began using it a bit too late this time, but they
had located the radio-produced interference caused by the ship's
invisibility apparatus, and they were sending a beam of interfering
radio energy at us. We are invisible only by reason of the vibration of
the molecules in response to the radio impressed oscillations. The
molecules vibrate in tune, at terrific frequency, and the light can pass
perfectly. What will happen, however, if someone locates the source of
the radio waves? It'll be simple for them to send out a radio beam and
touch our invisible ship with it. The two radio waves impressed on us
now will be out of step and the interference will instantly make us
visible. We can no longer attack them with our atomic hydrogen blast, or
with the gas--both are useless unless we can get close to them, and we
can't come within ten miles of them now. Those bombs of theirs are
effective at that distance."

Again he fell silent, thinking--hoping for an idea that would once more
give them a chance to combat the Kaxorians. His three companions,
equally depressed and without a workable idea, remained silent. Abruptly
Arcot stood up.

"I'm going to speak with the Commander-in-Field here. Then we can start
back for Sonor--and maybe we had better head for home. It looks as
though there is little we can do here."

Briefly he spoke to the young Venerian officer, and told him what he had
learned about the ship. Perhaps they could fly it to Sonor; or it could
be left there undestroyed if he would open a certain control just before
he left. Arcot showed him which one--it would drain out the power of the
great storage tank, throwing it harmlessly against the clouds above. The
Kaxorians might destroy the machine if they wanted to--Arcot felt that
they would not wish to. They would hope, with reason, they might
recapture it! It would be impossible to move that tremendous machine
without the power that its "tank" was intended to hold.




VII


Slowly they cruised back to Sonor, Arcot still engrossed in thought.
Would it be that Venus would fall before the attack of the mighty
planes, that they would sweep out across space, to Earth--to Mars--to
other worlds, a cosmic menace? Would the mighty machines soon be
circling Earth? Guided missiles with atomic warheads could combat them,
perhaps, as could the molecular motion machines. Perhaps these could be
armored with twenty-inch steel walls, and driven into the great
propellers, or at miles a second, into the ship itself! But these ships
would require long hours, days, even weeks to build, and in that time
the Kaxorian fleet would be ready. It would attack Earth within six days
now! What hope was there to avert incalculable destruction--if not
outright defeat?

In despair Arcot turned and strode quickly down the long hallway of the
_Solarite_. Above him he could hear the smooth, even hum of the sweetly
functioning generator, but it only reminded him of the vastly greater
energies he had seen controlled that night. The thudding relays in the
power room, as Wade maneuvered the ship, seemed some diminutive mockery
of the giant relays he had seen in the power room of the Kaxorian plane.

He sat down in the power room, looking at the stacked apparatus, neatly
arranged, as it must be, to get all this apparatus in this small space.
Then at last he began to think more calmly. He concentrated on the
greatest forces known to man--and there were only two that even occurred
to him as great! One was the vast energies he had that very night
learned of; the other was the force of the molecules, the force that
drove his ship.

He had had no time to work out the mathematics of the light compression,
mathematics that he now knew would give results. There remained only the
molecular motion. What could he do with it that he had not done?

He drew out a small black notebook. In it were symbols, formulas, and
page after page of the intricate calculus that had ended finally in the
harnessing of this great force that was even now carrying him smoothly
along.

Half an hour later he was still busy--covering page after page with
swiftly written formulas. Before him was a great table of multiple
integers, the only one like it known to exist in the System, for the
multiple calculus was an invention of Arcot's. At last he found the
expression he wanted, and carefully he checked his work, excitedly
though now, with an expression of eager hope--it seemed logical--it
seemed correct--

"Morey--oh, Morey," he called, holding his enthusiasm in check, "if you
can come here--I want you to check some math for me. I've done it--and I
want to see if you get the same result independently!" Morey was a more
careful mathematician than he, and it was to him Arcot turned for
verification of any new discovery.

Following the general directions Arcot gave him, Morey went through the
long series of calculations--and arrived at the same results. Slowly he
looked up from the brief expression with which he had ended.

It was not the formula that astonished him--it was its physical
significance.

"Arcot--do you think we can make it?"

There was a new expression in Arcot's eyes, a tightness about his mouth.

"I hope so, Morey. If we don't, Lanor is lost beyond a doubt--and
probably Earth is, too. Wade--come here a minute, will you? Let Fuller
take the controls, and tell him to push it. We have to get to work on
this."

Rapidly Arcot explained their calculations--and the proof he had gotten.

"Our beam of molecular motion-controlling energy directs all molecular
motion to go at right angles to it. The mechanism so far has been a
