don't mean goody-goody, but sincere and really...."

"Yeah, but don't fall in love with her. Everybody does and it doesn't do
any of them a bit of good. That's her specialty and she's _very_ good at
it. I told you she's a smooth, smooth worker."

"You can say _that_ again." Avengord did not know that he was repeating
himself. "But it isn't an act. She means it and it's true."

"Of course she means it and of course it's true. Otherwise even she,
with all her training, couldn't sell such a big bill of goods." Then, in
answer to the man's unspoken question, "Yes, we're all different. She's
the contactor, the spreader of the good old oil, the shining example of
purity and sweetness and light--in short, the Greaser of the Ways. I'm a
fighter, myself. Do you think she could actually have de-handed those
men? Uh-uh. At the last minute she would have weakened and brought them
in whole. My job in this operation is to knock hell out of the ones Lola
can't convince, such as those spies you and I are going to interview
pretty quick."

"Even they ought to be convinced. I don't see how anybody could help but
be."

"Uh-uh. It'll bounce off like hailstones off of a tin roof. The only
thing to do to that kind of scum is kill them. If you'll give me a
thought as to where your office is we'll hop over and...."

        *           *           *

Belle and Avengord disappeared from the stand; and, such was Lola's
hold, no one on the platform or in the throng even noticed that they
were gone. They materialized in Avengord's private office; he sitting as
usual at his desk, she reclining in legs-crossed ease in a big leather
chair.

"... get to work." Belle's thought had not been interrupted by any
passage of time whatever. "What do you want to do first?"

"But I thought you were covering Miss Montandon?"

"I am. Like a blanket. Just as well here as anywhere. I will be, until
she gets back to the _Pleiades_. What first?"

"Oh. Well, since I don't know what your limits are--if you have any--you
might as well do whatever you think best and I'll watch you do it."

"That's the way to talk. You're going to get a shock when you see who
the Head Man is. George T. Basil."

"_Basil_! I'll say it's a shock!" Avengord steadied, frowned in
concentration. "Could be, though. _He_ would _never_ be suspected--but
they're very good at that."

"Yeah. His name used to be Baslovkowitz. He was trained for years, then
planted. None of this can be proved, as his record is perfect. Born
citizen, highest standing in business and social circles. Unlimited
entry and top security clearance. Right?"

"Right ... and getting enough evidence, in such cases as that, is pure,
unadulterated hell."

"I suppose I could kill him, after we've recorded everything he knows,"
Belle suggested.

"No!" He snapped. "Too many people think of us as a strong-arm squad
now. Anyway, I'd rather kill him myself than wish the job off onto--you
don't _like_ killing, do you?"

"That's the understatement of the century. No civilized person does. In
a hot fight, yes; but killing anyone who is helpless to fight back--in
cold blood--ugh! It makes me sick in my stomach even to think of it."

"With the way you can read minds, we can get evidence enough to send
them all to jail, and that we'll have to do."

"How about this?" Belle grinned as another solution came to mind. "From
those first eight top men, we'll find out a lot of others lower down,
and so on, until we have 'em all locked up here. We'll announce that
exactly so many spies and agents--giving names, addresses, and facts, of
course--got panicky after Lola's address. They fired up their hidden
planes and flew back behind the Curtain. Then, when we've scanned their
minds and recorded everything you want, I'll pack them all, very snugly
and carefully, into Sovig's private office. With the world situation
what it then will be, he won't dare kill them--he simply won't know what
to do when faced with it."

        *           *           *

Avengord agreed happily. He reached out and flipped the switch of his
intercom. "Miss Kimling, come in, please."

The door burst open. "Why, it _is_ you! But you were on the rostrum just
a minute.... Oh!" She saw Belle, and backed, eyes wide, toward the door
she had just entered. "_She_ was there, too, and it's fifteen
_miles_...."

"Steady, Fram. I'd like to present you to Prime Operator Belle Bellamy,
who is cleaning out the entire Curtain organization for us."

"But how did you...."

"Never mind that. Teleportation. It took her half an hour to pound it
into me, and we can't take time to explain anything now. I'll tell
everybody everything I know as soon as I can. In the meantime, don't be
surprised at anything that happens, and by that I mean _anything_. Such
as solid people appearing on this carpet--on that spot right
there--instantaneously. I want you to pay close attention to everything
your mind receives, put your phenomenal memory into high gear, listen to
everything I record, stop me any time I'm wrong, and be _sure_ I get
everything we need."

"I don't know exactly what you're talking about, sir, but I'll try."

"Frankly, I don't, either--we'll just have to roll it as we go along.
We're ready for George T. Basil now, Miss Bellamy--I hope. Don't jump,
Fram."

        *           *           *

Basil appeared and Fram jumped. She did not scream, however, and did not
run out of the office. The master spy was a big, self-assured, affluent
type. He had not the slightest idea of how he had been spirited out of
his ultra-secret sub-basement and into this room; but he knew where he
was and, after one glance at Belle, he knew why. He decided instantly
what to do about it.

"This is an outrage!" he bellowed, hammering with his fist on Avengord's
desk. "A stupid, high-handed violation of the rights...."

Belle silenced him and straightened him up.

"High-handed? Yes," she admitted quite seriously. "However, from the
Galaxian standpoint, you have no rights at all and you are going to be
extremely surprised at just how high-handed I am going to be. I am going
to read your mind to its very bottom--layer by layer, like peeling an
onion--and everything you know and everything you think is going down in
Mr. Avengord's Big Black Book."

Belle linked all four minds together and directed the search, making
sure that no item, however small, was missed. Avengord recorded every
pertinent item. Fram Kimling memorized and correlated and
double-checked.

Soon it was done, and Basil, shouting even louder about this last and
worst violation of his rights--those of his own private mind--was led
away by two men and "put away where he would keep."

"But this _is_ a flagrant violation of law...." Miss Kimling began.

"You can say _that_ again!" her boss gloated. "And if you only knew how
tickled I am to do it, after the way they've been kicking _me_ around!

"But I wonder ... are you sure we can get away with it?"

"Certainly," Belle put in. "We Galaxians are doing it, not your
government or your Secret Service. We'll start you clean--but it'll be
up to you to keep it clean, and that will be no easy job."

"No, it won't; but we'll do it. Come around again, say in five or six
years, and see."

"You know, I might take you up on that? Maybe not this same team, but
I've got a notion to tape a recommendation for a re-visit, just to see
how you get along. It'd be interesting."

"I wish you would. It might help, too, if everybody thought you'd come
back to check. Suppose you could?"

"I've no idea, really. I'd like to, though, and I'll see what I can do.
But let's get on with the job. They're all in what you call the 'tank'
now. Which one do you want next?"

The work went on. That evening there was of course a reception; and then
a ball. And Belle's feet did hurt when she got back to the _Pleiades_,
but of course she would not admit the fact--most especially not to
Garlock.

Exactly at the expiration of the stipulated seventy-two hours, the
Galaxians began to destroy military atomic plants; and, shortly
thereafter, the starship's crew was again ready to go.

And James rammed home the red button that would send them--all four
wondered--_where_?

It turned out to be another Hodell-type world; and, even with the
high-speed comparator, it took longer to check the charts than it did to
make them.

        *           *           *

The next planet was similar. So was the next, and the next. The time
required for checking grew longer and longer.

"How about cutting out this checking entirely, Clee?" James asked then.
"What good does it do? Even if we find a similarity, what could we do
about it? We've got enough stuff now to keep a crew of astronomers busy
for five years making a tank of it."

"Okay. We probably are so far away now, anyway, that the chance of
finding a similarity is vanishingly small. Keep on taking the shots,
though; they'll prove, I think, that the universe is one whole hell of a
lot bigger than anybody has ever thought it was. That reminds me--are
you getting anywhere on that N-problem? I'm not."

"I'm getting nowhere, fast. You should have been a math prof in a grad
school, Clee. You could flunk every advanced student you had with that
one. Belle and I together can't feed it to Compy in such shape as to get
a definite answer. We think, though, that your guess was right--if we
ever stabilize anywhere it will probably be relative to Hodell, not to
Tellus. But the cold fact of how far away we must be by this time just
scares the pants off of me."

"You and me both, my ripe and old. We're a _long_ ways from home."

        *           *           *

Jumping went on; and, two or three planets later, they encountered an
Arpalone Inspector who did not test them for compatibility with the
humanity of his world.

"Do not land," the creature said, mournfully. "This world is dying, and
if you leave the protection of your ship, you too will die."

"But _worlds_ don't die, surely?" Garlock protested. "People, yes--but
worlds?"

"Worlds die. It is the Dilipic. The humans die, too, of course, but it
is the world itself that is attacked, not the people. Some of them, in
fact, will live through it."

Garlock drove his attention downward and scanned.

"You Arpalones are doing what looks like a mighty good job of fighting.
Can't you win?"

"No, it is too late. It was already too late when they first appeared,
two days ago. When the Dilipics strike in such small force that none of
their--agents?--devices?--whatever they are?--can land against our
beaming, a world can be saved; but such cases are very few."

"But this thought, 'Dilipic'?" Garlock asked, impatiently. "It is merely
a symbol--it doesn't _mean_ anything--to me, at least. What are they?
Where do they come from?"

"No one knows anything about them," came the surprising answer. "Not
even their physical shape--if they have any. Nor where they come from,
or how they do what they do."

"They can't be very common," Garlock pondered. "We have never heard of
them before."

"Fortunately, they are not," the Inspector agreed. "Scarcely one world
in five hundred is ever attacked by them--this is the first Dilipic
invasion I have seen."

"Oh, you Arpalones don't die with your worlds, then?" Lola asked. She
was badly shaken. "But I suppose the Arpales do, of course."

"Practically all of the Arpales will die, of course. Most of us
Arpalones will also die, in the battles now going on. Those of us who
survive, however, will stay aloft until the rehabilitation fleet
arrives, then we will continue our regular work."

"Rehab?" Belle exclaimed. "You mean you can _restore_ planets so badly
ruined that all the people die?"

"Oh, yes. It is a long and difficult work, but the planet is always
re-peopled."

"Let's go down," Garlock said. "I want to get all of this on tape."

They went down, over what had been one of that world's largest cities.
The air, the stratosphere, and all nearby space were full of battling
vessels of all shapes and sizes; ranging from the tremendous globular
spaceships of the invaders down to the tiny, one-man jet-fighters of the
Arpalones.

        *           *           *

The Dilipics were using projectile weapons only--ranging in size,
with the size of the vessels, from heavy machine guns up to
seventy-five-millimeter quick-firing rifles. They were also launching
thousands of guided missiles of fantastic speed and of tremendous
explosive power.

The Arpalones were not using anything solid at all. Each defending
vessel, depending upon its type and class, carried from four up to a
hundred or so burnished-metal reflectors some four feet in diameter;
each with a small black device at its optical center and each pouring
out a tight beam of highly effective energy. It was at these reflectors,
and particularly at these tiny devices, that the small-arms fire was
directed, and the marksmanship of the Dilipics was very good indeed.
However, each projector was oscillating irregularly and each
fighter-plane was taking evasive action; and, since a few bullet-holes
in any reflector did not reduce its efficiency very much, and since the
central mechanisms were so small and were moving so erratically, a good
three-quarters of the Arpalonian beams were still in action.

        *           *           *

There was no doubt at all that those beams were highly effective.
Invisible for the most part, whenever one struck a Dilipic ship or plane
everything in its path flared almost instantly into vapor and the beam
glared incandescently, blindingly white or violet or high blue--never
anything lower than blue. Almost everything material, that is; for guns,
ammunition, and missiles were not affected. They did not even explode.
When whatever fabric it was that supported them was blasted away, all
such things simply dropped; simply fell through thousands or hundreds of
thousands of feet of air to crash unheeded upon whatever happened to be
below.

The invading task force was arranged in a whirling, swirling, almost
