ovate or rounded, obtuse, each subtending several stamens; filaments
very short, mostly 2-forked; anthers bearded at the tip: fertile flowers
at the ends of leafy shoots of the season, in loose catkins; bractlets
foliaceous, each subtending a green, ovate, acute, ciliate, deciduous
scale, each scale subtending two pistils with long reddish styles.

=Fruit.=--In terminal catkins made conspicuous by the pale green, much
enlarged, and leaf-like 3-lobed bracts, each bract subtending a
dark-colored, sessile, striate nutlet.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers moist,
rich soil, near running water, on the edges of wet land or on rocky
slopes in shade. Its irregular outline and curiously ridged trunk make
it an interesting object in landscape plantations. It is not often used,
however, because it is seldom grown in nurseries, and collected plants
do not bear removal well. Propagated from the seed.

[Illustration: PLATE XXIX.--Carpinus Caroliniana.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower, back view.
  4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Fertile catkin.
  6. Fertile flower.
  7. Fruiting branch.


=BETULA.=

Inflorescence.--In scaly catkins, sterile and fertile on the same tree,
appearing with or before the leaves from shoots of the previous
season,--sterile catkins terminal and lateral, formed in summer, erect
or inclined in the bud, drooping when expanded in the following spring;
sterile flowers usually 3, subtended by a shield-shaped bract with 2
bractlets; each flower consisting of a 1-scaled calyx and 2 anthers,
which appear to be 4 from the division of the filaments into two parts,
each of which bears an anther cell: fertile catkins erect or inclined at
the end of very short leafy branchlets; fertile flowers subtended by a
3-lobed bract falling with the nuts; bractlets none; calyx none; corolla
none; consisting of 2-3 ovaries crowned with 2 spreading styles.


=Betula lenta, L.=

BLACK BIRCH. CHERRY BIRCH. SWEET BIRCH.

=Habitat and Range.=--Moist grounds; rich woods, old pastures, fertile
hill-slopes, banks of rivers.

     Newfoundland and Nova Scotia to the Lake Superior region.

Maine,--frequent; New Hampshire,--in the highlands of the southern
section, and along the Connecticut river valley to a short distance
north of Windsor; Vermont,--frequent in the western part of the state,
and in the southern Connecticut valley (_Flora of Vermont_, 1900);
Massachusetts and Rhode Island,--frequent throughout, especially in the
highlands, less often near the coast; Connecticut,--widely distributed,
especially in the Connecticut river valley, but not common.

     South to Delaware, along the mountains to Florida; west to
     Minnesota and Kansas.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized or rather large tree, 50-75 feet high, with a
trunk diameter of 1-4 feet, often conspicuous along precipitous ledges,
springing out of crevices in the rocks and assuming a variety of
picturesque forms. In open ground the dark trunk develops a symmetrical,
wide-spreading, hemispherical head broadest at its base, the lower limbs
horizontal or drooping sometimes nearly to the ground. The limbs are
long and slender, often more or less tortuous, and separated ultimately
into a delicate, polished spray. Distinguished by its long
purplish-yellow, pendulous catkins in spring, and in summer by its
glossy, bright green, and abundant foliage, which becomes yellow in
autumn.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk on old trees very dark, separating and cleaving
off in large, thickish plates; on young trees and on branches a dark
reddish-brown, not separating into thin layers, smooth, with numerous
horizontal lines 1-3 inches long; branchlets reddish-brown, shining,
with shorter lateral lines; season's shoots with small, pale dots. Inner
bark very aromatic, having a strong checkerberry flavor,--hence the
common name, "checkerberry birch"; called also "cherry birch," from the
resemblance of its bark to that of the garden cherry.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds reddish-brown, oblong or conical,
pointed, inner scales whitish, elongating as the bud opens. Leaves
simple, in alternate pairs, 3-4 inches long and one-half as wide,
shining green above and downy when young, paler beneath and
silvery-downy along the prominent, straight veins; outline ovate-oval,
ovate-oblong, or oval; sharply serrate to doubly serrate; apex acute to
acuminate; base heart-shaped to obtuse; leafstalk short, often curved,
hairy when young; stipules soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--April to May. Sterile catkins 3-4 inches long,
slender, purplish-yellow; scales fringed: fertile catkins erect or
suberect, sessile or nearly so, 1/2-1 inch long, oblong-cylindrical;
bracts pubescent; lateral lobes wider than in _B. lutea._

=Fruit.=--Fruiting catkins oblong-cylindrical, nearly erect; bracts with
3 short, nearly equal diverging lobes: nut obovate-oblong, wider than
its wings; upper part of seed-body usually appressed-pubescent.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows everywhere
from swamps to hilltops, but prefers moist rocky slopes and a loamy or
gravelly soil; occasionally offered by nurserymen; both nursery and
collected plants are moved without serious difficulty; apt to grow
rather unevenly.

[Illustration: PLATE XXX.--Betula lenta.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower, back view.
  4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Fertile flower.
  6. Fruiting branch.
  7. Fruit.
  8. Mature leaf.


=Betula lutea, Michx. f.=

YELLOW BIRCH. GRAY BIRCH.

=Habitat and Range.=--Low, rich woodlands, mountain slopes.

     Newfoundland and Nova Scotia to Rainy river.

New England,--abundant northward; common throughout, from borders of
lowland swamps to 1000 feet above the sea level; more common at
considerable altitudes, where it often occurs in extensive patches or
belts.

     South to the middle states, and along the mountains to Tennessee
     and North Carolina; west to Minnesota.

=Habit.=--A large tree, at its maximum in northern New England 60-90
feet high and 2-4 feet in diameter at the base. In the forest the main
trunk separates at a considerable height into a few large branches which
rise at a sharp angle, curving slightly, forming a rather small,
irregular head, widest near the top; while in open ground the head is
broad-spreading, hemispherical, with numerous rather equal, long and
slender branches, and a fine spray with drooping tendencies. In the
sunlight the silvery-yellow feathering and the metallic sheen of trunk
and branches make the yellow birch one of the most attractive trees of
the New England forest.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunks and large limbs in old trees gray or blackish,
lustreless, deep-seamed, split into thick plates, standing out at all
sorts of angles; in trees 6-8 inches in diameter, scarf-bark lustrous,
parted in ribbon-like strips, detached at one end and running up the
trunk in delicate, tattered fringes; season's shoots light
yellowish-green, minutely buff-dotted, woolly-pubescent, becoming in
successive seasons darker and more lustrous, the dots elongating into
horizontal lines. Aromatic but less so than the bark of the black birch;
not readily detachable like the bark of the canoe birch.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds conical, 1/4 inch long, mostly
appressed, tips of scales brownish. Leaves simple, in alternate pairs or
scattered singly along the stem; 3-5 inches long, 1/2-2 inches wide,
dull green on both sides, paler beneath and more or less pubescent on
the straight veins; outline oval to oblong, for the most part doubly
serrate; apex acuminate or acute; base heart-shaped, obtuse or truncate;
leafstalk short, grooved, often pubescent or woolly; stipules soon
falling.

=Inflorescence.=--April to May. Sterile catkins 3-4 inches long,
purplish-yellow; scales fringed: fertile catkins sessile or nearly so,
about 1 inch long, cylindrical; bracts 3-lobed, nearly to the middle,
pubescent, lobes slightly spreading.

=Fruit.=--Fruiting catkins oblong or oblong-ovoid, about 1 inch long and
two-thirds as thick, erect: nut oval to narrowly obovate, tapering at
each end, pubescent on the upper part, about the width of its wing.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in wet or
dry situations, but prefers wet, peaty soil, where its roots can find a
constant supply of moisture; similar to the black birch, equally
valuable in landscape-gardening, but less desirable as a street tree;
transplanted without serious difficulty.

Differences between black birch and yellow birch:

=Black Birch.=--Bark reddish-brown, not separable into thin layers;
leaves bright green above, finely serrate; fruiting catkins cylindrical;
bark of twigs decidedly aromatic.

=Yellow Birch.=--Bark yellow, separable into thin layers; leaves dull
green above; serration coarser and more decidedly doubly serrate;
fruiting catkins ovoid or oblong-ovoid; flavor of bark less distinctly
aromatic.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXI.--Betula lutea.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flower-buds.
  3. Flowering branch.
  4-6. Sterile flowers.
  7. Fertile flower.
  8. Bract.
  9. Fruiting branch.
  10. Fruit.


=Betula nigra, L.=

RED BIRCH. RIVER BIRCH.

=Habitat and Range.=--Along rivers, ponds, and woodlands inundated a
part of the year.

     Doubtfully and indefinitely reported from Canada.

No stations in Maine, Vermont, Rhode Island, or Connecticut; New
Hampshire,--found sparingly along streams in the southern part of the
state; abundant along the banks of Beaver brook, Pelham (F. W.
Batchelder); Massachusetts,--along the Merrimac river and its
tributaries, bordering swamps in Methuen and ponds in North Andover.

     South, east of the Alleghany mountains, to Florida; west, locally
     through the northern tier of states to Minnesota and along the Gulf
     states to Texas; western limits, Nebraska, Kansas, Indian
     territory, and Missouri.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized tree, 30-50 feet high, with a diameter at the
ground of 1-1-1/2 feet; reaching much greater dimensions southward. The
trunk, frequently beset with small, leafy, reflexed branchlets, and
often only less frayed and tattered than that of the yellow birch,
develops a light and feathery head of variable outline, with numerous
slender branches, the upper long and drooping, the reddish spray clothed
with abundant dark-green foliage.

=Bark.=--Reddish, more or less separable into layers, fraying into
shreddy, cinnamon-colored fringes; in old trees thick, dark
reddish-brown, and deeply furrowed; branches dark red or cinnamon,
giving rise to the name of "red birch"; season's shoots downy,
pale-dotted.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, mostly appressed near the ends of
the shoots, tapering at both ends. Leaves simple, alternate, 3-4 inches
long, two-thirds as wide, dark green and smooth above, paler and
soft-downy beneath, turning bright yellow in autumn; outline
rhombic-ovate, with unequal and sharp double serratures; leafstalk short
and downy; stipules soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--April to May. Sterile catkins usually in threes, 2-4
inches long, scales 2-3-flowered: fertile catkins bright green,
cylindrical, stalked; bracts 3-lobed, the central lobe much the longest,
tomentose, ciliate.

=Fruit.=--June. Earliest of the birches to ripen its seed; fruiting
catkins 1-2 inches long, cylindrical, erect or spreading; bracts with
the 3 lobes nearly equal in width, spreading, the central lobe the
longest: nut ovate to obovate, ciliate.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in all
soils, but prefers a station near running water; young trees grow
vigorously and become attractive objects in landscape plantations;
especially useful along river banks to bind the soil; retains its lower
branches better than the black or yellow birches. Seldom found in
nurseries, and rather hard to transplant; collected plants do fairly
well.

[Illustration: PLATE XXXII.--Betula nigra.]

  1. Leaf-buds.
  2. Flower-buds.
  3. Branch with sterile and fertile catkins.
  4. Sterile flower.
  5. Fertile flower.
  6. Scale of fertile flower.
  7. Fruit.
  8. Fruiting branch.


=Betula populifolia, Marsh.=

WHITE BIRCH. GRAY BIRCH. OLDFIELD BIRCH. POPLAR BIRCH. POVERTY
BIRCH. SMALL WHITE BIRCH.

=Habitat and Range.=--Dry, gravelly soils, occasional in swamps and
frequent along their borders, often springing up on burnt lands.

     Nova Scotia to Lake Ontario.

Maine,--abundant; New Hampshire,--abundant eastward, as far north as
Conway, and along the Connecticut to Westmoreland; Vermont,--common in
the western and frequent in the southern sections; Massachusetts, Rhode
Island, and Connecticut,--common.

     South, mostly in the coast region, to Delaware; west to Lake
     Ontario.

=Habit.=--A small tree, 20-35 feet high, with a diameter at the ground
of 4-8 inches, occasionally much exceeding these dimensions; under
favorable conditions, of extreme elegance. The slender, seldom erect
trunk, continuous to the top of the tree, throws out numerous short,
unequal branches, which form by repeated subdivisions a profuse, slender
spray, disposed irregularly in tufts or masses, branches and branchlets
often hanging vertically or drooping at the ends. Conspicuous in winter
by the airy lightness of the narrow open head and by the contrast of the
white trunk with the dark spray; in summer, when the sun shines and the
air stirs, by the delicacy, tremulous movement, and brilliancy of the
foliage.

=Bark.=--Trunk grayish-white, with triangular, dusty patches below the
insertion of the branches; not easily separable into layers; branches
dark brown or blackish; season's shoots brown, with numerous small round
dots becoming horizontal lines and increasing in length with the age of
the tree. The white of the bark does not readily come off upon clothing.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds somewhat diverging from the twig; narrow
conical or cylindrical, reddish-brown. Leaves simple, alternate, single
or in pairs, 3-4 inches long, two-thirds as wide, bright green above,
