
"Oh," she cried. "It's you!"

"Of course, it's me."

Rhoda stopped dead and Frank was sure that the look of eagerness died as
suddenly as it had been born.

"Well, good lord! Whom were you expecting?"

Rhoda laughed. "You just surprised me, that's all."

"Well, you gave me the keys to your apartment. Wasn't I supposed to use
them?"

"Of course, silly." She came across the room and sat down on the sofa
beside him. She bent down and kissed him.

"Golly," he said, sarcastically enthusiastic, "that was about as
stimulating as a meeting between two dead fish."

"Frank! For heaven's sake! What's got into you lately?"

"I think that question should be reversed. 'What's got into _you_?"

"I think you're being unreasonable."

"Am I? Is it unreasonable to wonder why you did a complete about-face?"

"I don't understand."

"You understand. I've brought it up before. You spent weeks convincing
me I ought to carry through with my internship and establish a practice.
You said the time element didn't make any difference to you. You talked
me out of the silly idea I had about cashing in on the man with two
hearts. I admitted it was a silly idea. I turned away from it
completely. Then you did the world's fastest about-face and began asking
questions. You began pushing me in the direction you'd been arguing
against."

Rhoda refused to match his serious mood. She ran a playful hand through
his hair. "A woman has a right to change her mind, hasn't she?"

"Oh, stop it, Rhoda. You're avoiding the issue."

"All right. I still maintain I have a right to change my mind, but in
making it all seem completely unnatural you neglected to mention _why_
you changed yours. Because a man named Brent Taber slapped your wrist
like a little boy and scared you. It wasn't my influence that turned you
around and started you walking the other way. It was a _big_ man from
Washington who said naughty, naughty and suddenly you were a nice little
intern again, afraid to ask questions."

"It was more dangerous than you know, Rhoda."

"Oh, I'm sure it was. Do you want another drink?"

"No." Frank looked out the window and scowled. "Rhoda, there was
something I didn't tell you about that affair."

"Was there? I'll bet you told Brent Taber, though."

"It was what brought Brent Taber into it. There was a murder in my
room."

"And when Brent Taber came on the scene--" Rhoda stopped and stared down
at him. "What did you say?"

"A man was killed in my room. The man with the broken leg. He didn't
just go on his way, as I told you; he got his throat cut in my room."

Rhoda continued to stare. "And you didn't tell me about it."

"Brent Taber told me to keep my mouth shut."

"I suppose if Brent Taber had said, 'I don't want you to see that woman
again,' you wouldn't even have dropped around to say good-bye."

"Rhoda--you're being unreasonable."

"Unreasonable to expect the man who says he loves me to confide in me?"

"All right. I was wrong. What happened is this: When William Matson was
ready to leave Park Hill, he had no place to go, so I took him down to
my room. I went back to the hospital and Les King contacted me. He said
William Matson was really a man named Sam Baker who'd disappeared from
his home in upstate New York ten years ago. We went down to see him and
found him sitting in a chair with his throat cut."

"You've been involved in a murder and you didn't say a single, solitary
word--"

"Rhoda! I said I was sorry."

"I didn't see anything about it in the papers. I'm sure it wasn't on any
of the newscasts."

"Of course, it wasn't. The police didn't even question me. I called the
police and they came--two prowl-car men. Then they told Les and me to
wait. We waited, and after a while this Brent Taber came in. He told us
to go home and keep our mouths shut. Later, we were called downtown and
Taber talked to us."

"He told you to go home," Rhoda said sarcastically. "You also said the
man was killed in your room. Just where is your home, Mr. Corson?"

"I came here, Rhoda. I spent that night here."

"With a possible murder charge hanging over your head, you came here and
didn't say a word!"

Frank sprang up from the couch and turned, scowling. "Goddamn it! Don't
you believe me? Do you think I'm lying?"

"I don't know what to believe. I just feel--betrayed. But something else
is more important."

"What?"

"You acted like a child. Just because some man appeared out of nowhere,
you said _Yes, sir_ and _No, sir_ and _Sorry, sir_ and walked away.
Frank! I'm ashamed of you!"

In quick anger, his hand came back as though to slap her. But he dropped
it to his side and strode across the room and picked up his jacket.

"And so now you're walking out again. You just can't face up to
anything, can you, Doctor Corson."

He turned on her, his eyes blazing. "All right. Maybe everything you say
is true. Maybe I've seesawed and acted like a kid. If I have, it's
because of you. The thing in the Village had nothing to do with me
changing my mind about going into research. I did it because I thought
you wanted me to."

Now Rhoda was on her feet, too, her patrician nostrils flaring. "Well,
don't do me any favors."

"From now on, I wouldn't dream of it."

As he pulled on his jacket, Rhoda sat down on the sofa and lit a
cigarette. "I'm convinced that if you'd gone along with Les King you
would have been on the right road. King wasn't frightened off by a man
who said he represented the government. He saw a chance to make some
money and is probably going ahead with it right now."

"I don't give a damn what Les King is doing!"

"Of course not. But there's another little thing you overlooked. Don't
you suppose this Brent Taber will toss that murder right back into your
lap if it suits his purpose? The body was in your room. You're probably
the chief suspect. So you sit back and let Brent Taber play whatever
game he's got in mind. And if it goes wrong, Frank Corson gets picked up
for murder."

"It can't possibly happen that way."

"Why not? Who is Brent Taber, really?"

"I told you--a government man."

"What government? Where can you get in touch with him?"

"I don't know. He gave me a phone number in case I ever saw a certain
man again."

"What man?"

"Rhoda! They aren't men at all. They're androids!"

Rhoda froze and stared at him in consternation. "You actually _believe_
that fairy tale? Frank, I just don't understand you."

"I told you about it before."

"But for the life of me I didn't think you took it seriously."

"I just didn't care. I'd had it. I wanted out."

"But you're involved in it, up to your neck, and if you had any guts
you'd face Taber and make him tell you _all_ the facts--and what's
behind them."

"I have no intention of calling him."

"I guess that's the rock we split on then," Rhoda said coldly. She
couldn't understand herself, even while she knew, deep down, that she
wanted more information for _him_--John Dennis. Any other reason or
excuse she used was a sham, a self-delusion.

If she expected a protest, she didn't get it. Rhoda took a long, calm
drag on her cigarette. She ground it into the ash tray. She raised her
eyes and looked levelly at Frank.

"Very well," he said, finally, "It was nice knowing you."

"Shut the door quietly on the way out," she retorted.

He stared at her, his face revealing nothing. He turned, went to the
door, and opened it. He looked back. She had not moved. He left without
a word.

Rhoda Kane lit another cigarette. She stared out across the East River
at the expensive view that went with her high-rent apartment. She got up
and went to the liquor cabinet and made herself a drink.

She was back on the sofa when a key turned in the lock. The door opened.
Frank Corson came in, walked to her and stood looking down at her. There
was misery in his face, a beaten look in his eyes.

"You knew I couldn't do it."

"Couldn't do what, sweet?"

"Walk out on you. I'm in love with you, goddamn it. If I stayed away
tonight, I'd be back tomorrow."

Rhoda set her glass down and held out her arms. "Darling," she
whispered. "You wouldn't have had to. I'd have been down in the Village
after you."

He kissed her hungrily and she pressed her hand against the back of his
head, holding his mouth tight to hers. His hand slipped inside her
blouse. She laid her own hand on it and held it firm.

"It's for your own good, darling, that I want you to contact this Taber
and demand what you're entitled to. You have a right to know. If you
don't find out, there might be a policeman at your door, any minute of
the day or night."

"I'll call him."

"And if he tells you it's none of your business, stand up to him."

"I will."

She allowed his hand to go on with its exploring now. His finger touched
her nipple, played with it. She closed her eyes as his mouth again
sought hers. "Darling ..." she murmured.

But she was speaking to a man who had come from nowhere and had
identified himself only as John Dennis. She had no number at which to
call him. She could only wait until he returned again, if he ever did.

She thought: _Oh, God, John Dennis. Why do you turn away from me? Why
did you strip me naked and look at me as though I were a statue? Will
you come back again? Please come back and make love to me._

She felt Frank Corson unsnapping her brassiere. She closed her eyes and
lay back and waited, and for all the effect he had on her, Frank Corson
could have been a statue.

At the last moment she insisted, "Remember, Frank, you've got to find
out _everything_!"




9


The man had sallow skin; the look of a consumptive. He sat in a chair
beside Crane's desk and dropped the ash from his cigar on Crane's
wall-to-wall carpeting. Crane scowled, but let it pass.

"All right. Dorfman, what have you got to show for the money I've paid
you?"

Dorfman, an old hand at confidential snooping, refused to quail before
the much-publicized senatorial scowl. "It's tough putting on a hunt when
you're not quite sure what you're after."

"I told you what I wanted. I wanted you to watch for any New York
contacts Brent Taber might be using at the present time. That's simple
enough, isn't it?"

"Taber contacts a lot of people. And he's a dangerous man to tail. He
knows all the tricks."

"Are you telling me he caught you following him? If he did, you're no
longer of any value to me."

"He didn't spot me," Dorfman said. "I followed him to New York and kept
tabs on a Manhattan office, one he uses as his headquarters there."

"A directory check would tell me that."

"Take it easy. I staked out the place all day yesterday. Five men
entered and left. Four were his own men."

Crane made a notation on a pad. He knew about those men. They'd been
pulled off Taber's staff without notice. No doubt they'd made their last
report to Taber and had headed back to Washington for reassignment.
Dorfman would not know this, of course.

Or so Crane thought. Dorfman smiled as though he'd read Crane's mind and
said, "I think Taber's losing his staff. They were government men--four
of them--reporting in or out. My guess was _out_." He peered keenly at
Crane for a moment. "Who's slicing away at Taber behind his back?"

"That's none of your--look here, Dorfman, I can get a better man than
you at half the price!"

"No, you can't," Dorfman said easily. "Like I told you, there were five.
The other one turned out to be a Doctor Frank Corson, an intern at Park
Hill Hospital in Manhattan."

Crane made another quick notation. A Manhattan doctor. One of the
androids had been found in the East River with its throat slit and a
broken leg. Now a doctor had contacted Taber. Was there a connection?
Somehow, Crane had to get on the track of the tenth android Taber was
hunting. Cutting the ground out from under Taber had been a satisfying
victory but it wasn't enough. To be of service to his electorate,
Senator Crane realized, he had to have something tangible in the way of
evidence. The only way to get this was to ferret out Taber's contacts
and locate the tenth android himself, or at least be there when Taber
located the creature.

A man of supreme confidence in his destiny, Crane had been working on
the speech he would make when he was ready for the _I accuse_ scene from
the Senate floor. He had even gone so far as to alert a fashionable
Washington hotel to be ready with a suite at a moment's notice. Crane
felt his office would be far too small to handle the traffic that would
result from his revelation.

It did not occur to Crane to compliment Dorfman on his skill as an
operative, for getting the book so completely and swiftly on a casual
visitor to Taber's office. He said, "You've got this doctor's address?"

Dorfman put a folded slip of paper on the desk. "Another little item
I'll throw in as a bonus. Taber had another tail--here in Washington."

This disturbed Crane. Did he have competition in the matter of the
android? Was someone else trying to get into the act?

"A New York free-lance photographer named King. I didn't have to check
