observers. Temple and Teddy, at least."

"At least," she agreed. "But damn it, you _aren't_ stupid. There isn't a
stupid bone in your head. So it must be love. And if so, what about
marriage? Why don't you and Temple make it a double with Alex and me?"

"That's the most cogent thought you ever had, but setting the date is
the bride's business." He glanced at his Oman wristwatch. "It's early
yet; let's skip over. I wouldn't mind seeing her a minute or two."

"Thy statement ringeth with truth, friend. Bill's there with Teddy?"

"I imagine so."

"So we'll talk to them about making it a triple. Oh, nice--let's go!"

They left the house and, her hand tucked under his elbow, walked up the
street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning, on her way to the Hall of Records, Sandra stopped off as
usual at the office. The Omans were all standing motionless. Hilton was
leaning far back in his chair, feet on desk, hands clasped behind head,
eyes closed. Knowing what that meant, she turned and started back out on
tiptoe.

However, he had heard her. "Can you spare a couple of minutes to think
at me, Sandy?"

"Minutes or hours, chief." Tuly placed a chair for her and she sat down,
facing him across his desk.

"Thanks, gal. This time it's the Stretts. Sawtelle's been having
nightmares, you know, ever since we emerged, about being attacked, and
I've been pooh-poohing the idea. But now it's a statistic that the soup
is getting thicker, and I can't figure out why. Why in all the hells of
space should a stasis that has lasted for over a quarter of a million
years be broken at this exact time? The only possible explanation is
that _we_ caused the break. And any way I look at that concept, it's
plain idiocy."

Both were silent for minutes; and then it was demonstrated again that
Terra's Advisory Board had done better than it knew in choosing Sandra
Cummings to be Jarvis Hilton's working mate.

"We did cause it, Jarve," she said, finally. "They knew we were coming,
even before we got to Fuel Bin. They knew we were human and tried to
wipe out the Omans before we got there. Preventive warfare, you know."

"They _couldn't_ have known!" he snorted. "Strett detectors are no
better than Oman, and you know what Sam Bryant had to say about them."

"I know." Sandra grinned appreciatively. "It's becoming a classic. But
it couldn't have been any other way. Besides, I _know_ they did."

He stared at her helplessly, then swung on Larry. "Does that make sense
to you?"

"Yes, sir. The Stretts could peyondire as well as the old Masters could,
and they undoubtedly still can and do."

"Okay, it does make sense, then." He absented himself in thought, then
came to life with a snap. "Okay! The next thing on the agenda is a
crash-priority try at a peyondix team. Tuly, you organized a team to
generate sathura. Can you do the same for peyondix?"

"If we can find the ingredients, yes, sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I had a hunch. Larry, please ask Teddy Blake's Oman to bring her in
here...."

"I'll be running along, then." Sandra started to get up.

"I hope to kiss a green pig you won't!" Hilton snapped. "You're one of
the biggest wheels. Larry, we'll want Temple Bells and Beverly Bell--for
a start."

"Chief, you positively amaze me," Sandra said then. "Every time you get
one of these attacks of genius--or whatever it is--you have me gasping
like a fish. Just what can you _possibly_ want of Bev Bell?"

"Whatever it was that enabled her to hit the target against odds of
almost infinity to one; not just once, but time after time. By
definition, intuition. What quality did you use just now in getting me
off the hook? Intuition. What makes Teddy Blake such an unerring
performer? Intuition again. My hunches--they're intuition, too.
Intuition, _hell_! Labels--based on utterly abysmal damned dumb
ignorance of our own basic frames of reference. Do you think those four
kinds of intuition are alike, by seven thousand rows of apple trees?"

"Of course not. I see what you're getting at.... Oh! This'll be fun!"

The others came in and, one by one, Tuly examined each of the four
women and the man. Each felt the probing, questioning feelers of her
thought prying into the deepest recesses of his mind.

"There is not quite enough of each of three components, all of which are
usually associated with the male. You, sir, have much of each, but not
enough. I know your men quite well, and I think we will need the doctors
Kincaid and Karns and Poynter. But such deep probing is felt. Have I
permission, sir?"

"Yes. Tell 'em I said so."

Tuly scanned. "Yes, sir, we should have all three."

"Get 'em, Larry." Then, in the pause that followed: "Sandy, remember
yowling about too many sweeties on a team? What do you think of this
business of all sweeties?"

"All that proves is that nobody can be wrong all the time," she replied
flippantly.

The three men arrived and were instructed. Tuly said: "The great trouble
is that each of you must use a portion of your mind that you do not know
you have. You, this one. You, that one." Tuly probed mercilessly; so
poignantly that each in turn flinched under brand-new and almost
unbearable pain. "With you, Doctor Hilton, it will be by far the worst.
For you must learn to use almost all the portions of both your minds,
the conscious and the unconscious. This must be, because you are the
actual peyondixer. The others merely supply energies in which you
yourself are deficient. Are you ready for a terrible shock, sir?"

"Shoot."

       *       *       *       *       *

He thought for a second that he _had_ been shot; that his brain had
blown up.

He couldn't stand it--he _knew_ he was going to die--he wished he
_could_ die--anything, anything whatever, to end this unbearable
agony....

It ended.

Writhing, white and sweating, Hilton opened his eyes. "Ouch," he
remarked, conversationally. "What next?"

"You will seize hold of the energies your friends offer. You will bind
them to yours and shape the whole into a dimensionless sphere of pure
controlled, dirigible energy. And, as well as being the binding force,
the cohesiveness, you must also be the captain and the pilot and the
astrogator and the ultimately complex computer itself."

"But how can I.... Okay, damn it. I _will_!"

"Of course you will, sir. Remember also that once the joinings are made
I can be of very little more assistance, for my peyondix is as nothing
compared to that of your fusion of eight. Now, to assemble the energies
and join them you will, all together, deny the existence of the sum
total of reality as you know it. Distance does not exist--every point in
the reachable universe coincides with every other point and that common
point is the focus of your attention. You can be and actually are
anywhere you please or everywhere at once. Time does not exist. Space
does not exist. There is no such thing as opacity; everything is
perfectly transparent, yet every molecule of substance is perceptible in
its relationship to every other molecule in the cosmos. Senses do not
exist. Sight, hearing, taste, touch, smell, sathura, endovix--all are
parts of the one great sense of peyondix. I am guiding each of you
seven--closer! Tighter! There! Seize it, sir--and when you work the
Stretts you must fix it clearly that time does not exist. You must work
in millionths of microseconds instead of in minutes, for they have minds
of tremendous power. Reality does not exist! Compress it more, sir.
Tighter! Smaller! Rounder! There! Hold it! Reality does not
exist--distance does not exist--all possible points are....
_Wonderful!_"

Tuly screamed the word and the thought: "Good-by! Good luck!"


END OF PART ONE




 PART TWO


 They were the Masters, and they
 had only to choose: eternal life,
 as inhuman monsters--or death!


 MASTERS
 OF
 SPACE


 BY EDWARD E. SMITH &
 E. EVERETT EVANS


 Illustrated by BERRY




      _What has gone before: The crew of the starship Orion found
      themselves in the middle of a great space war between the
      creatures called Stretts and the lost android servants of
      their own human ancestors. Helped by the androids, the
      Earthmen formed themselves into the powerful telepathic
      linkage called "peyondix" to invade the Strett planet
      itself. As their minds joined they heard the android Tuly
      cry out, "Good...." And then their minds were out in
      interstellar space._




VIII


Hilton did not have to drive the peyondix-beam to the planet Strett; it
was already there. And there was the monstrous First Lord Thinker Zoyar.

Into that mind his multi-mind flashed, its every member as responsive to
his will as his own fingers--almost infinitely more so, in fact, because
of the tremendous lengths of time required to send messages along
nerves.

That horrid mind was scanned cell by cell. Then, after what seemed like
a few hours, when a shield began sluggishly to form, Hilton transferred
his probe to the mind of the Second Thinker, one Lord Ynos, and absorbed
everything she knew. Then, the minds of all the other Thinkers being
screened, he studied the whole Strett planet, foot by foot, and
everything that was on it.

Then, mission accomplished, Hilton snapped his attention back to his
office and the multi-mind fell apart. As he opened his eyes he heard
Tuly scream: "... Luck!"

"Oh--you still here, Tuly? How long have we been gone?"

"Approximately one and one-tenth seconds, sir."

"WHAT!"

Beverly Bell, in the haven of Franklin Poynter's arms, fainted quietly.
Sandra shrieked piercingly. The four men stared, goggle-eyed. Temple
and Teddy, as though by common thought, burrowed their faces into brawny
shoulders.

Hilton recovered first. "So _that's_ what peyondix is."

"Yes, sir--I mean no, sir. No, I mean yes, but ..." Tuly paused, licking
her lips in that peculiarly human-female gesture of uncertainty.

"Well, what _do_ you mean? It either is or isn't. Or is that necessarily
so?"

"Not exactly, sir. That is, it started as peyondix. But it became something
else. Not even the most powerful of the old Masters--nobody--ever did or
ever could _possibly_ generate such a force as that. Or handle it so fast."

"Well, with seven of the best minds of Terra and a ..."

"Chip-chop the chit-chat!" Karns said, harshly. "What I want to know is
whether I was having a nightmare. Can there _possibly_ be a race such as
I thought I saw? So utterly savage--ruthless--merciless! So devoid of
every human trace and so hell-bent determined on the extermination of
every other race in the Galaxy? God damn it, it simply doesn't make
sense!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Eyes went from eyes to eyes to eyes.

All had seen the same indescribably horrible, abysmally atrocious,
things. Qualities and quantities and urges and drives that no words in
any language could even begin to portray.

"It doesn't seem to, but there it is." Teddy Blake shook her head
hopelessly.

Big Bill Karns, hands still shaking, lit a cigarette before he spoke
again. "Well, I've never been a proponent of genocide. But it's my
considered opinion that the Stretts are one race the galaxy can get
along without."

"A hell of a lot better without," Poynter said, and all agreed.

"The point is, what can we do about it?" Kincaid asked. "The first
thing, I would say, is to see whether we can do this--whatever it
is--without Tuly's help. Shall we try it? Although I, for one, don't
feel like doing it right away."

"Not I, either." Beverly Bell held up her right hand, which was shaking
uncontrollably. "I feel as though I'd been bucking waves, wind and tide
for forty-eight straight hours without food, water or touch. Maybe in
about a week I'll be ready for another try at it. But today--not a
chance!"

"Okay. Scat, all of you," Hilton ordered. "Take the rest of the day off
and rest up. Put on your thought-screens and don't take them off for a
second from now on. Those Stretts are tough hombres."

Sandra was the last to leave. "And you, boss?" she asked pointedly.

"I've got some thinking to do."

"I'll stay and help you think?"

"Not yet." He shook his head, frowned and then grinned. "You see, chick,
I don't even know yet what it is I'm going to have to think about."

"A bit unclear, but I know what you mean--I think. Luck, chief."

       *       *       *       *       *

In their subterranean sanctum turn on distant Strett, two of the deepest
thinkers of that horribly unhuman race were in coldly intent conference
via thought.

"My mind has been plundered, Ynos," First Lord Thinker Zoyar radiated,
harshly. "Despite the extremely high reactivity of my shield some
information--I do not know how much--was taken. The operator was one of
the humans of that ship."

"I, too, felt a plucking at my mind. But those humans could not
peyondire, First Lord."

"Be logical, fool! At that contact, in the matter of which you erred in
not following up continuously, they succeeded in concealing their real
abilities from you."

"That could be the truth. Our ancestors erred, then, in recording that
all those weak and timid humans had been slain. These offenders are
probably their descendants, returning to reclaim their former world."

"The probability must be evaluated and considered. Was it or was it not
through human aid that the Omans destroyed most of our task-force?"

"Highly probable, but impossible of evaluation with the data now
available."

"Obtain more data at once. That point must be and shall be fully
evaluated and fully considered. This entire situation is intolerable. It
must be abated."

"True, First Lord. But every operator and operation is now tightly
screened. Oh, if I could only go out there myself ..."

"Hold, fool! Your thought is completely disloyal and un-Strettly."

"True, oh First Lord Thinker Zoyar. I will forthwith remove my unworthy
self from this plane of existence."

"You will not! I hereby abolish that custom. Our numbers are too few by
far. Too many have failed to adapt. Also, as Second Thinker, your death
at this time would be slightly detrimental to certain matters now in
work. I will myself, however, slay the unfit. To that end repeat The
Words under my peyondiring."

"I am a Strett. I will devote my every iota of mental and of physical
strength to forwarding the Great Plan. I am, and will remain, a Strett."

"You do believe in The Words."

       *       *       *       *       *
