The above glasses may be had in sheets from 0.25 to 1 inch thick, and
6 to 12 inches square, at a cost of, say, 7s.  6d.  per pound.

Discs can also be obtained of any reasonable size.  Discs 2 inches in
diameter cost about L1 per dozen, discs 3 inches in diameter about
10s.  each.  The price of discs increases enormously with the size.  A
16-inch disc will cost about L100.

For special purposes, where the desired quality of glass does not
appear on the list, an application may be made to the Jena Factory of
Herr Schott.  In order to give a definite example, I may mention that
for ordinary telescopic objectives good results may be obtained by
combining the hard crown and dense flint of Chance's list, using the
crown to form a double convex, and the flint to form a double concave
lens.  The convex lens is placed in the more outward position in the
telescope, i.e.  the light passes first through it.

The conditions to be fulfilled are:

(1) The glass must be achromatic;

(2) it must have a small spherical aberration for rays converging to
the principal focus.

It is impossible to discuss these matters without going into a
complete optical discussion.  The radii of curvature of the surfaces,
beginning with the first, i.e.  the external face of the convex lens,
are in the ratio of 1, 2, and 3; an allowance of 15 inches focal
length per inch of aperture is reasonable (see Optics in Ency.
Brit.), and the focal length is the same as the greatest radius of
curvature.  Thus, for an object glass 2 inches in diameter, the first
surface of the convex lens would have a radius of curvature of 10
inches, the surface common to the convex and concave lens would have a
radius of curvature of 20 inches, and the last surface a radius of
curvature of 30 inches.  This would also be about the focal length of
the finished lens.  The surfaces in contact have, of course, a common
curvature, and need not be cemented together unless a slight loss of
light is inadmissible.

I will assume that a lens of about 2 inches diameter is to be made by
hand, i.e.  without the help of a special grinding or polishing
machine;  this can be accomplished perfectly well, so long as the
diameter of the glass is not above about 6 inches, after which the
labour is rather too severe.  The two glass discs having been obtained
from the makers, it will be found that they are slightly larger in
diameter than the quoted size, something having been left for the
waste of working.

It is difficult to deal with the processes of lens manufacture without
entering at every stage into rather tedious details, and, what is
worse, without interrupting the main account for the purpose of
describing subsidiary instruments or processes.  In order that the
reader may have some guide in threading the maze, it is necessary that
he should commence with a clear idea of the broad principles of
construction which are to be carried out.  For this purpose it seems
desirable to begin by roughly indicating the various steps which are
to be taken.

(1) The glass is to be made circular in form and of a given diameter.

(2) Called Rough Grinding. The surfaces of the glass are to be made
roughly convex, plane, or concave, as may be required; the glass is to
be equally thick all round the edge.  In this process the glass is
abraded by the use of sand or emery rubbed over it by properly shaped
pieces of iron or lead called "tools."

(3) The glass is ground with emery to the correct spherical figure as
given by a spherometer.

(4) Called Fine Grinding. The state of the surface is gradually
improved by grinding with finer and finer grades of emery.

(5) The glass is polished by rouge.

(6) The glass is "figured." This means that it is gradually altered in
form by a polishing tool till it gives the best results as found by
trial.

In processes 2 to 5 counterpart tool surfaces are required--as a rule
two convex and two concave surfaces for each lens surface.  These
subsidiary surfaces are worked (i.e.  ground) on discs of cast iron
faced with glass, or on slate discs;  and discs thus prepared are
called "tools."

Taking these processes in the order named, the mode of manufacture is
shortly as follows:-

(1) The disc of glass, obtained in a roughly circular form, is mounted
on an ordinary lathe, being conveniently cemented by Regnault's mastic
to a small face plate.  The lathe is rotated slowly, and the glass is
gradually turned down to a circular figure by means (1) of a tool with
a diamond point;  or (2) an ordinary hand-file moistened with
kerosene, as described in Sec. 42;  or (3) a mass of brass or iron served
with a mixture of emery--or sand--and water fed on to the disc, so
that the disc is gradually ground circular.

The operation of making a circular disc of given diameter does not
differ in any important particular from the similar operation in the
case of brass or iron, and is in fact merely a matter of turning at a
slow speed.

(2 and 3) Roughing or bringing the surfaces of the glass roughly to
the proper convex or concave shape.  This is accomplished by
grinding, generally with sand in large works, or with emery in the
laboratory, where the time saved is of more importance than the value
of the emery.

Discs of iron or brass are cast and turned so as to have a diameter
slightly less than that of the glass to be ground, and are, say, half
an inch thick.  These discs are turned convex or concave on one face
according as they are to be employed in the production of concave or
convex glass surfaces.  The proper degree of convexity or concavity
may be approximated to by turning with ordinary turning tools, using a
circular arc cut from zinc or glass (as will be described) as a
"template" or pattern.  This also is a mere matter of turning.

The first approximation to the desired convex or concave surface of
the glass is attained (in the case of small lenses, say up to three
inches diameter) by rotating the glass on the lathe as described above
(for the purpose of giving it a circular edge) and holding the tool
against the rotating glass, a plentiful supply of coarse emery and
water, or sand and water, being supplied between the glass and metal
surfaces.  The tool is held by hand against the surface of the
revolving glass, and is constantly moved about, both round its own
axis of figure and to and fro across the glass surface.  In this way
the glass gradually gets convex or concave.

The curvature is tested from time to time by a spherometer, and the
tool is increased or decreased in curvature by turning it on a lathe
so as to cause it to grind the glass more at the edges or in the
middle according to the indications of the spherometer.

This instrument, by the way--so important for lens makers--consists
essentially of a kind of three-legged stool, with an additional leg
placed at the centre of the circle circumscribing the other three.
This central leg is in reality a fine screw with a very large head
graduated on the edge, so that it is easy to compute the fractions of
a turn given to the screw.  The instrument is first placed on a flat
plate, and the central screw turned till its end just touches the
plate, a state of affairs which is very sharply discernible by the
slight rocking which it enables the instrument to undergo when pushed
by the hand.  See the sketch.

On a convex or concave surface the screw has to be screwed in or out,
and from the amount of screwing necessary to bring all four points
into equal contact, the curvature may be ascertained.

Let a be the distance between the equidistant feet, and d the distance
through which the screw is protruded or retracted from its zero
position on a flat surface.  Then the radius of curvature rho is given
by the formula 2rho = a2/3d +d.

Fig.  43.

The process of roughing is not always carried out exactly as
described, and will be referred to again.

(4) The glass being approximately of the proper radius of curvature on
one side, it is reversed on the chuck and the same process gone
through on the other side.  After this the glass is usually dismounted
from the lathe and mounted by cement on a pedestal, which is merely a
wooden stand with a heavy foot, so that the glass may be held
conveniently for the workman.  Sometimes a pedestal about four feet
high is fixed in the floor of the room, so that the workman engaged in
grinding the lens may walk round and round it to secure uniformity.
For ordinary purposes, however, a short pedestal may be placed on a
table and rotated from time to time by hand, the operator sitting down
to his work.

Rough iron or brass tools do not succeed for fine grinding--i.e.
grinding with fine emery, because particles of emery become embedded
in the metal so tightly that they cannot be got out by any ordinary
cleaning.  If we have been using emery passing say a sieve with 60
threads to the inch, and then go on to some passing say 100 threads to
the inch, a few of the coarser particles will adhere to the "tool",
and go on cutting and scratching all the time grinding by means of the
finer emery is in progress.

To get over this it is usual to use a rather different kind of
grinding tool.  A very good kind is made by cementing small squares of
glass (say up to half an inch on the side), on to a disc of slate
slightly smaller than the lens surface to be formed (Fig.  51).  The
glass-slate tool is then "roughed" just like the lens surface, but, of
course, if the lens has been roughed "convex" the tool must be roughed
"concave".

The "roughed" tool is then used to gradually improve the fineness of
grinding of the glass.  For this purpose grinding by hand is resorted
to, the tool and lens being supplied continually with finer and finer
emery.  Fig.  52 gives an idea of the way in which the tool is moved
across the glass surface.  Very little pressure is required.  The tool
is carried in small circular sweeps round and round the lens, so that
the centre of the tool describes a many-looped curve on the lens
surface.  The tool must be allowed to rotate about its own axis;  and
the lens and pedestal must also be rotated from time to time.

Every few minutes the circular strokes are interrupted, and simple,
straight, transverse strokes taken.  In no case (except to correct a,
defect, as will be explained) should the tool overhang the lens
surface by more than about one quarter the diameter of the latter.
After grinding say for an hour with one size of emery fed in by means
of a clean stick say every five minutes, the emery is washed off, and
everything carefully cleaned.  The process is then repeated with finer
emery, and so on.

The different grades of emery are prepared by taking advantage of the
fact that the smaller the particles the longer do they remain
suspended in water.  Some emery mud from a "roughing" operation is
stirred up with plenty of water and left a few seconds to settle, the
liquor is then decanted to a second jug and left say for double the
time, say ten seconds;  it is decanted again, and so on till four or
five grades of emery have been accumulated, each jug containing finer
emery than its predecessor in the process.

It is not much use using emery which takes more than half an hour to
settle in an ordinary bedroom jug.  What remains in the liquid to be
decanted is mostly glass mud and not emery at all.  The process of
fine grinding is continually checked by the spherometer, and the art
consists in knowing how to move the grinding tool so as to make the
lens surface more or less curved.  In general it may be said that if
the tool is moved in small sweeps, and not allowed to overhang much,
the Centre of the lens will be more abraded, while if bold free
strokes are taken with much overhanging, the edges of the lens will be
more ground away.

By the exercise of patience and perseverance any one will succeed in
gradually fine grinding the lens surface and keeping it to the
spherometer, but the skill comes in doing this rapidly by varying the
shape of the strokes before any appreciable alteration of curvature
has come about.

Polishing.

The most simple way of polishing is to coat the grinding tool with
paper, as will be described, and then to brush some rouge into the
paper.  The polisher is moved over the work in much the same way as
the fine grinding tool, until the glass is polished.  Many operators
prefer to use a tool made by squeezing a disc of slate, armed with
squares of warm pitch, against the lens surface (finely ground), and
then covering these squares with rouge and water instead of emery and
water as in the fine grinding process.

The final process is called "figuring."  It will in  general be
unnecessary with a small lens.  With large lenses or mirrors the final
touches have to be given after the optical behaviour of the lens or
mirror has been tested with the telescope itself, and this process is
called "figuring." A book might easily be written on the optical
indications of various imperfections in a mirror or lens.  Suffice it
to say here that a sufficiently skilled person will be able to decide
from an observation of the behaviour of a telescope whether a lens
will be improved by altering the curvature of one or all of the
surfaces.

A very small alteration will make a large difference in the optical
properties, so that in general "figuring" is done merely by using the
rouge polishing tool as an abrading tool, and causing it to alter the
curves in the manner already suggested for grinding.  There are other
methods based on knocking squares out of the pitch-polisher so that
some parts of the glass may be more abraded than others.

The "figuring" and polishing may be done by hand just like the
grinding.  There are machines, however, which can be made to execute
the proper motions, and a polisher is set in such a machine, and the
mechanical work done is by no means inconsiderable.  In fact for
surfaces above six inches in diameter few people are strong enough to
work a polisher by hand owing to the intense adhesion between it and
the exactly fitting glass surface.

Such is a general outline of the processes required to produce a lens
or mirror.  These processes will now be dealt with in much greater
detail, and a certain amount of repetition of the above will
unfortunately be necessary: the reader is asked to pardon this.  It
will also be advisable for the reader to begin by reading the whole
account before he commences any particular operation.  The reason for
this is that it has been desirable to keep to the main account as far
as possible without inserting special instructions for subsidiary
operations, however important they may be;  consequently it may not
always be quite clear how the steps described are to be performed.  It
will be found, however, that all necessary information is really
given, though perhaps not always exactly in the place the reader might
at first expect.

Sec. 54.  All the discs that I have seen, come from the makers already
roughly ground on the edges to a circular figure--but occasionally the
figure is very rough indeed--and in some cases, especially if small
lenses have to be made, it is convenient to begin by cutting the glass
discs out of glass sheet, which also may be purchased of suit-able
glass.  To do this, the simplest way is to begin by cutting squares
and then cutting off the corners with the diamond, the approximate
circular figure being obtained by grinding the edges on an ordinary
grindstone.

If the pieces are larger, time and material may be saved by using a
diamond compass, i.e.  an ordinary drawing compass armed with a
diamond to cut circles on the glass, and breaking the superfluous
glass away by means of a pair of spectacle-maker's shanks (Fig.  44),
or what does equally well, a pair of pliers with soft iron jaws.  With
these instruments glass can be chipped gradually up to any line,
whether diamond-cut or not, the jaws of the pincers being worked
against the edge of the glass, so as to gradually crush it away.

Fig.  44.

Assuming that the glass has been bought or made roughly circular, it
must be finished on the lathe.  For this purpose it is necessary to
chuck it on an iron or hardwood chuck, as shown in Fig.  46.  For a
lens below say an inch in diameter, the centering cement may be used;
but for a lens of a diameter greater than this, sufficient adhesion is
easily obtained with Regnault's mastic, and its low melting point
gives it a decided advantage over the shellac composition.

The glass may be heated gradually by placing it on the water bath, or
actually in the water, and gradually bringing the water up to the
boiling-point.  The glass, being taken out, is rapidly wiped, and
rubbed with a bit of waste moistened, not wet, with a little
turpentine:  its surface is then rubbed with a stick of mastic
previously warmed so as to melt easily.  The surface of the chuck
being also warm, and covered with a layer of melted cement, it is
applied to the glass.  The lathe is turned slowly by hand, and the
glass pushed gradually into the most central position;  it is then
pressed tight against the chuck  by the back rest, a bit of wood being
interposed for obvious reasons.

When all is cold the turning may be proceeded with.  The quickest way
is to use the method already described (i.e.  actual turning by a file
tool);  but if the student prefers (time being no object), he may
accomplish the reduction to a circular form very easily by grinding.

Fig.  45.

Fig.  46.

For this purpose he will require to make the following arrangements
(Fig.  45).  If the lathe has a slide rest, a piece of stout iron may
be bent and cut so as to fit the tool rest, and project beneath the
glass.  The iron must be fairly rigid, for if it springs appreciably
beneath the pressure of the glass, it will not grind the latter really
round.  The lathe may run rather faster than for turning cast iron of
the same size.  Coarse emery, passing through a sieve of 80 threads to
the inch (run), may be fed in between the glass and iron, and the
latter screwed up till the disc just grinds slightly as it goes round.

A beginner will generally (in this as in all cases of grinding
processes) tend to feed too fast--no grinding process can be hurried.
If a slide rest is not available, a hinged board, carrying a bit of
iron, may (see Fig.  45) be arranged so as to turn about its hinge at
the back of the lathe;  and it may be screwed up readily enough by
passing a long set-screw through the front edge, so that the point of
the screw bears upon the lathe bed.  I may add that emery behaves as
if it were greasy, and it is difficult to wet it with clean water.
This is easily got over by adding a little soap or alcohol to the
