"Is there _any_thing we can do, Doctor?" she asked.

"We don't know yet," he said gently. He considered for a moment, then
said: "Mrs. Stanton, I'd like for you to leave both of the boys here
for a few days, so that we can perform further tests. That will help us
a great deal in evaluating the circumstances, and help us get at the
root of Martin's trouble."

She looked at him with a little surprise. "Why, yes, of course--if you
think it's necessary. But ... why should Bart stay?"

The doctor weighed his words carefully before he spoke.

"Bart will be what we call a 'control', Mrs. Stanton. Since the boys are
genetically identical, they should have been a great deal alike, in
personality as well as in body, if it hadn't been for Martin's accident.
In other words, our tests of Bart will tell us what Martin _should_ be
like. That way, we can tell just how much and in what way Martin
deviates from what he should ideally be. Do you understand?"

"Yes. Yes, I see. All right, Doctor--whatever you say."

After Mrs. Stanton had left, the psychiatrist sat quietly in his chair
and stared thoughtfully at his desk top for several minutes. Then,
making his decision, he picked up a small book that lay on his desk and
looked up a number in Arlington, Virginia. He punched out the number on
his phone, and when the face appeared on his screen he said, "Hello,
Sidney. Busy right now?"

"Not particularly. Not for a few minutes. What's up?"

"I have a very interesting case out here that I'd like to talk to you
about. Do you happen to have a telepath who's strong enough to take a
meshing with an insane mind? If my suspicions are correct, I will need a
man with an absolutely impregnable sense of identity, because he's going
to get into the weirdest situation I've ever come across."




_[14]_


The Nipe squatted, brooding, in his underground nest, waiting for the
special crystallization process to take place in the sodium-gold alloy
that was forming in the reactor.

_How long?_ he wondered. He was not thinking of the complex
crystallization reaction; he knew the timing of that to a fraction of a
second. His dark thoughts were, instead, focused inwardly, upon himself.

How long would it be before he would be able to construct the
communicator that would span the light-years of intervening distance and
put him in touch with his own race again? How long would it be before he
could again hold discourse with reasonable beings? How much longer would
he have to be stranded on this planet, surrounded by an insane society
composed of degraded, insane beings?

The work was going incredibly slowly. He had known at the beginning that
his knowledge of the basic arts required to build a communicator was
incomplete, but he had not realized just how painfully inadequate it
was. Time after time, his instruments had simply refused to function
because of some basic flaw in their manufacture--some flaw that an
expert in that field could have pointed out at once. Time after time,
equipment had had to be rebuilt almost from the beginning. And, time
after time, only cut-and-try methods were available for correcting his
errors.

Not even his prodigious and accurate memory could hold all the
information that was necessary for the work, and there were no reference
tapes available, of course. They had all been destroyed when his ship
had crashed.

He had long since given up any attempt to understand the functioning of
the mad pseudo-civilization that surrounded him. He was quite certain
that the beings he had seen could not possibly be the real rulers of
this society, but he had no inkling, as yet, as to who the real rulers
were.

As to _where_ they were, that question seemed a little easier to answer.
It was highly probable that they were out in space, on the asteroids
that his instruments had detected when he was dropping in toward this
planet so many years before. He had made an error then in not landing in
the Belt, but at no time since had he experienced the emotion of regret
or wished he had done differently; both thoughts would have been
incomprehensible to the Nipe. He had made an error; the circumstances
had been checked and noted; he would not make that error again.

What further action could be taken by a logical mind?

None. The past was immutable and unchangeable. It existed only as a
memory in his own mind, and there was no way to change that indelible
record, even had the Nipe wished to do so insane a thing.

Surely, he thought, the real rulers must know of his existence. He had
tried, by his every action, to show that he was a reasoning,
intelligent, and civilized being. Why, then, had they taken no action?

There was, of course, the possibility that the rulers cared very little
for their subjects here on Earth, that they ignored what went on most of
the time. Still, it would seem that they would recognize the actions of
one of their own kind and take steps to investigate.

He was still not absolutely certain about Colonel Walther Mannheim. Was
he a Real Person or merely an underling? The information on the man was
pitifully small. It would, of course, be possible to wait, to see how
Colonel Walther Mannheim behaved if and when he discovered the Nipe's
nest. But if he had not discovered it after all these years--and the
information indicated that he had been looking almost since the
first--then it was unlikely that he was a Real Person. In which case, it
would be dangerous to allow him to find the nest.

No, the best plan of action would be to go to Colonel Walther Mannheim
first.




_[15]_


_Pok! Pok! Ping!_

_Pok! Pok! Ping!_

_Pok! Pok! Ping!_

_Pok! Pok! Ping!_

The action around the handball court was beautiful to watch. The robot
mechanism behind Bart Stanton would fire out a ball at random intervals
ranging from a tenth to a quarter of a second, bouncing them off the
wall in a random pattern. Stanton would retrieve the ball before it hit
the ground and bounce it off the wall again to strike the target on the
moving robot. Stanton had to work against a machine; no ordinary human
being could have given him any competition.

_Pok! Pok! Ping!_

_Pok! Pok! Ping!_

_Pok! Pok!_ PLUNK.

"One miss," Stanton said to himself. But he fielded the next one nicely
and slammed it home.

_Pok! Pok! Ping!_

The physical therapist who was standing to one side, well out of the way
of those hard-slammed, fast-moving drives, glanced at his watch. It was
almost time.

_Pok! Pok! Ping!_

The machine, having delivered its last ball, shut itself off with a smug
click. Stanton turned away from the handball court and walked toward the
physical therapist, who was holding out a robe for him.

"That was good, Bart," he said. "Real good."

"One miss," Stanton said as he shrugged into the robe.

"Yeah. Your timing was off a shade there, I guess. It's hard for me to
tell till I look at the slow-motion photographs. Your arms and hands are
just blurs to me when they're moving that fast. But you managed to chop
another ten seconds off your previous record, anyway."

Stanton looked at him. "You reset the timer again," he said accusingly.
But there was a grin on his face.

The P.T. man grinned back. "Yup. Come on, step into the mummy case." He
waved toward the narrow niche in the wall of the court, a niche just big
enough to hold a standing man. Stanton stepped in, and various
instrument pickups came out of the walls and touched him at various
points on his body. Hidden machines recorded his heartbeat, his blood
pressure, his brain activity, his muscular tension, his breathing, and
several other factors.

After a minute the P.T. man said, "Okay, Bart, that's it. Let's hit the
steam box."

Stanton stepped out of the niche and accompanied the therapist to
another room, where he took off the robe again and sat down on the small
stool inside an ordinary steam box. The box closed, leaving his head
free, and the box began to fill with steam.

"Did I ever tell you just what it is that I don't like about that
machine?" Stanton asked as the therapist draped a heavy towel around his
head.

"Nope. Didn't know you had any gripe. What is it?"

"You can't gloat after you beat it. You can't walk over and pat it on
the shoulder and say, 'Well, better luck next time, old man.' It isn't a
good loser, and it isn't a bad loser. The damned thing doesn't even know
it lost, and even if it did, it wouldn't care."

"Yeah, I see what you mean," said the P.T. man, chuckling. "You beat the
pants off it and what d'you get? Nothing. Not even a case of the sulks
out of it."

"Exactly. And what's worse, I know perfectly good and well that it's
only half trying. The stupid gadget could beat me easily if you just
turned that knob over a little more."

"Yeah, sure. But you're not competing against the machine, anyway," the
therapist said. "What you're doing, you're competing against yourself,
trying to beat your own record."

"I know. And what happens when I can't do _that_ any more, either?"
Stanton asked. "I can't just go on getting better and better forever.
I've got limits, you know."

"Sure," said the therapist easily. "So does anybody. So does a golf
player, for instance. You take a golf player, he goes out and practices
by himself to try to beat his own record."

"Bunk! Hogwash! The real fun in _any_ game is beating someone else! The
big kick in golf is winning over the other guy in a twosome."

"How about crossword puzzles or solitaire?"

"When you solve a crossword puzzle, you've beaten the guy who made up
the puzzle. When you play solitaire, you're playing against the laws of
chance, and that can become pretty boring unless there's money on it.
And, in that case, you're actually trying to beat the guy who's betting
against you. What I'd like to do is get out on the golf course with
someone else and do my best and then lose. Honestly."

"With a handicap ..." the therapist began. Then he grinned weakly and
stopped. On the golf course, Stanton was impossibly good. It had taken
him a little while to get the knack of it, but as soon as he got control
of his club and knew the reactions of the ball, his score started
plummeting. Now it was so low as to be almost ridiculous. One long drive
to the green and one putt to the cup. An easy thirty-six strokes for
eighteen holes! An occasional hole-in-one sometimes brought his score
down below that; an occasional wormcast or stray wind sometimes brought
it up.

"Sure," said Stanton. "A handicap. What kind of a handicap do you want
me to give you to induce you to make a fifty-dollar bet on a handball
game with me?"

The physical therapist could imagine himself trying to get under one of
Stanton's lightning-like returns. The thought of what would happen to
his hand if he were accidentally to catch one made him wince.

"We wouldn't even be playing the same game," said Stanton.

The therapist stepped back and looked at Stanton. "You know," he said
puzzledly, "you sound bitter."

"Sure I'm bitter," Stanton said. "All I ever get is just exercise. All
the fun has gone out of it." He sighed and grinned. There was no point
in upsetting the P.T. man. "I guess I'll just have to stick to cards and
chess if I want competition. Speed and strength don't help anything if
I'm holding two pair against three of a kind."

Before the therapist could say anything, the door opened and a tall,
lean man stepped into the foggy air of the room. "You are broiling a
lobster?" he asked the P.T. man blandly.

"Steaming a clam," the therapist corrected. "When he's done, I'll pound
him to chowder."

"Excellent. I came for a clambake."

"You're early, then, George," Stanton said. He didn't feel much in the
mood for lightness, and the appearance of Dr. Yoritomo did nothing to
improve his humor.

George Yoritomo beamed broadly, crinkling up his narrow, heavy-lidded
eyes. "Ah! A talking clam! Excellent! How much longer does this fine
specimen of clamhood have to cook?" he asked the P.T. man.

"About twenty-three more minutes."

"Excellent!" said Dr. Yoritomo. "Would you be so good as to return at
the end of that time?"

The therapist opened his mouth, closed it, then opened it again, and
said: "Sure, Doc. I can get some other stuff done. I'll see you in
twenty-three minutes. But don't let him out of there till I get back."
He went out through the far door.

After the door closed, Dr. Yoritomo pulled up a chair and sat down.
"There have been new developments," he said, "as you may have surmised."

The physical therapist, like many other of the personnel around the
Institute, knew of Stanton's abilities, but he didn't know the purpose
of the long series of operations that had made him what he was. Such
persons knew about Stanton himself, but they knew nothing of any
connection with the Nipe, although they might suspect. And all of them
kept their knowledge and their suspicions to themselves.

"I guessed," Stanton said. "What is it, George?" He flexed his muscles
under the caress of the hot, moist currents in the box.

He wondered why it was so important that the psychologist interrupt him
while he was relaxing after strenuous exercise. Yoritomo looked excited
in spite of his attempt to be calm. And yet Stanton knew that, whatever
it was, it wasn't anything tremendously urgent or Dr. Yoritomo would be
acting a great deal differently.

Yoritomo leaned forward in his chair, his thin lips in an excited smile,
his black-irised eyes sparkling. "I had to come tell you. The sheer,
utter beauty of it is too much to contain. Three times in a row was
almost absolute, Bart. The probability that our hypotheses were correct
was computed as straight nines to seven decimals. But now! The fourth
time! Straight nines to _twelve_ decimals!"

Stanton lifted an eyebrow. "Your Oriental calm is deserting you, George.
I'm not reading you."

Yoritomo's smile became broader. "Ah! Sorry. I refer to the theory we
have been discussing. About the peculiar mentality of our friend, the
Nipe. You remember?"

Stanton remembered. After six years of watching the recorded actions of
the Nipe, Dr. Yoritomo had evolved a theory about the kind of mentality
that lay behind the four baleful violet eyes in that snouted alien head.
In order that his theory be validated, it was necessary that the theory
be able to predict, in broad terms, the future actions of the Nipe.
Evidently that proof had now come. The psychologist was smiling and
rubbing his long, bony hands together. For Dr. George Yoritomo, that was
almost the equivalent of hysterical excitement.

"We have been able to predict the behavior of the Nipe!" he said. "For
the fourth time in succession!"

"Great," Stanton said. "Congratulations, George. But how does that fit
in with the rule you once told me about? You know, the one about
experimental animals."

"Ah, yes," Yoritomo said, nodding his head agreeably. "The Harvard Law
of Animal Behavior. 'A genetically standardized strain, under precisely
controlled laboratory conditions, when subjected to carefully calibrated
stimuli, will behave as it damned well pleases.' Yes. Very true."

He held up a cautionary finger. "But an animal could not do otherwise,
could it? Only as it pleases. Could it do anything else? It could not
please to behave as something it is not, could it?"

"Draw me a picture," Stanton said.

"What I mean," Yoritomo said, "is that any organism is limited in its
choice of behavior. A hamster, for example, cannot choose to behave in
the manner of a rhesus monkey. A dog cannot choose to react as a mouse
would react. If I prick a white mouse with a needle, it may squeal or
bite or jump--but it will not bark. Never. Nor will it, under any
circumstances, leap to a trapeze, hang by its tail, and chatter curses
