
Half an hour, perhaps, went by. The silence in this secluded spot hung
heavy about us. A fish broke the glassy surface of the water; a lizard
scurried along the ground; a bird flitted past. Then, setting our hearts
pounding, came the soft snapping of underbrush that we knew was the
cautious tread of some one approaching. I was half reclining under a
fallen tree, with a clump of palmettos about me. I parted their fronds
carefully before my face. A few yards away a man was standing motionless,
staring past me and apparently listening intently.

He moved forward after a moment. I feared he was coming almost upon us,
but he turned aside, bending low down as he crept slowly forward. Sounds
in the underbrush reached me now from other directions, and I knew that
the men had spread apart and were stalking the boat, expecting Mercer to
be in or near it.

Had they all come down here? I wondered. And where was Anina? I looked
down at Miela warningly as I felt her move slightly.

"We'll wait till they're all near the boat," I whispered to Mercer.

I saw Anina a moment later soaring over the bayou just above the treetops.
I sighed with relief, for it was a signal to us that everything was all
right. We continued to wait until the men had all come into view. They
went at the boat with a sudden rush. Several of them climbed into it, with
shouts to the others.

With a significant glance to Mercer I leaped suddenly to my feet. I was
perhaps twenty feet from the boat, and the space between us was fairly
clear. A single bound landed me beside it, almost among four of the men
who were standing there in a group. Before they had time to face me I was
upon them.

I scattered them like nine-pins, and two of them went down under my blows.
The other two flung themselves upon me. I stumbled over some inequality of
the ground, and we all three fell prone. This was the first time I had
come actually to hand grips with any of the Mercutians.

I felt now not only their lack of strength, but a curious frailness about
their bodies--a seeming absence of solidity that their stocky appearance
belied. These two men were like half-grown boys in my hands. I was back on
my feet in a moment, leaving one of them lying motionless. The other rose
to his knees, his face white with pain and terror.

I left him there and looked about me. Miela was fluttering around near by,
as I had instructed her--just off the ground and with the whole scene
under her eyes. It was she on whom I depended for warning should any of
the quarry attempt to escape us.

At the edge of the water another man was lying, whom I assumed Mercer had
felled. There was a great commotion from the boat. I ran toward it. A man
was standing beside it--an old man with snow-white hair. He stood still,
seeming confused and in doubt what to do. As I neared him he turned
clumsily to avoid me. I passed him by and bounded over the boat's gunwale,
landing in its bottom. The first thing I saw was Mercer struggling to his
feet with four of the Mercutians hanging on him. One had a grip on his
throat from behind; another clutched him about the knees.

The two others let go of him when they heard me land in the boat. One had
evidently had enough, for he dived overboard. The other waited warily for
my onslaught. As I got within reach I hit at his face, but my blow went
wild. He hit me full in the chest, but it was the blow of a child.

At that instant I heard Mercer give a choking cry, and out of the corner
of my eye saw him go down again. I could waste no more time upon this
single antagonist. The man had his hands at my throat now. I seized him
about the waist and carried him to the gunwale. He clung to me as a rat
might cling to a terrier, but I shook him off and dumped him in the water.

I turned to Mercer just as he was struggling to his feet again, and in a
moment more between us we had felled his two assailants. Mercer's face was
very white, and I saw blood streaming from a wound on his head; but he
grinned as he faced me.

"Have we--got 'em--all?" he gasped. He dashed the blood away from his eyes
with the flat of his hand. "I fell--damn it--right at the start, and hit
my head. Where are they all? Have we got 'em?"

Miela alighted in the boat beside us.

"Two are running," she said. "They are together. Hasten."

We jumped out of the boat. Miela flew up, and we followed her guidance
through the dense woods. We could make much better speed, I knew, than the
Mercutians. "We'll get them all, Ollie," I shouted at Mercer. "They're not
far ahead. See up there--Miela's evidently over them now."

We came up to them after a few hundred yards. It was the old man, and one
of those whom I had first encountered. They did not wait for us to attack
them, but stopped stock still, flinging their arms wide in token of
surrender.

Miela came down among us, and we went back to where we had lain hidden in
the palmettos. There we had left a number of short lengths of rope. While
we were tying the arms of these two prisoners behind them and fettering
their ankles so they could not run Anina joined us.

"Two--in water," she cried; and then added something to Miela.

"Two were in the water. Now they are in the woods, running. Anina will
show you."

Miela stood guard in the boat over our first two prisoners, while Mercer
and I rounded up the others. It was half an hour or more before we had
them all trussed up, but none of the ten escaped. We were a long time
reviving two of those we had injured, but finally we had them all lying or
sitting in the boat.

Mercer's head had stopped bleeding. He washed it, and I found his injury
no more than an ugly scalp wound.

"I fell and cut it on something," he explained lugubriously. "Couldn't see
for the blood in my eyes. But we got 'em, didn't we?"

Under Miela's direction Mercer and I shoved the boat out into the stream.
I need not go into details regarding the propelling mechanism of this
craft. Miela explained it hastily to me as we got under way. It used a
form of the light-ray from a sort of strange battery. The intense heat of
the ray generated a great pressure of superheated steam in a thick metal
cylinder underneath the keel.

This steam escaped through a nozzle under water at the stern of the boat,
and its thrust against the water propelled the boat forward. The boat was
constructed to draw very little water, and when going fast its bow planed
upward until only the stern of the hull touched the surface. It was
steered by a rudder not much different from some of those types we are
familiar with on earth. When we got out into open water I found the boat
was capable of great speed. This I attributed not so much to the efficacy
of its propelling force as to the lightness of the boat itself. It was
built of some metal that I may perhaps compare with aluminium, only this
was far stronger and lighter. The boat was, in fact, a mere shell,
extraordinarily buoyant.

Miela sat in the stern, steering and operating the mechanism. I sat with
her. Mercer was farther forward, beside Anina, talking to her earnestly.
Our prisoners lay huddled in various attitudes--frightened, all of them,
and obviously in no condition to give us further trouble. They were, I saw
now, not ruffians by any means, but rather men of superior intelligence,
selected by Tao evidently as those best fitted for spreading his
propaganda among the people of the Great City.

We made slow progress down the bayou. Some of its turns were so sharp and
so overhung with trees, and obstructed by fallen logs, we could hardly get
through. During the latter part of the trip the bayou broadened rapidly,
dividing into many channels like a delta.

We came out into the open sea finally--a broad, empty expanse, with a
mirrorlike surface. The curvature of the planet was even more apparent
now; it seemed almost as though the water should be sliding back downhill
over the horizon.

We turned to the left as we came out of the delta, and for the first time
Miela put the boat to the limit of its speed. The best comparison I can
make, I think, to this rapid, noiseless, smooth progress, is that of
sailing on an iceboat.

We sped along some five or ten miles, keeping close inland. I saw some of
the small thatched shacks along here, though not many. For a while the
shore remained that same palm-lined, half-inundated marshland. Then
gradually it began to change, and we came upon a broad beach of white
sand.

We landed here, and found the girls with the platform waiting for us.
Miela took Anina and one or two of the older girls aside, and gave them
last instructions.

"What do I do--just dump them on the other shore?" Mercer asked me.

"That's about it. I don't know the lay of the land over there. Anina does.
You do what she tells you."

"You bet I will," he agreed enthusiastically. "Some kid--that little girl.
We get along fine. She understands everything I say to her already. I'll
have her talking English like a streak by the time you see her again."

We had removed the cords from our prisoners' ankles. I motioned them to
get out of the boat. We crowded Tao's men on the platform. They were
surprised, and some of them alarmed, when they saw how we proposed to
transport them over the water. Miela silenced their protests, and soon we
had them all seated on the platform, with Mercer at the rear end facing
them.

The fifty girls grasped the platform handles. Another moment and they were
in the air, with Mercer waving good-by to us vigorously.

Miela and I, left alone, watched them silently as they dwindled to a speck
in the haze of the sky.

We were about to start back when we saw a girl coming toward us, flying
low over the water. One of those we had directed to patrol the coast,
Miela said when she came closer. She saw us, and came down on the beach.

The two girls spoke together hurriedly.

"Tao's men in the Water City have caused great disturbance, Alan," Miela
said to me.

"Where's the Water City?"

"Near the Great City--across the marshlands. We must get back. And when
Anina and our friend Ollie have returned we must go to the Water City. It
is very bad there, she said."

Our trip back to the Great City was without unusual incident. We followed
the main route at the best speed we could make.

"We shall tell our king, of course, about this disturbance," said Miela.
"Perhaps he will think there is something he can do. But I fear greatly
that unless he appeals directly to the people, and they are with him--"

"He's an old man," I said, "and all his councilors are old. They're not
fit to rule at such a time as this. Suppose he were to die--what would
happen? Who would be king then?"

"A little prince there is--a mere child. And there is our queen--a younger
woman, only married to our king these few years. His first queen died."

I questioned Miela concerning her government. It was, I soon learned, an
autocracy in theory. But of later years the king's advanced age, and his
equally old councilors whom he refused to change, had resulted in a
vacillating policy of administration, which now, I could see plainly, left
the government little or no real power.

Only by constantly pandering to the wishes of the people could the king
hold his throne. The supreme command was held by the king and his aged
councilors. At stated intervals the more prominent men of each city met
and enacted laws. The cities were each ruled by a governor in similar
fashion, paying tribute to the central government somewhat after our old
feudal system; but for practical purposes they acted as separate nations.
They were united merely by the bonds of their common need of defense
against the Twilight People, and of intermarriage, which was frequent,
since the virgins, flying about, often found mates in cities other than
their own.

There were courts in each city, not much more than rude tribunals, and
jails in which the offenders were held. The police I have already
mentioned. They, like the king's guards, were inclined in an emergency to
do, not so much what they were ordered, as what they thought the people
wished.

It was all very extraordinary, but like many another makeshift government
it served, after a fashion.

Hiding the boat in another bayou, we took our way home on foot. That is to
say, I ran, and Miela followed me, alternately flying and walking. We made
our best speed this way, and very soon were back at home in the Great
City.

We crossed the garden and entered the front door, expecting to find Lua in
the living room, but she was not there. The house was quiet.

"She would wait up, she told me," Miela said, and, raising her voice,
called her mother's name.

There was no answer, although now I remember I thought I heard a footfall
upstairs.

We went up to Lua's room hurriedly. It was empty, and our loud cries of
anxiety throughout the house evoked no response. We entered our own
bedroom, and before I could make a move to defend myself I was seized
tightly by both elbows from behind.

At the same instant an arm hooked around my neck under my chin and jerked
my head backward, and another pair of arms clutched me around the knees. I
struggled vainly to free myself, shouting to Miela to run.

But there were too many holding me. A moment more and my arms were tied
behind me and a rope was about my legs. I was pushed into a chair, and as
I sat down I saw Miela standing quietly near by, with two Mercutians
holding her by the arms and shoulders.

The man who had pushed me to the seat bent down and struck me across the
cheek with the flat of his hand. His grinning, malevolent face was only a
few inches from mine. I saw that it was Baar!



CHAPTER XVIII.


REVOLUTION.


There seemed to be five of our captors, all of them as evil-looking men as
I think I have ever seen. They rummaged about the room, evidently in
search for weapons they thought I might have secreted. Then they ordered
me to stand up, and without more ado led Miela and me from the house.

This was once when I was glad of the interminable daylight. I hoped we
might find some early risers about the streets, for I thought certainly
the time of sleep must now be nearly over. But no one was in sight as we
left the garden. We turned the first corner and headed toward the base of
the mountain.

"To Baar's house they are taking us, I think. It is on the marshland
below." Miela spoke without fear of our captors understanding the English
words. We took advantage of this until after a moment we were roughly
ordered to be quiet.

Lua, we thought, must have been taken away before we arrived; we would
find her at Baar's house when we arrived there. We had come down to the
level marshlands now, the outskirts of the city, and were passing along a
path between occasional shacks. Before us, standing alone in a rice paddy,
I saw a larger, more pretentious house--a wooden structure on stilts, with
a thatched roof, which Miela said was where Baar lived.

We went in single file up its board incline, and entered a squalid room
with matting on the floor, a rude charcoal brazier at one side, and the
remains of a previous meal lying on a table.

Two women were in the room as we entered. I took these to be Baar's wife
and a servant. Two naked little children lay on the floor, one of them
crying lustily.

Baar glanced around as he came in, and with what I took to be an oath
ordered the children removed from the room. The slave woman--I could see
she was a slave by the band upon her arm--picked them up. Evidently she
did not move fast enough to suit Baar's temper, for as she straightened up
the man cuffed her upon the head. She stumbled to one side against Baar's
wife, who was standing there, and the other woman, with a sharp
imprecation, struck her full in the breast.

Neither of them saw the look she gave as she shuffled away, carrying the
infants; but I did. It was a look of the most intense hatred, born and
nourished, I realized, by long ill-treatment.

Miela and I were now bound securely hand and foot, and Miela's wings were
lashed to her body. Thus rendered entirely helpless, we were laid together
in a corner.

From the talk that followed Miela gathered that Baar and his men were
expecting the arrival of others. He roughly ordered his wife--a woman of
the Twilight Country, obviously--to clear away the remains of their last
meal and bring other food. She obeyed submissively.

This, the first of the Twilight Country People I had seen, was a thick-set
woman of perhaps thirty-five, although she might have been older, for her
black hair, which fell in an unkempt mass to her waist, was beginning to
gray. She wore a single garment, a pair of silken trousers, drab with
dirt. Her clipped wings were covered in the usual way.

I could see now why Miela had said these Twilight women could not fly, for
this woman's torso was fat and flabby. Her skin was curiously pale--a
dead, unpleasant white. Her face was broad, heavy and unintelligent. Her
eyes were large and protruded slightly.

Baar and his men ate breakfast, paying no further attention to Miela and
me. Suddenly Miela spoke in a frightened whisper. "They are going now in a
moment to the castle. The king they will kill!"

It was evidently a widespread plot we now overheard. Baar's followers had
for some time been talking quietly with the lower classes, and, finding
they could count on their support, planned now to murder the king. Then
with the queen and the little prince held as hostages, they expected that
the men of science, threatened also with a revolt of the peons, would
release the light-ray.

The light-ray once in his control, Baar could make himself king. It seemed
an absurd hope, but such was the plan they were now discussing. And what
was far worse, I could see no way by which I could prevent the attempt.

"They are going to the castle--now--to murder the king?" I whispered,
incredulous.

"Yes," Miela answered. "So they plan. Now--in a moment--before the time of
sleep is over."

"Isn't he guarded? Can they get in the castle without arousing others?"

"There are the guards--a few. But Baar has promised them great wealth, and
they will stand aside and let him pass. So it is arranged."

The arrival of several other men interrupted our whispered conversation.
Baar, his meal over, consulted with them hurriedly. He then instructed his
wife to watch us, and after a moment they all left the house.

The woman, who was now the only occupant of the room with us, shuffled
about, clearing away the meal. I tried desperately to work my hands loose;
I even tried with my teeth to gnaw Miela's bonds, but without success.
Every moment counted, if we were to do anything to save the king. I
wondered again where Lua was--perhaps in another part of the house here,
bound as we were.

"Miela," I whispered, "ask for food. Tell her we have had nothing for many
hours. Perhaps she will loosen our bonds a little to let us eat. We may be
able to do something then."

The woman answered Miela's pleading by setting us up side by side, with
our backs against the wall. She placed food before us, and then, with a
knife, cut the cords that bound our arms.

My heart leaped exultantly; but, instead of leaving us and going on with
her work, she sat down just out of reach, holding the knife in her hand
and watching us narrowly.

"We must eat, Miela," I said, using as casual a tone as I could and
pointing to the food smilingly. "Eat, and pretend not to notice her.
Perhaps I can get to my feet."

We ate the food she had given us. I tensed the muscles of my legs, and
believed that, bound as I was, I might be able to leap forward and reach
the woman. It was almost hopeless to attempt it, for I realized she would
meet my body with the dagger point.

We were still eating, and I was thinking over this plan, when the slave
woman appeared silently in a doorway across the room, behind the woman who
faced us. Something in her attitude made me look away again casually and
go on with my eating.

Miela had evidently not noticed her.

The slave woman came slowly toward us. A moment later she hurled herself
upon Baar's wife from behind. At the same instant I threw myself forward,
falling prone, but within reach of the seated woman. I gripped her with my
