space which I myself fill in it. So it pleases God; it shall then please
me also.' The rigorous curtailment of his liberty which prompted Galileo
to head his letters, 'From my prison at Arcetri,' was relaxed when total
blindness had supervened upon the infirmities of age. Permission was
given him to receive his friends, and he was allowed to have free
intercourse with his neighbours.

Milton, during his stay at Florence, visited Galileo at Arcetri. We are
ignorant of the details of this eventful and interesting interview
between the aged and blind astronomer and the young English poet, who
afterwards immortalised his name in heroic verse, and who in his
declining years suffered from an affliction similar to that which befel
Galileo, and to which he alludes so pathetically in the following
lines:--

                          Thee I revisit safe,
    And feel thy sovran vital lamp; but thou
    Revisitest not these eyes, that roll in vain
    To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
    So thick a drop serene hath quenched their orbs,
    Or dim suffusion veiled.--iii. 21-26.

We can imagine that Galileo's astronomical views, which at that time
were the subject of much discussion among scientific men and professors
of religion, and on account of which he suffered persecution, were
eagerly discussed. It is also probable that the information communicated
by Galileo, or by some of his followers, may have persuaded Milton to
entertain a more favourable opinion of the Copernican theory. The
interesting discoveries made by Galileo with his telescope without doubt
formed a pleasant subject of conversation, and Milton enjoyed the
privilege of listening to a detailed description of these from the lips
of the aged astronomer. The telescope, its principle, its mechanism, and
the method of observing, were most probably explained to him; and we can
believe that an opportunity was afforded him of examining those in
Galileo's observatory, and of perhaps testing their magnifying power
upon some celestial object favourably situated for observation. Though
Milton has not favoured us with any details of his visit to Galileo, yet
it was one which made a lasting impression upon his mind, and was never
afterwards forgotten by him. 'There it was,' he writes, 'I found and
visited the famous Galileo, grown old, a prisoner of the Inquisition for
thinking in astronomy otherwise than the Franciscan and Dominican
licensers thought.' In years long after, when Milton, himself feeble
and blind, sat down to compose his 'Paradise Lost,' the remembrance of
the Tuscan artist and his telescope was still fresh in his memory.

By the invention of the telescope and its application to astronomical
research, a vast amount of information and additional detail have been
learned regarding the bodies which enter into the formation of the solar
system; and by its aid many new ones were also discovered. On sweeping
the heavens with the instrument, the illimitable extent of the sidereal
universe became apparent, and numberless objects of interest were
brought within the range of vision the existence of which had not been
previously imagined.

The Galilean telescope was invented in 1609. But the magnifying power of
certain lenses, and their combination in producing singular visual
effects, are alluded to in the writings of several early authors. The
value of single lenses as an aid to sight had been long known, and
spectacles were in common use in the fourteenth century. Several
mathematicians have described the wonderful optical results obtained
from glasses concave and convex, of parabolic and circular forms, and
from 'perspective glasses,' in which were embodied the principle of the
telescope. It is asserted that our countryman, Roger Bacon (1214), had
some notion of the properties of the telescope; but among those familiar
with the combination of lenses the two men who made the nearest approach
to the invention of the instrument were Baptista Porta and Gerolamo
Fracastro. The latter, who died in 1553, writes as follows: 'For which
reason those things which are seen at the bottom of water appear greater
than those which are at the top; and if anyone look through two
eye-glasses, one placed upon the other, he will see everything much
larger and nearer.' It is doubtful if Fracastro had any notion of
constructing a mechanism which might answer the purpose of a telescopic
tube. Baptista Porta (1611) is more explicit in what he describes. He
writes: 'Concave lenses show distant objects most clearly, convex those
which are nearer; whence they may be used to assist the sight. With a
concave glass distant objects will be seen, small, but distinct; with a
convex one, those near at hand, larger, but confused; if you know
_rightly_ how to combine one of each sort, you will see both far and
near objects larger and clearer.' He then goes on to say: 'I shall now
endeavour to show in what manner we may continue to recognise our
friends at the distance of several miles, and how those of weak sight
may read the most minute letters from a distance. It is an invention of
great utility, and grounded on optical principles; nor is at all
difficult of execution; but it must be so divulged as not to be
understood by the vulgar, and yet be clear to the sharp-sighted.' After
this, he proceeds to describe a mechanism the details of which are
confusing and unintelligible, nor did it appear to bear any resemblance
to a telescopic tube.

In a work published by Thomas Digges in 1591, he makes the following
allusion to his father's experiments with the lenses: 'My father, by his
continuall painfull practices, assisted with demonstrations
mathematicall, was able, and sundry times hath by proportionall glasses,
duely situate in convenient angles, not only discouered things farre
off, read letters, numbered peeces of money with the verye coyne and
superscription thereof cast by some of his freends of purpose, upon
downes in open fields; but also seuen miles off, declared what hath beene
doone at that instant in priuate places.' It must be admitted that if
Leonard Digges had not constructed a telescope, he knew how to combine
lenses by the aid of which a visual effect was created similar to that
produced by the use of the instrument.

The inventor of the telescope was a Dutchman named Hans Lippershey, who
carried on the business of a spectacle-maker in the town of Middelburg.
His discovery was purely accidental. It is said that the
instrument--which was directed towards a weather-cock on a church spire,
of which it gave a large and inverted image--was for some time exhibited
in his shop as a curiosity before its importance was recognised. The
Marquis Spinola, happening to see this philosophical toy, purchased it,
and presented it to Prince Maurice of Nassau, who imagined it might be
of service for the purpose of military reconnoitring. The value of the
invention was, however, soon realised, and in the following year
telescopes were sold in Paris. In 1609, Galileo, when on a visit to a
friend at Venice, received intelligence of the invention of an
instrument by a Dutch optician which possessed the power of causing
distant objects to appear much nearer than when observed by ordinary
vision. The accuracy of this information was confirmed by letters which
he received from Paris; and this general report, Galileo asserted, was
all he knew of the subject. Fuccarius, in a disparaging letter, says
that one of the Dutch telescopes had been brought to Venice, and that he
himself had seen it. This statement is not incompatible with Galileo's
affirmation that he had not seen the original instrument, and knew no
more about it than what had been communicated to him in the letters from
the French capital. It was insinuated by Fuccarius that Galileo had seen
the telescope at Venice, but, as he denied this, we should not hesitate
to believe in his veracity.

Immediately after his return to Padua, Galileo began to think how he
might be able to contrive an instrument with properties similar to the
one of which he had been informed; and in the following words describes
the process of reasoning by which he arrived at a successful result: 'I
argued in the following manner. The contrivance consists either of one
glass or of more--one is not sufficient, since it must be either convex,
concave, or plane. The last does not produce any sensible alteration in
objects; the concave diminishes them. It is true that the convex
magnifies, but it renders them confused and indistinct; consequently,
one glass is insufficient to produce the desired effect. Proceeding to
consider two glasses, and bearing in mind that the plane causes no
change, I determined that the instrument could not consist of the
combination of a plane glass with either of the other two. I therefore
applied myself to make experiments on combinations of the two other
kinds, and thus obtained that of which I was in search.' Galileo's
telescope consisted of two lenses--one plano-convex, the other
plano-concave, the latter being held next the eye. These he fixed in a
piece of organ pipe, which served the purpose of a tube, the glasses
being distant from each other by the difference of their focal lengths.
An exactly similar principle is adopted in the construction of an
opera-glass, which can be accurately described as a double Galilean
telescope. Galileo must be regarded as the inventor of this kind of
telescope, which in one respect differed very materially from the one
constructed by the Dutch optician. If what has been said with regard to
the _inverted_ weather-cock be true, then Lippershey's telescope was
made with two convex lenses, distant from each other by the sum of their
focal lengths, and all objects observed with it were seen inverted.
Refracting astronomical telescopes are now constructed on this
principle, it having been discovered that for observational purposes
they possess several advantages over the Galilean instrument. When
Galileo had completed his first telescope he returned with it to
Venice, where he exhibited it to his friends. The sensation created by
this small instrument, which magnified only three times, was most
extraordinary, and almost amounted to a frenzy. Crowds of the principal
citizens of Venice flocked to Galileo's house in order that they might
see the magical tube about which such wonderful reports were circulated;
and for upwards of a month he was daily occupied in describing his
invention to attentive audiences. At the expiration of this time the
Doge of Venice, Leonardo Deodati, hinted that the Senate would not be
averse to receive the telescope as a gift. Galileo readily acquiesced
with this desire, and, as an acknowledgment of his merits, a decree was
issued confirming his appointment as professor at Padua for life, and
increasing his salary from 500 to 1,000 florins. The public excitement
created by the telescope showed no signs of abatement. Sirturi mentions
that, having succeeded in constructing an instrument, he ascended the
tower of St. Mark's at Venice, hoping to be able to use it there without
interruption. He was, however, detected by a few individuals, and soon
surrounded by a crowd, which took possession of his telescope, and
detained him for several hours until their curiosity was satisfied.
Eager inquiries having been made as to where he lodged, Sirturi, fearing
a repetition of his experience in the church tower, decided to quit
Venice early next morning, and betake himself to a quieter and less
frequented neighbourhood.

The instrument was at first called Galileo's tube; the double eye-glass;
the perspective; the trunk; the cylinder. The appellation _telescope_
was given it by Demisiano.

Galileo next directed his attention to the construction of telescopes,
and applied his mechanical skill in making instruments of a larger size,
one of which magnified _eight_ times. 'And at length,' he writes,
'sparing neither labour nor expense, he completed an instrument that was
capable of magnifying more than _thirty_ times.'

Galileo now commenced an exploration of the celestial regions with his
telescope, and on carefully examining some of the heavenly bodies, made
many wonderful discoveries which added greatly to the fame and lustre of
his name.

The first celestial object to which Galileo directed his telescope was
the Moon. He was deeply interested to find how much her surface
resembled that of the Earth, and was able to perceive lofty mountain
ranges, the illumined peaks of which reflected the sunlight, whilst
their bases and sides were still enveloped in dark shadow; great plains
which he imagined were seas, valleys, elevated ridges, depressions, and
inequalities similar to what are found on our globe. Galileo believed
the Moon to be a habitable world, and concluded that the dark and
luminous portions of her surface were land and water, which reflected
with unequal intensity the light of the Sun. The followers of Aristotle
received the announcement of these discoveries with much displeasure.
They maintained that the Moon was perfectly spherical and smooth--a vast
mirror, the dark portions of which were the reflection of our
terrestrial mountains and forests--and accused Galileo 'of taking a
delight in distorting and ruining the fairest works of Nature.' He
appealed to the unequal condition of the surface of our globe, but this
was of no avail in altering their preconceived notions of the lunar
surface.

Perhaps the most important discovery made by Galileo with the telescope
was that of the four moons of Jupiter. On the night of January 7, 1610,
when engaged in observing the planet, his attention was attracted by
three small stars which appeared brighter than those in their immediate
neighbourhood. They were all in a straight line and parallel with the
ecliptic; two of them were situated to the east, and one to the west of
Jupiter. On the following night he was surprised to find all three to
the west of the planet, and nearer to each other. This caused him
considerable perplexity, and he was at a loss to understand how Jupiter
could be east of the three stars, when on the preceding night he was
observed to the west of two of them. Galileo was unable to reconcile the
altered positions of those bodies with the apparent motion of Jupiter
among the fixed stars as indicated by the astronomical tables. The next
opportunity he had of observing them was on the 10th, when two stars
only were visible, and they were to the east of the planet. As it was
impossible for Jupiter to move from west to east on January 8 and from
east to west on the 10th, he concluded that it was the motion of the
stars and not that of Jupiter which accounted for the observed
phenomena. Galileo watched the stars attentively on successive evenings
and discovered a fourth, and on observing how they changed their
positions relatively to each other he soon arrived at the conclusion
that the stars were four moons which revolved round Jupiter after the
manner in which the Moon revolves round the Earth. Having assured
himself that the four new stars were four moons that with periodical
regularity circled round the great planet, Galileo named them the
Medicean Stars in honour of his patron, Cosmo de' Medici, Grand Duke of
Tuscany. He also published an essay entitled 'Nuncius Sidereus,' or the
'Sidereal Messenger,' which contained an account of this important
discovery.

The announcement of Galileo's discovery of the four satellites of
Jupiter created a profound sensation, and its significance became at
once apparent. Aristotelians and Ptolemaists received the information
with much disfavour and incredulity, and many persons positively refused
to believe Galileo, whom they accused of inventing fables. On the other
hand, the upholders of the Copernican theory hailed it with
satisfaction, as it declared that Jupiter with his four moons
constituted a system of greater magnitude and importance than that of
our globe with her single satellite, and that consequently the Earth
could not be regarded as the centre of the universe.

When Kepler heard of this remarkable discovery, he wrote to Galileo and
expressed himself in the following characteristic manner: 'I was sitting
idle at home thinking of you, most excellent Galileo, and your letters,
when the news was brought me of the discovery of four planets by the
help of the double eye-glass. Wachenfels stopped his carriage at my door
to tell me, when such a fit of wonder seized me at a report which seemed
so very absurd, and I was thrown into such agitation at seeing an old
dispute between us decided in this way, that between his joy, my
colouring, and the laughter of both, confounded as we were by such a
novelty, we were hardly capable, he of speaking, or I of listening.... I
am so far from disbelieving in the existence of the four circumjovial
planets, that I long for a telescope to anticipate you, if possible, in
discovering two round Mars (as the proportion seems to me to require),
six or eight round Saturn, and perhaps one each round Mercury and
Venus.' The intelligence of Galileo's discoveries was received by his
opponents in a spirit entirely different from that manifested by Kepler.
The principal professor of philosophy at Padua, when requested to look
at the Moon and planets through Galileo's glass, persistently declined,
and did his utmost to persuade the Grand Duke that the four satellites
of Jupiter could not possibly exist. Francesco Sizzi, a Florentine
astronomer, argued that, as there are seven apertures in the head,
seven known metals, and seven days in the week, so there could only be
seven planets. To these absurd remarks Galileo replied by saying that,
'whatever their force might be as a reason for believing beforehand that
no more than seven planets would be discovered, they hardly seemed of
sufficient weight to destroy the new ones when actually seen.' Another
individual, named Christmann, writes: 'We are not to think that Jupiter
has four satellites given him by Nature in order, by revolving round
him, to immortalize the name of the Medici, who first had notice of the
observation. These are the dreams of idle men, who love ludicrous ideas
better than our laborious and industrious correction of the heavens.
Nature abhors so horrible a chaos, and to the truly wise such vanity is
detestable.' Martin Horky, a _protege_ of Kepler's, issued a pamphlet in
which he made a violent attack on Galileo. He says: 'I will never
concede his four new planets to that Italian from Padua though I die for
it.' He then asks the following questions, and replies to them himself:
(1) Whether they exist? (2) What they are? (3) What they are like? (4)
Why they are? 'The first question is soon disposed of by Horky's
declaring positively that he has examined the heavens with Galileo's own
glass, and that no such thing as a satellite about Jupiter exists. To
the second, he declared solemnly that he does not more surely know that
he has a soul in his body than that reflected rays are the sole cause of
Galileo's erroneous observations. In regard to the third question, he
says that these planets are like the smallest fly compared to an
elephant; and, finally, concludes on the fourth, that the only use of
them is to gratify Galileo's "thirst of gold," and to afford himself a
subject of discussion.'[7] Galileo did not condescend to take any notice
of this scurrilous production; but Horky, who imagined that he had done
something clever, sent a copy of his pamphlet to Kepler. In a few days
