room. Their leader took one quick step forward, then paused as if
hesitating to meet this young adversary.

"Do go easy," Professor Sykes was imploring. "We do not know where we
are nor who they are, but we must do nothing to antagonize them."

McGuire had reacted from his hilarious seizure with an emotional swing
to the opposite extreme. "I'll break their damn necks," he growled,
"if they get rough with me." And his narrow eyes exchanged glare for
glare with those in the face like blood and ashes before him.

The cold cat eyes held steadily upon him while the scarlet figure
retreated. A louder call, shrill and vibrant, came from the thin lips,
and a swarm of bodies in dull red were scrambling into the room to
mass about their scarlet leader. Above and behind them the face under
its brilliant turban and golden clasp was glaring in triumph.

The tall figures crouched, grotesque and awkward; their long arms and
hands with grasping, tendril-like fingers were ready. McGuire waited
for the sharp hissing order that would throw these things upon him,
and he met the attack when it came with his own shoulders dropped to
the fighter's pose, head drawn in close and both fists swinging free.

There were lean fingers clutching at his throat, a press of blood-red
bodies thick about him, and a clustering of faces where color blotched
and flowed.

The thud of fists in blows that started from the floor was new to
these lean creatures that clawed and clung like cats. But they
trampled on those who went down before the flyer's blows and stood
upon them to spring at his head; they crowded in in overwhelming
numbers while their red hands tore and twined about his face.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was no place now for long swings; McGuire twisted his body and
threw his weight into quick short jabs at the faces before him. He was
clear for an instant and swung his heavy boot at something that clung
to one leg; then met with a rain of hooks and short punches the faces
that closed in again. He saw in that instant a wild whirl of bodies
where the stocky figure of Professor Sykes was smothered beneath his
taller antagonists. But the professor, if he was forgetting the
science of the laboratory, was remembering that of the squared
circle--and the battle was not entirely one sided.

McGuire was free; the blood was trickling down his face from
innumerable cuts where sharp-nailed fingers had sunk deep. He wiped
the red stream from his eyes and threw himself at the weaving mass of
bodies that eddied about Sykes in frantic struggle across the room.

The face of the professor showed clear for a moment. Like McGuire he
was bleeding, and his breath came in short explosive gasps, but he was
holding his own! The eyes of McGuire glimpsed a wildly gesticulating,
shouting figure in the rear. The face, contorted with rage, was almost
the color of the brilliant scarlet that the creature wore. The
blood-stained man in khaki left his companion to fight his own battle,
and plunged headlong at a leaping cluster of dull red, smashed through
with a frenzied attack of straight rights and lefts, and freed himself
to make one final leap at the leader of this unholy pack.

He was fighting in blind desperation now; the two were out-numbered by
the writhing, lean-bodied creatures, and this thing that showed in
blurred crimson before him was the directing power of them all. The
figure symbolized and personified to the raging man all the repulsive
ugliness of the leaping horde. The face came clear before him through
the mist of blood, and he put the last ounce of his remaining strength
and every pound of weight behind a straight, clean drive with his
right fist.

His last conscious impression was of a red, clawing hand that was
closed around the thick butt of a tube of steel ... then down, and
still down, he plunged into a bottomless pit of whirling, red flashes
and choking fumes....

There were memories that were to occur to Lieutenant McGuire
afterward--visions, dim and hazy and blurred, of half-waking moments
when strange creatures forced food and water into his mouth, then held
a mask upon his face while he resisted weakly the breathing of sweet,
sickly fumes that sent him back to unconsciousness.

There were many such times; some when he came sufficiently awake to
know that Sykes was lying near him, receiving similar care. Their
lives were being preserved: How, or why, or what life might hold in
store he neither knew nor cared; the mask and the deep-drawn fumes
brought stupor and numbness to his brain.

A window was in the floor beside him when he awoke--a circular window of
thick glass or quartz. But no longer did it frame a picture of a sky in
velvet blackness; no unwinking pin-points of distant stars pricked keenly
through the night; but, clear and dazzling, came a blessed radiance that
could mean only sunshine. A glowing light that was dazzling to his
sleep-filled eyes, it streamed in golden--beautiful--to light the
unfamiliar room and show motionless upon the floor the figure of Professor
Sykes. His torn clothing had been neatly arranged, and his face showed
livid lines of healing cuts and bruises.

McGuire tried gingerly to move his arms and legs; they were still
functioning though stiff and weak from disuse. He raised himself
slowly and stood swaying on his feet, then made his uncertain way to
his companion and shook him weakly by the shoulder.

Professor Sykes breathed deeply and raised leaden lids from tired eyes
to stare uncomprehendingly at McGuire. Soon his dark pupils ceased to
dilate, and he, too, could see their prison and the light of day.

"Sunlight!" he said in a thin voice, and he seemed to know now that
they were in the air; "I wonder--I wonder--if we shall land--what
country? ... Some wilderness and a strange race--a strange, strange
race!"

He was muttering half to himself; the mystery of these people whom he
could not identify was still troubling him.

       *       *       *       *       *

McGuire helped the other man to his feet, and they clung to each to
the other for support as they crossed to kneel beside the floor-window
and learn finally where their captors meant to take them.

A wilderness, indeed, the sight that met their eyes, but a wilderness
of clouds--no unfamiliar sight to Lieutenant McGuire of the United
States Army air service. But to settle softly into them instead of
driving through with glistening wings--this was new and vastly
different from anything he had known.

Sounds came to them in the silence, penetrating faintly through thick
walls--the same familiar wailing call that trembled and quavered and
seemed to the listening men to be guiding them down through the mist.

Gone was the sunlight, and the clouds beyond the deep-set window were
gloriously ablaze with a brilliance softly diffused. The cloud bank
was deep, and they felt the craft under them sink slowly, steadily
into the misty embrace. It thinned below them to drifting vapor, and
the first hazy shadows of the ground showed through from far beneath.
Their altitude, the flyer knew, was still many thousands of feet.

"Water," said McGuire, as his trained eyes made plain to him what was
still indistinct to the scientist. "An ocean--and a shore-line--" More
clouds obscured the view; they parted suddenly to show a portion only
of a clear-cut map.

       *       *       *       *       *

It stretched beyond the confines of their window, that unfamiliar line
of wave-marked shore; the water was like frozen gold, wrinkled in
countless tiny corrugations and reflecting the bright glow from above.
But the land,--that drew their eyes!

Were those cities, those shadow-splashed areas of gray and rose?...
The last veiling clouds dissolved, and the whole circle was plain to
their view.

The men leaned forward, breathless, intent, till the scientist,
Sykes--the man whose eyes had seen and whose brain recorded a dim
shape in the lens of a great telescope--Sykes drew back with a
quivering, incredulous breath. For below them, so plain, so
unmistakable, there lay an island, large even from this height, and it
formed on this round map a sharp angle like a great letter "L."

"We shall know that if we ever see it again," Professor Sykes had
remarked in the quiet and security of that domed building surmounting
the heights of Mount Lawson. But he said nothing now, as he stared at
his companion with eyes that implored McGuire to arouse him from this
sleep, this dream that could never be real. But McGuire, lieutenant
one-time in the forces of the U. S. A., had seen it too, and he stared
back with a look that gave dreadful confirmation.

The observatory--Mount Lawson--the earth!--those were the things
unreal and far away. And here before them, in brain-stunning
actuality, were the markings unmistakable--the markings of Venus. And
they were landing, these two, in the company of creatures wild and
strange as the planet--on Venus itself!

(_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *

[Advertisement: ]




The Destroyer

_By William Merriam Rouse_

[Illustration: "The connection is made," murmured Von Stein.]

[Sidenote: Slowly, insidiously, there stole over Allen Parker
something uncanny. He could no longer control his hands--even his
brain!]

The pencil in the hand of Allen Parker refused to obey his will. A
strange unseen force pushed his will aside and took possession of the
pencil point so that what he drew was not his own. It was the same
when he turned from drawing board to typewriter. The sentences were
not of his framing; the ideas were utterly foreign to him. This was
the first hint he received of the fate that was drawing in like night
upon him and his beautiful wife.

Parker, a young writer of growing reputation who illustrated his own
work, was making a series of pencil sketches for a romance partly
finished. The story was as joyous and elusive as sunlight, and until
to-day his sketches had held the same quality. Now he could not tap
the reservoir from which he had taken the wind-blown hair and smiling
eyes of Madelon, his heroine.

When he drew or wrote he seemed to be submerged in the dark waters of
a measureless evil pit. The face that mocked him from the paper was
stamped with a world-old knowledge of forbidden things.

Parker dropped his pencil and leaned back, tortured. He and his wife,
Betty, had taken this house in Pine Hills, a small and extremely
quiet suburban village, solely for the purpose of concentration on the
book which was to be the most important work he had done. He went to
the door of the room that he used for a studio and called:

"Betty! Can you come here a moment, please?"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a patter of running feet on the stairs and then a girl of
twenty, or thereabout, came into the room. Any man would have said she
was a blessing. Her hair "was yellow like ripe corn," and her vivid
blue eyes held depth and character and charm.

"Look!" exclaimed Parker. "What do you think of this stuff?"

For a moment there was silence. Then Allen Parker saw something he had
never before seen in his wife's face for him or his work--a look of
complete disgust.

"I wouldn't have believed you capable of doing anything so ... so
horrid!" she said coldly. "How could you?"

"I don't know!" His arms, which had been ready to take her to him for
comfort, dropped. "The work has been ... difficult, lately. As though
something were pulling at my mind. But not like this! It isn't _me_!"

"It must be you, since it came out of you!" She turned away and moved
restlessly to one of the windows.

"Through me!" muttered Parker. "Ideas _come_!"

"You'll have to do something!"

"But what? I don't know what to do!"

"Why not go to see that new doctor?" asked Betty, over her shoulder.
"Dr. Friedrich von Stein?"

"Von Stein?" repeated Parker, vaguely. "Don't know him. Anyhow, I
don't need a doctor. What in the world made you think of that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Nothing, except that I can see his house from here. He's taken what
they call 'the old Reynolds place.' You know--opposite the church. We
looked at it and thought it was too large for us. He's made a lot of
alterations."

"Oh, yes!" Parker had placed the newcomer, more recent than himself.
"I had an idea that he was a doctor of philosophy, not medicine."

"He has half a dozen degrees, they say. Certainly he's a stunning
looking man. I saw him on the street."

"Maybe he doesn't practice." The artist was gazing, baffled and sick
at heart, upon what he had wrought. "And what could he do, unless it's
my liver?"

"He might be a psycho-analyst, or something like that," she replied,
slowly.

"But why the wild interest in this particular doctor?" Parker roused
himself and looked at her. He felt irritable, and was ashamed of it.

"Only for your work," said Betty. A faint pink touched her cheeks.

Allen Parker had a sudden feeling of certainty that his wife was lying
to him. To one who knew the Parkers it would have been equally
impossible to think of Betty as lying, or of her husband as believing
such a thing. Parker was outraged by his own suspicion. He sprang up
and began to pace the floor.

"All right, then!" he exploded. "My work is going to the dogs! Why,
there's an appointment with Cartwright to-morrow to show him these
sketches, and the last few chapters I've done! We'll go now! If this
man can't do anything for me I'll try somebody else!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In ten minutes they were walking up the quiet street toward the
present home of Dr. Friedrich von Stein. Despite his self-absorption
Parker could not help noticing that his wife had never looked more
attractive than she did at this moment. Her color had deepened, little
wisps of hair curled against her cheeks, and there was a sparkle in
her eyes which he knew came only on very particular occasions.

Even from the outside it was apparent that many strange things had
been done to the staid and dignified house of Reynolds. A mass of
aerials hung above the roof. Some new windows had been cut at the
second floor and filled with glass of a peculiar reddish-purple tinge.
A residence had been turned into a laboratory, in sharp contrast to
the charming houses up and down the street and the church of gray
stone that stood opposite.

Beside the door, at the main entrance, a modest plate bore the legend:
"Dr. Friedrich von Stein." Parker pressed the bell. Then he squared
his broad shoulders and waited: a very miserable, very likeable young
man, with a finely shaped head and a good set of muscles under his
well cut clothes. He had brought his sketches, but he was
uncomfortable with the portfolio under his arm. It seemed to
contaminate him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The door opened to reveal a blocky figure of a man in a workman's
blouse and overalls. The fellow was pale of eye, towheaded; he
appeared to be good natured but of little intelligence. The only
remarkable thing about him was a livid welt that ran across one cheek,
from nose to ear. Beside him a glossy-coated dachshund wagged
furiously, after having barked once as a matter of duty.

"May we see Dr. von Stein?" asked Parker. "If he is in?"

"I will ask the Herr Doktor if he iss in," replied the man, stiffly.

"_Dummkopf!_" roared a voice from inside the house. An instant later
man and dog shrank back along the hall and there appeared in their
place one of the most striking personalities Allen Parker had ever
seen.

Dr. Friedrich von Stein was inches more than six feet tall and he
stood perfectly erect, with the unmistakable carriage of a well
drilled soldier. He was big boned, but lean, and every movement was
made with military precision. More than any other feature his eyes
impressed Parker: they were steady, penetrating, and absolutely black.
But for a thread of gray here and there his well-kept beard and hair
were black. He might have been any age from forty to sixty, so
deceptive was his appearance.

