
"Is at an end," said the cool voice.

"I learned more than you were aware of in this last year while I
familiarized myself with the interests that would soon be mine. No,
Herr Schwartzmann, your methods do not appeal to me; they are an
anachronism in the world of to-day."

Harkness was standing in stunned silence. "Delacoeur!" Diane was
Mademoiselle Delacoeur! But that name had been borne by the wealthiest
house of France! Old Delacoeur had died, possessed of millions beyond
counting--and he had left a daughter--Diane!

His mind could not grasp the full significance of this. But one thing
was clear: he could not aspire to the love of one of the queens of
Earth. Whatever faint hope that remained in his heart was lost.... The
cool voice was still speaking.

"You may leave now," she was saying--this girl who had been his
comrade, so unfailingly tender, so true and steady in the face of
incredible dangers. And Herr Schwartzmann took his dismissal as one
who cannot dispute his superior.

       *       *       *       *       *

The room was silent. Harkness stood with downcast eyes that followed
with meticulous precision the intricacies of design in the rug on
which he stood. A voice was speaking. Not the cool, imperative voice
of Mademoiselle Delacoeur, mistress of vast estates, but the voice of
Diane--the Diane he had learned to love--and it tore at his emotions
until his mind was a whirl of conflicting thoughts.

A tender voice: and there was laughter in it and in the eyes that his
own came despondently to meet.

"Such a man, this Walter Harkness!" she was saying. "So hard, so
vindictive! Ah, the trouble he will make for me because of my
conscienceless agents!"

Harkness threw out his hands in a helpless gesture. "Don't taunt me,"
he said. "You know you have me tied. You've drawn the charges from all
my guns. There is nothing to be done."

Diane Delacoeur drew near. The raillery was gone from her voice, and
the hand that she placed on his arm was trembling.

"Nothing?" she inquired. "Then, if friendly rivalry is impossible,
would you consider, could there not be arranged--a merger of our
interests? I am not thinking now of wealth, of which you will have far
more than I: there are so much greater things in life--"

The eyes that clung to his were pleading now. And within them was the
light that Walter Harkness at last could understand and define. He
took the trembling hand in one of his that was suddenly strong, and
with the other he raised a lovely face that no longer dared to meet
his look.

"You mean--" he began, and fumbled for words to express an emotion
that was beyond words. "Chet said--why, he said--that you needed me--"

Her reply came mingled with a tremulous laugh.

"I have the greatest regard," she whispered, "for Chet's judgement.
But--do you--need me?"

Walt Harkness held the soft body close; bent nearer to catch the
words. And he answered them with his own lips in an ecstasy of emotion
that made nothing of the thrills to be found in that other
conquest--of a Dark Moon.


A SCIENTIFIC HELL

Science playing the role of an up-to-date Persephone, visiting the
underworld realm of Pluto to wrest from it hidden cosmic secrets, was
described recently at a meeting of the American Geographical Society
at the Engineering Building by Prof. Harlow Shapley, Harvard
astronomical wizard, who told of the ultra-modern scientific version
of Ulysses's descent into Hades or Dante's visit to hell.

Prof. Shapley, to whom 10,000,000 light-years are like a day to any
ordinary mortal, and whose astronomical investigations have led him to
the center of the cosmos, told the scientists present to descend to
the bowels of the earth and construct therein "Plutonic Laboratories,"
where a man could learn many things unknown about beginnings and
endings, and where, incidentally he may find a way of utilising the
tremendous heat energy stored up in the "scientific hell."

Under the general theme of the "Third Dimension in Geography," Prof.
Shapley talked about the past, present and future of the earth-moon
system; how in 50,000,000 years our days and months will be
forty-seven times as long as they are now; how after that the moon
will again approach the earth until it is broken up by tidal
disruption into ring fragments circulating around the earth like the
ring around Saturn; and of shooting stars coming from far-away solar
systems.

"The temperature under the surface of the earth," said Prof. Shapley,
"increases one degree Fahrenheit at every seventy-six feet, about
seventy degrees per mile. In some places in California we get the
temperature of boiling water at a depth of less than a mile. The
center of the earth is roughly 4,000 miles below the surface.

"Because of this intense internal heat of the earth it would probably
be impossible to maintain permanent laboratories at greater depths
than two miles," said the lecturer, "and, in addition, the
installation and maintenance of Plutonic laboratories will be a
scientific adventure of great difficulty and expense. Yet, if carried
on in connection with the work of existing mines and borings it may
mark the coming decade as one of the important epochs in man's attempt
to understand the earth.

"These Plutonic laboratories, placed at various depths under the
surface, fully equipped with modern scientific apparatus, and
maintained indefinitely, will contribute to our knowledge in a dozen
important fields of geophysic and astronomy."

What Prof. Shapley pointed to as merely a possible by-product of the
proposed scientific "descent into Hades" is the commercial possibility
of tapping the earth's internal source of heat. There is 31,000,000
times as much natural heat in the earth than in all the coal resources
of the world. He stated that Sir Charles Parsons and John L. Hodgson,
both noted British engineers, are already engaged in work on this
problem.




When Caverns Yawned

_By Captain S. P. Meek_

[Illustration: From the bump on the side of the submarine came a flash
of red light.]

[Sidenote: Only Dr. Bird's super-scientific sleuthing stands in the
way of Ivan Saranoff's latest attempt at wholesale destruction.]


Bells jangled discordantly. A whistle split the air with a piercing
note. A band blared away on the platform. With a growing rumble of
sound, the Presidential special slowly gathered headway. The President
waved a final farewell to the crowds at the platform and sat down. He
chatted cheerily with his companions until the train was clear of
Charleston, then rose, and with a word to the others stepped into the
car. Operative Carnes of the United States Service slumped back in
his chair with a sigh of relief.

"Thank Goodness, that's over," he said. "I was never so glad to get
him safely away from a place in my life."

Haggerty of the secret service nodded in agreement. Colonel Holmes,
the military aide, looked up inquiringly.

"Why so? Do you think Charleston an especially dangerous place for him
to be?"

"Not ordinarily. Charleston is a very patriotic and loyal city, but I
have been worried. There have been vague rumors going around. Nothing
definite that we could pin down, but enough to make me pretty uneasy."

"I think you've worried needlessly. I have been in constant touch with
the Military Intelligence Division and they have reported nothing
alarming."

Haggerty chuckled at the look of disgust that spread over Carnes'
face. Colonel Holmes bridled visibly.

"Now look here, Carnes," he began.

"Oh, horse-feathers!" interrupted Carnes. "The M.I.D. is all right in
its place--Good Lord! What's that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The train gave a sudden sickening lurch. Colonel Holmes sprawled in an
undignified heap in one corner of the observation platform. Carnes and
Haggerty kept their feet by hanging on to the rails. From the interior
of the car came cries of alarm. The train righted itself for a moment
and then lurched worse than before. There was a scream of brakes as
the engineer strove to halt the forward progress. The train swayed and
lurched like a ship in a storm. Carnes sprang for the telephone
connected with the engine cab and rang excitedly.

"Hello, Bemis," he cried when an answer came: "take off the brakes!
Keep moving at full speed, no matter what happens. What? Use your gun
on him, man! Keep moving even if the train tips over!"

The train swayed and rocked worse than ever as it began to gather
momentum. Carnes looked back along the track and gasped. For three
hundred yards behind them, the track was sinking out of sight. The
train forged ahead, but it was evident that it also was sinking into
the ground. The track behind them suddenly gave. With a roar like a
hundred buildings collapsing, it sank out of sight in a cloud of dust.
The rear car of the train hung partially over the yawning cavern in
the earth for an instant before the laboring engine dragged it to
solid ground. The swaying and lurching grew less. For a mile it
persisted to a slight degree. With a face the color of a sheet, Carnes
made his way into the train. The President met him at the door.

"What's the trouble, Carnes?" he demanded.

"I am not sure, Mr. President. It felt like an earthquake. A great
cavern opened in the earth behind us. Our train was almost trapped in
it."

"An earthquake! We must stop the train at once and take charge of the
situation. An emergency of that sort demands immediate attention."

"I beg you to do nothing of the sort, sir. Your presence would add
little to the rescue work and your life is too precious to risk."

"But my duty to the people--"

"Is to keep yourself alive, sir! Mr. President, this may well be an
attempt on your life. There are persons who would give anything to do
away with you, especially at present. You have not endeared yourself
to a certain class in calling for a conference of the powers to curb
Russia's anti-religious tactics."

       *       *       *       *       *

The President hesitated. He knew Carnes well enough to know that he
usually spoke from accurate knowledge and with good judgment.

"Mr. President," went on the operative earnestly, "I am responsible to
the American people for your safety. I beg you to follow my advice."

"Very well, Carnes," replied the President, "I'll put myself in your
hands for the present. What is your program?"

"Your route is well known. Other attempts may be planned since this
one failed. Let me have you transferred incognito to another train and
hurried through to Washington secretly. I am going to drop off and go
back. That earthquake needs to be looked into."

Again the President hesitated.

"My desertion of the stricken area will not be favorably regarded. If
I sneak away secretly as though in fear, it will be bad for the public
morale."

"We'll let the special go through. No one need know that you have left
it."

"Well--I guess you're right. What are you going to do about it?"

"My first move will be to summon Dr. Bird from Washington."

"That's a good move. You'd better have him bring Dr. Lassen with him.
Lassen is a great volcano and earthquake specialist, you know."

"I will, sir. If you will get ready to drop off at the next connecting
point, I'll send Haggerty and Bemis with you. The rest of the party
can remain on the special."

"All right, Carnes, if you insist."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carnes went forward to the operator of the train's radio set. In half
an hour the special came to a stop at a junction point and four men
got off. Ten minutes later three of them climbed aboard another train
which stopped for them. Carnes, the fourth man, hurried to a
telephone. Fifteen minutes later he was talking to Dr. Bird at the
latter's private laboratory in the Bureau of Standards.

"An earthquake, Carnes?" exclaimed the doctor as the operative
described the happenings. "Wait a few minutes, will you?"

In five minutes he was back on the telephone.

"It was no earthquake, old dear, whatever it may have been. I have
examined the records of all three of the Bureau's seismographs. None
of them record even a tremor. What are you going to do?"

"Whatever you say, Doctor. I'm out of my depth already."

"Let me think a moment. All right, listen. Go back to Charleston as
quickly as you can and get in touch with the commanding officer at
Fort Moultrie. I'll have the Secretary of War telephone him and give
him orders. Get troops and go to the scene of the catastrophe. Allow
no one near it. Proclaim martial law if necessary. Stop all road and
rail traffic within a radius of two miles. Arrest anyone trying to
pass your guard lines. I'll get a plane from Langley Field and come
down on the run. Is that all clear?"

"Perfectly, Doctor. By the way, the President suggested that you bring
Dr. Lassen with you."

"Since it wasn't an earthquake, he wouldn't be of much value. However,
I'll bring him if I can get hold of him. Now start things moving down
there. I'll get some apparatus together and join you in five hours;
six at the outside. Have a car waiting for me at the Charleston
airport."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carnes commandeered a passing car and drove back to Charleston. He
made a wide sweep to avoid the disturbed area and went direct to Fort
Moultrie. Dr. Bird had been good at his word. The troops were
assembled in heavy marching order when the detective arrived. A few
words to the commanding officer was sufficient to set the trucks
loaded with soldiers in motion. Carnes, accompanied by the colonel and
his staff, went direct to the scene of the catastrophe.

He found a hole in the ground, a hundred feet wide and a quarter of a
mile long, sunk to a depth of fifty feet. He shuddered as he thought
of what would have happened had the Presidential train been in the
center of the devastated area instead of at the edge. The edges of the
hole were ragged and sloping as though the earth had caved in to fill
a huge cavern underground.

State and local authorities were already on the ground, striving to
hold back sightseers. They were very glad to deliver their
responsibility to the representative of the federal government. Carnes
added their force to that of the military. In an hour a cordon of
guards were stationed about the cavern while every road was picketed
two miles away. Fortunately there had been no loss of life and no
rescue work was needed. The earth-shaking had been purely a local
matter, centered along the line of the railroad track.

There was nothing to do but wait, Carnes thought furiously. He had
worked with Dr. Bird long enough to have a fair idea of the
scientist's usual lines of investigation.

"The first thing he'll want to do is to explore that hole," he mused.
"Probably, that'll mean some excavating. I'd better get a wrecking
train with a crane on it and a steam shovel here. A gang of men with
picks and shovels might be useful, too."

He hurried to the railroad officials. The sight of his gold badge had
the desired result. Telegraph keys began to click and telephones to
ring. Carnes was sorely tempted to explore the hole himself, but he
resisted the temptation. Dr. Bird was not always pleasant when his
colleagues departed from the orders he had given.

       *       *       *       *       *

The morning passed, and the first part of the afternoon. Two wrecking
trains stood with steam up at the edge of the hole. Grouped by the
trains were a hundred negroes with shovels and picks. Carnes sat at
the edge of the hole and stared down into it. He was roused from his
reverie by the sound of a motor.

From the north came an airplane. High over the hole it passed, and
then swerved and descended. On the under side of the wings could be
seen the insignia of the Air Corps. Carnes jumped to his feet and
waved his hat. Lower came the plane until it roared across the cavern
less than a hundred feet above the ground. Two figures leaned out and
examined the terrain carefully. Carnes waved again. One of the figures
waved a hand in reply. The plane rose in the air and straightened out
toward Charleston.

"We'll have the doctor here in a few minutes now," said Carnes to the
Colonel. "It might be a good plan to send a motorcycle out along the
