
       *       *       *       *       *

"They found me, rather!" corrected the prince. "But we get on quite
well together. They consider me a god, you see, since I, too, came out
of the sky in a thunderbolt, as their great diamond once did,
according to their legends."

"But who are they? What is their origin? Why are they so small, so
pale?"

"Natural questions, Professor, but not so easy to answer. Who they are
I cannot say, save that they are the snow people of native
superstition. Their origin? It is lost in antiquity. Perhaps they are
the remnants of some Tibetan tribe driven into the mountains by
enemies, thousands of years ago. While as for their stature, their
pallor--these no doubt are the result of the furtive underground life
they lead."

He paused, waited politely, as though for further questions, but
neither spoke. Now that the main mystery was solved, the one question
uppermost in both their minds was what this suave, inscrutable
nobleman was going to do with them--and that question neither cared to
ask, fearful of what the answer might be.

       *       *       *       *       *

Finally Prince Krassnov spoke again.

"What, gentlemen--you have no further curiosity about me? How
unflattering! I thought perhaps you might want to know why I have
chosen to maintain my headquarters here on Kinchinjunga, the past two
years, and how I have been occupying my time. But I hold no
resentment. I shall tell you, so that you will be prepared for what I
am going to propose."

He turned and addressed the pigmy host in what must have been their
own tongue. Then, facing his guests again, he said:

"Now, come. Let us retire to my private study, where we shall have
more leisure."

They followed him from that dazzling chamber and proceeded on down the
cavern to a fork that ended about twenty paces further in a massive
steel-bound door.

There he paused and twirled a knob like the dial of a safe. After a
moment there came a click, as of tumblers meshing, and a tug on the
knob swung the door open.

The prince bowed.

"Step into my little apartment," he said.

They entered, to find themselves in a large oblong room furnished in
Slavic luxury.

       *       *       *       *       *

As they crossed a rich Oriental rug spread over the threshold, a
musical gong sounded somewhere, and almost instantly two enormous
Cossacks sprang into view, to bar their way with rifles.

"My bodyguard," apologized Krassnov, shutting the door. "They are
quite harmless, except to intruders. Just one of the little
precautions that make life safer."

He spoke to the men in Russian and they withdrew.

Then he advanced to a divan beside a teakwood table on which stood a
large copper samovar. Dropping down, he motioned for them to take
seats beside him.

"You will have tea, my friends? Or perhaps you would prefer whiskey
and soda?"

They chose the latter, since their recent exertions seemed to have
warranted it, and their host tinkled a silver bell, bringing a Chinese
boy beaming and salaaming.

A few words to him and the samovar was lit; then he hurried off on
padding feet, to return with miraculous speed, bearing not only the
whiskey and soda but a platter heaped with exotic cakes, cubed
sandwiches of caviar and spiced fish, together with a profusion of
other delicacies--doubly welcome to men who had toiled all day on a
mountain peak, with nothing but chocolate to sustain them.

And while they drank and ate, Prince Krassnov told his story--a story
whose very first words were an admission that he was the head of the
great diamond-smuggling plot Stoddard had set out to trace down.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a story as dramatic and romantic as it was unscrupulous.

Finding himself and the crew of the rocket marooned on the upper
slopes of this mighty mountain, in the midst of an incalculable
wealth, he had set about at once to capitalize their astounding
discovery.

First he had made certain adjustments in the mechanism of his
apparatus--which fortunately had not been injured by its forced
landing--and then he had taken off with specimens of the treasure,
bringing the craft down this time with precision in the midst of his
ancestral estates near Baku, in the foothills of the Caucasus
Mountains.

This vast property the Bolsheviks had not confiscated, partly because
of its remoteness, no doubt, and partly because of the prince's
services to the Soviet Republic. At any rate, it was here he had
developed in secret the details of his amazing plot--a plot that had
as its aim not only his own enrichment but the rehabilitation of all
the Russian nobles.

Once they had heard his story of the Diamond Thunderbolt and seen the
specimens he showed them, many had eagerly joined the plot, with the
result that an international ring had been formed for disposal of the
gems.

His plans perfected, Prince Krassnov had then returned to Kinchinjunga
with his rocket, since when the mysterious flood of those perfect
diamonds into the jewel markets of the world had begun.

"So you see, my friends," he smiled, "that is what you Americans would
call my 'little game'--a game your chance discovery has rather
jeopardized, you must admit."

Professor Prescott could well realize this, but at a glance from
Stoddard he declined to admit it.

"A very ingenious game!" he said. "But where do the Lamas figure in
this? Surely they must know of the presence of this meteor within
their kingdom."

"No doubt they do," the prince conceded. "This is why they are so
reluctant to have foreigners enter their domain. At one time, I am
satisfied, they knew its exact location and drew many of their own
gems from that source. But in recent times the snow people have
guarded their secret well. The Lamas are as terrified of them as the
natives--and with better reason!"

He did not mention what the reason was, but there was something
ominous in his tone.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But to get on with my story, friends. I am not telling you all this
merely to satisfy your curiosity. I have what you call a motive in my
madness!"

Madness was right, thought Stoddard. The man was dangerously,
criminally mad.

"My motive is simply this," he went on. "You have chanced upon my
little nest-egg, and consequently I have either to let you in on the
deal or--"

Krassnov paused; shrugged.

"But why talk of anything unpleasant, when there is wealth enough here
for all? What I propose, briefly, is that you join me."

They knew it was coming, but they winced, nevertheless.

"Oh, don't be premature!" he exclaimed, a little nettled. "Hear me
out. What is good enough for me and my fellow nobles of Imperial
Russia is surely good enough for poor, under-paid professors of
democratic America. Listen, friends--I am generous. Join me and we
will make millionaires out of all of you. Every professor in your
country shall be a little czar. It will be, to use the old phrase, a
triumph of the intellect."

Beyond a doubt, the man was mad; yet his madness was vast, dizzying.
Though neither was tempted, they were both rendered speechless for a
moment. It was like standing on a mountain top and being shown the
countries and the glories of the world--like standing on the top of
Kinchinjunga, thought Prescott.

"But you assume we are all Bolsheviks, like yourself, we professors,"
he said, struggling for calm words.

"Bolsheviks!" snorted the prince. "I spit on them! You think I, a
nobleman, am interested in the masses? Cattle--swine! I plan only for
the day when we who are worthy rule again, and this that I have told
you is my plan. You can, as you Americans so coarsely say, either take
it or leave it."

       *       *       *       *       *

A tension hung in the air, as his words echoed into silence. The man
had revealed himself.

"And suppose we leave it?" asked the professor, restraining his
irritation as best he could. "What then?"

"Then I am afraid--ah--unpleasant consequences would result," was the
bland answer. "Surely you realize that I could not let you and young
Dr. Stoddard rejoin your expedition with this story to report."

They realized it quite well.

"But suppose we agree not to report it?" said Professor Prescott.

"Not to doubt your honesty of intention," replied Krassnov sharply. "I
would refuse to accept such an agreement."

"Then I see nothing else but to decline your kind proposal," said
Stoddard, before the professor could formulate further words. "What do
you propose to do--murder us?"

"Nothing so personal," said the prince, with his sardonic smile. "I
shall merely turn you over to my little subjects. They no doubt will
deal with you as your merits warrant."

Whereupon he pressed a button under that elaborate teakwood table. The
musical gong they had heard before sounded again, and the prince's two
Cossack retainers reappeared.

He addressed them briefly in Russian, adding to his guests:

"Adieu, friends! If you change your minds, you have only to speak. You
will be understood, and I shall be gratified."

And without further words, they were led from that ornate apartment.

       *       *       *       *       *

Taken back to the dazzling chamber under the meteor, they were turned
over to the pigmies.

A powwow resulted, but it was brief. The two captives were bound fast
in a curious ceremonial pit near the center of the room. Then the
midget horde withdrew, leaving them alone there under that eery glow.

"Now what the devil will be the next step?" queried Stoddard, when the
last of the pigmies had gone.

Professor Prescott considered for a moment, before replying.

"I don't think there will be any next step, except our cremation," he
said at length.

"Cremation?" gasped his young friend. "What do you mean, cremation?"

Another pause, then:

"Just this. Don't you see where we are? Right under the Thunderbolt!
Well?"

"Well what?"

"Simple enough, Jack." The professor's tone was grave. "When dawn
comes, and the rising sun strikes that--"

"Good God!" Stoddard suddenly understood. "Why, we'll be cooked
alive--frizzled!"

It was only too true. Even now, the pale rays of the moon,
concentrated by the myriad facets of that monumental diamond, were
beginning to focus on them a warmth that was uncomfortable. And by
morning--!

The two men crouched there silent, realizing their desperate plight.
They _must_ escape, before the sun rose. But how?

       *       *       *       *       *

Studying their bonds, they discovered that they were of rawhide of
some sort, obviously from the hides of animals these strange people
caught on the lower slopes somewhere. But though they strained and
twisted, they could not stretch them, the leather evidently having
been cured to a marvelous toughness in these high altitudes.

Precious minutes ticked by as they struggled there, but they were
unable to extricate themselves.

But before the end of a half-hour, Stoddard managed to free one arm,
and reaching into his jacket he drew forth a small, compact metal
object--his cigarette lighter.

Twirling the wheel, while Professor Prescott held his breath, he
succeeded in kindling a flame on its tiny wick.

If only he could reach the thongs with it! If only he could burn them
through and free himself and the professor before any of the pigmies
re-entered that lethal chamber!

Wrenching around now, he applied the flame to his left wrist, which
was still bound. As the living fire touched his flesh, he winced with
pain, but almost anything was better than the grisly fate that
threatened.

Slowly, a little at a time, he endured the torture, straining at each
application to see if the thongs would yield.

"Here, let me try it once!" called out Professor Prescott, as he cried
aloud with the agony of the ordeal.

"No. I'll get it!" Stoddard gritted his teeth, continued. "There! I
think my hand is free!" He struggled. "Yes. Now wait!"

Replacing his cigarette lighter in his pocket, he drew his blistered
wrist from its smouldering bonds and struggled feverishly now to undo
the lashes about his feet.

Five minutes of that and suddenly he flung them off and stood up.

"Now! Now then, Professor. I'll have you loose in a jiffy!"

Bending over his fettered companion, he worked with frantic haste to
untie the rawhide bonds.

Another five minutes and they were both free.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Prescott stood up and stretched.

"Thank God for small favors!" he exclaimed. "But you, Jack? You must
be burned cruelly.

"Forget it!" Stoddard was already wrapping a handkerchief around his
wrist. "Now let's see about getting out of here. These little rats all
seem to be asleep, and Lord knows where that maniac Krassnov is.
Perhaps we can make it. At any rate, we'll give them a run for their
money!"

As he spoke, he drew his automatic.

Silently, stealthily, they left that glittering chamber and proceeded
down the cavern toward what seemed to be the entrance, guided by their
remembrance of the way they had come.

A hundred yards or more they made, seeing no sign of their captors,
when suddenly a musical gong rang out.

"We've stepped on one of Krassnov's infernal signals!" cried Stoddard,
above the din. "Now there'll be hell to pay!"

And "hell to pay" there was, almost instantly--for before they had
taken ten more steps, the cavern ahead was full of small, ghostly
figures, jabbering in their shrill voices.

Indifferent now of what he did, their lives at stake, Stoddard blazed
away with his automatic, sweeping it from side to side of the stony
walls as he fired.

As the shots crashed out, the jabbers turned to shrieks of terror.
Several of the pigmies fell. The rest broke their ranks and shrank
into the shadows.
