puppy, you may save your breath," thundered an angry voice, and Simon de
Montfort strode, scowling, into the room.

The girl paled, but not from fear of her father, for the fighting blood
of the De Montforts was as strong in her as in her sire. She faced
him with as brave and resolute a face as did the young man, who turned
slowly, fixing De Montfort with level gaze.

"I heard enough of your words as I was passing through the corridor,"
continued the latter, "to readily guess what had gone before. So it
is for this that you have wormed your sneaking way into my home? And
thought you that Simon de Montfort would throw his daughter at the head
of the first passing rogue? Who be ye, but a nameless rascal? For aught
we know, some low born lackey. Get ye hence, and be only thankful that I
do not aid you with the toe of my boot where it would do the most good."

"Stop!" cried the girl. "Stop, father, hast forgot that but for Roger
de Conde ye might have seen your daughter a corpse ere now, or, worse,
herself befouled and dishonored?"

"I do not forget," replied the Earl, "and it is because I remember that
my sword remains in its scabbard. The fellow has been amply repaid by
the friendship of De Montfort, but now this act of perfidy has wiped
clean the score. An' you would go in peace, sirrah, go quickly, ere I
lose my temper."

"There has been some misunderstanding on your part, My Lord," spoke
Norman of Torn, quietly and without apparent anger or excitement. "Your
daughter has not told me that she loves me, nor did I contemplate asking
you for her hand. When next I come, first shall I see her and if she
will have me, My Lord, I shall come to you to tell you that I shall wed
her. Norm--Roger de Conde asks permission of no man to do what he would
do."

Simon de Montfort was fairly bursting with rage but he managed to
control himself to say,

"My daughter weds whom I select, and even now I have practically closed
negotiations for her betrothal to Prince Philip, nephew of King Louis
of France. And as for you, sir, I would as lief see her the wife of the
Outlaw of Torn. He, at least, has wealth and power, and a name that be
known outside his own armor. But enough of this; get you gone, nor let
me see your face again within the walls of Leicester's castle."

"You are right, My Lord, it were foolish and idle for us to be
quarreling with words," said the outlaw. "Farewell, My Lady. I shall
return as I promised, and your word shall be law." And with a profound
bow to De Montfort, Norman of Torn left the apartment, and in a few
minutes was riding through the courtyard of the castle toward the main
portals.

As he passed beneath a window in the castle wall, a voice called to
him from above, and drawing in his horse, he looked up into the eyes of
Bertrade de Montfort.

"Take this, Roger de Conde," she whispered, dropping a tiny parcel to
him, "and wear it ever, for my sake. We may never meet again, for the
Earl my father, is a mighty man, not easily turned from his decisions;
therefore I shall say to you, Roger de Conde, what you forbid my saying.
I love you, and be ye prince or scullion, you may have me, if you can
find the means to take me."

"Wait, my lady, until I return, then shall you decide, and if ye be
of the same mind as today, never fear but that I shall take ye. Again,
farewell." And with a brave smile that hid a sad heart, Norman of Torn
passed out of the castle yard.

When he undid the parcel which Bertrade had tossed to him, he found that
it contained a beautifully wrought ring set with a single opal.

The Outlaw of Torn raised the little circlet to his lips, and then
slipped it upon the third finger of his left hand.




CHAPTER XII

Norman of Torn did not return to the castle of Leicester "in a few
days," nor for many months. For news came to him that Bertrade de
Montfort had been posted off to France in charge of her mother.

From now on, the forces of Torn were employed in repeated attacks
on royalist barons, encroaching ever and ever southward until even
Berkshire and Surrey and Sussex felt the weight of the iron hand of the
outlaw.

Nearly a year had elapsed since that day when he had held the fair form
of Bertrade de Montfort in his arms, and in all that time he had heard
no word from her.

He would have followed her to France but for the fact that, after he had
parted from her and the intoxication of her immediate presence had left
his brain clear to think rationally, he had realized the futility of
his hopes, and he had seen that the pressing of his suit could mean only
suffering and mortification for the woman he loved.

His better judgment told him that she, on her part, when freed from
the subtle spell woven by the nearness and the newness of a first love,
would doubtless be glad to forget the words she had spoken in the
heat of a divine passion. He would wait, then, until fate threw them
together, and should that ever chance, while she was still free, he
would let her know that Roger de Conde and the Outlaw of Torn were one
and the same.

If she wants me then, he thought, but she will not. No it is impossible.
It is better that she marry her French prince than to live, dishonored,
the wife of a common highwayman; for though she might love me at first,
the bitterness and loneliness of her life would turn her love to hate.

As the outlaw was sitting one day in the little cottage of Father
Claude, the priest reverted to the subject of many past conversations;
the unsettled state of civil conditions in the realm, and the stand
which Norman of Torn would take when open hostilities between King and
baron were declared.

"It would seem that Henry," said the priest, "by his continued breaches
of both the spirit and letter of the Oxford Statutes, is but urging the
barons to resort to arms; and the fact that he virtually forced Prince
Edward to take up arms against Humphrey de Bohun last fall, and to carry
the ravages of war throughout the Welsh border provinces, convinces me
that he be, by this time, well equipped to resist De Montfort and his
associates."

"If that be the case," said Norman of Torn, "we shall have war and
fighting in real earnest ere many months."

"And under which standard does My Lord Norman expect to fight?" asked
Father Claude.

"Under the black falcon's wing," laughed he of Torn.

"Thou be indeed a close-mouthed man, my son," said the priest, smiling.
"Such an attribute helpeth make a great statesman. With thy soldierly
qualities in addition, my dear boy, there be a great future for thee in
the paths of honest men. Dost remember our past talk?"

"Yes, father, well; and often have I thought on't. I have one more duty
to perform here in England and then, it may be, that I shall act on thy
suggestion, but only on one condition."

"What be that, my son?"

"That wheresoere I go, thou must go also. Thou be my best friend; in
truth, my father; none other have I ever known, for the little old
man of Torn, even though I be the product of his loins, which I much
mistrust, be no father to me."

The priest sat looking intently at the young man for many minutes before
he spoke.

Without the cottage, a swarthy figure skulked beneath one of the
windows, listening to such fragments of the conversation within as came
to his attentive ears. It was Spizo, the Spaniard. He crouched entirely
concealed by a great lilac bush, which many times before had hid his
traitorous form.

At length the priest spoke.

"Norman of Torn," he said, "so long as thou remain in England, pitting
thy great host against the Plantagenet King and the nobles and barons of
his realm, thou be but serving as the cats-paw of another. Thyself hast
said an hundred times that thou knowst not the reason for thy hatred
against them. Thou be too strong a man to so throw thy life uselessly
away to satisfy the choler of another.

"There be that of which I dare not speak to thee yet and only may I
guess and dream of what I think, nor do I know whether I must hope
that it be false or true, but now, if ever, the time hath come for the
question to be settled. Thou hast not told me in so many words, but I be
an old man and versed in reading true between the lines, and so I know
that thou lovest Bertrade de Montfort. Nay, do not deny it. And now,
what I would say be this. In all England there lives no more honorable
man than Simon de Montfort, nor none who could more truly decide upon
thy future and thy past. Thou may not understand of what I hint, but
thou know that thou may trust me, Norman of Torn."

"Yea, even with my life and honor, my father," replied the outlaw.

"Then promise me, that with the old man of Torn alone, thou wilt come
hither when I bidst thee and meet Simon de Montfort, and abide by his
decision should my surmises concerning thee be correct. He will be the
best judge of any in England, save two who must now remain nameless."

"I will come, Father, but it must be soon for on the fourth day we ride
south."

"It shall be by the third day, or not at all," replied Father Claude,
and Norman of Torn, rising to leave, wondered at the moving leaves of
the lilac bush without the window, for there was no breeze.

Spizo, the Spaniard, reached Torn several minutes before the outlaw
chief and had already poured his tale into the ears of the little, grim,
gray, old man.

As the priest's words were detailed to him the old man of Torn paled in
anger.

"The fool priest will upset the whole work to which I have devoted
near twenty years," he muttered, "if I find not the means to quiet his
half-wit tongue. Between priest and petticoat, it be all but ruined now.
Well then, so much the sooner must I act, and I know not but that now be
as good a time as any. If we come near enough to the King's men on this
trip south, the gibbet shall have its own, and a Plantagenet dog shall
taste the fruits of his own tyranny," then glancing up and realizing
that Spizo, the Spaniard, had been a listener, the old man, scowling,
cried:

"What said I, sirrah? What didst hear?"

"Naught, My Lord; thou didst but mutter incoherently," replied the
Spaniard.

The old man eyed him closely.

"An did I more, Spizo, thou heardst naught but muttering, remember."

"Yes, My Lord."

An hour later, the old man of Torn dismounted before the cottage of
Father Claude and entered.

"I am honored," said the priest, rising.

"Priest," cried the old man, coming immediately to the point, "Norman
of Torn tells me that thou wish him and me and Leicester to meet here. I
know not what thy purpose may be, but for the boy's sake, carry not out
thy design as yet. I may not tell thee my reasons, but it be best that
this meeting take place after we return from the south."

The old man had never spoken so fairly to Father Claude before, and so
the latter was quite deceived and promised to let the matter rest until
later.

A few days after, in the summer of 1263, Norman of Torn rode at the head
of his army of outlaws through the county of Essex, down toward London
town. One thousand fighting men there were, with squires and other
servants, and five hundred sumpter beasts to transport their tents and
other impedimenta, and bring back the loot.

But a small force of ailing men-at-arms, and servants had been left to
guard the castle of Torn under the able direction of Peter the Hermit.

At the column's head rode Norman of Torn and the little grim, gray,
old man; and behind them, nine companies of knights, followed by the
catapult detachment; then came the sumpter beasts. Horsan the Dane, with
his company, formed the rear guard. Three hundred yards in advance of
the column rode ten men to guard against surprise and ambuscades.

The pennons, and the banners and the bugles; and the loud rattling of
sword, and lance and armor and iron-shod hoof carried to the eye and ear
ample assurance that this great cavalcade of iron men was bent upon no
peaceful mission.

All his captains rode today with Norman of Torn. Beside those whom
we have met, there was Don Piedro Castro y Pensilo of Spain; Baron
of Cobarth of Germany, and Sir John Mandecote of England. Like their
leader, each of these fierce warriors carried a great price upon his
head, and the story of the life of any one would fill a large volume
with romance, war, intrigue, treachery, bravery and death.

Toward noon one day, in the midst of a beautiful valley of Essex, they
came upon a party of ten knights escorting two young women. The meeting
was at a turn in the road, so that the two parties were upon each other
before the ten knights had an opportunity to escape with their fair
wards.

"What the devil be this," cried one of the knights, as the main body of
the outlaw horde came into view, "the King's army or one of his foreign
legions?"

"It be Norman of Torn and his fighting men," replied the outlaw.

The faces of the knights blanched, for they were ten against a thousand,
and there were two women with them.

"Who be ye?" said the outlaw.

"I am Richard de Tany of Essex," said the oldest knight, he who
had first spoken, "and these be my daughter and her friend, Mary de
Stutevill. We are upon our way from London to my castle. What would you
of us? Name your price, if it can be paid with honor, it shall be paid;
only let us go our way in peace. We cannot hope to resist the Devil of
Torn, for we be but ten lances. If ye must have blood, at least let the
women go unharmed."

"My Lady Mary is an old friend," said the outlaw. "I called at her
father's home but little more than a year since. We are neighbors, and
the lady can tell you that women are safer at the hands of Norman of
Torn than they might be in the King's palace."

"Right he is," spoke up Lady Mary, "Norman of Torn accorded my mother,
my sister, and myself the utmost respect; though I cannot say as much
for his treatment of my father," she added, half smiling.

"I have no quarrel with you, Richard de Tany," said Norman of Torn.
"Ride on."

The next day, a young man hailed the watch upon the walls of the castle
of Richard de Tany, telling him to bear word to Joan de Tany that Roger
de Conde, a friend of her guest Lady Mary de Stutevill, was without.

In a few moments, the great drawbridge sank slowly into place and Norman
of Torn trotted into the courtyard.

He was escorted to an apartment where Mary de Stutevill and Joan de Tany
were waiting to receive him. Mary de Stutevill greeted him as an old
friend, and the daughter of de Tany was no less cordial in welcoming her
friend's friend to the hospitality of her father's castle.

"Are all your old friends and neighbors come after you to Essex," cried
Joan de Tany, laughingly, addressing Mary. "Today it is Roger de
Conde, yesterday it was the Outlaw of Torn. Methinks Derby will soon be
depopulated unless you return quickly to your home."

"I rather think it be for news of another that we owe this visit from
Roger de Conde," said Mary, smiling. "For I have heard tales, and I
see a great ring upon the gentleman's hand--a ring which I have seen
before."

Norman of Torn made no attempt to deny the reason for his visit, but
asked bluntly if she heard aught of Bertrade de Montfort.

"Thrice within the year have I received missives from her," replied
Mary. "In the first two she spoke only of Roger de Conde, wondering why
he did not come to France after her; but in the last she mentions not
his name, but speaks of her approaching marriage with Prince Philip."

Both girls were watching the countenance of Roger de Conde narrowly,
but no sign of the sorrow which filled his heart showed itself upon his
face.

"I guess it be better so," he said quietly. "The daughter of a De
Montfort could scarcely be happy with a nameless adventurer," he added,
a little bitterly.

"You wrong her, my friend," said Mary de Stutevill. "She loved you and,
unless I know not the friend of my childhood as well as I know myself,
she loves you yet; but Bertrade de Montfort is a proud woman and what
can you expect when she hears no word from you for a year? Thought
you that she would seek you out and implore you to rescue her from the
alliance her father has made for her?"

"You do not understand," he answered, "and I may not tell you; but I ask
that you believe me when I say that it was for her own peace of mind,
for her own happiness, that I did not follow her to France. But, let us
talk of other things. The sorrow is mine and I would not force it upon
others. I cared only to know that she is well, and, I hope, happy. It
will never be given to me to make her or any other woman so. I would
that I had never come into her life, but I did not know what I was
doing; and the spell of her beauty and goodness was strong upon me, so
that I was weak and could not resist what I had never known before in
all my life--love."

"You could not well be blamed," said Joan de Tany, generously. "Bertrade
de Montfort is all and even more than you have said; it be a benediction
simply to have known her."

As she spoke, Norman of Torn looked upon her critically for the first
time, and he saw that Joan de Tany was beautiful, and that when she
spoke, her face lighted with a hundred little changing expressions of
intelligence and character that cast a spell of fascination about her.
Yes, Joan de Tany was good to look upon, and Norman of Torn carried
a wounded heart in his breast that longed for surcease from its
sufferings--for a healing balm upon its hurts and bruises.

And so it came to pass that, for many days, the Outlaw of Torn was a
daily visitor at the castle of Richard de Tany, and the acquaintance
between the man and the two girls ripened into a deep friendship, and
with one of them, it threatened even more.

Norman of Torn, in his ignorance of the ways of women, saw only
friendship in the little acts of Joan de Tany. His life had been a hard
and lonely one. The only ray of brilliant and warming sunshine that had
entered it had been his love for Bertrade de Montfort and hers for him.

His every thought was loyal to the woman whom he knew was not for him,
but he longed for the companionship of his own kind and so welcomed the
friendship of such as Joan de Tany and her fair guest. He did not dream
that either looked upon him with any warmer sentiment than the sweet
friendliness which was as new to him as love--how could he mark the line
between or foresee the terrible price of his ignorance!

Mary de Stutevill saw and she thought the man but fickle and shallow
in matters of the heart--many there were, she knew, who were thus. She
might have warned him had she known the truth, but instead, she let
things drift except for a single word of warning to Joan de Tany.
