St. Louis, Mo., have added to their present establishment a Machinery
Department, from whence the wants of the Western machine-using public
will be supplied. Manufacturers will do well to correspond with them.

On actual test the Eaton Sulky Plow is ahead. Manufacturers wanted to
build them. Territory for sale. Address E. C. Eaton, Pinckneyville,
Ill.

Sir Henry Halford says Vanity Fair Smoking Tobacco has no equal.
Received highest award at Paris, 1878.

Wanted.--Tools for the manufacture of Wagon Axles and Springs. Address
Box 66, Lambertville, N. J.

For Sale.--Norwalk Engine, 16 x 42; little used; excellent order; very
cheap. Address Box 106, Meriden, Ct.

H. W. Johns' Asbestos Liquid Paints contain no water. They are the
best and most economical paints in the world for general purposes,
and for wood and iron structures exposed to severe tests of climatic
changes, saltwater atmosphere, etc. They are 50 per cent more durable
than the best white lead and linseed oil.

1,000 2d hand machines for sale. Send stamp for descriptive price
list. Forsaith & Co., Manchester, N. H.

Florey & Smith, San Francisco, make a specialty of introducing useful
inventions in the Pacific States.

J. C. Hoadley, Consulting Engineer and Mechanical and Scientific
Expert, Lawrence, Mass.

Nickel Plating.--Wenzel's Patent Perforated Carbon Box Anode for
holding Grain Nickel. A. C. Wenzel, 114 Center St., New York City.

Bolt Forging Machine & Power Hammers a specialty. Send for circulars.
Forsaith & Co., Manchester, N. H.

For Sale.--A 6 x 6 Upright Yacht Engine, 6 H.P. Wm. F. Codd, Nantucket,
Mass.

For Solid Wrought Iron Beams, etc., see advertisement. Address Union
Iron Mills, Pittsburgh, Pa., for lithograph, etc.

The Lawrence Engine is the best. See ad. page 381.

Sheet Metal Presses, Ferracute Co., Bridgeton, N. J.

The only Engine in the market attached to boiler having cold bearings.
F. F. & A. B. Landis, Lancaster, Pa.

Brush Electric Light.--20 lights from one machine. Latest & best
light. Telegraph Supply Co., Cleveland, O.

The Lathes, Planers, Drills, and other Tools, new and second-hand, of
the Wood & Light Machine Company, Worcester, are to be sold out very
low by the George Place Machinery Agency, 121 Chambers St., New York.

For the best advertising at lowest prices in Scientific, Mechanical,
and other Newspapers, write to E. N. Freshman & Bros., Advertising
Agents, 186 W. 4th St., Cin., O.

For Town and Village use, comb'd Hand Fire Engine & Hose Carriage,
$350. Forsaith & Co., Manchester, N. H.

Manufacturers of Improved Goods who desire to build up a lucrative
foreign trade, will do well to insert a well displayed advertisement
in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition. This paper has a very large
foreign circulation.

Brick Presses for Fire and Red Brick. Factory, 309 S. 5th St.,
Philadelphia, Pa. S. P. Miller & Son.

Punching Presses, Drop Hammers, and Dies for working Metals, etc. The
Stiles & Parker Press Co., Middletown, Conn.

Hydraulic Presses and Jacks, new and second hand. Lathes and Machinery
for Polishing and Buffing Metals. E. Lyon & Co., 470 Grand St., N. Y.

Nickel Plating.--A white deposit guaranteed by using our material.
Condit, Hanson & Van Winkle, Newark, N. J. English Agency, 18 Caroline
St., Birmingham.

H. Prentiss & Co., 14 Dey St., N. Y., Manufs. Taps, Dies, Screw
Plates, Reamers, etc. Send for list.

Diamond Engineer, J. Dickinson, 64 Nassau St., N. Y.

Solid Emery Vulcanite Wheels--The Solid Original Emery Wheel--other
kinds imitations and inferior. Caution.--Our name is stamped in full
on all our best Standard Belting, Packing, and Hose. Buy that only.
The best is the cheapest. New York Belting and Packing Company, 37 and
38 Park Row, N. Y.

Presses, Dies, and Tools for working Sheet Metals, etc. Fruit
and other Can Tools. Bliss & Williams, Brooklyn, N. Y., and Paris
Exposition, 1878.

The Cameron Steam Pump mounted in Phosphor Bronze is an indestructible
machine. See advertisement.

Wheel Press, Cotton Press, Pipe Line, and Test Mercury Gauges. T.
Shaw, 915 Ridge Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.

The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition is published monthly, about the
15th of each month. Every number comprises most of the plates of the
four preceding weekly numbers of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, with other
appropriate contents, business announcements etc. It forms a large and
splendid periodical of nearly one hundred quarto pages, each number
illustrated with about one hundred engravings. It is a complete record
of American progress in the arts.

Special Planers for Jointing and Surfacing, Band and Scroll Saws,
Universal Wood-workers, etc., manufactured by Bentel, Margedant & Co.,
Hamilton, Ohio.

Boston Blower Co., Boston, Mass. Blowers, Exhaust Fans, Hot Blast
Apparatus. All parts interchangeable material and workmanship
warranted the best. Write for particulars.

We make steel castings from 1/4 to 10,000 lbs. weight 3 times as
strong as cast iron. 12,000 Crank Shafts of this steel now running
and proved superior to wrought iron. Circulars and price, list free.
Address Chester Steel Castings Co., Evelina St., Philadelphia, Pa.

Machine Cut Brass Gear Wheels for Models, etc. (new list). Models,
experimental work, and machine work generally. D. Gilbert & Son, 212
Chester St., Phila., Pa.

Elevators, Freight and Passenger, Shafting, Pulley and Hangers. L. S.
Graves & Son, Rochester, N. Y.

Holly System of Water Supply and Fire Protection for Cities and
Villages, is fully described in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, No.
140.

Howard Patent Safety Elevators. Howard Iron Works Buffalo, N. Y.

Mellen, Williams & Co., 57 Kilby St., Boston, Mass. Wiegand Sectional
Steam Boiler. AEtna Rocking Grate Bar.

North's Lathe Dog. 347 N. 4th St., Philadelphia, Pa.

Self-feeding upright Drilling Machine of superior construction. Drills
holes from 1/8 to 3/4 in. diameter Pratt & Whitney Co., Manufs.,
Hartford, Conn.

Wm. Sellers & Co., Phila., have introduced a new Injector, worked by a
single motion of a lever.

For Shafts, Pulleys, or Hangers, call and see stock kept at 79 Liberty
St. Wm. Sellers & Co.

The Turbine Wheel made by Risdon & Co., Mt. Holly N. J., gave the best
results at Centennial test.

Wheels and Pinions, heavy and light, remarkably strong and durable.
Especially suited for sugar mills and similar work. Pittsburgh Steel
Casting Company, Pittsburgh, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES AND QUERIES [illus.]

       *       *       *       *       *

(1) Detroit asks whether a boat propelled with a force of 3 miles an
hour on still water will with the same propelling force run 6 miles an
hour in a current running 3 miles an hour? A. We think so.

(2) J. C. R asks: Which was the first railroad built in the United
States? That is, a regular, incorporated road, connecting two points,
and conveying passengers, freight, etc. A. We believe that the road
now known as the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad was the first in the
United States chartered for carrying on a general transportation
business.

(3) J. R. E. asks how to make an ordinary sunshade for a telescope
when placed, and what kind of glass it is composed of. A. Any very
dark glass will answer, providing it is perfectly plane. It should be
placed between the eye and eyepiece.

(4) W. H. G. S. writes: I wish to give a blue color to screw heads,
wire and steel. What shall I use? A. Heat them in a sand bath, or
apply shellac or copal varnish, to which a little Prussian blue has
been added.

(5) T. McW. asks (1) for a good recipe for making Babbitt metal. A.
By weight, 4 parts copper, 8 parts antimony, 96 parts tin. 2. What is
meant by heating surface in boilers, and how is it computed? A. The
term heating surface, as ordinarily used, refers to the surface which
has water on one side, and flame or the products of combustion on the
other. 3. I have a peculiar kind of steel which I cannot harden by
fire and water, neither will it caseharden by prussiate of potash.
What can I do with it to harden it? A. Assuming your account to be
correct, we judge that you cannot harden it.

(6) A. Van B. writes: A correspondent in your last issue asks how
to keep rubber belts from slipping. Mine slipped considerably, but I
checked it by throwing powdered rosin in between the belt and pulley
while running. The pulley soon becomes covered with a tough black
coating, very much like leather, and there is no more slip. [This
expedient can be used to advantage in certain cases, but it is
better to have a belt large enough to drive without using any
preparation.--ED.]

(7) E. B. C. asks: 1. Does a more powerful battery produce better
results in telephone or microphone? A. A powerful battery is not
required for either. 2. Can you give me a short description of the
principle and construction of the aerophone? A. We think it has not
been perfected.

(8) A. T. L. asks for a recipe for a liquid boot or shoe polish. A.
Clausen's ink is made as follows: Nutgalls, 8 parts; logwood extract,
10 parts; boil together in water, q. s., and add Castile soap, 4
parts; glycerin, trace. Crocker's--Logwood extract, 6 ozs.; water, 1
gallon; ivory black, 1.5 oz.; glycerin, 1 oz.; bichromate of potassa,
0.125 oz.; copperas, 0.125 oz.; boil together. Sefton's--Orange
shellac, 64 ozs.; alcohol, 4 gallons; pure asphaltum, 60 ozs.; neat's
foot oil, 1 pint; lampblack, q. s. Ovington's--Water, 1 gallon;
logwood extract, 6 ozs.; water, 1 gallon; borax, 6 ozs.; shellac,
1.5 oz.; water, 0.5 pint; bichromate of potassa, 0.375 oz. Mix the
solutions, and add 3 ozs. ammonia. Shaw's--Borax, 3 ozs.; orange
shellac, 5 ozs.; water, q. s.; boil and add soluble aniline black or
nigrosine, q. s. Rub the spots with strong aqueous solution of ferric
chloride, and dry before applying the dressing.

(9) J. S. & R. M. write: 1. We propose putting in a steam engine of 20
horse power, and we are informed there is an engine that weighs 2,700
lbs., that has a balance wheel weighing 500 lbs., cylinder 10 x 10
inches; cutting off at 3/4 stroke, running at 180 to 200 revolutions
a minute, and they say that it is 20 horse at 70 lbs. steam. Will such
an engine develop 20 horse power? A. The engine would develop 20 horse
power under the above conditions, if well constructed. 2. How can
we calculate the power of an engine? A. To determine the power of
an engine, multiply the mean pressure on the piston in lbs., by the
piston speed in feet per minute, and divide the product by 33,000.

(10) A. L. G. asks: 1. With a boiler 15 inches in diameter by 30
inches in height, with five 11/2 inch tubes 18 inches long, firebox 12
x 12, and all made of iron plates 1/4 inch thick. What is the greatest
number of pounds of steam to the square inch it will hold, and what
fraction of a horse power will it give to an engine having a cylinder
2 x 4 inches, situated 2 feet from the boiler, and connected by 40
inches of steam pipe? A. You can carry 150 lbs. of steam, and might
develop 1 horse power. 2. What is meant by the pitch of a wheel in a
propeller, and what is the inclination of a cylinder? A. The pitch of
a propeller is the distance it would advance in the direction of its
axis at each revolution, if it worked without slip. The inclination of
a cylinder refers to the angle made by its axis with a horizontal or
vertical line.

(11) J. H. asks: 1. Has steel been used for portable boilers? A. Yes.
2. What size boiler is required for an engine having a 3 x 4 inch
cylinder? A. Diameter, 24 inches; height, 45 inches; heating surface,
65 to 70 square feet.

(12) J. A. M. asks: How large must an air pump be for an engine steam
cylinder 8 x 8, making 100 revolutions per minute with 90 lbs. of
steam, allowing the pump to be 4 inches stroke, double acting, to be
attached to surface condenser? A. Diameter, 31/2 inches.

(13) J. A. F. asks: 1. What shall I paint my boiler and smoke stack
with, and where can I get the paint? My engine is a thrashing engine,
and of course is out of doors during the fall of the year. A. Get
some black varnish made from petroleum, from a dealer in machinists'
supplies. 2. How shall I care for the boiler inside? A. Leave the
boiler perfectly dry, unless you can coat the interior with oil. 3.
What shall I do for the engine. Is it necessary to take the piston out
of cylinder and oil it? A. If the engine is to stand for some time,
remove the piston, coat it and the cylinder with tallow; the same for
the journals. Cover all finished parts of the engine with a mixture of
white lead and tallow. 4. I find my steam gauge does not indicate less
than 10 lbs. when boiler is cold. What is the trouble and how can it
be repaired? A. In such a case it is best to send the gauge to a maker
for repairs.

(14) "Zebra" wishes to know the best test of the genuineness of
white lead; also the simplest way to try the comparative value of
two samples of ground white lead. Also the name of the best work to
consult upon the manufacture of Portland cement. A. See answer No. 29,
p. 283, current volume, SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Also pp. 102-105 Normandy
and Noad's "Commercial Analysis." The relative value of different
samples of white lead in oil is roughly judged from the weight of
a given measured quantity, the covering properties when compared on
glass with a sample of finest white lead, and the color and general
appearance of the sample. You may consult Reid's "Manufacture of
Portland Cement."

(15) J. B. B. asks: Can I arrange an electric battery so as to heat a
platinum wire for the purpose of cutting wood? Is it practicable? A.
Two or three Bunsen cells will do it. It is impracticable save as an
experiment.

(16) D. S. M. asks how to color butter to make it yellow, without
injuring it in any way. A. A little annotto is often used. If pure, it
is not injurious.

(17) H. C. M. asks: What substances are there that will absorb light
during the day when exposed to light, and give it out again at night?
A. 1. Heat strontium theosulphate for fifteen minutes over a good
Bunsen gas lamp and then for 5 minutes over a blast lamp. 2. Heat
equal parts of strontium carbonate and lac Supt gently for 5
minutes, then strongly for 25 minutes over a Bunsen lamp, and finally
5 minutes over a blast lamp. 3. Precipitate strong aqueous solution
of strontium chloride by means of sulphuric acid, dry the precipitate,
and heat it to redness for some time in a current of hydrogen, then
over a Bunsen lamp for 10 minutes, and for 20 minutes over a blast
lamp. Mix any of these with pure melted paraffin for use as a paint,
and expose for a time to sunlight. The two former yield a greenish
phosphorescence in the dark, the latter a bluish light.

(18) Z. asks: Is the Great African Desert below the level of the sea,
and if so, could it be made into an inland sea by flooding from the
ocean? A. A considerable, though relatively small, portion of the
Sahara is below the sea level, and the flooding of the lowest portion
has been proposed. The greater part of North Africa lies at a higher
level, the exception being a chain of old lake beds or chotts on the
