stretching the cloth while being woven. It is so constructed as to
adjust itself as the cloth is being woven and carried forward to the
cloth beam.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW WOODWORKING AND HOUSE AND CARRIAGE BUILDING INVENTIONS.

IMPROVED THILL COUPLING.


Josiah Kitzmiller, Keedysville, Md.--This is an improvement upon that
form of thill coupling in which a pivoted cap is employed to slide
over the end of the bolt or pin which secures the eye of the thill
iron to the lugs or ears of the axle clip, the said cap serving to
prevent the said pin from becoming accidentally displaced without
the use of a screw nut or other securing device. It consists in the
construction and arrangements of a spring catch for holding
said pivoted cap down to its place against any tendency to rise
accidentally, the said spring catch being located in a transverse
groove or recess in the cap and between the cap and the adjacent lug
and being provided with a beveled head and square shoulder, which
engages with the under side of the lug to hold the cap down. The merit
of this arrangement is that the catch is concealed from sight by the
complete inclosure of the spring and the position of the beveled head
beneath the coupling, and hence the exterior of the coupling
presents a plain, smooth, and neat appearance, free from catches
or projections, which would be liable to hook into the clothing in
getting into or out of the carriage.


IMPROVED VEHICLE SPRING.


Fredrick W. Faber, Columbus, Texas.--This invention consists in
combining an auxiliary spring with a spring suspended from goosenecks
attached to the axle, the said auxiliary spring being attached to the
axle, and provided with yokes for embracing the suspended spring, the
object being to provide a device for steadying the main spring and
preventing lateral motion.


IMPROVED TIRE HEATER.


Philip W. Cassil, New Athens, O.--To the top of the furnace or firebox
is secured the ring heating chamber, which consists of the ring plate
having a ring flange or rim formed around its outer edge. To the ring
plate are attached the outer ends of a number of arms, the inner ends
of which meet in the center of the ring plate, and have a journal
attached to them. The journal may be hollow or solid, and upon it is
placed a hub to which are attached a number of radial arms, to the
outer ends of which is attached a rim. The rim fits against the
inner part of the ring plate, and forms the inner wall of the heating
chamber.


IMPROVED CHIMNEY COWL.


Andrew F. Barry and Ira G. Lane, New York city.--This invention is a
chimney cowl or ventilator which will deflect the natural current of
air, so that a draft is continually maintained. To the upper end of
a sheet metal chimney top is attached a strip of metal, bent into a
spiral form, and having spaces between the successive convolutions of
the spiral. The spirals overlap each other, and increase in diameter
towards the top. The coils are connected at intervals by stays, and
the end of the upper and outer coil is tapped on to the one that
precedes it, and is trimmed off horizontally, and upon it is placed an
ornamental border. The wind, striking this top from any direction,
is deflected so as to cause a draft. The device is claimed to be
ornamental in appearance, is cheaply and easily made, and does not
obstruct the chimney.


IMPROVED WAGON AXLE.


Wilbur F. Buckelew, Shreveport, La.--The object of this invention is
to strengthen the wooden axles of wagons, and to fasten the skeins
so that they will not become loose. A wooden axle is grooved
longitudinally upon its under side throughout its entire length, to
receive a rod, which is reduced in size at its ends, and threaded to
receive the nuts. This rod is bent so as to conform to the tapering
portion of the axle upon which the skein is placed. The skeins, having
countersunk outer ends, are placed on the ends of the axle, and nuts
having a beveled face corresponding to the countersunk ends of the
skeins, are placed on the ends of the rod, and clamp the skeins
securely on the axle. By giving the nut this peculiar form, it
contains more threads than it otherwise would, and is in consequence
stronger. The rod not only serves to retain the skeins securely in
their places, but it also acts as a stay or truss rod for the axle,
greatly strengthening it.


IMPROVED WAGON BRAKE LEVER.


Jacob P. Outson, Racine, Wis.--This invention consists of a curved
ratchet bar and two levers working on the same pivot, one carrying a
spring pawl, that engages with the curved ratchet bar, and the other
carrying a stud for throwing the pawl out of the notches of the
ratchet bar. When the brake is to be applied to the wheels of the
wagon, one lever is thrown forward, carrying with it the other lever;
and the pawl, by engaging the notches of the bar, holds the lever
at any desired point. When it is desired to release the brake first
named, the lever is drawn back, moving first the length of the slot,
the stud striking the pawl and throwing it out of engagement with
the ratchet bar, when the lever may be carried back to any required
position.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW HOUSEHOLD INVENTIONS.

IMPROVED BAKER.


Luna Drew, Irving, Wis.--This is an improved baking attachment to
heating stoves of all kinds, so that the heat of the same may be
utilized for baking, warming, raising bread, and other purposes. It
consists of a baker supported on adjustable legs, and secured to
a round, oval, or square heating stove by suitable top and bottom
slides. A warmer is arranged below the baker. The front of the baker
is detachable, to admit its use for baking or warming purposes.


IMPROVED FIRE KINDLER.


John G. Distler, Brooklyn (Greenpoint P. O.), N. Y.--This invention is
an improved fire kindler, simple in construction, convenient in use,
and effective in operation, burning freely, and lasting long enough
to fully kindle the fire. It is formed of corncobs, steamed, having
a number of transverse holes formed through them, dried, dipped in
melted white resin, and wrapped in paper. The corncobs are steamed to
prevent them from breaking while being bored. The cobs, while still
moist with the steam, have a number of transverse holes bored in them
with a rapidly revolving bit, and are then thoroughly dried. When dry
the cobs are dipped in melted white resin, and before they are fully
cold they are wrapped in ordinary paper, which adheres to them,
prevents any odor from passing off into the room and prevents them
from soiling the hands while being handled.


IMPROVED MATCH SAFE.


John A. Field, Racine, Wis.--This is a match safe, the back, top, and
front of which are made from a single piece of tin, and to which a
lighter of wire cloth is attached, which is placed over a picture, to
give the match safe an ornamental appearance. It is so arranged that
the matches are delivered singly to a pair of hooks, from which they
may be readily taken by the fingers.


IMPROVED NURSERY CHAIR.


Luther I. Adams, East Templeton, Mass.--This chair may be readily
converted into a high or low chair, and in which an attached toy box
retains the toys when the chair is in either position. The armed low
chair has curved legs. Between the rear legs a shaft is journaled,
upon which two wheels are placed. The support for the low parts
when it is used as a high chair consists of two similar sides, each
composed of two curved strips, which are held together partly by
crossbars and partly by triangular metallic pieces that are attached
to their upper ends and pivoted to the center of the crossbars that
connect the legs. A shaft, having upon it wheels, is journaled in the
curved strips at the back of the chair near the lower ends. The toy
box consists of a tray that is concaved at its upper edge and is made
convex at its lower end, and is provided with a cover that extends
over a portion of it, and forms a receptacle for toys when the box is
in a vertical position.


IMPROVED FRUIT JAR.


Catherine Hastings, Oswego, N. Y.--This is an improved attachment for
fruit jars, to enable them to be conveniently handled when filled with
hot fruit, and at other times. It does not interfere with standing the
full fruit jars upon their tops, if desired, and enables the jars to
be used for holding and carrying various articles. There is a metallic
screw band, by which the cover is secured upon the mouth of jar. To
the opposite sides of the band are soldered lugs to which are pivoted
the ends of a wire bail.


IMPROVED VENTILATOR.


Charles E. Darling, Lewiston, Me., assignor of two thirds his right
to Henry Free and John E. Lydston, of same place.--This ventilator for
windows, doors, etc., works in noiseless manner, and is watertight. It
consists of radially recessed face disks, clamped to the glass frame,
and having an intermediate pivoted disk with corresponding recesses
that are set by a crank lever and cords into open or closed piston.


IMPROVED BAKING PAN.


Charles I. Kagey and Fred W. Stoneburner, Arcola, Ill.--The body of
this roaster is made of sheet iron, and is rectangular in form. To one
end of the body a cap is secured, and to the other end a rectangular
cast iron frame is fitted, to which a cast iron door is hinged. At the
top of the roaster, at or near its center, an aperture is made, which
is closed by a tapering projection that extends downward from a plate
that is hinged to the top of the roaster. Rings are attached to the
top of the roaster near each end for convenience in handling. The
apparatus, when in use, is placed upon a stove or in an oven.


IMPROVED STOVEPIPE SHELF.


John W. Jackson, Sharpsville, Pa.--A wire of the requisite strength is
bent into the shape required to form the horizontal support. To this
the shelf is attached, and also the bracket, which rests against the
pipe for supporting the same.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW MECHANICAL AND ENGINEERING INVENTIONS.

IMPROVED WATER WHEEL.


Isaac Mallery, Dryden, N. Y.--This invention relates to downward
discharge turbine water wheels; and it consists in the employment, in
combination with a stationary chute case and an independent adjustable
frame, of a series of gates, which are pivoted to this frame and
adjustable to the periphery of said case. The bucket wheel is formed
of curved and inclined buckets arranged around a hub, and applied to a
cap ring and a skirting. This wheel is keyed on a driving shaft,
stepped on a bridge, and passed up through a tubular sleeve, which is
cast on the top of a cylindrical chute or guide case. This case is
rigidly secured to the base or bed frame, and constructed with oblique
issues, which direct the currents of inflowing water against the
buckets of the wheel.


IMPROVED VALVE MOTION FOR STEAM ENGINES.


Henry Haering, New York city.--This is an improved device for
operating the slide valve of a steam engine from the piston rod of
said engine, in such a way that the valve will be moved slightly to
partially uncover the inlet and exhaust ports as the piston completes
its stroke, and its motion will be continued in the same direction as
the piston begins to move upon the return stroke, until the ports are
fully opened, and will then stand still, with the ports fully open,
until the piston has nearly completed its return stroke. It consists
in the combination of a three-armed bar, two levers, connecting bar,
and connecting lever, with the piston rod and the valve stem of
a steam engine; and in the combination of a lockbar, spring, two
cylinders, and pin, with the two levers and the three-armed bar.
As the piston approaches the end of its stroke, the upper end of an
upright arm of a bar strikes the concaved side of the upper part of
one of the levers operating it, and moving the slide valve to close
the ports and admit steam in front of the piston. As the piston begins
its return stroke the inclined upper surface of one of the side arms
of the three-armed bar comes in contact with the lower end of the said
lever, and continues its motion in the same direction, fully opening
the said inlet port, which remains fully open until the piston has
again nearly completed its stroke.


IMPROVED REVERSIBLE ECCENTRIC.


George G. Lafayette and Pitt W. Strong, Brockville, Ontario,
Canada.--This is an improved device to act as a substitute for the
link motion on a reversible engine, or for adjusting the stroke of
a boiler-feed pump, while in motion, so as to regulate the amount of
feed water supplied to the boiler, without the use of an overflow pipe
and cock, and keeping thereby the pump constantly in motion, which
will save the annoyance frequently experienced in pumps by their
refusing to prime after having been stopped for a short time. It may
be further used to control the speed of all kinds of engines, whether
with plain slide valve or with a cut-off valve working on top of the
other by connecting directly to the device a suitable governor, so
as to automatically shorten and lengthen the stroke of the valve, and
give a uniform motion to the engine under different loads.


IMPROVED EXPANDING REAMER.


Robert Blair, San Francisco, Cal.--In this improved tool there is
a clamping bolt by which the cutters are clamped fast after being
adjusted. The cutters are arranged to slide directly across the stock
in dovetail grooves, and are slotted to slide along the clamping bolt
and washers, by which they are clamped fast after they are adjusted
to the position required by a toothed pinion and racks. The pinion is
arranged in the stock between the cutters, and the shaft extends out
of the end of the stock, with a nick in the end for a screwdriver to
turn it.

       *       *       *       *       *




