tone was sardonic, at the end.

"I don't know."

"I hope I don't either," said Terry dourly.

He was in no amiable mood. He'd made too many guesses like those Davis
had mentioned. He was beginning to have less and less hope that they
were untrue. Each new development made any imaginable cause of these
events just so much more appalling to think about.

In an hour, three boats came back from the small bay into which all the
fish of the lagoon had been crowded. Terry turned off the underwater
horn. A stout man walked slowly along the shore with a heavy burden of
known edible fish. He was the island's cook, and he had speared them
from the beach. The boats, altogether, had speared and captured not less
than sixty specimens of fish normally found only many thousand feet
below the ocean's surface. Upon inspection, all of them were found to
have deftly punctured swim bladders, punctured with so slender a barb
that the opening would close by itself, except when serving for the
release of intolerably expanding gas.

Before noon, seven more plastic objects had been found among the
deep-sea fish. Three seemed identical to the one Terry had found. Two
others were identical to each other but of a different kind, and the
last two were of two different types altogether. Only those like the one
tested by Terry seemed sensitive to sounds, which they changed into
other sounds at a twenty-thousand-cycle frequency, or higher. The rest
did nothing that could be detected.

During the afternoon, news came to distract the absorption of the
tracking station staff in the lagoon's fish. The short-wave operator
came running to the wharf, waving a written message. The deck of the
_Esperance_ was not a pretty sight, just then, with the dissection that
had been taking place on it. Jug was beginning to flush the debris
overside.

The short-wave operator arrived. Dr. Morton read the message. He raised
his voice.

"Here's a fancy one!" he told the assembled company. "Space-radar's
picked up a new object coming in from nowhere. It will probably orbit
once before it hits the air and burns. By the line of motion it should
pass nearly overhead here. We're alerted to get it under observation
and watch it!" He waved the message in a large gesture. "We've got to
get ourselves set up! The argument on the path of last night's bolide
and why it fell where it did is again in order. We'll see what we can do
about computing the fall-point of this!"

He headed for the shore. The staff followed, babbling. Somebody's
mathematics would be verified, and with it his views on the possible
effects of terrestrial magnetism on objects approaching the earth.

"We ought to get these plastic things to Manila," Davis said slowly.
"They need to be compared to others. But I think we'll wait and see this
bolide first."

A heated argument started in the tracking station staff. From Dr. Morton
downward, almost to the station's cook, the most varied predictions were
made. The official computation from Washington, made from the observed
course and height and speed, predicted that the bolide would land
somewhere in the South Pacific. Dr. Morton predicted a fall in the China
Sea, within a certain precisely stated number of miles from Thrawn
Island. Other predictions varied.

At exactly fourteen minutes after eight--a time way ahead of the
official schedule but exactly as Dr. Morton had predicted--the bolide
passed overhead. It was an amazing spectacle. It left a trail of flame
behind, across thirty degrees of sky. It went on and on....

Less than ten minutes later the short-wave radio informed the island
that the shooting star had been seen to fall in the sea. It had been
observed by a plane which was then circling over the area in which the
_Esperance_ had encountered the circle of shining sea. The plane was
there to see if the phenomenon would occur again. It didn't.

But the plane saw the bolide as it struck the sea, and huge masses of
steam and spray arose. The bolide was not white-hot, then, as when it
passed over Thrawn Island. It was barely of dull-red brightness. It hit
the sea and sank, leaving steam behind.

The water was forty-five hundred fathoms deep at that point.




_Six_


Fourteen hours later the _Esperance_ made ready to sail from Thrawn
Island. Her purpose was to carry the plastic objects to Manila, where
they would be turned over to specialized laboratories to be studied.
Five such objects had been found before: one in the Thrawn Island
lagoon, while the satellite-tracking station was under construction, and
four attached to exotic fish brought to market by the commercial fishing
boat _La Rubia_. Now there were eight more, of four different kinds. To
the laboratories would go Terry's observation that one kind of these
objects absorbed sound at audible frequencies and retransmitted it at
much higher ones, but only under water. All this was very interesting
and very puzzling.

But a serious disturbance had arisen at the tracking station.

Dr. Morton came to the _Esperance_ before her departure. He had a
problem. He'd predicted to the minute, and almost to the mile, the
landing of the bolide of the night before. That was the first accurate
prediction of the kind in history. But his forecast stood alone in its
precision. Nobody else had even come near being right. Now he was being
insistently queried by astronomers the world over. They wanted to know
how he'd done it. In particular, they wanted to know how he'd figured
that the bolide would lose just so many feet per second velocity,
neither more nor less, in a three-quarter orbit around the world. Nobody
else had such a figure in his equation for the landing spot. Dr. Morton
had. His prediction had been exact. Where did he get that necessary but
inexplicable figure?

He beckoned Davis and Terry to go below with him, in the _Esperance's_
after cabin. Terry hesitated.

"You may as well hear my troubles," said Morton vexedly. "You're largely
responsible for them."

Terry followed uneasily. He didn't see how Dr. Morton could hold them
responsible. He had guarded his own guesses about the _Esperance's_
discoveries against even the slightest expression. He couldn't let
himself believe in their correctness, but he was appalled at the
inadequacy of all other explanations of past events.

"In sixteen months," said Morton annoyedly, down below, "we've spotted
six bolides coming in to land in the Luzon Deep. That's out of all
reason! Of course, it could be a mathematical series of wildly unlikely
coincidences, such as probability says may happen sometimes. Up to last
night that seemed to be a possible explanation."

Davis nodded. His expression was odd.

"But now," said Morton somehow indignantly, "that's ruled out! It's
ruled out by last night's bolide, and yesterday's fishing experiment,
and that business of the shining sea, plus those damned plastic gadgets
and deep sea fish thriving in shallow water! There's no reasonable
explanation for such things, and they're not mere coincidences!"

"I'm afraid," admitted Davis, "that they're not."

"The obvious explanation," said Morton doggedly, "I refuse to name or
consider. But nevertheless the question is not whether a theory or an
explanation is unlikely or not. The question is whether it's true!"

Davis nodded. Terry had to agree. But the way people are trained in
modern times puts a great emphasis on reason, often at the expense of
fact. Terry felt the customary civilized reluctance to accept a
statistically improbable idea.

"I'm on a spot," fumed Morton. "I calculated that the damned bolide
would slow after it went into orbit around the earth. I calculated that
it would slow exactly so much. Do you want to know how I figured how
much it should slow down? I'll tell you! I calculated exactly how much
it would have to slow to be able to fall into the Luzon Deep! It did
slow. It did fall there. But how am I going to explain that to
Washington?"

Terry suddenly felt a warm sympathy for Morton. It is bad enough to
dispute with oneself when something incredible happens. But Dr. Morton
had gone out on a limb. He'd been caught psychologically naked telling
the truth, and now he was asked to explain it. And he couldn't.

"This thing has got to come to a head!" he said angrily. "Sooner or
later they'll find out that I don't calculate where it'll land by its
behavior in space but by its landing spot! Davis, you've talked about
stirring something up. For Heaven's sake, do it! You may save my
reputation! And you...."

"I'll try to think of something," said Davis reservedly.

"I've got to have proof that my suspicions are right or wrong before I'm
ruined. I know what you're planning to do. Do it! Is there anything that
can be done here to help?"

Davis spread out his hands helplessly. But Terry said, "Yes. Send a boat
every so often to listen at the gap in the reef. Put an oar overboard
and put your ear to the handle. You should hear the underwater hum, if
it's still there. It was there this morning."

Morton looked at him suspiciously.

"Why check on it? Should it change?"

"Perhaps," said Terry. "We've speared most of the deep-sea fish in the
lagoon. Maybe we've interfered with ... the reports from the plastic
objects, telling what was happening up here. There may be a reaction. If
so, most likely the humming will stop, and after a longer or shorter
time begin again. And then, if my guess is right, there'll be more
deep-sea creatures in the lagoon."

"Ha," said Morton. "I think you and I have the same kind of delusions!
All right. I'll see that that's done. You two do the rest."

He went abovedecks. When Terry got on deck, Dr. Morton's angular figure
was already marching along the wharf to the shore.

There was no ceremony of departure. The _Esperance_ cast off and her
engine started. She moved toward the lagoon entrance under power only,
but her sails were hoisted as she floated on, and Jug Bell was trimming
the jib when she cleared the opening to the sea.

The humming in the water was still audible to the submarine ear, close
to the land. It occurred to Terry to take a bearing on the source of the
sound, noting both the compass direction and the vertical angle from
the reef. If his vertical-angle reading was accurate, a line from the
reef to the source of the sound would touch the bottom at twenty-seven
thousand feet down, between four and five miles away.

The _Esperance_ sailed on. The humming duly faded away. Terry left the
recorder picking up undersea sounds, without recording them. It relayed
the underwater sounds to the people on deck. It was in Terry's mind to
keep at least half an ear cocked to it, in case the mooing sounds, heard
and recorded elsewhere, should come again.

They did not. The _Esperance_ went methodically on her way, headed south
by east, under sail. A slowly swaying horizon of unbroken sea was all
about. There was nothing in the least unusual or mysterious to be seen
anywhere.

Presently, Terry found himself in conversation with Deirdre, and the
world seemed so blatantly normal that their talk dodged all unusual
trends. They talked about their childhoods, about things they had done
and places they had seen.

At about four in the afternoon Nick bellowed, "_Thar she blows!_" in a
fine attempt at proper whaling ship style, and all the _Esperance's_
company joined to watch a spouting far ahead. The yacht changed course a
little, and presently reached a pod of sperm whales at the surface. The
huge dark bodies moved leisurely through the water. Jud displayed great
erudition on the subject and explained in detail how their spouting
proved them to be sperm whales. Deirdre pointed out a baby whale close
beside a larger one.

They sailed on, leaving the whales behind. The crew-cuts, inevitably,
argued about them. They canvassed all the information and misinformation
they possessed and came up with a heated discussion about whales, how
they can swim down to the enormous depths without suffering from the
bends on rising again. Then the conversation turned to the food they
eat. Whalers, in the old days, had found snouts of squids and undigested
sections of squids' tentacles in the stomachs of harpooned sperm whales.
There were reports of sections of tentacles four feet thick, implying a
startling total size, all of which proved that the whales had been at
the bottom of the ocean, where such gigantic squids can be found. These
were the reports of reliable whaling skippers. Certainly the scars made
by the tentacular arms of huge squids, indicating battle, have been
found on the skin of sperm whales, and there have been reports of
battles on the surface between whales and squids of sizes most
naturalists would be unwilling to certify. In such cases it was assumed
that the squids had been attacked at the bottom of the sea and had
followed the whale to the surface when it came up in need of air.
Certainly only an enormous squid would be able to sustain a battle with
a whale.

Terry listened to the discussion. Everybody had his own opinion.

"You'd never settle the argument, unless you could put a camera and a
flash gun on a whale and get an instrument-report from it."

Which was not a new idea, of course. But it was curious that the thought
of sending self-reporting instruments down to the bottom of the sea had
been suggested by his own suspicion that similar instruments had been
sent up from below. Sounding lines had been lowered with thermometers
and nets and sampling machines. Core-takers had been dropped to get
samplings of abyssal mud. But tethered instrumentation is never more
than so useful.

Deirdre said something. Terry realized that she'd repeated it. He'd
become absorbed in the possibilities of instrument-reporting from the
surface to the depths and back again.

"You're not listening," protested Deirdre. "I'm talking about the
bathyscaphe that ought to be in Manila any day now."

"I'm trying to picture myself going down in a bathyscaphe," said Terry
hastily. "I don't think I'd like it."

A bathyscaphe is a metal sphere with walls and windows of enormous
thickness, hung from a metal balloon filled with gasoline for flotation.
It is lowered to appalling depths with the help of heavy ballast, and is
equipped with electric motors for independent motion. It carries
powerful electric reflectors which allow as much as thirty or forty feet
of visibility. It rises to the surface again when its ballast is
dumped. There are only three such undersea exploring devices in the
whole world.

"I'm not at all sure you wouldn't like it," said Deirdre.

Terry scowled at his own thoughts. There are opinions a man holds firmly
without ever being aware of them, unless they are challenged, and if
that happens, he is deeply suspicious of the challenge because it
suggests that his opinion needs to be re-examined. Terry had been
gathering scraps of information here, and unquestionable items there,
resisting a conclusion all the while.

It seemed fantastic to think that the plastic objects carried by
deep-sea fish out of their natural environment were actually man-made
instruments--telemetering apparatus closely comparable to the devices
used to transmit information from outer space. It was wildly imaginative
to suppose that they transmitted information from the water surface to
the depths of the ocean; that fish had been driven up from the abyss in
order to report what went on at the surface. Report to whom? It was the
most fantastic of fantasies to think that there was curiosity, in the
Luzon Deep, about the manners and customs of the inhabitants of the
surface waters and of those areas not covered by the sea.

But Terry stopped short. There were limits to the ideas he would allow
his brain to think about.

Deirdre walked away, and he assured himself he never thought of anything
so ridiculous as the conclusions he had just reached. Presently, dinner
was served, and Terry painstakingly acted like a perfectly rational
