terrible current."

"What do you suppose caused the awful heat, and then made it go away
again?" asked Jack.

"I can only make a guess at it," Mr. Henderson answered. "There are many
strange things we will come across if we stay here long, I believe. As
for the fire I think we must have passed a sort of interior volcano."

"But what sort of a place do you think we have come to, Professor?"
asked Mark.

"It is hard to say," the scientist replied. "We are certainly somewhere
within the earth. Our gage tells us it is five hundred miles. That may
or may not be correct, but I believe we are several hundred miles under
the crust, at all events. As to what sort of a place it is, you can see
for yourselves."

"But how is it we can breathe here, and things can grow?" asked Bill,
who was beginning to lose his fright at the thought of being practically
buried alive.

"I do not know what makes such things possible," Mr. Henderson replied,
"but that there is air here is a certainty. I can hardly believe it is
drawn from the surface of the earth, down the big hole, and I am
inclined to think this place of the under-world has an atmosphere of its
own, and one which produces different effects than does our own."

"They certainly have larger flowers than we have," said Mark. "See how
big they grow, and what strong colors they have."

He pointed to the port, against which some of the blooms were nodding in
the wind that had sprung up, for, in spite of the many differences, the
under-world was in some respects like the upper one.

"Probably the difference in the atmosphere accounts for that," the
professor said. "It enables things to grow larger. And, by the way,
Mark, that reminds me of something you said about seeing some horrible
monster fleeing from the ship. Did you dream that?"

"I did see something horrible, Professor," he answered. "I'm not
positive what it was, but I'll tell you as nearly as I can what it was
like."

Thereupon Mark detailed what he had seen.

"But how could anything, least of all some big monster, be concealed in
the storeroom, and we not know anything about it?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"I thought you did know something of it," replied Mark.

"Who, me? My dear boy, you must be dreaming again. Why should I want to
conceal any being in the storeroom? Come, there is something back of
this. Tell me all you know of it. I can't imagine why you think I was
hiding something in the apartment."

"I thought so because you were always so anxious not to have me go near
it," answered the boy. "Don't you remember when you saw me going toward
it, several times, you warned me away?"

"So I did!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson, a light breaking over his face.
"But, Mark, it was not because I had hidden some human being or animal
there. I can't tell you what it is yet, save that I can say it is merely
a machine of mine that I have invented. For reasons of my own I don't
want any one to see it yet. Perhaps it may never be seen. I thought, not
long ago, that we might have to undertake a terrible risk in escaping
from this place. I directed you to go to the storeroom--but there, I
can't say any more, my friends. Sufficient that I had nothing in the
animal line concealed there."

"But I am certain there was some beast or human being in there,"
insisted Mark. "I heard curious noises in there. Besides, how do you
account for the food disappearing and the door being open at times?"

"It might have been rats," said Jack.

"I don't believe there are rats in the ship," put in the professor.
"More likely it was one of us who got up hungry and took the victuals."

"I'm sorry I can't agree with you," Mark added respectfully. "I am sure
some strange being was on board this ship, and I believe it has now
escaped. Who or what it was I can't say, but you'll find I'm right, some
day."

"All right," spoke Mr. Henderson with a laugh. "I like to see any one
brave enough to stick up for his opinion, but, at the same time, I can't
very well imagine any person or thing being concealed in that storeroom
ever since we started. How could it get in?"

Mark did not answer, but there came to him the recollection of that
night, previous to the sailing of the _Flying Mermaid_, when he had
observed some strange shadow that seemed to glide aboard the craft.

"Now let's forget all about such things," the professor went on. "We are
in a strange country, and there are many things to see and do. Let's
explore a little. Then we must see what we can do with the ship. We are
dependent on it, and it will not do to allow it to remain in a damaged
state. We expect to travel many miles in the interior of the earth if it
is possible, and we have only our craft to go in."

"I reckon we'd all better assimilate into our interior progression some
molecules and atoms of partly disentegrated matter in order to supply
combustion for the carbonaceous elements and assist in the manufacture
of red corpuscles," said Washington, appearing in the door, with a broad
grin on his good-natured face.

"Which, being interpreted," the professor said, "means, I suppose, that
we had better eat something to keep our digestive apparatus in good
working order?"

"Yo' done guessed it!" exclaimed the colored man, relapsing into his
ordinary speech. "I'se got a meal all ready."

They agreed that they might not have another opportunity soon to partake
of food, so they all gathered about the table, on which Washington had
spread a good meal.

"Come on, let's go outside and view this new and strange land at closer
quarters," the professor said, when they had satisfied their appetites.
"We can't see much from inside the ship."

Accordingly the heavy door in the side of the _Mermaid_ was slid back,
and, for the first time the travelers stepped out on the surface of the
land in the interior of the earth.

At first it seemed no different than the ordinary land to which they
were accustomed. But they soon found it had many strange attributes. The
queer shifting and changing light, with the myriad of hues was one of
them, but to this the adventurers had, by this time, become accustomed,
though it was, none the less, a marvel to them. It was odd enough to see
the landscape blood red one instant, and a pale green the next, as it
does when you look through differently colored glasses.

Then, too, they noticed that the grass and flowers grew much more
abundantly than in the outer part of the world. They saw clover six feet
high, and blades of grass even taller. In some places the growth of
grass was so big that they were in danger of getting lost in it.

"If the grass is like this, what will the trees be?" asked Mark.

"There are some away over there," Jack replied. "We'll have to take a
sail over. They must be several hundred feet high."

"Well, at any rate, here's a little brook, and the water looks good to
drink," went on Mark. "I'm thirsty, so here goes."

He hurried to where a stream was flowing sluggishly between grassy
banks. The water was as clear as crystal, and Mark got down on his face
and prepared to sip some of the liquid up.

But, no sooner had his lips touched it, than he sprang up with a cry and
stood gazing at the water.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack. "Hot?"

"No, it isn't hot," Mark replied, "but it isn't water. It's white
molasses!"

"White molasses?" repeated the professor, coming up at that moment.
"What are you talking about?"

He stooped down and dipped his finger into the stream. He drew it up
quickly, and there ran from it big drops that flowed as slowly as the
extract of the sugarcane does in cold weather.

"You're about right, Mark," he said. "It's water but it's almost as
thick as molasses." He touched his finger to his tongue. "It's good to
drink, all right," he went on, "only it will be a little slow going
down."

Then he dipped up a palm full, and let it trickle down his throat.

"It is the strangest water I ever saw," he added. "It must be that the
lack of some peculiar property of air, which we have on the surface, has
caused this. I must make some notes on it," and he drew out pencil and
paper. He was about to jot down some facts when he was interrupted by a
cry from Washington.

"Come and see what's the matter with this stone!" he cried.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                       CAUGHT BY A STRANGE PLANT


"Washington is in trouble!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. Followed by the two
boys he ran to where the colored man stood in a stooping position over a
small pile of stones.

"What is it? Has something bit you?" asked the scientist, as he came up
on the run.

"No, but I can't git this stone up!" Washington said. "Look at what a
little stone it is, but I can't lift it. Something must have happened to
me. Maybe some one put th' evil eye on me! Maybe I'm bewitched!"

"Nonsense!" exclaimed the professor, "what did you want the stone for?"

"Nothin' in particular," replied Washington, still tugging away at the
stone, which was the size of his head. "I was just goin' t' throw it at
a big bird, but when I went to lift it this little stone 'peared t' be
glued fast."

Washington moved aside to give Mr. Henderson a chance to try to pick up
the piece of rock. As the scientist grasped it a look of surprise came
over his features:

"This is most remarkable!" he exclaimed. "I can't budge it. I wonder if
a giant magnet is holding it down."

He tugged and tugged until he was red in the face. Then he beckoned to
the two boys, and they came to his aid. There was barely room for them
all to each get one hand on the rock, and then, only after a powerful
tug did it come up. Almost instantly it dropped back to the earth.

"This is remarkable!" the professor said. "I wonder if the other stones
are the same."

He tried several others, and one and all resisted his efforts. It was
only the small stones he was able to lift alone, and these, he said,
were so weighty that it would have been a task to throw them any
distance.

"The water and the stones are strangely heavy in this land," he said. "I
wonder what other queer things we shall see."

"I saw a bird a little while ago, when I went to pick up that stone,"
observed Washington.

"What kind was it?" asked the inventor.

"I don't know, only it was about as big as an eagle."

The travelers wandered about a quarter of a mile from the ship. They
avoided the tall grass and the lofty nodding flowers that seemed to grow
in regular groves, and kept to places where they could walk with
comparative freedom.

"Have you formed any idea, Professor, as to the nature of this country?"
asked Mark, who liked to get at the bottom of things.

"I have, but it is only a theory," Mr. Henderson answered. "I believe we
are on a sort of small earth that is inside the larger one we live on.
This sphere floats in space, just as our earth does and we have passed
through the void that lies between our globe and this interior one. I
think this new earth is about a quarter the size of ours and in some
respects the same. In others it is vastly different.

"But we will not think of those things now. We must see what our
situation is, whether we are in any danger, and must look to repairing
our ship. There will be time enough for other matters later."

The travelers were walking slowly along, noting the strange things on
every side. As they advanced the vegetation seemed to become more
luxuriant, as if nature had tried to out-do herself in providing
beautiful flowers and plants. The changing lights added to the beauty
and weirdness of the scene.

The plain was a rolling one, and here and there were small hills and
hollows. As the travelers topped a rise Jack, who was in advance, called
out:

"Oh what queer plants! They are giant Jacks-in-the-pulpit!"

The others hastened forward to see what the boy had discovered. Jack was
too eager to wait, and pressed on. The hill which sloped away from the
top of the little plateau on which he stood, was steeper than he had
counted on. As he leaned forward he lost his balance and toppled, head
foremost, down the declivity, rolling over.

"Look out!" cried Mark, who had almost reached his comrade's side.

The scene that confronted the travelers was a strange one. Before them
in a sort of hollow, were scores of big plants, shaped somewhat like a
Jack-in-the-pulpit, or a big lily, with a curved top or flap to it.

The plants were about eight feet tall, three feet across the top, and
the flap or covering was raised about two feet. They were nodding and
swaying in the wind on their short stems.

"He's headed right for one of them!" Mr. Henderson exclaimed. "I hope
he'll not fall into one of the openings."

"Is there any danger?" asked Mark.

"I'm afraid there is," the inventor added. "Those plants are a variety
of the well-known pitcher plant, or fly-trap, as they are sometimes
called. In tropical countries they grow to a large size, but nothing
like these. They are filled, in the cup, with a sort of sticky, sweet
mixture, and this attracts insects. When one enters the cup the top flap
folds over, and the hapless insect is caught there. The plant actually
devours it, nature providing a sort of vegetable digestive apparatus.
These giant plants are the same, and they seem large enough to take in a
man, to say nothing of Jack!"

With anxious faces the adventurers turned to watch the fate of their
comrade. Jack was slipping, sliding and rolling down the hill. He could
not seem to stop, though he was making desperate efforts to do so. He
was headed straight for one of the largest of the terrible plants.

In vain, as he saw what was in front of him, did he try to change the
course of his involuntary voyage. Over and over he rolled, until, at
length, he struck a little grassy hummock, bounced into the air, and
right into the opening of a monster pitcher plant.

"It has him!" cried Mark. "We must save him! Come on everyone!"

He raced down the hill, while the others came closely after him. They
reached the plant into which Jack had bounced. The flap, or top piece,
had closed down, tightly over the unfortunate boy.

"Quick! We must save him or he will be smothered to death or drowned in
the liquid the cup contains!" Mr. Henderson exclaimed. "Attack the plant
with anything you can find!"

"Let's cut through the side of the flower-cup!" suggested Mark. "That
seems softer than the stem."

His idea was quickly put into operation. Andy's long hunting knife came
in very handy. While the sides of the long natural cup were tough, the
knife made an impression on them, and, soon, a small door or opening had
been cut in the side of the pitcher plant, large enough to enable a
human body to pass through.

When the last fibre had been severed by Andy, who was chosen to wield
the knife because of his long practice as a hunter, there was a sudden
commotion within the plant. Then a dark object, dripping water, made a
spring and landed almost at the feet of the professor.

It was Jack, and a sorry sight he presented. He was covered from head to
foot with some sticky substance, which dripped from all over him.

With hasty movements he cleared the stuff from his eyes and mouth, and
spluttered:

"It's a good thing you cut me out when you did. I couldn't have held on
much longer!"




                              CHAPTER XIX

                             THE BIG PEACH

