
"Aw, shut up," Zen answered. If she thought he had read her mind,
did this mean that she was actually capable of reading his thoughts?
Could all of these people read his mind? Had the nude bronze girl
going through the rhythmic exercises known what he was thinking about
her. Zen felt himself coloring. It was one thing to have the normal
libidinous impulses of the male but it was quite another thing to have
every woman know what he was thinking about her.

"Colonel, I do believe you are blushing," Nedra said, a twinkle in her
eyes.

"I am not," Zen said. "Actually I was wondering--"

"Whether or not I could read your mind? I told you it was not good
manners here."

"Good manners or not, you seemed to know what I was thinking."

"It isn't necessary to read your mind to know what you are thinking if
a pretty woman is concerned," Nedra said, primly. "Your thoughts are
written on your face."

"Uh!" For a moment, his confusion grew. Her understanding was much too
acute. Was she playing games, making fun? If so, this was a game that
two could play. "In that case, since you already know about me--how
about it?" he said, looking boldly at her.

She understood his meaning. For a moment, the violet eyes showed
sadness. They seemed to indicate that she was disappointed in him, that
she had hoped for much better from him. Then a sparkle came into them.
"I told you once before--"

"Yeah, I know. You are going to wash out my mind with soap. But let's
not do it right now. I'm still hungry."

"You are one of the most perplexing men I have ever met," Nedra said,
as she rose to fill his plate again. "Also one of the fastest--"

"I thought we were going to stay away from that subject," he protested.

"I intended to say fastest on his mental feet," she answered. "And if
you don't stop interrupting me to make a play on words, I'm going to
give you a hit on the head. After that, Sam wants to see you."

"Sam, huh?" he said, with no real enthusiasm in his voice. Somehow
this morning, he did not relish seeing the craggy man. But there was
the matter of the missing pack and gun to be taken up with someone in
authority. He suspected that West was that person.

The craggy man was alone in the room to which Nedra took him when he
had finished breakfast. West was standing with his back to them as
they entered, staring out of a picture window that was set flush with
the wall of the building. Turning, he nodded to them, then motioned
to them to come and stand beside him. Kurt Zen looked out on one of
the most breath-takingly beautiful scenes he had ever seen. Directly
below them the cliff dropped away for hundreds of feet, a blank wall
of sheer rock. To the left, climbing up into the sky, was the peak of
the mountain, solid granite. They were just at the edge of timberline
here. Lower, the trees began: spruce, fir, and aspen, marching downward
tier on tier over a series of rolling hills that concealed more than
they revealed. In the distance was the front range, a towering sweep of
mountains that looked small but which Zen knew to be rugged country. He
had climbed them too recently to have any doubts as to how high they
were. And how rugged.

In the far distance cumulus clouds were visible, thunder-storms beyond
the mountains.

"_Thy purple mountain's majesty above the fruited plain...._"

The words of the song came unbidden into Kurt's mind. Down below him
was--America. Or what was left of it. A pang came up in his throat at
the thought and he felt muscles pull and knot in his stomach. He had
loved this land.

America had stood for freedom. Her sons had fought for it, on
battlefields in every corner of the earth, from sun-baked equatorial
Africa to the freezing bitter steppes of Central Asia. While her sons
had found graves, fighting for freedom, something had happened to the
freedom for which they fought.

Nobody knew quite what had happened, but it had gone away. Possibly
it had been lost as emergency followed emergency on the international
scene, possibly it had been strangled in red tape as regulation
followed regulation on the national scene. The time had come in
America, too, as it had come to foreign lands, when all actions that
were not compulsory were forbidden.

Thus freedom had died.

"Do you feel as bad as all that, colonel?" West said softly. The man's
face was grave and each ridge on it seemed carved out of another and
harder kind of granite.

"It seems such a shame," Zen said. "I loved this land. It was my
country. And I don't feel that I have to apologize for a gulp in my
tongue as I talk about it."

"It is not necessary to apologize for loving one's own land, colonel,"
West said, his voice softer still. "You are not alone."

"Not alone?" Zen said. "From you, this talk sounds strange."

"We have all loved this land, too, colonel, and the principles for
which it stood. That is why we are here." West's voice became softer
still, but the gravity in his face seemed to increase.

"That is good talk," Zen said. "However, if I have learned one thing,
it is that talk is cheap. You are outlaws hiding here yet you talk of
loving the land that you have failed to serve." He felt his voice grate
as he spoke.

"Bravely spoken, colonel," West applauded. A glint that might have
been appreciation and might have been the edge of hidden anger
showed in his eyes. "Particularly so since you are in the power of
these--ah--outlaws."

"Very brave," Nedra agreed. "And very foolish."

"You did not bring me here to tell me that I am in your power," Zen
answered. "Nor to comment on my bravery. Nor my foolishness."

"I think he can read minds," Nedra said.

"I do not in the least doubt it," West answered. "If he did not possess
this ability, or almost possess it, he would not be here."

"I, in my turn, think both of you are nuts," Zen answered. "I'm not
putting on a mind-reading act."

"Not consciously, colonel, of course," West agreed. "You think your
thoughts are your own. Often they are. But there are also times when
they have originated with somebody else. However, before you tell me
that I did not call you up here to discuss your mind-reading ability,
or lack of it, I will show you one reason why I wanted you. Take the
glasses, observe the ridge in the far distance, just under the pines.
Tell me what you see there."

"Horses," Zen said. "No, mules. With riders. Cuso's men going out on a
raiding party looking for food, ammo, and women, if they can catch 'em."

"Quite right, colonel. Except that they probably have the additional
duty of inspecting the damage their blooper did when it exploded."

"I hope they inspect that damage from close range," Zen said fervidly.
"That area is hot. If they will only spend an hour or so--" He broke
off as he remembered that both Nedra and West had spent too much time
in the same hot zone.

"They will not be that foolish," West said.

"I know some people who were," Zen said.

"Perhaps the area, at least on the fringes, was not as hot as you had
thought," West suggested.

"My counter said it was," Zen answered.

"Possibly your counter was in error. Now if you will come into this
room, colonel." West moved through an archway in the stone wall and
into another room, holding the heavy draperies aside so Zen and Nedra
could enter. An opaque screen was set into the wall. Several chairs,
including one large seat with control buttons built into the arms,
were in this room. West closed the curtain over the arch through which
they had entered and motioned Zen to a chair. The craggy man slid into
the chair with the buttons on the arms. Nedra sat beside Zen. Relaxed
and at ease in the chair, she seemed to have forgotten that such
creatures as colonels of intelligence existed. West pushed a button.
Light flicked across the screen, danced an erratic pattern there, and
vanished. An image began to form. Firming, it increased in detail, and
became a city.

Or what had once been a city.

The place was blackened now, the buildings lying in ruins. Towers had
toppled, windows had broken, the ravages of fire were visible. Here
and there tall buildings had crumbled into streets that crossed and
criss-crossed each other at crazy angles. The rubble from the broken
buildings still lay where it had fallen.

"Washington, by thunder!" Zen said. "This was their prime target. We
stopped their bombers cold but they eventually got through with a
guided missile. The city is still hot. You can see it right there on
the screen. Not a sign of life!" He became excited as he re-lived those
first mad moments when the Asian Federation had struck out of nowhere.
In this moment what little freedom that had remained in America had
been given up in the face of the seemingly more important necessity of
remaining alive.

"Yes," West said. "Now what do you see?"

The ruined Washington faded from the scene. As it faded, the broken
dome of the capitol building--its top had been blown off in the
blast--was revealed looking like a mysterious crater on the moon open
to the sea of space.

Another city came on the screen, a mass of broken buildings where two
rivers met.

"I think that's Pittsburgh," Zen said. "They were eager to hit us
there, to cut down on our industrial production potential. They got
Gary, Indiana, and South Chicago, for the same reason. In spite of
everything we could do to stop it, they eventually got through to our
major production centers. If we hadn't foreseen the possibility of this
happening, and had not spread our industry across the country, breaking
it up into small parts, they would have crippled us so badly before the
war even started that we would not have lasted long. However, even with
our production spread, when they hit the sources of our raw materials,
they hurt us--bad. Our stock piles gave out after a couple of years.
Since then we've been scavenging for metal wherever we can find it."

"Yes. I know," West said.

"Of course, while they were hurting us, we weren't exactly helping
them," Zen said. "We had a few guided missiles ready in their launching
racks ourselves. We weren't exactly defenseless." Pride came into his
voice as he spoke.

"I agree with you there," West said. "Would you like to see some of our
results."

"Hell, yes," Zen blurted out, surprised. "Our photo ships have never
gotten really good pics. Have to fly too high for that. Oh, we have
turned loose a flood of pics that purported to show how we had bombed
hell out of the enemy, but these were all re-touched, to boost public
morale. But--how does this radar work? Do you mean to tell me you can
actually see what is going on inside the country of the enemy?" Puzzled
wonder crept into his voice. Behind the feeling was a keen interest. If
he could use this radar to see into the country of the enemy, it was a
very important invention, though West did not seem to realize this.

In war, information was always as important as weapons, and sometimes
more so. Knowledge of the enemy's troop dispositions, of his strength
and his weaknesses, was often more than half the battle.

West did not answer. Another city swam into position on the screen. Zen
caught a glimpse of a single minaret standing among the bare ruins and
hazarded a guess as to the identity of the city.

"Moscow?"

"Yes."

"Good. One of our fast planes sneaked over in full daylight, dumping
his load. When the photo plane passed over hours later, the city was
still burning. We really blasted the hell out of that dump!"

"You sound pleased, colonel. Do you know how many millions of people
died directly or indirectly in that bomb explosion?"

"How many millions died in Washington, Pittsburgh, and Chicago?" Zen
flared.

"Granted," West answered. "But after the first man has been killed,
does it help the situation to kill a second? Or does killing the
second one merely make it more likely that a third one will have to be
destroyed?"

"What the hell difference does it make? This is war."

"That is also granted. However, the rules of life do not change because
men declare war."

"Don't be so damned academic that you forget to be realistic. They were
striking at our heart," Zen said, bitterness deep in his voice. "Look,
we didn't seek this war. We did everything we could to prevent it. We
tried compromise, arbitration, placation, and everything else we could
think of. Nothing worked. They struck in the dark, without warning." As
he spoke, his bitterness turned into deep anger.

"That is also granted," West said, while the ruined city was displayed
on the screen. "But does it make a great deal of difference?"

Zen stared at the man, wondering what kind of a human he was. In the
dim room, it was difficult to make out West's features. "It makes all
the difference in the world. We believed in fairness. They ignored it.
We believed in a better world. They would plunge us back into the night
of barbarism. We believed in freedom. They wanted slaves. They set up a
slave state and threw armed slaves against free men. We had no choice
except to fight back."

"I see nothing to argue in all you have said," West answered. "Nor
is it to my purpose to attempt to justify the actions of the western
democracies. They need no justification. Nor do the actions of the
Asian Federation need justification. In their eyes, they were right."
His voice was a low monotone of sound without the trace of an emotion
in it.

"Then what is your purpose?" Zen demanded.

"First, to point out that the human race is one organism. Viewed in
its totality, it is just that, an organism. All the billions of
individuals who compose it are cells in that organism."

"I am familiar with that theory," Zen answered. "A few crackpots have
always insisted that we are a biological entity. But they have not
succeeded in proving this."

"Haven't they?" West said. The slightest touch of irony appeared in his
voice.

"Not so far as I know."

"Is it possible, colonel, that you do not know everything?" West asked.

