was placed under a microscope, furnished with an eye-piece micrometer, and
the tip of the largest leaf was
[page 203]
found to be in constant movement. It crossed five divisions of the
micrometer, that is, 1/100th of an inch, in 6 m. 20 s. There could hardly
be a doubt that it was the stem which chiefly moved, for the tip did not
get quickly out of focus; and this would have occurred had the movement
been confined to the leaf, which moves up or down in nearly the same
vertical plane.

(3.) Linum usitatissimum (Lineae, Fam. 39).--The stems of this plant,
shortly before the flowering period, are stated by Fritz Müller ('Jenaische
Zeitschrift,' B. v. p. 137) to revolve, or circumnutate.

(4.) Pelargonium zonale (Geraniaceae, Fam. 47).--A young plant, 7 ½ inches
in height, was observed in the usual manner; but, in order to see the bead
at the end of the glass filament

Fig. 71. Pelargonium zonale: circumnutation of stem of young plant, feebly
illuminated from above. Movement of bead magnified about 11 times; traced
on a horizontal glass from noon on March 9th to 8 A.M. on the 11th.

and at the same time the mark beneath, it was necessary to cut off three
leaves on one side. We do not know whether it was owing to this cause, or
to the plant having previously become bent to one side through
heliotropism, but from the morning of the 7th of March to 10.30 P.M. on the
8th, the stem moved a considerable distance in a zigzag line in the same
general direction. During the night of the 8th it moved to some distance at
right angles to its former course, and next morning (9th) stood for a time
almost still. At noon on the 9th a new tracing was begun (see Fig. 71),
which was continued till 8 A.M. on the 11th. Between noon on the 9th and 5
P.M. on the 10th (i.e. in the course of 29 h.), the stem described a
circle. This plant therefore circumnutates, but at a very slow rate, and to
a small extent.

 (5.) Tropaeolum majus (?) (dwarfed var. called Tom Thumb); (Geraniaceae,
Fam. 47).--The species of this genus climb by the
[page 204]
aid of their sensitive petioles, but some of them also twine round
supports; but even these latter species do not begin to circumnutate in a
conspicuous manner whilst young. The

Fig. 72. Tropaeolum majus (?): circumnutation of stem of young plant,
traced on a horizontal glass from 9 A.M. Dec. 26th to 10 A.M. on 27th.
Movement of bead magnified about 5 times, and here reduced to half of
original scale.

variety here treated of has a rather thick stem, and is so dwarf that
apparently it does not climb in any manner. We therefore wished to
ascertain whether the stem of a young plant, consisting of two internodes,
together 3.2 inches in height, circumnutated. It was observed during 25 h.,
and we see in Fig. 72 that the stem moved in a zigzag course, indicating
circumnutation.

Fig. 73. Trifolium resupinatum: circumnutation of stem, traced on vertical
glass from 9.30 A.M. to 4.30 P.M. Nov. 3rd. Tracing not greatly magnified,
reduced to half of original size. Plant feebly illuminated from above.

 (6.) Trifolium resupinatum (Leguminosae, Fam. 75).--When we treat of the
sleep of plants, we shall see that the stems in several Leguminous genera,
for instance, those of Hedysarum, Mimosa, Melilotus, etc., which are not
climbers, circumnutate in a conspicuous manner. We will here give only a
single instance (Fig. 73), showing the circumnutation of the stem of a
large plant of a clover, Trifolium resupinatum. In the course of 7 h. the
stem changed
[page 205]
its course greatly eight times and completed three irregular circles or
ellipses. It therefore circumnutated rapidly. Some of the lines run at
right angles to one another.

Fig. 74. Rubus (hybrid): circumnutation of stem, traced on horizontal
glass, from 4 P.M. March 14th to 8.30 A.M. 16th. Tracing much magnified,
reduced to half of original size. Plant illuminated feebly from above.

 (7.) Rubus idaeus (hybrid) (Rosaceae, Fam. 76).--As we happened to have a
young plant, 11 inches in height and growing vigorously, which had been
raised from a cross between the raspberry (Rubus idaeus) and a North
American Rubus, it was observed in the usual manner. During the morning of
March 14th the stem almost completed a circle, and then moved far to the
right. At 4 P.M. it reversed its course, and now a fresh tracing was begun,
which was continued during 40 ½ h., and is given in Fig. 74. We here have
well-marked circumnutation.

(8.) Deutzia gracilis (Saxifrageae, Fam. 77).--A shoot on a bush about 18
inches in height was observed. The bead changed its course greatly eleven
times in the course of 10 h. 30 m. (Fig. 75), and there could be no doubt
about the circumnutation of the stem.

Fig. 75. Deutzia gracilis: circumnutation of stem, kept in darkness, traced
on horizontal glass, from 8.30 A.M. to 7 P.M. March 20th. Movement of bead
originally magnified about 20 times, here reduced to half scale.

(9.) Fuchsia (greenhouse var., with large flowers, probably a hybrid)
(Onagrarieae, Fam. 100).--A young plant, 15 inches in height, was observed
during nearly 48 h. The
[page 206]
accompanying figure (Fig. 76) gives the necessary particulars, and shows
that the stem circumnutated, though rather slowly.

Fig. 76. Fuchsia (garden var.): circumnutation of stem, kept in darkness,
traced on horizontal glass, from 8.30 A.M. to 7 P.M. March 20th. Movement
of bead originally magnified about 40 times, here reduced to half scale.

(10.) Cereus speciocissimus (garden var., sometimes called Phyllocactus
multiflorus) (Cacteae, Fam. 109).--This plant, which was growing vigorously
from having been removed a few days before from the greenhouse to the
hot-house, was observed with especial interest, as it seemed so little
probable that the stem would circumnutate. The branches are flat, or
flabelliform; but some of them are triangular in section, with the three
sides hollowed out. A branch of this latter shape, 9 inches in length and 1
½ in diameter, was chosen for observation, as less likely to circumnutate
than a flabelliform branch. The movement of the bead at the end of the
glass filament, affixed to the summit of the branch, was traced (A, Fig.
77) from 9.23 A.M. to 4.30 P.M. on Nov. 23rd, during which time it changed
its course greatly six times. On the 24th another tracing was made (see B),
and the bead on this day changed its course oftener, making in 8 h. what
may be considered as four ellipses, with their longer axes differently
directed. The position of the stem and its commencing course on the
following morning are likewise shown. There can be no doubt that this
branch, though appearing quite rigid, circumnutated; but the
[page 207]
extreme amount of movement during the time was very small, probably rather
less than the 1/20th of an inch.

Fig 77. Cereus speciocissimus: circumnutation of stem, illuminated from
above, traced on a horizontal glass, in A from 9 A.M. to 4.30 P.M. on Nov.
23rd; and in B from 8.30 A.M. on the 24th to 8 A.M. on the 25th. Movement
of the bead in B magnified about 38 times.

(11.) Hedera helix (Araliaceae, Fam. 114).--The stem is known to be
apheliotropic, and several seedlings growing in a pot in the greenhouse
became bent in the middle of the summer at right angles from the light. On
Sept. 2nd some of these stems were tied up so as to stand vertically, and
were placed before a north-east window; but to our surprise they were now
decidedly heliotropic, for during 4 days they curved themselves towards the
light, and their course being traced on a horizontal glass, was strongly
zigzag. During the 6 succeeding days they circumnutated over the same small
space at a slow rate, but there could be no doubt about their
circumnutation. The plants were kept exactly in the same place before the
window, and after an interval of 15 days the stems were again observed
during 2 days and their movements traced, and
[page 208]
they were found to be still circumnutating, but on a yet smaller scale.

(12.) Gazania ringens (Compositae, Fam. 122).--The circumnutation of the
stem of a young plant, 7 inches in height, as measured to the tip of the
highest leaf, was traced during 33 h., and is shown in the accompanying
figure (Fig. 78). Two

Fig. 78. Gazania ringens: circumnutation of stem traced from 9 A.M. March
21st to 6 P.M. on 22nd; plant kept in darkness. Movement of bead at the
close of the observations magnified 34 times, here reduced to half the
original scale.

main lines may be observed running at nearly right angles to two other main
lines; but these are interrupted by small loops.

(13.) Azalea Indica (Ericineae, Fam. 128).--A bush 21 inches in height was
selected for observation, and the circumnutation of its leading shoot was
traced during 26 h. 40 m., as shown in the following figure (Fig. 79).

 (14.) Plumbago Capensis (Plumbagineae, Fam. 134).--A small lateral branch
which projected from a tall freely growing bush, at an angle of 35o above
the horizon, was selected for observation. For the first 11 h. it moved to
a considerable distance in a nearly straight line to one side, owing
probably to its having been previously deflected by the light whilst
standing in the greenhouse. At 7.20 P.M. on March 7th a fresh tracing was
begun and continued for the next 43 h. 40 m. (see Fig. 80). During the
first 2 h. it followed nearly the same direction as before, and then
changed it a little; during the night it moved at nearly right angles to
its previous course. Next
[page 209]
day (8th) it zigzagged greatly, and on the 9th moved irregularly round and
round a small circular space. By 3 P.M. on the 9th the figure had become so
complicated that no more dots could be made; but the shoot continued during
the evening of the 9th, the whole of the 10th, and the morning of the 11th
to

Fig. 79. Azalea Indica: circumnutation of stem, illuminated from above,
traced on horizontal glass, from 9.30 A.M. March 9th to 12.10 P.M. on the
10th. But on the morning of the 10th only four dots were made between 8.30
A.M. and 12.10 P.M., both hours included, so that the circumnutation is not
fairly represented in this part of the diagram. Movement of the bead here
magnified about 30 times.

Fig. 80. Plumbago Capensis: circumnutation of tip of a lateral branch,
traced on horizontal glass, from 7.20 P.M. on March 7th to 3 P.M. on the
9th. Movement of bead magnified 13 times. Plant feebly illuminated from
above.

circumnutate over the same small space, which was only about the 1/26th of
an inch (.97 mm.) in diameter. Although this branch circumnutated to a very
small extent, yet it changed its course frequently. The movements ought to
have been more magnified.

(15.) Aloysia citriodora (Verbenaceae, Fam. 173).--The following figure
(Fig. 81) gives the movements of a shoot during
[page 210]
31 h. 40 m., and shows that it circumnutated. The bush was 15 inches in
height.

Fig. 81. Aloysia citriodora: circumnutation of stem, traced from 8.20 A.M.
on March 22nd to 4 P.M. on 23rd. Plant kept in darkness. Movement magnified
about 40 times.

(16.) Verbena melindres (?) (a scarlet-flowered herbaceous var.)
(Verbenaceae).--A shoot 8 inches in height had been laid horizontally, for
the sake of observing its apogeotropism, and the terminal portion had grown
vertically upwards for a length of 1 ½ inch. A glass filament, with a bead
at the end, was fixed

Fig. 82. Verbena melindres: circumnutation of stem in darkness, traced on
vertical glass, from 5.30 P.M. on June 5th to 11 A.M. June 7th. Movement of
bead magnified 9 times.

upright to the tip, and its movements were traced during 41 h. 30 m. on a
vertical glass (Fig. 82). Under these circumstances the lateral movements
were chiefly shown; but as the lines from side to side are not on the same
level, the shoot
[page 211]
must have moved in a plane at right angles to that of the lateral movement,
that is, it must have circumnutated. On the next day (6th) the shoot moved
in the course of 16 h. four times to the right, and four times to the left;
and this apparently represents the formation of four ellipses, so that each
was completed in 4 h.
(17.) Ceratophyllum demersum (Ceratophylleae, Fam. 220).--An interesting
account of the movements of the stem of this water-plant has been published
by M. E. Rodier.* The movements are confined to the young internodes,
becoming less and less lower down the stem; and they are extraordinary from
their amplitude. The stems sometimes moved through an angle of above 200o
in 6 h., and in one instance through 220o in 3 h. They generally bent from
right to left in the morning, and in an opposite direction in the
afternoon; but the movement was sometimes temporarily reversed or quite
arrested. It was not affected by light. It does not appear that M. Rodier
made any diagram on a horizontal plane representing the actual course
pursued by the apex, but he speaks of the "branches executing round their
axes of growth a movement of torsion." From the particulars above given,
and remembering in the case of twining plants and of tendrils, how
difficult it is not to mistake their bending to all points of the compass
for true torsion, we are led to believe that the stems of this
Ceratophyllum circumnutate, probably in the shape of narrow ellipses, each
completed in about 26 h. The following statement, however, seems to
indicate something different from ordinary circumnutation, but we cannot
fully understand it. M. Rodier says: "Il est alors facile de voir que le
mouvement de flexion se produit d'abord dans les mérithalles supérieurs,
qu'il se propage ensuite, en s'amoindrissant du haut en bas; tandis qu'au
contraire le movement de redressement commence par la partie inférieur pour
se terminer a la partie supérieure qui, quelquefois, peu de temps avant de
se relever tout à fait, forme avec l'axe un angle très aigu."

 (18.) Coniferae.--Dr. Maxwell Masters states ('Journal Linn. Soc.,' Dec.
2nd, 1879) that the leading shoots of many Coniferae during the season of
their active growth exhibit very remarkable movements of revolving
nutation, that is, they circumnutate. We may feel sure that the lateral
shoots whilst growing would exhibit the same movement if carefully
observed.

* 'Comptes Rendus,' April 30th, 1877. Also a second notice published
separately in Bourdeaux, Nov. 12th, 1877.
[page 212]

(19.) Lilium auratum (Fam. Liliaceae).--The circumnutation

Fig. 83. Lilium auratum: circumnutation of a stem in darkness, traced on a
horizontal glass, from 8 A.M. on March 14th to 8.35 A.M. on 16th. But it
should be noted that our observations were interrupted between 6 P.M. on
the 14th and 12.15 P.M. on the 15th, and the movements during this interval
of 18 h. 15 m. are represented by a long broken line. Diagram reduced to
half original scale.

of the stem of a plant 24 inches in height is represented in the above
figure (Fig. 83).

Fig. 84. Cyperus alternifolius: circumnutation of stem, illuminated from
above, traced on horizontal glass, from 9.45 A.M. March 9th to 9 P.M. on
10th. The stem grew so rapidly whilst being observed, that it was not
possible to estimate how much its movements were magnified in the tracing.

 (20.) Cyperus alternifolius (Fam. Cyperaceae.)--A glass
[page 213]
filament, with a bead at the end, was fixed across the summit of a young
stem 10 inches in height, close beneath the crown of elongated leaves. On
March 8th, between 12.20 and 7.20 P.M. the stem described an ellipse, open
at one end. On the following day a new tracing was begun (Fig. 84), which
plainly shows that the stem completed three irregular figures in the course
of 35 h. 15 m.]

Concluding Remarks on the Circumnutation of Stems.--Any one who will
inspect the diagrams now given, and will bear in mind the widely separated
position of the plants described in the series,--remembering that we have
good grounds for the belief that the hypocotyls and epicotyls of all
seedlings circumnutate,--not forgetting the number of plants distributed in
the most distinct families which climb by a similar movement,--will
probably admit that the growing stems of all plants, if carefully observed,
would be found to circumnutate to a greater or less extent. When we treat
of the sleep and other movements of plants, many other cases of
circumnutating stems will be incidentally given. In looking at the
diagrams, we should remember that the stems were always growing, so that in
each case the circumnutating apex as it rose will have described a spire of
some kind. The dots were made on the glasses generally at intervals of an
hour, or hour and a half, and were then joined by straight lines. If they
had been made at intervals of 2 or 3 minutes, the lines would have been
more curvilinear, as in the case of the tracks left on the smoked
glass-plates by the tips of the circumnutating radicles of seedling plants.
The diagrams generally approach in form to a succession of more or less
irregular ellipses or ovals, with their longer axes directed to different
points of the compass during the same day or on succeeding days. The stems
there-
[page 214]
fore, sooner or later, bend to all sides; but after a stem has bent in any
one direction, it commonly bends back at first in nearly, though not quite,
the opposite direction; and this gives the tendency to the formation of
ellipses, which are generally narrow, but not so narrow as those described
by stolons and leaves. On the other hand, the figures sometimes approach in
shape to circles. Whatever the figure may be, the course pursued is often
interrupted by zigzags, small triangles, loops, or ellipses. A stem may
describe a single large ellipse one day, and two on the next. With
different plants the complexity, rate, and amount of movement differ much.
The stems, for instance, of Iberis and Azalea described only a single large
ellipse in 24 h.; whereas those of the Deutzia made four or five deep
zigzags or narrow ellipses in 11 ½ h., and those of the Trifolium three
triangular or quadrilateral figures in 7 h.

CIRCUMNUTATION OF STOLONS OR RUNNERS.

Stolons consist of much elongated, flexible branches, which run along the
surface of the ground and form roots at a distance from the parent-plant.
They are therefore of the same homological nature as stems; and the three
following cases may be added to the twenty previously given cases.

[Fragaria (cultivated garden var.): Rosaceae.--A plant growing in a pot had
emitted a long stolon; this was supported by a stick, so that it projected
for the length of several inches horizontally. A glass filament bearing two
minute triangles of paper was affixed to the terminal bud, which was a
little upturned; and its movements were traced during 21 h., as shown in
Fig. 85. In the course of the first 12 h. it moved twice up and twice down
in somewhat zigzag lines, and no doubt travelled in the same manner during
the night. On the following
[page 215]
morning after an interval of 20 h. the apex stood a little higher than it
did at first, and this shows that the stolon had not been
Fig. 85. Fragaria: circumnutation of stolon, kept in darkness, traced on
vertical glass, from 10.45 A.M. May 18th to 7.45 A.M. on 19th.

acted on within this time by geotropism;* nor had its own weight caused it
to bend downwards.

On the following morning (19th) the glass filament was detached and refixed
close behind the bud, as it appeared possible that the circumnutation of
the terminal bud and of the adjoining part of the stolon might be
different. The movement was now traced during two consecutive days (Fig.
86). During the first day the filament travelled in the course of 14 h. 30
m. five times up and four times down, besides some lateral movement. On the
20th the course was even more complicated, and can hardly be followed in
the figure; but the filament moved in 16 h. at least five times up and five
times down, with very little

* Dr. A. B. Frank states ('Die Naturliche wagerechte Richtung von
Pflanzentheilen,' 1870, p. 20) that the stolons of this plant are acted on
by geotropism, but only after a considerable interval of time.
[page 216]

lateral deflection. The first and last dots made on this second day, viz.,
at 7 A.M. and 11 P.M., were close together, showing that the stolon had not
fallen or risen. Nevertheless, by comparing its position on the morning of
the 19th and 21st, it is obvious that the stolon had sunk; and this may be
attributed to slow bending down either from its own weight or from
geotropism.

Fig. 86. Fragaria: circumnutation of the same stolon as in the last figure,
observed in the same manner, and traced from 8 A.M. May 19th to 8 A.M.
21st.

During a part of the 20th an orthogonal tracing was made by applying a cube
of wood to the vertical glass and bringing the apex of the stolon at
successive periods into a line with one edge; a dot being made each time on
the glass. This tracing therefore represented very nearly the actual amount
of movement of the apex; and in the course of 9 h. the distance of the
extreme dots from one another was .45 inch. By the same method it was
ascertained that the apex moved between 7 A.M. on the 20th and 8 A.M. on
the 21st a distance of .82 inch.

A younger and shorter stolon was supported so that it projected at about
45o above the horizon, and its movement was traced by the same orthogonal
method. On the first day the apex soon rose above the field of vision. By
the next morning it had sunk, and the course pursued was now traced during
14 h. 30 m. (Fig. 87). The amount of movement was almost the same,
[page 217]
from side to side as up and down; and differed in this respect remarkably
from the movement in the previous cases. During the latter part of the day,
viz., between 3 and 10.30 P.M., the

Fig. 87. Fragaria: circumnutation of another and younger stolon, traced
from 8 A.M. to 10.30 P.M. Figure reduced to one-half of original scale.

actual distance travelled by the apex amounted to 1.15 inch; and in the
course of the whole day to at least 2.67 inches. This is an amount of
movement almost comparable with that of some climbing plants. The same
stolon was observed on the following day, and now it moved in a somewhat
less complex manner, in a plane not far from vertical. The extreme amount
of actual movement was 1.55 inch in one direction, and .6 inch in another
direction at right angles. During neither of these days did the stolon bend
downwards through geotropism or its own weight.

Four stolons still attached to the plant were laid on damp sand in the back
of a room, with their tips facing the north-east windows. They were thus
placed because De Vries says* that they are apheliotropic when exposed to
the light of the sun; but we could not perceive any effect from the above
feeble degree of illumination. We may add that on another occasion, late in
the summer, some stolons, placed upright before a south-west window

* 'Arbeiten Bot Inst., Würzburg,' 1872, p. 434.
[page 218]

on a cloudy day, became distinctly curved towards the light, and were
therefore heliotropic. Close in front of the tips of the prostrate stolons,
a crowd of very thin sticks and the dried haulms of grasses were driven
into the sand, to represent the crowded stems of surrounding plants in a
state of nature. This was done for the sake of observing how the growing
stolons would pass through them. They did so easily in the course of 6
days, and their circumnutation apparently facilitated their passage. When
the tips encountered sticks so close together that they could not pass
between them, they rose up and passed over them. The sticks and haulms were
removed after the passage of the four stolons, two of which were found to
have assumed a permanently sinuous shape, and two were still straight. But
to this subject we shall recur under Saxifraga.

Saxifraga sarmentosa (Saxifrageae).--A plant in a suspended pot had emitted
long branched stolons, which depended like

Fig. 88. Saxifraga sarmentosa: circumnutation of an inclined stolon, traced
in darkness on a horizontal glass, from 7.45 A.M. April 18th to 9 A.M. on
19th. Movement of end of stolon magnified 2.2 times.

threads on all sides. Two were tied up so as to stand vertically, and their
upper ends became gradually bent downwards, but so slowly in the course of
several days, that the bending was probably due to their weight and not to
geotropism. A glass filament with little triangles of paper was fixed to
the end of one of these stolons, which was 17 ½ inches in length, and had
already become much bent down, but still projected at a considerable angle
above the horizon. It moved only slightly three times from side to side and
then upwards; on the following day
[page 219]
the movement was even less. As this stolon was so long we thought that its
growth was nearly completed, so we tried another which was thicker and
shorter, viz., 10 1/4 inches in length. It moved greatly, chiefly upwards,
and changed its course five times in the course of the day. During the
night it curved so much upwards in opposition to gravity, that the movement
could no longer be traced on the vertical glass, and a horizontal one had
to be used. The movement was followed during the next 25 h., as shown in
Fig. 88. Three irregular ellipses, with their longer axes somewhat
differently directed, were almost completed in the first 15 h. The extreme
actual amount of movement of the tip during the 25 h. was .75 inch.
Several stolons were laid on a flat surface of damp sand, in the same
manner as with those of the strawberry. The friction of the sand did not
interfere with their circumnutation; nor could we detect any evidence of
their being sensitive to contact. In order to see how in a state of nature
they would act, when encountering a stone or other obstacle on the ground,
short pieces of smoked glass, an inch in height, were stuck upright into
the sand in front of two thin lateral branches. Their tips scratched the
smoked surface in various directions; one made three upward and two
downward lines, besides a nearly horizontal one; the other curled quite
away from the glass; but ultimately both surmounted the glass and pursued
their original course. The apex of a third thick stolon swept up the glass
in a curved line, recoiled and again came into contact with it; it then
moved to the right, and after ascending, descended vertically; ultimately
it passed round one end of the glass instead of over it.

Many long pins were next driven rather close together into the sand, so as
to form a crowd in front of the same two thin lateral branches; but these
easily wound their way through the crowd. A thick stolon was much delayed
in its passage; at one place it was forced to turn at right angles to its
former course; at another place it could not pass through the pins, and the
hinder part became bowed; it then curved upwards and passed through an
opening between the upper part of some pins which happened to diverge; it
then descended and finally emerged through the crowd. This stolon was
rendered permanently sinuous to a slight degree, and was thicker where
sinuous than elsewhere, apparently from its longitudinal growth having been
checked.

Cotyledon umbilicus (Crassulaceae).--A plant growing in a pan
[page 220]
of damp moss had emitted 2 stolons, 22 and 20 inches in length. One of
these was supported, so that a length of 4 ½ inches projected in a straight
and horizontal line, and the movement of the apex was traced. The first dot
was made at 9.10 A.M.;

Fig. 89. Cotyledon umbilicus: circumnutation of stolon, traced from 11.15
A.M. Aug. 25th to 11 A.M. 27th. Plant illuminated from above. The terminal
internode was .25 inch in length, the penultimate 2.25 and the third 3.0
inches in length. Apex of stolon stood at a distance of 5.75 inches from
the vertical glass; but it was not possible to ascertain how much the
tracing was magnified, as it was not known how great a length of the
internode circumnutated.

the terminal portion soon began to bend downwards and continued to do so
until noon. Therefore a straight line, very nearly as long as the whole
figure here given (Fig. 89), was first traced on the glass; but the upper
part of this line has not been copied in the diagram. The curvature
occurred in the middle
[page 221]
of the penultimate internode; and its chief seat was at the distance of 1
1/4 inch from the apex; it appeared due to the weight of the terminal
portion, acting on the more flexible part of the internode, and not to
geotropism. The apex after thus sinking down from 9.10 A.M. to noon, moved
a little to the left; it then rose up and circumnutated in a nearly
vertical plane until 10.35 P.M. On the following day (26th) it was ob-

Fig. 90. Cotyledon umbilicus: circumnutation and downward movement of
another stolon, traced on vertical glass, from 9.11 A.M. Aug. 25th to 11
A.M. 27th. Apex close to glass, so that figure but little magnified, and
here reduced to two-thirds of original size.

served from 6.40 A.M. to 5.20 P.M., and within this time it moved twice up
and twice down. On the morning of the 27th the apex stood as high as it did
at 11.30 A.M. on the 25th. Nor did it sink down during the 28th, but
continued to circumnutate about the same place.

Another stolon, which resembled the last in almost every
[page 222]
respect, was observed during the same two days, but only two inches of the
terminal portion was allowed to project freely and horizontally. On the
25th it continued from 9.10 A.M. to 1.30 P.M. to bend straight downwards,
apparently owing to its weight (Fig. 90); but after this hour until 10.35
P.M. it zigzagged. This fact deserves notice, for we here probably see the
combined effects of the bending down from weight and of circumnutation. The
stolon, however, did not circumnutate when it first began to bend down, as
may be observed in the present diagram, and as was still more evident in
the last case, when a longer portion of the stolon was left unsupported. On
the following day (26th) the stolon moved twice up and twice down, but
still continued to fall; in the evening and during the night it travelled
from some unknown cause in an oblique direction.]

We see from these three cases that stolons or runners circumnutate in a
very complex manner. The lines generally extend in a vertical plane, and
this may probably be attributed to the effect of the weight of the
unsupported end of the stolon; but there is always some, and occasionally a
considerable, amount of lateral movement. The circumnutation is so great in
amplitude that it may almost be compared with that of climbing plants. That
the stolons are thus aided in passing over obstacles and in winding between
the stems of the surrounding plants, the observations above given render
almost certain. If they had not circumnutated, their tips would have been
liable to have been doubled up, as often as they met with obstacles in
their path; but as it is, they easily avoid them. This must be a
considerable advantage to the plant in spreading from its parent-stock; but
we are far from supposing that the power has been gained by the stolons for
this purpose, for circumnutation seems to be of universal occurrence with
all growing parts; but it is not improbable that the amplitude of the
movement may have been specially increased for this purpose.
[page 223]

CIRCUMNUTATION OF FLOWER-STEMS.

We did not think it necessary to make any special observations on the
circumnutation of flower-stems, these being axial in their nature, like
stems or stolons; but some were incidentally made whilst attending to other
subjects, and these we will here briefly give. A few observations have also
been made by other botanists. These taken together suffice to render it
probable that all peduncles and sub-peduncles circumnutate whilst growing.

[Oxalis carnosa.--The peduncle which springs from the thick and woody stem
of this plant bears three or four sub-peduncles.

Fig. 91. Oxalis carnosa: flower-stem, feebly illuminated from above, its
circumnutation traced from 9 A.M. April 13th to 9 A.M. 15th. Summit of
flower 8 inches beneath the horizontal glass. Movement probably magnified
about 6 times.

A filament with little triangles of paper was fixed within the calyx of a
flower which stood upright. Its movements were observed for 48 h.; during
the first half of this time the flower was fully expanded, and during the
second half withered. The figure here given (Fig. 91) represents 8 or 9
ellipses. Although the main peduncle circumnutated, and described one large
and
[page 224]
two smaller ellipses in the course of 24 h., yet the chief seat of movement
lies in the sub-peduncles, which ultimately bend vertically downwards, as
will be described in a future chapter. The peduncles of Oxalis acetosella
likewise bend downwards, and afterwards, when the pods are nearly mature,
upwards; and this is effected by a circumnutating movement.

It may be seen in the above figure that the flower-stem of O. carnosa
circumnutated during two days about the same spot. On the other hand, the
flower-stem of O. sensitiva undergoes a strongly marked, daily, periodical
change of position, when kept at a proper temperature. In the middle of the
day it stands vertically up, or at a high angle; in the afternoon it sinks,
and in the evening projects horizontally, or almost horizontally, rising
again during the night. This movement continues from the period when the
flowers are in bud to when, as we believe, the pods are mature: and it
ought perhaps to have been included amongst the so-called sleep-movements
of plants. A tracing was not made, but the angles were measured at
successive periods during one whole day; and these showed that the movement
was not continuous, but that the peduncle oscillated up and down. We may
therefore conclude that it circumnutated. At the base of the peduncle there
is a mass of small cells, forming a well-developed pulvinus, which is
exteriorly coloured purple and hairy. In no other genus, as far as we know,
is the peduncle furnished with a pulvinus. The peduncle of O. Ortegesii
behaved differently from that of O. sensitiva, for it stood at a less angle
above the horizon in the middle of the day, then in the morning or evening.
By 10.20 P.M. it had risen greatly. During the middle of the day it
oscillated much up and down.

Trifolium subterraneum.--A filament was fixed vertically to the uppermost
part of the peduncle of a young and upright flower-head (the stem of the
plant having been secured to a stick); and its movements were traced during
36 h. Within this time it described (see Fig. 92) a figure which represents
four ellipses; but during the latter part of the time the peduncle began to
bend downwards, and after 10.30 P.M. on the 24th it curved so rapidly down,
that by 6.45 A.M. on the 25th it stood only 19o above the horizon. It went
on circumnutating in nearly the same position for two days. Even after the
flower-heads have buried themselves in the ground they continue, as will
hereafter be shown, to circumnutate. It will also be seen in the next
chapter that the sub-peduncles of the separate flowers of
[page 225]
Trifolium repens circumnutate in a complicated course during several days.
I may add that the gynophore of Arachis hypogoea,

Fig. 92. Trifolium subterraneum: main flower-peduncle, illuminated from
above, circumnutation traced on horizontal glass, from 8.40 A.M. July 23rd
to 10.30 P.M. 24th.

which looks exactly like a peduncle, circumnutates whilst growing
vertically downwards, in order to bury the young pod in the ground.

The movements of the flowers of Cyclamen Persicum were not observed; but
the peduncle, whilst the pod is forming, increases much in length, and bows
itself down by a circumnutating movement. A young peduncle of Maurandia
semperflorens, 1 ½ inch in length, was carefully observed during a whole
day, and it made 4 ½ narrow, vertical, irregular and short ellipses, each
at an average rate of about 2 h. 25 m. An adjoining peduncle described
during the same time similar, though fewer, ellipses.* According to Sachs**
the flower-stems, whilst growing,

* 'The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants,' 2nd edit., 1875, p. 68.

** 'Text-Book of Botany,' 1875,
[[page 226]]
p. 766. Linnaeus and Treviranus (according to Pfeffer, 'Die Periodischen
Bewegungen,' etc., p. 162) state that the flower-stalks of many plants
occupy different positions by night and day, and we shall see in the
chapter on the Sleep of Plants that this implies circumnutation.
[page 226]

of many plants, for instance, those of Brassica napus, revolve or
circumnutate; those of Allium porrum bend from side to side, and, if this
movement had been traced on a horizontal glass, no doubt ellipses would
have been formed. Fritz Müller has described* the spontaneous revolving
movements of the flower-stems of an Alisma, which he compares with those of
a climbing plant.

We made no observations on the movements of the different parts of flowers.
Morren, however, has observed** in the stamens of Sparmannia and Cereus a
"fremissement spontané," which, it may be suspected, is a circumnutating
movement. The circumnutation of the gynostemium of Stylidium, as described
by Gad,*** is highly remarkable, and apparently aids in the fertilisation
of the flowers. The gynostemium, whilst spontaneously moving, comes into
contact with the viscid labellum, to which it adheres, until freed by the
increasing tension of the parts or by being touched.]
