beak snapping. With one talon she raked Jack's right arm and shredded
the heavy coatsleeve, the sleeve beneath, and scratched his arm. The
next instant her iron beak snapped upon his left hand.

Jack Darrow was plucky, but the pain of the wound brought a scream to
his lips. It was answered by the wild shrieks of the eagle.

And then, ere any of his friends could reach him (for the professor
had gone back to the cabin), the boy, fighting for his sight--indeed,
for his very life--by some unfortunate movement depressed the planes.
Like an arrow from the bow the _Snowbird_ shot downward into the yawning
crevasse which split the glacier from wall to wall. With a yell of
terror Mark Sampson sprang forward to the operator's bench. But he was
too late--if he could have done any good at all.

The _Snowbird_ swung to one side. Her right forward plane crashed
against the wall of ice, shattering some of the hard crystal. But on
the rebound the fluttering flying machine sank lower. Jack tried to
make her rise. She refused to obey the lever.

And then, with a suddenness that made them all catch their breath, the
_Snowbird_ plunged down into the ice-gulf and ended her dive with
a terrific crash on a narrow shelf at least two hundred feet below the
surface of the glacier.




CHAPTER XVI

PROFESSOR HENDERSON REVEALS THE TRUTH


The force with which the flying machine had plunged into the chasm in
the ice was sufficient to smash her keel-fin to bits. There was other
damage done, too--how great this damage was the boys and the professor
could not immediately discover.

They were all alive--that was one thing to be thankful for. And
Washington White's Shanghai, aroused from sleep by the disturbance,
began to crow vociferously.

The _Snowbird_ was wedged into a very small space upon the ledge
of ice. At first view it was quite certain that she could not be
launched again from this position by any ordinary means. And the
steering gear was practically a wreck, so that she positively must be
repaired before attempting another flight.

Jack's wounds were dressed by Andy first of all. Mark and the professor
made some attempt to look over the wreckage. The disaster was so great
that Mark gave up hope.

"We're done for now!" he cried. "The poor _Snowbird_ is a wreck. And how
are we ever going to get out of this hole?"

"Hush, my boy!" admonished the professor. "Don't lose your grip. This
is truly a serious predicament; but we have been in tight places
before."

"Nothing worse than this," grumbled Mark. "Nor half so bad. How are
we going to get out of this chasm? Why, just as Washington says, we've
been swallowed up like a duck gobbling a June bug."

"This is certainly a bad situation," Phineas Roebach remarked. "But,
as the professor says, it isn't the worst that might happen."

"What worse could happen?" demanded Mark.

"Hold on! Don't you step too near the edge of this shelf," warned the
oil man. "If you step off and fall clear to the bottom of this crevasse
you'll probably find _that_ a good deal worse than our present position.
B-r-r! Isn't it cold?"

Two hundred feet below the surface of the ice river was indeed a cold
spot. Washington produced all the warm clothing there was aboard the
flying machine and all hands were glad to bundle up. Then the professor
suggested that the black man prepare some hot drink and a ration of
their food, while all gathered in the cabin for a discussion as to
their future course. "Our perilous situation is apparent," said
Professor Henderson, quietly. "But there is always more than one way
out of a serious predicament--sometimes there are a dozen ways."

"I'd like to hear of a dozen ways of getting out of this hole," murmured
Mark Sampson.

"Mr. Roebach," said the professor, ignoring the youth, "what do you
say? What is your advice?"

"The sun will be up in an hour, or thereabout. It's pretty dim down
here. Let us wait and see what daylight shows us," was the oil man's
reply.

"The moon--the _other_ moon--is just appearing," Jack said. "We'll
have light enough in a few minutes."

"Two moons! what do you think of that?" cried Mark.

"Are you sure, Jack?" queried the professor, eagerly.

"I just saw it peeking over the eastern cliffs while Andy was patching
me up." He carried one arm in a sling, and his other hand was bandaged.

"Then I must take an observation," ejaculated the professor, and seizing
some instruments he had arranged on the table he went out to where the
powerful telescope was adjusted.

"He's forgotten all about gittin' out of this hole in the ice," said
Andy. "I, for one, think we'd ought to take axes and begin to cut steps
up the wall. How else will we escape from the place?"

"The poor old _Snowbird_ cannot be repaired in a hurry, that is sure,"
muttered Mark.

"And this is no place to remain for fun," agreed Jack. "Suppose the
walls of the crack should shut together--where would we be?"

"Just about here, for fair!" said Phineas Roebach, grimly, while
Washington uttered a most mournful wail.

"Gollyation! Is we gotter be squeeged ter deaf in disher awful
cavernarious hole? Dis is suah a time ob trouble an' tribbilation."

They heard an exclamation from the professor and Jack led the way to
the open deck of the crippled flying machine. By chance the _Snowbird_
in landing had remained upright, her decks on a level. They found the
professor bending over some further calculations on a great sheet of
paper. Here, two hundred feet below the surface of the ice, the heavenly
bodies all looked brighter and more distinct than they had while the
aeroplane was in flight above the ground.

The strange new planet had not yet gone out of sight. From the east
the old moon was soaring steadily. There could be no mistaking the two
orbs, now that both were visible in the sky at once. The new planet
or moon was much larger than the real moon.

"What do you suppose that great planet is?" queried Jack.

The professor looked up from his calculations. His face was very pale;
his eyes glowed with excitement. The boys had seldom seen the old
gentleman so moved.

"You are right, my boy. A planet it surely is," he said to Jack.

"But why have we never seen it before?" demanded Mark.

"For a very good reason," returned the professor, solemnly. "We were
never in a position before to behold that planet, save on two
occasions."

"Then we have seen it twice before?" asked the puzzled Jack.

"On two occasions we have been enabled to stand off, as it were, and
look at that planet as though we were inhabitants of another world--when
we went to the moon, and when we went to Mars."

"What do you mean, Professor?" cried Mark.

"It's the earth!" exclaimed Jack Darrow. "It's the earth! We have left
the earth--is that it, Professor?"

The old scientist nodded. Phineas Roebach snorted his disbelief, while
Washington White gave vent to his trouble of mind most
characteristically:

"Goodness gracious gollyation! De fat am suah in de fiah now! We'se
done los' de earf an' Buttsy an' me will nebber see our happy home no
mo'."

"Oh, Professor! how could we have left the earth?" demanded Mark. "See!
we are standing upon it now; at least, this glacier is an ice-river
of Alaska, and Alaska has not been wiped off the map!"

"But that is exactly what has happened to it," said the professor,
earnestly. "At least, a part of Alaska--we do not know how much of
that territory, or how much other territory with it--is no longer a
part of the sphere called the earth."

Phineas Roebach looked at the old scientist as though he thought the
latter had taken leave of his senses. But Jack Darrow leaped to the
right conclusion.

"You mean, sir, that the earthquake and the volcanic eruption have
torn away some great fragment of the world, and we are on it?"

"That is what I mean."

"We are floating in space, then--an entirely new world? And _that_ is
the old world shining there in the sky?"

"That is what has happened, Jack," declared Professor Henderson, with
solemnity. "I suspected it when we first felt the lightness of the
atmosphere. I was convinced when I found the ether envelope of this
new world--this island in the air, as it were--was so thin. My
calculations regarding the rising of the moon, and the outlines of
objects upon the great globe hanging yonder, prove to my mind
conclusively that the awful cataclysm we endured, when we all completely
lost consciousness, was the time when the eruption occurred, and we,
with this great fragment of the earth, were blown out into space."

"It can't be! it can't be!" shouted Phineas Roebach. "We've lost our
heads, perhaps; but we haven't lost our hold on the earth. It's
nonsense!"

"I sincerely wish I could feel that same confidence, Mr. Roebach,"
said Professor Henderson, drily. "These instruments of mine, however,
cannot lie. It is a simple calculation to figure that the moon, now
just risen, is thousands of miles out of her course, if we are still
on the earth. No, Mr. Roebach, I am stating the exact truth when I say
that we have been blown off the earth by that awful volcanic eruption,
and that we are now floating on a torn-away world, or a new planet,
in space, doubtless hanging between the earth and the sun. We are as
unsafe as though we were on a wandering star, or meteor--only this
island is not afire. But in time we shall fall into one or the other
greater bodies of our system--of that end there can be no possible
doubt."




CHAPTER XVII

ON AN ISLAND IN THE AIR


The stern and uncompromising statement of Professor Henderson relating
to the awful fate that had overtaken his friends and Phineas Roebach
was so uncompromising--almost brutal--that not a word was spoken for
several minutes.

Even Washington White was dumb. The fact that the fragment of the earth
on which they were imprisoned was floating miles above the globe, in
the rarified atmosphere of the outer universe, and that they were at
that moment able to look up and see the great, calm, palely glowing
sphere which had been their home, rolling across the arch above
them--all this was too awful a mystery to be grasped immediately by
the professor's companions.

Jack Darrow, whose mind was the keenest of any, was the first to break
the depressing silence. And he spoke in an awed tone that showed how
fully he realized the horror of their situation, if nothing more.

"Then, Professor, we are at the mercy of Chance--at any moment this
fragment of the earth may fall again--or be propelled into the sun?"

"We are in the hands of Providence, my boy," replied Professor
Henderson, reverently.

"The fact remains that we are totally unable to help ourselves," said
Jack, firmly. "Even could we repair the _Snowbird_, and get her out of
this crack in the ice, we could not fly to the earth. Between us and the
earth lies a portion of the universe that has no atmosphere--no
breathable air--like that envelope which surrounds the moon. Am I
right?"

"Practically correct, I believe, Jack," responded the aged scientist.

"But," cried Mark, at last getting _his_ speech, "how can such a thing
be possible? Blown off the earth! Why, we'd simply go up in the air and
come down again."

"Now you're talking sense, young fellow," muttered Roebach, still
rubbing his head as though stunned.

"Not if we were blown far enough to get beyond the earth's
attraction--or to get so far away from that body that the sun's
attraction counterbalances that of the earth," replied the professor,
calmly.

"And why do we not fall off?" asked Mark.

"We do come pretty near falling off," returned Professor Henderson,
grimly. "I should think you could see that, Mark."

"Our lightness!" Jack cried. "Washington's jumping and the lightness
of all objects! I see. This fragment of the earth--this island in the
air, as you call it, Professor--is large enough to possess some powers
of attraction of its own; but not as much as the earth. I wonder how
large it really is?"

"That is a matter for future discovery," returned the scientist, with
some eagerness.

"My goodness me!" groaned Mark. "He really enjoys the situation."

"No man has ever been in such a position before--I am convinced of
that," declared the professor. "Were it not that you are all in as
perilous a situation as myself, I would not worry about this condition.
It is marvelous, and the situation affords me opportunity to learn
many things that science has only guessed at before."

"Don't talk that way!" wailed the oil man, suddenly. "You'll make
_me_ believe in this island in the air business, and I _know_ it's
craziness!"

Nor could anything the professor say convince the oil man that there
was any common sense in the plain statement of their situation. It was
beyond Phineas Roebach's powers of imagination.

As for Washington White, he could not understand the affair anyway.
But he always accepted the professor's words as Bible truth and he had
no doubt of the surprising fact.

"We was bound ter git inter trouble, Buttsy an' me, w'en we agreed ter
start on any sech foolish journey. And de consanguinuity ob dis 'casion
assuages me ob de fac' dat we'se only got our come-upance fo' bein'
so reckless. Now we is nebber gwine ter see de State o' Maine again,
'ceptin' it is froo de perfesser's telescope."

His complaint received little attention from Jack Darrow or Mark
Sampson; they were too deeply interested in the explanation of the
catastrophe that had overtaken them.

"How big a slice of Alaska do you suppose has been blown off the earth,
Professor?" asked Jack.

"It may be much more than a part of Alaska," replied Mr. Henderson.
"Until we have a chance to explore the region more thoroughly I cannot
even guess the answer to your question."

"And how can we explore it?" demanded Mark, quickly. "If there is no
atmosphere on these mountain tops which we see--or, which we saw before
we fell into this crevasse--we cannot get off this plane. We are
imprisoned on the low ground. The lack of air will keep us from climbing
the mountains."

"Or from flying over them if we can get the _Snowbird_ into commission
again," added Jack. "Every necessity brings its own invention," said the
professor. "Let us not despair. We may yet find some means of traveling
all about this floating island."

"And what will you do if you get to the edge--fall off?" exclaimed
Andy.

He likewise accepted the professor's words at their face value. He
