
"No, but he and his accomplices might get the old man to some remote
place and make him a prisoner."

"And force him to give up a lot of money before they let him go."

"Yes, that has been done before," admitted Dave.

"Anyhow, two days alter Mr. Dale left Warrenton, a check passed
through the bank signed by him for one thousand dollars."

Dave was both interested and alarmed.

"Four days ago a check for two thousand dollars arrived.  The bank
refused to cash it."

"Why, Mr. King?"

"Because it was a forgery."

"Not Mr. Dale's signature?"

"That's it."

"But where did the checks come from?" inquired Dave.

"From two cities, widely apart.  I know the places.  It looks to me
as if the first check was given willingly by Mr. Dale.  Then he must
have become suspicious, and refused to pay out any more money.  The
second check was numbered correctly, and Gregg must have got
possession of the old man's regular check book."

"This is a pretty serious affair, Mr. King," commented Dave.

"It is, and I came straight back here to tell you about it, and then
cancel all my engagements at the meet.  I shall start out at once to
run down this Gregg and locate Mr. Dale."

"And I must join you-I see that it is my duty," declared Dave.

"Not at all," responded the aviator definitely.  "I have mapped out
the best plan of procedure, and I believe I can run down this
business alone in a very short time."

Dave was really anxious concerning Mr. Dale.  He truly believed it
his first duty towards the old friend of his father to do all he
could to assist him.  For all that, Dave was relieved to know that
he could go on without interruption in service of his employers.

"Yes," proceeded the aviator, "I feel that I have an interest in
finding Mr. Dale.  In the first place, he is your friend.  Next, I
feel responsible for letting that young scamp, Gregg, go free.  At a
selfish motive, I believe that if I succeed in rescuing the old man
he will gladly finance my giant airship scheme."

"He surely will, Mr. King," said Dave confidently.  "I believe he
would help you, anyway.  I do hope he can be found."

"I shall not rest until he is," declared the aviator.  "Now,
Dashaway, I don't want you to take this affair on your mind.  If I
fail in what I have planned, I will certainly call you into the
case.  I fancy, from what Hiram here has told me, that you have some
important business of your own on hand."

"Yes, that is quite true," replied Dave seriously.

"Are you having some trouble with the Interstate people?" inquired
the aviator pointedly.

"Not on my account, I, am glad to say, Mr. King," replied Dave.
"There is some trouble, though, for all hands around.  It's about
the stolen aero-hydroplane, or hydro-aeroplane, they haven't just
settled on the exact name."

"The Drifter?"

"Yes, sir."

"I read about that strange case.  I suppose it puts you back in your
arrangements at the meet here?"

"Not only that, Mr. King," explained Dave, "but it has placed me in
a position where I shall have to give up all my engagements for a
time."

"Why, you don't say so, Dashaway?" exclaimed the aviator, much
disturbed.

"Those are the orders," replied Dave.  "I have hurried back to
Columbus purposely, to consult on your helping in a search for the
Drifter."

"Of course that is not possible, now that this Dale affair has come
up," said Mr. King.  "As to a search for the stolen aircraft, that
is going to be no easy task, I'm thinking.  Have the Interstate
people no theory as to the way the Drifter was stolen, and the
motive for the theft?"

"I had better tell you all I know about it, Mr. King."

"Do so, Dashaway."

Dave proceeded to relate his interview with Mr. Randolph, the
manager of the Interstate factory.  He did not refer just then to
his experience with the tramp.

"It's a good deal of a puzzle," commented the aviator.  "What is
your plan?"

"Why, I expected that I could induce you to take charge of the
search.  As you cannot, I am thinking of Hiram going back with me to
Bolton."

"What's your idea?"

"The Interstate people have offered me their best monoplane to start
the chase for the missing Drifter."

"It will be a blind start, Dashaway, without a clew."

"But I have a clew," announced Dave.

"You didn't say so."

"I hadn't come to that yet, Mr. King.  I haven't even told the
Interstate people.  I am pretty certain that the Drifter left Bolton
on a due northwest course," and Dave drew from his pocket the card
he had got from the tramp.

"Capital!" cried the aviator, becoming very much interested.  "If
you know that, you have half solved the problem."

"Besides that," went on Dave, producing the duplicate N. A. L.
badge, and glancing at the scratched initials on its back, "I know
who stole the Drifter."

"What's that?" almost shouted the aviator, springing to his feet, in
a great state of excitement.

"Say, Dave, are you sure?" pressed the eager Hiram Dobbs, worked up
to fever heat with curiosity and suspense.

"Who was it?" asked Mr. King.

"Jerry Dawson," was Dave Dashaway's reply.




CHAPTER XV

AT THE AERODROME


"That is the machine I want, Mr. Randolph," said Dave Dashaway.

It was two days after the young aviator had told his friends at
Columbus the name of the person he suspected of stealing the
aero-hydroplane, the Drifter from the Interstate Aeroplane Company.

Now, he and Hiram and the manager of the Interstate plant stood amid
the half hundred or more aero machines that comprised the stock of
one of the largest factories in that line in the country.

They had left the aero meet at Columbus the evening previous, not,
however, until Dave had explained how he came to suspect Jerry
Dawson.

"It's simple and plain, Mr. King," the young aviator had said.  "The
badge I bought from the tramp at Bolton was the property of young
Dawson."

"Sure of that, Dashaway?" Mr. King had inquired.

"Oh, yes.  The initials are crude, but they certainly stand for 'J.
D.' and not 'T. O.' as the tramp thought."

An inspection of the duplicate badge by both Mr. King and Hiram
satisfied them that Dave's theory was correct.

"Another thing," Dave had added--"the coat found on the barb wire
top of the factory fence I have seen Jerry wear many a time."

"And the card?" pressed Hiram.

"The card has some scrawls on it, made by Jerry, I think.  It shows
a sort of rough outline of the upper lake district here.  Some
arrows show a straight course due northwest.  I believe the Drifter
was started on its way over the Canadian border."

"And the two men with Jerry?" asked Mr. King.

"I can't figure out that they could be anybody but Jerry's father
and the man who left Columbus with them--Ridgely."

"The man the revenue officer was looking for!" exclaimed Hiram.

"The smuggler, as he was called, yes," replied Dave.

Mr. King and Hiram indulged in all kinds of conjectures as to the
possible motive of the party of three in stealing the aircraft.

"The way I figure it out," said Mr. King, "is that this Ridgely
wanted to get out of the country knowing that the revenue people
were dose on his trail."

"Perhaps," agreed Dave thoughtfully.  "There's another thing,
though."

"What's that?" inquired the interested Hiram.

"His coming all the way around the lakes to find his friends, the
Dawsons, looks as though he had some future scheme in view, with an
airship a part of it."

"That's so," assented Mr. King.  "Well, Dashaway, you have done
famously so far in finding out what you have.  The Interstate people
think the only way to chase the fugitives is with one of their own
machines.  I don't know anybody better adapted to do just that than
yourself."

"Thank you, Mr. King," said Dave modestly

The two boys left Columbus with pretty clear minds.  They had a
definite purpose in view, and Mr. King, Dave felt sanguine, would do
all that the interests of Mr. Dale required while they were gone.

"Say, Dave," spoke Hiram, as they boarded the train bound for
Bolton, "this is just like acting out some story, isn't it?"

"In a way," acquiesced the young aviator, "only there won't be much
acting--it will be real, earnest hard work."

"I see that, and I am anxious to do my share," declared Hiram.

"You always are, Hiram," said Dave.

Now, the morning following, the two aviator friends found themselves
at the Interstate factory, where both received a warm welcome from
Mr. Randolph.

Dave now related to the manager all that he had held back during his
first visit to the great plant.

"I say, Dashaway, that's simply wonderful," was Mr. Randolph's
enthusiastic comment.  "Anybody with the genius to gather up all
those clews cannot fail to work out this entire case.  We shall soon
receive some great reports from you."

"I hope so," said Dave.

"Now then, you and your friend go over to the aerodrome and see
which one of our machines there suits you best."

It was after Dave and Hiram had spent the most fascinating half hour
of their lives viewing the wonders of mechanism on display, that the
manager rejoined them.  It was then, too, that Dave reported to him
with the words:

"That is the machine I want, Mr. Randolph."

As Dave spoke he pointed to a monoplane of which he had made a close
inspection for over ten minutes.  The manager burst out into a
hearty laugh.

"Well, well!" he cried, clapping Dave on the shoulder in an
approving way, "I must say you are certainly a grand judge of
monoplanes."

"How is that?" asked Dave.

"You have picked out the best machine in the place."

"Why, I was looking for the best one, wasn't I, Mr. Randolph?" asked
the young aviator with a smile.

"It is our new model of the composite hydro-aeroplane," explained
the manager.  "It's the best standard built in this country--the
Monarch II."

"It's easy to see that," responded Dave.  "It is the equal of the
Drifter in a great many ways."

"That is true," replied Mr. Randolph.  "While it may not be as swift
in the water as an all-steel hydro, it is built on the best float
system and will sustain a weight of one thousand three hundred
pounds."

"And the front elevation and tail are also of the newest type," said
Dave.

"You studied that out, eh?  It's a model of lightness as such
machines go.  The engine is only three hundred pounds, it carries
twenty gallons of gasoline, and has a lifting capacity of twelve
hundred pounds, giving leeway for a three hundred pound pilot."

"Dave and I wouldn't weigh that together, Mr. Randolph," said Hiram.

"Its simplicity strikes me," remarked Dave.

"Yes," said Mr. Randolph, "and it can be knocked down and
reassembled in a hurry.  You see, the ailerons never leave their
sections and in the planes not a wire is changed.  The outriggers
fold, keeping them in pairs together, each piece is bent, not
buckled, and can be straightened good as new in case of a
disarrangement."

The manager went over the entire machine in a speedy but expert way.
He saw that all locks on the turnbuckles were fastened, and that the
locks had lock washers beneath them.  All the movable wires were
reinforced with a piece of loose hay wire, and provisions against
rust perfected.

Hiram stood mute, but fascinated, as the manager explained in detail
the fine points of the Monarch II, as the composite hydro-aeroplane
was named.

What interested Dave immensely was a self starting apparatus.  This
was operated by a handle inserted in a socket, fastened on a special
ball ratchet on the large sprocket.  Pulling this handle turned the
motor over two, sometimes three compressions, and started up the
machine without difficulty, Mr. Randolph explained.  During the
operation the throttle shut down so that the operator might resume
his seat and take the levers.

The planes had double covered fabric on top and bottom, tightened at
the rear of the planes by lacing.  A single lever controlled the
