running water in some far-gone age when a mighty river found its
way to the south through this single breach in the barrier of rock
and ice that hems the country of the pole.

Thuvan Dihn and I traversed the remaining nineteen caverns without
adventure or mishap.

We were afterward to learn that but once a month is it possible to
find all the apts of the Carrion Caves in a single chamber.

At other times they roam singly or in pairs in and out of the
caves, so that it would have been practically impossible for two
men to have passed through the entire twenty-seven chambers without
encountering an apt in nearly every one of them.  Once a month
they sleep for a full day, and it was our good fortune to stumble
by accident upon one of these occasions.

Beyond the last cave we emerged into a desolate country of snow
and ice, but found a well-marked trail leading north.  The way was
boulder-strewn, as had been that south of the barrier, so that we
could see but a short distance ahead of us at any time.

After a couple of hours we passed round a huge boulder to come to
a steep declivity leading down into a valley.

Directly before us we saw a half dozen men--fierce, black-bearded
fellows, with skins the color of a ripe lemon.

"The yellow men of Barsoom!" ejaculated Thuvan Dihn, as though
even now that he saw them he found it scarce possible to believe
that the very race we expected to find hidden in this remote and
inaccessible land did really exist.

We withdrew behind an adjacent boulder to watch the actions of
the little party, which stood huddled at the foot of another huge
rock, their backs toward us.

One of them was peering round the edge of the granite mass as though
watching one who approached from the opposite side.

Presently the object of his scrutiny came within the range of my
vision and I saw that it was another yellow man.  All were clothed
in magnificent furs--the six in the black and yellow striped hide
of the orluk, while he who approached alone was resplendent in the
pure white skin of an apt.

The yellow men were armed with two swords, and a short javelin
was slung across the back of each, while from their left arms hung
cuplike shields no larger than a dinner plate, the concave sides
of which turned outward toward an antagonist.

They seemed puny and futile implements of safety against an even
ordinary swordsman, but I was later to see the purpose of them and
with what wondrous dexterity the yellow men manipulate them.

One of the swords which each of the warriors carried caught
my immediate attention.  I call it a sword, but really it was a
sharp-edged blade with a complete hook at the far end.

The other sword was of about the same length as the hooked instrument,
and somewhere between that of my long-sword and my short-sword.
It was straight and two-edged.  In addition to the weapons I have
enumerated each man carried a dagger in his harness.

As the white-furred one approached, the six grasped their swords
more firmly--the hooked instrument in the left hand, the straight
sword in the right, while above the left wrist the small shield
was held rigid upon a metal bracelet.

As the lone warrior came opposite them the six rushed out upon him
with fiendish yells that resembled nothing more closely than the
savage war cry of the Apaches of the South-west.

Instantly the attacked drew both his swords, and as the six fell
upon him I witnessed as pretty fighting as one might care to see.

With their sharp hooks the combatants attempted to take hold of
an adversary, but like lightning the cupshaped shield would spring
before the darting weapon and into its hollow the hook would plunge.

Once the lone warrior caught an antagonist in the side with his
hook, and drawing him close ran his sword through him.

But the odds were too unequal, and, though he who fought alone was
by far the best and bravest of them all, I saw that it was but a
question of time before the remaining five would find an opening
through his marvelous guard and bring him down.

Now my sympathies have ever been with the weaker side of an argument,
and though I knew nothing of the cause of the trouble I could not
stand idly by and see a brave man butchered by superior numbers.

As a matter of fact I presume I gave little attention to seeking an
excuse, for I love a good fight too well to need any other reason
for joining in when one is afoot.

So it was that before Thuvan Dihn knew what I was about he saw me
standing by the side of the white-clad yellow man, battling like
mad with his five adversaries.




WITH THE YELLOW MEN


Thuvan Dihn was not long in joining me; and, though we found the
hooked weapon a strange and savage thing with which to deal, the
three of us soon despatched the five black-bearded warriors who
opposed us.

When the battle was over our new acquaintance turned to me, and
removing the shield from his wrist, held it out.  I did not know
the significance of his act, but judged that it was but a form of
expressing his gratitude to me.

I afterward learned that it symbolized the offering of a man's life
in return for some great favor done him; and my act of refusing,
which I had immediately done, was what was expected of me.

"Then accept from Talu, Prince of Marentina," said the yellow man,
"this token of my gratitude," and reaching beneath one of his wide
sleeves he withdrew a bracelet and placed it upon my arm.  He then
went through the same ceremony with Thuvan Dihn.

Next he asked our names, and from what land we hailed.  He seemed
quite familiar with the geography of the outerworld, and when I
said I was from Helium he raised his brows.

"Ah," he said, "you seek your ruler and his company?"

"Know you of them?" I asked.

"But little more than that they were captured by my uncle, Salensus
Oll, Jeddak of Jeddaks, Ruler of Okar, land of the yellow men of
Barsoom.  As to their fate I know nothing, for I am at war with my
uncle, who would crush my power in the principality of Marentina.

"These from whom you have just saved me are warriors he has sent
out to find and slay me, for they know that often I come alone to
hunt and kill the sacred apt which Salensus Oll so much reveres.
It is partly because I hate his religion that Salensus Oll hates
me; but mostly does he fear my growing power and the great faction
which has arisen throughout Okar that would be glad to see me ruler
of Okar and Jeddak of Jeddaks in his place.

"He is a cruel and tyrannous master whom all hate, and were it not
for the great fear they have of him I could raise an army overnight
that would wipe out the few that might remain loyal to him.  My
own people are faithful to me, and the little valley of Marentina
has paid no tribute to the court of Salensus Oll for a year.

"Nor can he force us, for a dozen men may hold the narrow way to
Marentina against a million.  But now, as to thine own affairs.
How may I aid you?  My palace is at your disposal, if you wish to
honor me by coming to Marentina."

"When our work is done we shall be glad to accept your invitation,"
I replied.  "But now you can assist us most by directing us to the
court of Salensus Oll, and suggesting some means by which we may
gain admission to the city and the palace, or whatever other place
we find our friends to be confined."

Talu gazed ruefully at our smooth faces and at Thuvan Dihn's red
skin and my white one.

"First you must come to Marentina," he said, "for a great change
must be wrought in your appearance before you can hope to enter
any city in Okar.  You must have yellow faces and black beards,
and your apparel and trappings must be those least likely to arouse
suspicion.  In my palace is one who can make you appear as truly
yellow men as does Salensus Oll himself."

His counsel seemed wise; and as there was apparently no other way
to insure a successful entry to Kadabra, the capital city of Okar,
we set out with Talu, Prince of Marentina, for his little, rock-bound
country.

The way was over some of the worst traveling I have ever seen, and
I do not wonder that in this land where there are neither thoats
nor fliers that Marentina is in little fear of invasion; but at
last we reached our destination, the first view of which I had from
a slight elevation a half-mile from the city.

Nestled in a deep valley lay a city of Martian concrete, whose
every street and plaza and open space was roofed with glass.  All
about lay snow and ice, but there was none upon the rounded,
domelike, crystal covering that enveloped the whole city.

Then I saw how these people combated the rigors of the arctic, and
lived in luxury and comfort in the midst of a land of perpetual
ice.  Their cities were veritable hothouses, and when I had come
within this one my respect and admiration for the scientific and
engineering skill of this buried nation was unbounded.

The moment we entered the city Talu threw off his outer garments
of fur, as did we, and I saw that his apparel differed but little
from that of the red races of Barsoom.  Except for his leathern
harness, covered thick with jewels and metal, he was naked, nor could
one have comfortably worn apparel in that warm and humid atmosphere.

For three days we remained the guests of Prince Talu, and during
that time he showered upon us every attention and courtesy within
his power.  He showed us all that was of interest in his great
city.

The Marentina atmosphere plant will maintain life indefinitely in
the cities of the north pole after all life upon the balance of
dying Mars is extinct through the failure of the air supply, should
the great central plant again cease functioning as it did upon that
memorable occasion that gave me the opportunity of restoring life
and happiness to the strange world that I had already learned to
love so well.

He showed us the heating system that stores the sun's rays in great
reservoirs beneath the city, and how little is necessary to maintain
the perpetual summer heat of the glorious garden spot within this
arctic paradise.

Broad avenues of sod sewn with the seed of the ocher vegetation
of the dead sea bottoms carried the noiseless traffic of light and
airy ground fliers that are the only form of artificial transportation
used north of the gigantic ice-barrier.

The broad tires of these unique fliers are but rubber-like gas bags
filled with the eighth Barsoomian ray, or ray of propulsion--that
remarkable discovery of the Martians that has made possible the
great fleets of mighty airships that render the red man of the
outer world supreme.  It is this ray which propels the inherent
or reflected light of the planet off into space, and when confined
gives to the Martian craft their airy buoyancy.

The ground fliers of Marentina contain just sufficient buoyancy in
their automobile-like wheels to give the cars traction for steering
purposes; and though the hind wheels are geared to the engine, and
aid in driving the machine, the bulk of this work is carried by a
small propeller at the stern.

I know of no more delightful sensation than that of riding in one
of these luxuriously appointed cars which skim, light and airy as
feathers, along the soft, mossy avenues of Marentina.  They move
with absolute noiselessness between borders of crimson sward and
beneath arching trees gorgeous with the wondrous blooms that mark
so many of the highly cultivated varieties of Barsoomian vegetation.

By the end of the third day the court barber--I can think of no
other earthly appellation by which to describe him--had wrought
so remarkable a transformation in both Thuvan Dihn and myself that
our own wives would never have known us.  Our skins were of the
same lemon color as his own, and great, black beards and mustaches
had been deftly affixed to our smooth faces.  The trappings of
warriors of Okar aided in the deception; and for wear beyond the
hothouse cities we each had suits of the black- and yellow-striped
orluk.

Talu gave us careful directions for the journey to Kadabra, the
capital city of the Okar nation, which is the racial name of the
yellow men.  This good friend even accompanied us part way, and
then, promising to aid us in any way that he found possible, bade
us adieu.

On parting he slipped upon my finger a curiously wrought ring set
with a dead-black, lusterless stone, which appeared more like a
bit of bituminous coal than the priceless Barsoomian gem which in
reality it is.

"There had been but three others cut from the mother stone," he
said, "which is in my possession.  These three are worn by nobles
high in my confidence, all of whom have been sent on secret missions
to the court of Salensus Oll.

"Should you come within fifty feet of any of these three you will
feel a rapid, pricking sensation in the finger upon which you wear
this ring.  He who wears one of its mates will experience the same
feeling; it is caused by an electrical action that takes place the
moment two of these gems cut from the same mother stone come within
the radius of each other's power.  By it you will know that a friend
is at hand upon whom you may depend for assistance in time of need.

"Should another wearer of one of these gems call upon you for aid
do not deny him, and should death threaten you swallow the ring
rather than let it fall into the hands of enemies.  Guard it with
your life, John Carter, for some day it may mean more than life to
you."

With this parting admonition our good friend turned back toward
Marentina, and we set our faces in the direction of the city of
Kadabra and the court of Salensus Oll, Jeddak of Jeddaks.

That very evening we came within sight of the walled and glass-roofed
city of Kadabra.  It lies in a low depression near the pole,
surrounded by rocky, snow-clad hills.  From the pass through which
we entered the valley we had a splendid view of this great city of
the north.  Its crystal domes sparkled in the brilliant sunlight
gleaming above the frost-covered outer wall that circles the entire
one hundred miles of its circumference.

At regular intervals great gates give entrance to the city; but
even at the distance from which we looked upon the massive pile
we could see that all were closed, and, in accordance with Talu's
suggestion, we deferred attempting to enter the city until the
following morning.

As he had said, we found numerous caves in the hillsides about
us, and into one of these we crept for the night.  Our warm orluk
skins kept us perfectly comfortable, and it was only after a
most refreshing sleep that we awoke shortly after daylight on the
following morning.

Already the city was astir, and from several of the gates we saw
parties of yellow men emerging.  Following closely each detail
of the instructions given us by our good friend of Marentina, we
remained concealed for several hours until one party of some half
dozen warriors had passed along the trail below our hiding place
and entered the hills by way of the pass along which we had come
the previous evening.

After giving them time to get well out of sight of our cave, Thuvan
Dihn and I crept out and followed them, overtaking them when they
were well into the hills.

When we had come almost to them I called aloud to their leader, when
the whole party halted and turned toward us.  The crucial test had
come.  Could we but deceive these men the rest would be comparatively
easy.

"Kaor!" I cried as I came closer to them.

"Kaor!" responded the officer in charge of the party.

"We be from Illall," I continued, giving the name of the most remote
city of Okar, which has little or no intercourse with Kadabra.
"Only yesterday we arrived, and this morning the captain of the
gate told us that you were setting out to hunt orluks, which is
a sport we do not find in our own neighborhood.  We have hastened
after you to pray that you allow us to accompany you."

The officer was entirely deceived, and graciously permitted us to
go with them for the day.  The chance guess that they were bound
upon an orluk hunt proved correct, and Talu had said that the
chances were ten to one that such would be the mission of any party
leaving Kadabra by the pass through which we entered the valley,
since that way leads directly to the vast plains frequented by this
elephantine beast of prey.

In so far as the hunt was concerned, the day was a failure, for
we did not see a single orluk; but this proved more than fortunate
for us, since the yellow men were so chagrined by their misfortune
that they would not enter the city by the same gate by which they
had left it in the morning, as it seemed that they had made great
boasts to the captain of that gate about their skill at this
dangerous sport.

We, therefore, approached Kadabra at a point several miles from
that at which the party had quitted it in the morning, and so were
relieved of the danger of embarrassing questions and explanations
on the part of the gate captain, whom we had said had directed us
