I caught him in my arms, fearing that he would tumble overboard in his
fright, and Edmund, instantly recovering his composure, turned back to
his work.

Finding Juba sufficiently recovered, although yet weak and almost
helpless, he rose again, but more cautiously than before. And now our
pursuers, plainly believing that these maneuvers could have but one
ending, began to set their net, and I could not help admiring their plan,
which would surely have succeeded if they had not made a fundamental
error in their calculations, but one for which they were not to blame.
There was such a multitude of their craft, fresh ones coming up all the
while, that they were able to form themselves into the shape of a huge
bag net, the edge of which was carried as high as they dared to go, while
the sides and receding bottom were composed of air ships so numerous that
they were packed almost as closely as meshes. Edmund laughed again as he
looked down into this immense net.

"No, no," he shouted. "We're no gudgeons! You'll have to do better than
that!"

"See here, Edmund," Jack suddenly exclaimed, "why don't you make off and
leave them? By keeping just above their reach we could easily escape."

"_And leave the car?_" was the reply.

"By Jo," returned Jack, "I never thought of that. But, then, what did you
run away for at all?"

"Because," said Edmund quietly, "I thought it better to parley than to
lie in prison."

"Parley! How are you going to parley?"

"That remains to be seen; but I guess we'll manage it."

We were now, as far as I could estimate, five or six miles high. When we
were highest, the great cloud dome seemed to be but a little way above
our heads, and I thought, at first, that Edmund intended to run up into
it and thus conceal our movements. The highest of our pursuers were about
half a mile below us. They circled about, and were evidently parleying on
their own account, for waves of color flowed all about them, making a
spectacle so brilliant and beautiful that sometimes I almost forgot our
critical situation in watching it.

"I suppose you'll play them a prismatic symphony," said Henry mockingly.

I looked at him in surprise. Evidently his fear of Edmund had vanished;
no doubt because he knew in his heart the magnanimity of our great
leader.

"Who knows?" Edmund replied. "I've no doubt the materials are aboard, and
if I had been here a month, I'd probably try it. As things stand, we
shall have to resort to other methods."

While we were talking, Edmund did not relax his vigilance, and two or
three times, when he had dropped to a lesser elevation for Juba's sake,
he baffled a dash of the enemy. At last we noticed a movement in the
crowd which betokened something of importance, and in a moment we saw
what it was. A splendid air ship, by far the most beautiful that we had
yet seen, was swiftly approaching from below.

"It's the queen," said Edmund. "I thought she'd come."

The approaching ship made its way straight toward us, and, without the
slightest hesitation, Edmund dropped down to meet it. Those who had been
our pursuers now made no attempt to interfere with us; they recognized
the presence of a superior authority. Soon we were so near that we could
recognize Ala, who looked like Cleopatra in her barge on the charmed
waves of Cydnus. Beside her, to the intense disappointment of Jack and
myself, stood Ingra.

"Confound him!" growled Jack. "He's always got to have his oar in the
puddle. Blamed if I'm not sorry Edmund spoiled my aim. I'd have had his
scalp to hang up at the Olympus to be smoked at!"

Of what now occurred, I can give no detailed account, because it was all
beyond my comprehension. We approached almost within touch, and then
Edmund stood forth, fearless and splendid as Caesar, and conducted his
"parley." When it was over, there was a flashing of aerial colors between
Ala's ship and the others, and then all, including ours, set out to
return to the capital. After a while Edmund, who had been very
thoughtful, turned to us and said:

"You can make your minds easy. Of course you'll understand there is a
certain amount of guesswork in what I tell you, but you can depend upon
the correctness of my general conclusions. I believe that I have made it
perfectly clear that we intended no harm, and that we are not dangerous
characters. At least Ala understands it perfectly. As for Ingra, perhaps
he doesn't want to understand it. I can't make out the cause of his
enmity, but it is certain that he doesn't like us, and if it all depended
upon him, it would go hard with us. I believe that we shall have to stand
a trial of some kind, but remember that we've got a powerful advocate. I
don't regret our running off, for, as I anticipated, it afforded us the
opportunity to establish some sort of terms. The mere fact that we return
willingly when they know that we might have fled beyond their reach
should count in our favor, for, as I have always insisted, these are
highly intelligent people, with civilized ideas. If I had not been sure
of that I should have continued the flight and depended upon some other
means of recovering the car--or constructing a new one."

We had become so much accustomed to accept Edmund's decisions as final
that none of us thought of objecting to what he had done; unless it might
have been Henry, but he kept his thoughts to himself.




CHAPTER XI


BEFORE THE THRONE OF VENUS

While we were dropping down toward the city, with a great fleet of air
ships attending, Edmund opened his mind upon another curious difficulty
besetting us.

"You, of course, noted," he said, "how close we approached at one time to
the cloud dome. The existence of that sky screen is a circumstance which
may possibly be decisive in the determination of our fate."

"Favorable or unfavorable?" I asked.

"Unfavorable, for this reason. If these people could be made to
understand that we are visitors from another world, and not inhabitants
of the other side of their own planet, they might treat us with greater
consideration, and even with a certain superstitious deference. The
imagination is doubtless as active with them as with terrestrial beings,
and if you can once touch the imagination, even of the most intelligent
and instructed persons, you can do almost anything you choose with them.
But how am I to convey to them any idea of this kind? Seeing neither sun,
nor moon, nor stars, they can have no conception of such a thing as
another world than their own."

"Couldn't you persuade them," said Jack, "that we come from the upper
side of the cloud dome? You could pretend that it's very fine living up
there--plenty of sunshine and good air."

Edmund laughed.

"I'm afraid, Jack, that they are too intelligent to believe that a person
of your avoirdupois could walk on the clouds. You're not quite angelic
enough for that. I'm sure that they know perfectly well what the dome
consists of."

"The presence of Juba with us is another difficulty," I suggested. "If,
as you suppose, they recognize certain racial characteristics in him,
which convince them that he belongs to the other side of Venus, then they
are sure to believe that we belong there, too."

"Certainly. But I must find some way round the difficulty. I depend upon
the intelligence of Ala. If she had been killed, nothing could have saved
us. We have had an unpleasant escape from something too closely
resembling the misfortune of Oedipus."

In the meanwhile, we reached the capital and disembarked on the great
tower. To our intense surprise and delight, instead of being reconducted
to prison, we were led into a magnificent apartment, with open arches
facing toward the distant mountains, and a repast was spread before us.
Juba, to our great contentment, was allowed to accompany us. I think that
Jack was the most pleased member of the party at the sight of the food.
We sat at a round table, and I observed that the eatables consisted, as
with Juba's people, exclusively of vegetables, except that there were
birds, of species unknown to us, but of most exquisite flavor, and a
light, white wine, the most delicious that I ever tasted.

When we had finished eating, we fell to admiring the view, and Jack
pulled out his pipe, and, aided by Edmund's pocket lamp, which possessed
an attachment for cigar lighting, began to smoke, leaning back
luxuriously in his seat, with as much nonchalance as if he had been in
the smoking room at the Olympus. I think I may say that we all exhibited
a _sang froid_ amidst our novel surroundings that would have astonished
us if we had stopped to analyze our feelings, but in that respect Jack
was often the coolest member of the party, although he had not the iron
nerves of Edmund. On this occasion, he was not long in producing a
sensation. No sooner had the smoke begun to curl from his lips than the
attendants in the room were thrown into a state of laughable
consternation. Evidently they thought, like the servant of Walter
Raleigh, that the smoke must come from an internal fire. Their looks
showed alarm as well as astonishment.

"Keep your pipe concealed," whispered Edmund. "Take a few strong whiffs,
and hide it in your pocket before they observe whence the smoke really
comes. This may do us some good; it will, at least, serve to awake their
imagination, and that is what we need."

Jack did as requested, first filling his mouth with smoke, and then
slowly letting it out in puffs that more and more astonished the
onlookers, who kept at a respectful distance, and excitedly discussed the
phenomenon. Suddenly, Jack, with characteristic mobility of thought,
turned to Edmund and demanded:

"Edmund, why didn't those fellows shoot us when we were running away?
There were enough of them to bring us down with the wildest sort of
shooting."

"They didn't shoot," was the reply, "because they had nothing to shoot
with. I have made up my mind that they are an unwarlike people. I don't
believe that they have the slightest idea what a gun is. Yet they are no
cowards, and they'll fight if there is need of fighting, and no doubt
they have weapons of some kind; only they are not natural slaughterers
like ourselves, and I shouldn't be surprised if war is unknown on Venus.

"All the same," said Jack, "I wish I had my pistol back. I tried to hide
it, but those fellows had their eyes on it, and it's confiscated. I'm
glad you think they don't know how to use it."

"And I'm glad," returned Edmund, "that you haven't got your pistol.
You've been altogether too handy with it. Now," he continued, "let us
consider our situation. You see at a glance that we have gained a great
deal as a result of the parley; the way we have just been treated here
shows plainly enough that we shall, at least, have a fair trial, and we
couldn't have counted on that before. You can never make people listen to
reason against their inclination unless you hold certain advantages, and
our advantage was that we clearly had it in our power to continue our
flight. My only anxiety now is in regard to the means of holding them to
the agreement--for agreement it certainly was--and of impressing them not
only with a conviction of our innocence but with a sense of our reserve
power, and the more mysterious I can make that power seem to them, the
better. That is why I welcomed even the incident of Jack's smoking. We
shall surely be arraigned before a court of some kind, and I imagine that
we shall not have long to wait. What I wish particularly is that all of
you shall desist from every thought of resistance, and follow strictly
such instructions as I may have occasion to give you."

He had hardly ceased speaking when a number of official-looking persons
entered the room where we were.

"Here come the cops," said Jack. "Now for the police court."

He was not very far wrong. We were gravely conducted to one of the little
craft which served for elevators, and after a rapid descent, were led
through a maze of passages terminating in a vast and splendid apartment,
apparently perfectly square in plan, and at least three hundred feet on a
side. It was half filled with a brilliant throng, in which our entry
caused a sensation. Light entered through lofty windows on all four
sides. The floor seemed to be of a rose-colored marble, with inlaid
diapering of lapis lazuli, and the walls and ceiling were equally rich.
But that which absolutely fascinated the eye in this great apartment was
a huge circle high on the wall opposite the entrance door, like a great
clock face, or the rose window of a cathedral, from which poured
trembling streams of colored light.

"Chromatic music, once more," said Edmund, in a subdued voice. "Do you
know, that has a strange effect upon my spirits, situated as we are. It
is a prelude that may announce our fate; it might reveal to us the
complexion of our judges, if I could but read its meaning."

"It is too beautiful to spell tragedy," I said.

"Ah, who knows? What is so fascinating as tragedy for those who are only
lookers-on?"

"But, Edmund," I protested, "why do you, who are always the most hopeful,
now fall into despondency?"

"I am not desponding," he replied, straightening up. "But this soundless
music thrills me with its mysterious power, and sometimes it throws me
into dejection, though I cannot tell why. To me, when what I firmly
believe was the great anthem of this wonderful race, was played in the
sky with spectral harmonies, there was, underlying all its mystic beauty,
an infinite sadness, an impending sense of something tragic and
terrible."

I was deeply surprised and touched by Edmund's manner, and would have
questioned him further, but we were interrupted by the officials, who now
led us across the vast apartment and to the foot of a kind of throne
which stood directly under the great clock face. Then, for the first
time, we recognized Ala, seated on the throne. Beside her was a person of
majestic stature, with features like those of a statue of Zeus, and long
curling hair of snowy whiteness. The severity of his aspect struck cold
to my heart, but Ala's countenance was smiling and full of encouragement.
As we were led to our places a hush fell upon the throng of attendants,
and the colors ceased to play from the circle.

"Orchestra stopped," whispered the irrepressible Jack. "Curtain rises."

The pause that followed brought a fearful strain upon my nerves, but in a
moment it was broken by Ala, who fixed her eyes upon Edmund's face as he
stood a little in advance of the rest of us. He returned her regard
unflinchingly. Every trace of the feeling which he had expressed to me
was gone. He stood erect, confident, masterful, and as I looked, I felt a
thrill of pride in him, pride in his genius which had brought us hither,
pride in our mother earth--for were we not her far-wandering children?

[Illustration: "'Who and what are you, and whence do you come?'"]

I summoned all my powers in the effort to understand the tongueless
speech which I knew was issuing from Ala's eyes. And I did understand it!
Although there was not a sound, I would almost have sworn that my ears
heard the words:

"Who and what are you, and whence do you come?"

Breathlessly I awaited Edmund's answer. He slowly lifted his hand and
pointed upward. He was, then, going at once to proclaim our origin from
another world; to throw over us the aegis of the earth!

The critical experiment had begun, and I shivered at the thought that
here they knew no earth; here no flag could protect us. I saw perplexity
and surprise in Ala's eyes and in those of the stern Zeus beside her.
Suddenly a derisive smile appeared on the latter's lips, while Ala's
confusion continued. God! Were we to fail at the very beginning?

Edmund calmly repeated his gesture, but it met with no response; no
indication appeared to show that it awakened any feeling other than
uncomprehending astonishment in one of his judges and derision in the
other. And then, with a start, I caught sight of Ingra, standing close
beside the throne, his face made more ugly by the grin which overspread
it.

I was almost wild; I opened my mouth to cry I know not what, when there
was a movement behind, and Juba stepped to Edmund's side, dropped on his
knees, rose again, and fixed his great eyes upon the judges!

My heart bounded at the thoughts which now raced through my brain. Juba
belonged to their world, however remote the ancestral connection might
be; he possessed at least the elements of their unspoken language; and
_it might be a tradition among his people, who we knew worshipped the
earth-star, that it was a brighter world than theirs_. Had Edmund's
gesture suddenly suggested to his mind the truth concerning us--a truth
which the others had not his means of comprehending--and could he now
bear effective testimony in our favor?

With what trembling anxiety I watched his movements! Edmund, too, looked
at him with mingled surprise and interest in his face. Presently he
raised his long arm, as Edmund had done, and pointed upward. A momentary
chill of disappointment ran through me--could he do no more than that?
But he _did_ more. Half unconsciously I had stepped forward where I could
see his face. _His eyes were speaking._ I knew it. And, thank God! there
was a gleam of intelligence answering him from the eyes of our judges.

He had made his point; he had suggested to them a thought of which they
had never dreamed!

They did not thoroughly comprehend him; I could see that, for he must
have been for them like one speaking a different dialect, to say nothing
of the fundamental difficulty of the idea that he was trying to convey,
but yet the meaning did not escape, and as he continued his strange
communication, the wonder spread from face to face, for it was not only
the judges who had grasped the general sense of what he was telling them.
Even at that critical moment there came over me a feeling of admiration
for a language like this; a truly universal language, not limited by
rules of speech or hampered by grammatical structure. At length it became
evident that Juba had finished, but he continued standing at Edmund's
side.

Ala and her white-headed companion looked at one another, and I tried to
read their thoughts. In her face, I believed that I could detect every
sign of hope for us. Occasionally she glanced with a smile at Edmund. But
the old judge was more implacable, or more incredulous. There was no
kindness in his looks, and slowly it became clear that Ala and he were
opposed in their opinion.

Suddenly she placed her hand upon her breast, where the bullet must have
grazed her, and made an energetic gesture, including us in its sweep,
which I interpreted to mean that she had no umbrage against those who had
unintentionally injured her. It was plain that she insisted upon this
point, making it a matter personal to herself, and my hopes rose when I
thought that I detected signs of yielding on the part of the other. At
this moment, when the decision seemed to hang in the balance, a new
element was introduced into the case with dramatic suddenness and
overwhelming force.

For several minutes I had seen nothing of Ingra, but my thoughts had been
too much occupied with more important things to take heed of his
movements. Now he appeared at the left of the throne, leading a file of
fellows bearing a burden. They went direct to the foot of the throne, and
deposited their burden within a yard of the place where Edmund was
standing. They drew off a covering, and I could not repress a cry of
consternation.

It was the body of one of their compatriots, and a glance at it sufficed
to show the manner in which death had been inflicted. It had been crushed
in a way which could probably mean nothing else than a fearful fall. The
truth flashed upon me like a gleaming sword. The victim must have been
precipitated from the air ship which we had struck at the beginning of
our flight!

And there stood our enemy, Ingra, with exultation written on his
features. He had made a master stroke, like a skillful prosecutor.

"Hang him!" I heard Jack mutter between his teeth. "Oh, if I only had my
pistol!"

"Then you would make matters a hundred times worse," I whispered. "Keep
your head, and remember Edmund's injunction."

The behavior of the latter again awoke my utmost admiration.
Contemptuously turning his back upon Ingra, he faced Ala and old Zeus,
and as their regards mingled, I knew well what he was trying to express.
This time, since his meaning involved no conception lying utterly beyond
their experience, he was more successful. He told them that the death of
this person was a fact hitherto unknown to us, and that, like the injury
to Ala, it had been inflicted without our volition. I believed that this
