luckless navigators lost their way, and perished, either through collisions
with other vessels, or by driving upon a rocky shore.

The fate of the gigantic building containing the offices of the municipal
government, which stood near the ancient City Hall, and which had been the
culminating achievement of the famous epoch of "sky-scrapers," was a thing
so singular, and at the same time dramatic, that in a narrative dealing
with less extraordinary events than we are obliged to record it would
appear altogether incredible.

With its twoscore lofty stories, and its massive base, this wonderful
structure rose above the lower quarter of the city, and dominated it, like
a veritable Tower of Babel, made to defy the flood. Many thousands of
people evidently regarded it in that very light, and they had fled from all
quarters, as soon as the great downpour began, to find refuge within its
mountainous flanks. There were men--clerks, merchants, brokers from the
downtown offices--and women and children from neighboring tenements.

By good chance, but a few weeks before, this building had been fitted with
a newly invented system of lighting, by which each story was supplied with
electricity from a small dynamo of its own, and so it happened that now the
lamps within were all aglow, lightening the people's hearts a little with
their cheering radiance.

Up and up they climbed, the water ever following at their heels, from floor
to floor, until ten of the great stages were submerged. But there were more
than twice as many stages yet above, and they counted them with unexpiring
hope, telling one another, with the assurance of desperation, that long
before the flood could attain so stupendous an altitude the rain would
surely cease, and the danger, as far as they were concerned, would pass
away.

"See! See!" cries one. "It is stopping! It is coming no higher! I've been
watching that step, and the water has stopped! It hasn't risen for ten
minutes!"

"Hurrah! Hurrah!" yells the crowd behind and above. And the glad cry is
taken up and reverberated from story to story until it bursts wildly out
into the rain-choked air at the very summit.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! We are saved! The flood has stopped!"

Men madly embrace each other. Women burst into tears and hug their children
to their breasts, filled with a joy and thankfulness that can find no
expression in words.

"You are wrong," says another man, crouching beside him who first spoke.
"It has not stopped--it is still rising."

"_What_! I tell you it _has_ stopped," snaps the other. "Look at that step!
It stopped right below it."

"_You've been watching the wrong step_. It's rising!"

"You fool! Shut your mouth! I say it has _stopped_."

"No, it has not."

"It has! It has!"

"Look at _that_ step, then! See the water just now coming over it."

The obstinate optimist stares a moment, turns pale, and then, with an oath,
strikes his more clear-headed neighbor in the face! And the excited crowd
behind, with the blind instinctive feeling that, somehow, he has robbed
them of the hope which was but now as the breath of life to them, strike
him and curse him, too.

But he had seen only too clearly.

With the steady march of fate--two inches a minute, as Cosmo Versal had
accurately measured it--the water still advances and climbs upward.

In a little while they were driven to another story, and then to another.
But hope would not down. They could not believe that the glad news, which
had so recently filled them with joy, was altogether false. The water
_must_ have stopped rising _once_; it had been _seen_. Then, it would
surely stop _again_, stop to rise no more.

Poor deluded creatures! With the love of life so strong within them, they
could not picture, in their affrighted minds, the terrible consummation to
which they were being slowly driven, when, jammed into the narrow chambers
at the very top of the mighty structure, their remorseless enemy would
seize them at last.

But they were nearer the end than they could have imagined even if they had
accepted and coolly reasoned upon the facts that were so plain before them.
And, after all, it was not to come upon them only after they had fought
their way to the highest loft and into the last corner.

A link of this strange chain of fatal events now carries us to the spot
where the United States Navy Yard in Brooklyn once existed. That place was
sunk deep beneath the waters. All of the cruisers, battleships, and other
vessels that had been at anchor or at moorings there had gone under. One
only, the boast of the American navy, the unconquerable _Uncle Sam_, which,
in the last great war that the world had known, had borne the starry flag
to victories whose names broke men's voices and filled their eyes with
tears of pride, had escaped, through the incomparable seamanship of Captain
Robert Decatur, who had been her commander for thirty years.

But though the _Uncle Sam_ managed to float upon the rising flood, she
was unable to get away because of the obstructions lodged about the great
bridges that spanned the East River. A curious eddy that the raging
currents formed over what was once the widest part of that stream kept
her revolving round and round, never departing far in any direction,
and, with majestic strength, riding down or brushing aside the floating
timbers, wooden houses, and other wreckage that pounded furiously against
her mighty steel sides.

Just at the time when the waters had mounted to the eighteenth story of the
beleaguered Municipal Building, a sudden change occurred in these currents.
They swept westward with resistless force, and the _Uncle Sam_ was
carried directly over the drowned city. First she encountered the cables of
the Manhattan Bridge, striking them near the western tower, and, swinging
round, wrenched the tower itself from its foundations and hurled it beneath
the waters.

Then she rushed on, riding with the turbid flood high above the buried
roofs, finding no other obstruction in her way until she approached the
Municipal Building, which was stoutly resisting the push of the waves.


[Illustration: "THE GREAT BATTLESHIP... CRASHED, PROW ON, INTO THE
STEEL-RIBBED WALLS"]


Those who were near the windows and on the balconies, on the eastern side
of the building, saw the great battleship coming out of the gray gloom
like some diluvian monster, and before they could comprehend what it was,
it crashed, prow on, into the steel-ribbed walls, driving them in as if
they had been the armored sides of an enemy.

So tremendous was the momentum of the striking mass that the huge vessel
passed, like a projectile, through walls and floors and partitions. But as
she emerged in the central court the whole vast structure came thundering
down upon her, and ship and building together sank beneath the boiling
waves.

But out of the awful tangle of steel girders, that whipped the air and the
water as if some terrible spidery life yet clung to them, by one of those
miracles of chance which defy all the laws of probability and reason, a
small boat of levium, that had belonged to the _Uncle Sam_, was cast forth,
and floated away, half submerged but unsinkable; and clinging to its
thwarts, struggling for breath, insane with terror, were two men, the sole
survivors of all those thousands.

One of them was a seaman who had taken refuge, with a crowd of comrades,
in the boat before the battleship rushed down upon the building. All of
his comrades had been hurled out and lost when the blow came, while his
present companion was swept in and lodged against the thwarts. And so
those two waifs drove off in the raging waves. Both of them were bleeding
from many wounds, but they had no fatal hurts.

The boat, though filled with water, was so light that it could not sink.
Moreover, it was ballasted, and amid all its wild gyrations it kept right
side up. Even the ceaseless downpour from the sky could not drive it
beneath the waves.

After a while the currents that had been setting westward changed their
direction, and the boat was driven toward the north. It swept on past
toppling skyscrapers until it was over the place where Madison Square once
spread its lawns, looked down upon by gigantic structures, most of which
had now either crumbled and disappeared or were swaying to their fall. Here
there was an eddy, and the boat turned round and round amid floating debris
until two other draggled creatures, who had been clinging to floating
objects, succeeded by desperate efforts in pulling themselves into it.
Others tried but failed, and no one lent a helping hand. Those who were
already in the boat neither opposed nor aided the efforts of those who
battled to enter it. No words were heard in the fearful uproar--only
inarticulate cries.

Suddenly the current changed again, and the boat, with its dazed occupants,
was hurried off in the direction of the Hudson. Night was now beginning
once more to drop an obscuring curtain over the scene, and under that
curtain the last throes of drowning New York were hidden. When the sun
again faintly illuminated the western hemisphere the whole Atlantic
seaboard was buried under the sea.

As the water rose higher, Cosmo Versal's Ark at last left its cradle, and
cumbrously floated off, moving first eastward, then turning in the
direction of Brooklyn and Manhattan. Cosmo had his engines in operation,
but their full power was not developed as soon as he had expected, and
the great vessel drifted at the will of the currents and the wind, the
latter coming now from one side and now from another, rising at times to
hurricane strength and then dying away until only a spanking breeze swept
the ever-falling rain into swishing sheets. Occasionally the wind failed
entirely, and for many minutes at a time the water fell in vertical
streams.

At length the motive power of the Ark was developed, and it began to obey
its helm. From the shelter of a "captain's bridge," constructed at the
forward end of the huge levium dome that covered the vessel, Cosmo Versal,
with Captain Arms, a liberally bewhiskered, veteran navigator in whose
skill he confided, peered over the interminable waste of waters. There was
nothing in sight except floating objects that had welled up from the
drowned city and the surrounding villages. Here and there the body of an
animal or a human being was seen in the tossing waves, and Cosmo Versal
sadly shook his head as he pointed them out, but the stout mariner at his
side chewed his tobacco, and paid attention only to his duties, shouting
orders from time to time through a speaking-tube, or touching an electric
button.

Cosmo Versal brought a rain-gage and again and again allowed it to fill
itself. The story was always the same--two inches per minute, ten feet per
hour, the water mounted.

The nebula had settled down to regular work, and, if Cosmo's calculations
were sound, there would be no intermission for four months.

After the power of the propellers had been developed the Ark was steered
southeastward. Its progress was very slow. In the course of eight hours
it had not gone more than fifty miles. The night came on, and the speed
was reduced until there was only sufficient way to insure the command of
the vessel's movements. Powerful searchlights were employed as long as
the stygian darkness continued.

With the return of the pallid light, at what should have been daybreak,
Cosmo and his navigator were again at their post. In fact, the former
had not slept at all, keeping watch through the long hours, with
Captain Arms within easy call.

As the light became stronger, Cosmo said to the captain:

"Steer toward New York. I wish to see if the last of the tall buildings on
the upper heights have gone under."

"It will be very dangerous to go that way," objected Captain Arms. "There
are no landmarks, and we may strike a snag."

"Not if we are careful," replied Cosmo. "All but the highest ground is now
buried very deep."

"It is taking a fool's risk," growled Captain Arms, through his brush, but
nevertheless he obeyed.

It was true that they had nothing to go by. The air was too thick with
water, and the light too feeble for them to be able to lay their course
by sighting the distant hills of New Jersey which yet remained above the
level of the flood. Still, by a kind of seaman's instinct, Captain Arms
made his way, until he felt that he ought to venture no farther. He had
just turned to Cosmo Versal with the intention of voicing his protest
when the Ark careened slightly, shivered from stem to stern, and then
began a bumping movement that nearly threw the two men from their feet.

"We are aground!" cried the captain, and instantly turned a knob that set
in motion automatic machinery which cut off the engines from the
propellers, and at the same time slowed down the engines themselves.




CHAPTER XI

"A BILLION FOR A SHARE"


The Ark had lodged on the loftiest part of the Palisades. It was only after
long and careful study of their position, rendered possible by occasional
glimpses of the Orange Hills and high points further up the course of the
Hudson, that Cosmo Versal and Captain Arms were able to reach that
conclusion. Where New York had stood nothing was visible but an expanse of
turbid and rushing water.

But suppose the hard trap rocks had penetrated the bottom of the Ark! It
was a contingency too terrible to be thought of. Yet the facts must be
ascertained at once.

Cosmo, calling Joseph Smith, and commanding him to go among the frightened
passengers and assure them, in his name, that there was no danger, hurried,
with the captain and a few trusty men, into the bowels of the vessel. They
thoroughly sounded the bottom plates. No aperture and no indentation was
to be found.

But, then, the bottom was double, and the outer plates might have been
perforated. If this had happened the fact would reveal itself through the
leakage of water into the intervening space. To ascertain if that had
occurred it was necessary to unscrew the covers of some of the manholes in
the inner skin of levium.

It was an anxious moment when they cautiously removed one of these covers.
At the last turns of the screw the workman who handled it instinctively
turned his head aside, and made ready for a spring, more than half
expecting that the cover would be driven from his hands, and a stream of
water would burst in.

But the cover remained in place after it was completely loosened, and until
it had been lifted off. A sigh of relief broke from every breast. No water
was visible.

"Climb in there, and explore the bottom," Cosmo commanded.

There was a space of eighteen inches between the two bottoms, which were
connected and braced by the curved ribs of the hull. A man immediately
disappeared in the opening and began the exploration. Cosmo ordered the
removal of other covers at various points, and the exploration was extended
over the whole bottom. He himself passed through one of the manholes and
aided in the work.

At last it was determined, beyond any doubt, that even the outer skin was
uninjured. Not so much as a dent could be found in it.

"By the favor of Providence," said Cosmo Versal, as his great head emerged
from a manhole, "the Ark has touched upon a place where the rocks are
covered with soil, and no harm has come to us. In a very short time the
rising water will lift us off."

"And, with my consent, you'll do no more navigating over hills and
mountains," grumbled Captain Arms. "The open sea for the sailor."

The covers were carefully replaced, and the party, in happier spirits,
returned to the upper decks, where the good news was quickly spread.

The fact was that while the inspection was under way the Ark had floated
off, and when Cosmo and the captain reached their bridge the man who had
been left in charge reported that the vessel had swung halfway round.

"She's headed for the old Atlantic," sung out Captain Arms. "The sooner
we're off the better."

But before the captain could signal the order to go ahead, Cosmo Versal
laid his hand on his arm and said:

"Wait a moment; listen."

Through the lashing of the rain a voice penetrated with a sound between a
call and a scream. There could be no doubt that it was human. The captain
and Cosmo looked at one another in speechless astonishment. The idea that
any one outside the Ark could have survived, and could now be afloat amid
this turmoil of waters, had not occurred to their minds. They experienced
a creeping of the nerves. In a few minutes the voice came again, louder
than before, and the words that it pronounced being now clearly audible,
the two listeners could not believe their ears.

"Cosmo Versal!" it yelled. "Cosmo-o-o Ver-sa-al! A billion for a share! A
_billion_, I say, a _bil-li-on_ for a share!"

Then they perceived a little way off to the left something which looked
like the outline of a boat, sunk to the gunwales, washed over by every
wave; and standing in it, up to their waists in water, were four men, one
of whom was gesticulating violently, while the others seemed dazed and
incapable of voluntary movement.

It was the boat of levium that had been thrown out of the wreckage when the
battleship ran down the Municipal tower, and we must now follow the thread
of its adventures up to the time of its encounter with the Ark.

As the boat was driven westward from the drowned site of Madison Square it
gradually freed itself from the objects floating around, most of which soon
sunk, and in an hour or two its inmates were alone--the sole survivors of a
dense population of many millions.

Alone they were in impenetrable darkness, for, as we have said, night had
by this time once more fallen.

They floated on, half drowned, chilled to the bone, not trying to speak,
not really conscious of one another's presence. The rain beat down upon
them, the waves washed over them, the unsinkable boat sluggishly rose and
fell with the heaving of the water, and occasionally they were nearly flung
overboard by a sudden lurch--and yet they clung with desperate tenacity to
the thwarts, as if life were still dear, as if they thought that they might
yet survive, though the world was drowned.
