     Which wrap'd in flames AUGUSTA'S sinking towers?
415  Why did ye linger in your wells and groves,
     When sad WOODMASON mourn'd her infant loves?
     When thy fair Daughters with unheeded screams,
     Ill-fated MOLESWORTH! call'd the loitering streams?--
     The trembling Nymph on bloodless fingers hung
420  Eyes from the tottering wall the distant throng,
     With ceaseless shrieks her sleeping friends alarms,
     Drops with singed hair into her lover's arms.--
     The illumin'd Mother seeks with footsteps fleet,
     Where hangs the safe balcony o'er the street,
425  Wrap'd in her sheet her youngest hope suspends,
     And panting lowers it to her tiptoe friends;
     Again she hurries on affection's wings,
     And now a third, and now a fourth, she brings;
     Safe all her babes, she smooths her horrent brow,
430  And bursts through bickering flames, unscorch'd, below.
     So, by her Son arraign'd, with feet unshod
     O'er burning bars indignant Emma trod.


[Footnote: _Woodmason, Molesworth_. l. 416. The histories of these
unfortunate families may be seen in the Annual Register, or in the
Gentleman's Magazine.]


        "E'en on the day when Youth with Beauty wed,
     The flames surprized them in their nuptial bed;--
435  Seen at the opening sash with bosom bare,
     With wringing hands, and dark dishevel'd hair,
     The blushing Beauty with disorder'd charms
     Round her fond lover winds her ivory arms;
     Beat, as they clasp, their throbbing hearts with fear,
440  And many a kiss is mix'd with many a tear;--
     Ah me! in vain the labouring engines pour
     Round their pale limbs the ineffectual shower!--
     --Then crash'd the floor, while shrinking crouds retire,
     And Love and Virtue sunk amid the fire!--
445  With piercing screams afflicted strangers mourn,
     And their white ashes mingle in their urn.

        XII. "PELLUCID FORMS! whose crystal bosoms show
     The shine of welfare, or the shade of woe;
     Who with soft lips salute returning Spring,
450  And hail the Zephyr quivering on his wing;
     Or watch, untired, the wintery clouds, and share
     With streaming eyes my vegetable care;
     Go, shove the dim mist from the mountain's brow,
     Chase the white fog, which floods the vale below;
455  Melt the thick snows, that linger on the lands,
     And catch the hailstones in your little hands;
     Guard the coy blossom from the pelting shower,
     And dash the rimy spangles from the bower;
     From each chill leaf the silvery drops repel,
460  And close the timorous floret's golden bell.


[_Shove the dim mist_. l. 453. See note on l. 20 of this Canto.]

[_Catch the hail-stones_. l. 456. See note on l. 15 of this Canto.]

[_From each chill leaf_. l. 459. The upper side of the leaf is the organ
of vegetable respiration, as explained in the additional notes, No.
XXXVII, hence the leaf is liable to injury from much moisture on this
surface, and is destroyed by being smeared with oil, in these respects
resembling the lungs of animals or the spiracula of insects. To prevent
these injuries some leaves repel the dew-drops from their upper surfaces
as those of cabbages; other vegetables close the upper surfaces of their
leaves together in the night or in wet weather, as the sensitive plant;
others only hang their leaves downwards so as to shoot the wet from
them, as kidney-beans, and many trees. See note on l. 18 of this Canto.]

[_Golden bell_. l. 460. There are muscles placed about the footstalks of
the leaves or leaflets of many plants, for the purpose of closing their
upper surfaces together, or of bending them down so as to shoot off the
showers or dew-drops, as mentioned in the preceeding note. The claws of
the petals or of the divisions of the calyx of many flowers are
furnished in a similar manner with muscles, which are exerted to open or
close the corol and calyx of the flower as in tragopogon, anemone. This
action of opening and closing the leaves or flowers does not appear to
be produced simply by _irritation_ on the muscles themselves, but by the
connection of those muscles with a _sensitive_ sensorium or brain
existing in each individual bud or flower. 1st. Because many flowers
close from the defect of stimulus, not by the excess of it, as by
darkness, which is the absence of the stimulus of light; or by cold,
which is the absence of the stimulus of heat. Now the defect of heat, or
the absence of food, or of drink, affects our _sensations_, which had
been previously accustomed to a greater quantity of them; but a muscle
cannot be said to be stimulated into action by a defect of stimulus. 2.
Because the muscles around the footstalks of the subdivisions of the
leaves of the sensitive plant are exerted when any injury is offered to
the other extremity of the leaf, and some of the stamens of the flowers
of the class Syngenesia contract themselves when others are irritated.
See note on Chondrilla, Vol. II. of this work.

From this circumstance the contraction of the muscles of vegetables
seems to depend on a disagreeable _sensation_ in some distant part, and
not on the _irritation_ of the muscles themselves. Thus when a particle
of dust stimulates the ball of the eye, the eye-lids are instantly
closed, and when too much light pains the retina, the muscles of the
iris contract its aperture, and this not by any connection or consent of
the nerves of those parts, but as an effort to prevent or to remove a
disagreeable sensation, which evinces that vegetables are endued with
sensation, or that each bud has a common sensorium, and is furnished
with a brain or a central place where its nerves were connected.]


         "So should young SYMPATHY, in female form,
     Climb the tall rock, spectatress of the storm;
     Life's sinking wrecks with secret sighs deplore,
     And bleed for others' woes, Herself on shore;
465  To friendless Virtue, gasping on the strand,
     Bare her warm heart, her virgin arms expand,
     Charm with kind looks, with tender accents cheer,
     And pour the sweet consolatory tear;
     Grief's cureless wounds with lenient balms asswage,
470  Or prop with firmer staff the steps of Age;
     The lifted arm of mute Despair arrest,
     And snatch the dagger pointed to his breast;
     Or lull to slumber Envy's haggard mien,
     And rob her quiver'd shafts with hand unseen.
475  --Sound, NYMPHS OF HELICON! the trump of Fame,
     And teach Hibernian echoes JONES'S name;
     Bind round her polish'd brow the civic bay,
     And drag the fair Philanthropist to day.--
     So from secluded springs, and secret caves,
480  Her Liffy pours his bright meandering waves,
     Cools the parch'd vale, the sultry mead divides,
     And towns and temples star his shadowy sides.


[_Jones's name_. l. 476. A young lady who devotes a great part of an
ample fortune to well chosen acts of secret charity.]


       XIII. "CALL YOUR light legions, tread the swampy heath,
     Pierce with sharp spades the tremulous peat beneath;
485  With colters bright the rushy sward bisect,
     And in new veins the gushing rills direct;--
     So flowers shall rise in purple light array'd,
     And blossom'd orchards stretch their silver shade;
     Admiring glebes their amber ears unfold,
490  And Labour sleep amid the waving gold.

        "Thus when young HERCULES with firm disdain
     Braved the soft smiles of Pleasure's harlot train;
     To valiant toils his forceful limbs assign'd,
     And gave to Virtue all his mighty mind,
495  Fierce ACHELOUS rush'd from mountain-caves,
     O'er sad Etolia pour'd his wasteful waves,
     O'er lowing vales and bleating pastures roll'd,
     Swept her red vineyards, and her glebes of gold,
     Mined all her towns, uptore her rooted woods,
500  And Famine danced upon the shining floods.
     The youthful Hero seized his curled crest,
     And dash'd with lifted club the watery Pest;
     With waving arm the billowy tumult quell'd,
     And to his course the bellowing Fiend repell'd.


[_Fierce Achelous_. l. 495. The river Achelous deluged Etolia, by one of
its branches or arms, which in the antient languages are called horns,
and produced famine throughout a great tract of country, this was
represented in hieroglyphic emblems by the winding course of a serpent
and the roaring of a bull with large horns. Hercules, or the emblem of
strength, strangled the serpent, and tore off one horn from the bull;
that is, he stopped and turned the course of one arm of the river, and
restored plenty to the country. Whence the antient emblem of the horn of
plenty. Dict. par M. Danet.]


505    "Then to a Snake the finny Demon turn'd
     His lengthen'd form, with scales of silver burn'd;
     Lash'd with restless sweep his dragon-train,
     And shot meandering o'er the affrighted plain.
     The Hero-God, with giant fingers clasp'd
510  Firm round his neck, the hissing monster grasp'd;
     With starting eyes, wide throat, and gaping teeth,
     Curl his redundant folds, and writhe in death.

       "And now a Bull, amid the flying throng
     The grisly Demon foam'd, and roar'd along;
515  With silver hoofs the flowery meadows spurn'd,
     Roll'd his red eye, his threatening antlers turn'd.
     Dragg'd down to earth, the Warrior's victor-hands
     Press'd his deep dewlap on the imprinted sands;
     Then with quick bound his bended knee he fix'd
520  High on his neck, the branching horns betwixt,
     Strain'd his strong arms, his sinewy shoulders bent,
     And from his curled brow the twisted terror rent.
     --Pleased Fawns and Nymphs with dancing step applaud,
     And hang their chaplets round the resting God;
525  Link their soft hands, and rear with pausing toil
     The golden trophy on the furrow'd soil;
     Fill with ripe fruits, with wreathed flowers adorn,
     And give to PLENTY her prolific horn.


[_Dragg'd down to earth_. l. 517. Described from an antique gem.]


       XIV. "On Spring's fair lap, CERULEAN SISTERS! pour
530  From airy urns the sun-illumined shower,
     Feed with the dulcet drops my tender broods,
     Mellifluous flowers, and aromatic buds;
     Hang from each bending grass and horrent thorn
     The tremulous pearl, that glitters to the morn;
535  Or where cold dews their secret channels lave,
     And Earth's dark chambers hide the stagnant wave,
     O, pierce, YE NYMPHS! her marble veins, and lead
     Her gushing fountains to the thirsty mead;
     Wide o'er the shining vales, and trickling hills
540  Spread the bright treasure in a thousand rills.
     So shall my peopled realms of Leaf and Flower
     Exult, inebriate with the genial shower;
     Dip their long tresses from the mossy brink,
     With tufted roots the glassy currents drink;
545  Shade your cool mansions from meridian beams,
     And view their waving honours in your streams.


[_Spread the bright treasure_. l. 540. The practice of flooding lands
long in use in China has been but lately introduced into this country.
Besides the supplying water to the herbage in dryer seasons, it seems to
defend it from frost in the early part of the year, and thus doubly
advances the vegetation. The waters which rise from springs passing
through marl or limestone are replete with calcareous earth, and when
thrown over morasses they deposit this earth and incrust or consolidate
the morass. This kind of earth is deposited in great quantity from the
springs at Matlock bath, and supplies the soft porous limestone of which
the houses and walls are there constructed; and has formed the whole
bank for near a mile on that side of the Derwent on which they stand.

The water of many springs contains much azotic gas, or phlogistic air,
besides carbonic gas, or fixed air, as that of Buxton and Bath; this
being set at liberty may more readily contribute to the production of
nitre by means of the putrescent matters which it is exposed to by being
spread upon the surface of the land; in the same manner as frequently
turning over heaps of manure facilitates the nitrous process by
imprisoning atmospheric air in the interstices of the putrescent
materials. Water arising by land-floods brings along with it much of the
most soluble parts of the manure from the higher lands to the lower
ones. River-water in its clear state and those springs which are called
soft are less beneficial for the purpose of watering lands, as they
contain less earthy or saline matter; and water from dissolving snow
from its slow solution brings but little earth along with it, as may be
seen by the comparative clearness of the water of snow-floods.]


       "Thus where the veins their confluent branches bend,
     And milky eddies with the purple blend;
     The Chyle's white trunk, diverging from its source,
550  Seeks through the vital mass its shining course;
     O'er each red cell, and tissued membrane spreads
     In living net-work all its branching threads;
     Maze within maze its tortuous path pursues,
     Winds into glands, inextricable clues;
555  Steals through the stomach's velvet sides, and sips
     The silver surges with a thousand lips;
     Fills each fine pore, pervades each slender hair,
     And drinks salubrious dew-drops from the air.

       "Thus when to kneel in Mecca's awful gloom,
560  Or press with pious kiss Medina's tomb,
     League after league, through many a lingering day,
     Steer the swart Caravans their sultry way;
     O'er sandy wastes on gasping camels toil,
     Or print with pilgrim-steps the burning soil;
565  If from lone rocks a sparkling rill descend,
     O'er the green brink the kneeling nations bend,
     Bathe the parch'd lip, and cool the feverish tongue,
     And the clear lake reflects the mingled throng."

       The Goddess paused,--the listening bands awhile
570  Still seem to hear, and dwell upon her smile;
     Then with soft murmur sweep in lucid trains
     Down the green slopes, and o'er the pebbly plains,
     To each bright stream on silver sandals glide,
     Reflective fountain, and tumultuous tide.

575    So shoot the Spider-broods at breezy dawn
     Their glittering net-work o'er the autumnal lawn;
     From blade to blade connect with cordage fine
     The unbending grass, and live along the line;
     Or bathe unwet their oily forms, and dwell
580  With feet repulsive on the dimpling well.

       So when the North congeals his watery mass,
     Piles high his snows, and floors his seas with glass;
     While many a Month, unknown to warmer rays,
     Marks its slow chronicle by lunar days;
585  Stout youths and ruddy damsels, sportive train,
     Leave the white soil, and rush upon the main;
     From isle to isle the moon-bright squadrons stray,
     And win in easy curves their graceful way;
     On step alternate borne, with balance nice
590  Hang o'er the gliding steel, and hiss along the ice.




                    _Argument of the Fourth Canto._


Address to the Sylphs. I. Trade-winds. Monsoons. N.E. and S.W. winds.
Land and sea breezes. Irregular winds. 9. II. Production of vital air
from oxygene and light. The marriage of Cupid and Psyche. 25. III. 1.
Syroc. Simoom. Tornado. 63. 2. Fog. Contagion. Story of Thyrsis and
Aegle. Love and Death. 79. IV. 1. Barometer. Air-pump. 127. 2. Air-
balloon of Mongulfier. Death of Rozier. Icarus. 143. V. Discoveries of
Dr. Priestley. Evolutions and combinations of pure air. Rape of
Proserpine. 165. VI. Sea-balloons, or houses constructed to move under
the sea.  Death of Mr. Day.  Of Mr. Spalding.  Of Captain Pierce and his
Daughters. 195. VII. Sylphs of music. Cecelia singing. Cupid with a lyre
riding upon a lion. 233. VIII. Destruction of Senacherib's army by a
pestilential wind. Shadow of Death. 263. IX. 1. Wish to possess the
secret of changing the course of the winds. 305. 2. Monster devouring
air subdued by Mr. Kirwan. 321. X. 1. Seeds suspended in their pods.
Stars discovered by Mr. Herschel. Destruction and resuscitation of all
things. 351. 2. Seeds within seeds, and bulbs within bulbs. Picture on
the retina of the eye. Concentric strata of the earth. The great seed.
381. 3. The root, pith, lobes, plume, calyx, coral, sap, blood, leaves
respire and absorb light. The crocodile in its egg. 409. XI. Opening of
the flower. The petals, style, anthers, prolific dust. Transmutation of
the silkworm. 441. XII. 1. Leaf-buds changed into flower-buds by
wounding the bark, or strangulating a part of the branch. 461. 2.
Ingrafting. Aaron's rod pullulates. 477. XIII. 1. Insects on trees.
Humming-bird alarmed by the spider-like apearance of Cyprepedia. 491. 2.
Diseases of vegetables. Scratch on unnealed glass. 511. XIV. 1. Tender
flowers. Amaryllis, fritillary, erythrina, mimosa, cerea. 523. 2. Vines.
Oranges. Diana's trees. Kew garden. The royal family. 541. XV. Offering
to Hygeia. 587. Departure of the Goddess. 629.




                                  THE
                         ECONOMY OF VEGETATION.


                               CANTO IV.


       As when at noon in Hybla's fragrant bowers
     CACALIA opens all her honey'd flowers;
     Contending swarms on bending branches cling,
     And nations hover on aurelian wing;
  5  So round the GODDESS, ere she speaks, on high
     Impatient SYLPHS in gawdy circlets fly;
     Quivering in air their painted plumes expand,
     And coloured shadows dance upon the land.


[_Cacalia opens_. l. 2. The importance of the nectarium or honey-gland
in the vegetable economy is seen from the very complicated apparatus,
which nature has formed in some flowers for the preservation of their
honey from insects, as in the aconites or monkshoods; in other plants
instead of a great apparatus for its protection a greater secretion of
it is produced that thence a part may be spared to the depredation of
insects. The cacalia suaveolens produces so much honey that on some days
it may be smelt at a great distance from the plant. I remember once
counting on one of these plants besides bees of various kinds without
number, above two hundred painted butterflies, which gave it the
beautiful appearance of being covered with additional flowers.]


       I. "SYLPHS! YOUR light troops the tropic Winds confine,
 10  And guide their streaming arrows to the Line;
     While in warm floods ecliptic breezes rise,
     And sink with wings benumb'd in colder skies.
     You bid Monsoons on Indian seas reside,
     And veer, as moves the sun, their airy tide;
 15  While southern gales o'er western oceans roll,
     And Eurus steals his ice-winds from the Pole.
     Your playful trains, on sultry islands born,
     Turn on fantastic toe at eve and morn;
     With soft susurrant voice alternate sweep
 20  Earth's green pavilions and encircling deep.
     OR in itinerant cohorts, borne sublime
     On tides of ether, float from clime to clime;
     O'er waving Autumn bend your airy ring,
     Or waft the fragrant bosom of the Spring.


[_The tropic winds_. l. 9. See additional notes, No. XXXIII.]


 25    II. "When Morn, escorted by the dancing Hours,
     O'er the bright plains her dewy lustre showers;
     Till from her sable chariot Eve serene
     Drops the dark curtain o'er the brilliant scene;
     You form with chemic hands the airy surge,
 30  Mix with broad vans, with shadowy tridents urge.
     SYLPHS! from each sun-bright leaf, that twinkling shakes
     O'er Earth's green lap, or shoots amid her lakes,
     Your playful bands with simpering lips invite,
     And wed the enamour'd OXYGENE to LIGHT.--
 35  Round their white necks with fingers interwove,
     Cling the fond Pair with unabating love;
     Hand link'd in hand on buoyant step they rise,
     And soar and glisten in unclouded skies.
     Whence in bright floods the VITAL AIR expands,
 40  And with concentric spheres involves the lands;
     Pervades the swarming seas, and heaving earths,
     Where teeming Nature broods her myriad births;
     Fills the fine lungs of all that _breathe_ or _bud_,
     Warms the new heart, and dyes the gushing blood;
 45  With Life's first spark inspires the organic frame,
     And, as it wastes, renews the subtile flame.


[_The enamour'd oxygene_. l. 34. The common air of the atmosphere
appears by the analysis of Dr. Priestley and other philosophers to
consist of about three parts of an elastic fluid unfit for respiration
or combustion, called azote by the French school, and about one fourth
of pure vital air fit for the support of animal life and of combustion,
called oxygene. The principal source of the azote is probably from the
decomposition of all vegetable and animal matters by putrefaction and
combustion; the principal source of vital air or oxygene is perhaps from
the decomposition of water in the organs of vegetables by means of the
sun's light. The difficulty of injecting vegetable vessels seems to shew
that their perspirative pores are much less than those of animals, and
that the water which constitutes their perspiration is so divided at the
time of its exclusion that by means of the sun's light it becomes
decomposed, the inflammable air or hydrogene, which is one of its
constituent parts, being retained to form the oil, resin, wax, honey,
&c. of the vegetable economy; and the other part, which united with
light or heat becomes vital air or oxygene gas, rises into the
atmosphere and replenishes it with the food of life.

Dr. Priestley has evinced by very ingenious experiments that the blood
gives out phlogiston, and receives vital air, or oxygene-gas by the
lungs. And Dr. Crawford has shewn that the blood acquires heat from this
vital air in respiration. There is however still a something more subtil
than heat, which must be obtained in respiration from the vital air, a
something which life can not exist a few minutes without, which seems
necessary to the vegetable as well as to the animal world, and which as
no organized vessels can confine it, requires perpetually to be renewed.
See note on Canto I. l. 401.]


       "So pure, so soft, with sweet attraction shone
     Fair PSYCHE, kneeling at the ethereal throne;
     Won with coy smiles the admiring court of Jove,
 50  And warm'd the bosom of unconquer'd LOVE.--
     Beneath a moving shade of fruits and flowers
     Onward they march to HYMEN'S sacred bowers;
     With lifted torch he lights the festive train,
     Sublime, and leads them in his golden chain;
 55  Joins the fond pair, indulgent to their vows,
     And hides with mystic veil their blushing brows.
     Round their fair forms their mingling arms they fling,
     Meet with warm lip, and clasp with rustling wing.--
     --Hence plastic Nature, as Oblivion whelms
