expressions of mutual esteem.

The king then summoned Firmin in order to make a short note of a number
of things that he had said during the day. But after about twenty
minutes' work the sweet sleepiness of the mountain air overcame him, and
he dismissed Firmin and went to bed and fell asleep at once, and slept
with extreme satisfaction. He had had an active, agreeable day.

Section 5

The establishment of the new order that was thus so humanly begun,
was, if one measures it by the standard of any preceding age, a rapid
progress. The fighting spirit of the world was exhausted. Only here
or there did fierceness linger. For long decades the combative side
in human affairs had been monstrously exaggerated by the accidents of
political separation. This now became luminously plain. An enormous
proportion of the force that sustained armaments had been nothing more
aggressive than the fear of war and warlike neighbours. It is doubtful
if any large section of the men actually enlisted for fighting ever at
any time really hungered and thirsted for bloodshed and danger. That
kind of appetite was probably never very strong in the species after the
savage stage was past. The army was a profession, in which killing had
become a disagreeable possibility rather than an eventful certainty. If
one reads the old newspapers and periodicals of that time, which did
so much to keep militarism alive, one finds very little about glory and
adventure and a constant harping on the disagreeableness of invasion
and subjugation. In one word, militarism was funk. The belligerent
resolution of the armed Europe of the twentieth century was the
resolution of a fiercely frightened sheep to plunge. And now that its
weapons were exploding in its hands, Europe was only too eager to drop
them, and abandon this fancied refuge of violence.

For a time the whole world had been shocked into frankness; nearly all
the clever people who had hitherto sustained the ancient belligerent
separations had now been brought to realise the need for simplicity
of attitude and openness of mind; and in this atmosphere of moral
renascence, there was little attempt to get negotiable advantages out of
resistance to the new order. Human beings are foolish enough no doubt,
but few have stopped to haggle in a fire-escape. The council had its
way with them. The band of 'patriots' who seized the laboratories and
arsenal just outside Osaka and tried to rouse Japan to revolt against
inclusion in the Republic of Mankind, found they had miscalculated the
national pride and met the swift vengeance of their own countrymen. That
fight in the arsenal was a vivid incident in this closing chapter of the
history of war. To the last the 'patriots' were undecided whether, in
the event of a defeat, they would explode their supply of atomic bombs
or not. They were fighting with swords outside the iridium doors,
and the moderates of their number were at bay and on the verge of
destruction, only ten, indeed, remained unwounded, when the republicans
burst in to the rescue....

Section 6

One single monarch held out against the general acquiescence in the new
rule, and that was that strange survival of mediaevalism, the 'Slavic
Fox,' the King of the Balkans. He debated and delayed his submissions.
He showed an extraordinary combination of cunning and temerity in his
evasion of the repeated summonses from Brissago. He affected ill-health
and a great preoccupation with his new official mistress, for his
semi-barbaric court was arranged on the best romantic models. His
tactics were ably seconded by Doctor Pestovitch, his chief minister.
Failing to establish his claims to complete independence, King Ferdinand
Charles annoyed the conference by a proposal to be treated as a
protected state. Finally he professed an unconvincing submission, and
put a mass of obstacles in the way of the transfer of his national
officials to the new government. In these things he was enthusiastically
supported by his subjects, still for the most part an illiterate
peasantry, passionately if confusedly patriotic, and so far with no
practical knowledge of the effect of atomic bombs. More particularly he
retained control of all the Balkan aeroplanes.

For once the extreme naivete of Leblanc seems to have been mitigated by
duplicity. He went on with the general pacification of the world as if
the Balkan submission was made in absolute good faith, and he announced
the disbandment of the force of aeroplanes that hitherto guarded the
council at Brissago upon the approaching fifteenth of July. But instead
he doubled the number upon duty on that eventful day, and made various
arrangements for their disposition. He consulted certain experts, and
when he took King Egbert into his confidence there was something in his
neat and explicit foresight that brought back to that ex-monarch's
mind his half-forgotten fantasy of Leblanc as a fisherman under a green
umbrella.

About five o'clock in the morning of the seventeenth of July one of the
outer sentinels of the Brissago fleet, which was soaring unobtrusively
over the lower end of the lake of Garda, sighted and hailed a strange
aeroplane that was flying westward, and, failing to get a satisfactory
reply, set its wireless apparatus talking and gave chase. A swarm of
consorts appeared very promptly over the westward mountains, and before
the unknown aeroplane had sighted Como, it had a dozen eager attendants
closing in upon it. Its driver seems to have hesitated, dropped down
among the mountains, and then turned southward in flight, only to find
an intercepting biplane sweeping across his bows. He then went round
into the eye of the rising sun, and passed within a hundred yards of his
original pursuer.

The sharpshooter therein opened fire at once, and showed an intelligent
grasp of the situation by disabling the passenger first. The man at the
wheel must have heard his companion cry out behind him, but he was too
intent on getting away to waste even a glance behind. Twice after that
he must have heard shots. He let his engine go, he crouched down, and
for twenty minutes he must have steered in the continual expectation of
a bullet. It never came, and when at last he glanced round, three great
planes were close upon him, and his companion, thrice hit, lay dead
across his bombs. His followers manifestly did not mean either to upset
or shoot him, but inexorably they drove him down, down. At last he was
curving and flying a hundred yards or less over the level fields of
rice and maize. Ahead of him and dark against the morning sunrise was
a village with a very tall and slender campanile and a line of cable
bearing metal standards that he could not clear. He stopped his engine
abruptly and dropped flat. He may have hoped to get at the bombs when he
came down, but his pitiless pursuers drove right over him and shot him
as he fell.

Three other aeroplanes curved down and came to rest amidst grass close
by the smashed machine. Their passengers descended, and ran, holding
their light rifles in their hands towards the debris and the two dead
men. The coffin-shaped box that had occupied the centre of the machine
had broken, and three black objects, each with two handles like the ears
of a pitcher, lay peacefully amidst the litter.

These objects were so tremendously important in the eyes of their
captors that they disregarded the two dead men who lay bloody and broken
amidst the wreckage as they might have disregarded dead frogs by a
country pathway.

'By God,' cried the first. 'Here they are!'

'And unbroken!' said the second.

'I've never seen the things before,' said the first.

'Bigger than I thought,' said the second.

The third comer arrived. He stared for a moment at the bombs and then
turned his eyes to the dead man with a crushed chest who lay in a muddy
place among the green stems under the centre of the machine.

'One can take no risks,' he said, with a faint suggestion of apology.

The other two now also turned to the victims. 'We must signal,' said the
first man. A shadow passed between them and the sun, and they looked up
to see the aeroplane that had fired the last shot. 'Shall we signal?'
came a megaphone hail.

'Three bombs,' they answered together.

'Where do they come from?' asked the megaphone.

The three sharpshooters looked at each other and then moved towards the
dead men. One of them had an idea. 'Signal that first,' he said, 'while
we look.' They were joined by their aviators for the search, and all
six men began a hunt that was necessarily brutal in its haste, for
some indication of identity. They examined the men's pockets, their
bloodstained clothes, the machine, the framework. They turned the bodies
over and flung them aside. There was not a tattoo mark.... Everything
was elaborately free of any indication of its origin.

'We can't find out!' they called at last.

'Not a sign?'

'Not a sign.'

'I'm coming down,' said the man overhead....

Section 7

The Slavic fox stood upon a metal balcony in his picturesque Art Nouveau
palace that gave upon the precipice that overhung his bright little
capital, and beside him stood Pestovitch, grizzled and cunning, and now
full of an ill-suppressed excitement. Behind them the window opened into
a large room, richly decorated in aluminium and crimson enamel, across
which the king, as he glanced ever and again over his shoulder with a
gesture of inquiry, could see through the two open doors of a little
azure walled antechamber the wireless operator in the turret working at
his incessant transcription. Two pompously uniformed messengers waited
listlessly in this apartment. The room was furnished with a stately
dignity, and had in the middle of it a big green baize-covered table
with the massive white metal inkpots and antiquated sandboxes natural to
a new but romantic monarchy. It was the king's council chamber and
about it now, in attitudes of suspended intrigue, stood the half-dozen
ministers who constituted his cabinet. They had been summoned for twelve
o'clock, but still at half-past twelve the king loitered in the balcony
and seemed to be waiting for some news that did not come.

The king and his minister had talked at first in whispers; they had
fallen silent, for they found little now to express except a vague
anxiety. Away there on the mountain side were the white metal roofs of
the long farm buildings beneath which the bomb factory and the bombs
were hidden. (The chemist who had made all these for the king had died
suddenly after the declaration of Brissago.) Nobody knew of that store
of mischief now but the king and his adviser and three heavily faithful
attendants; the aviators who waited now in the midday blaze with
their bomb-carrying machines and their passenger bomb-throwers in the
exercising grounds of the motor-cyclist barracks below were still in
ignorance of the position of the ammunition they were presently to take
up. It was time they started if the scheme was to work as Pestovitch
had planned it. It was a magnificent plan. It aimed at no less than the
Empire of the World. The government of idealists and professors away
there at Brissago was to be blown to fragments, and then east, west,
north, and south those aeroplanes would go swarming over a world that
had disarmed itself, to proclaim Ferdinand Charles, the new Caesar, the
Master, Lord of the Earth. It was a magnificent plan. But the tension
of this waiting for news of the success of the first blow
was--considerable.

The Slavic fox was of a pallid fairness, he had a remarkably long nose,
a thick, short moustache, and small blue eyes that were a little too
near together to be pleasant. It was his habit to worry his moustache
with short, nervous tugs whenever his restless mind troubled him, and
now this motion was becoming so incessant that it irked Pestovitch
beyond the limits of endurance.

'I will go,' said the minister, 'and see what the trouble is with the
wireless. They give us nothing, good or bad.'

Left to himself, the king could worry his moustache without stint; he
leant his elbows forward on the balcony and gave both of his long white
hands to the work, so that he looked like a pale dog gnawing a bone.
Suppose they caught his men, what should he do? Suppose they caught his
men?

The clocks in the light gold-capped belfries of the town below presently
intimated the half-hour after midday.

Of course, he and Pestovitch had thought it out. Even if they had caught
those men, they were pledged to secrecy.... Probably they would be
killed in the catching.... One could deny anyhow, deny and deny.

And then he became aware of half a dozen little shining specks very high
in the blue.... Pestovitch came out to him presently. 'The government
messages, sire, have all dropped into cipher,' he said. 'I have set a
man----'

'LOOK!' interrupted the king, and pointed upward with a long, lean
finger.

Pestovitch followed that indication and then glanced for one questioning
moment at the white face before him.

'We have to face it out, sire,' he said.

For some moments they watched the steep spirals of the descending
messengers, and then they began a hasty consultation....

They decided that to be holding a council upon the details of an
ultimate surrender to Brissago was as innocent-looking a thing as the
king could well be doing, and so, when at last the ex-king Egbert, whom
the council had sent as its envoy, arrived upon the scene, he discovered
the king almost theatrically posed at the head of his councillors in the
midst of his court. The door upon the wireless operators was shut.

The ex-king from Brissago came like a draught through the curtains and
attendants that gave a wide margin to King Ferdinand's state, and the
familiar confidence of his manner belied a certain hardness in his
eye. Firmin trotted behind him, and no one else was with him. And as
Ferdinand Charles rose to greet him, there came into the heart of the
Balkan king again that same chilly feeling that he had felt upon the
balcony--and it passed at the careless gestures of his guest. For surely
any one might outwit this foolish talker who, for a mere idea and at the
command of a little French rationalist in spectacles, had thrown away
the most ancient crown in all the world.

One must deny, deny....

And then slowly and quite tiresomely he realised that there was nothing
to deny. His visitor, with an amiable ease, went on talking about
everything in debate between himself and Brissago except----.

Could it be that they had been delayed? Could it be that they had had
to drop for repairs and were still uncaptured? Could it be that even
now while this fool babbled, they were over there among the mountains
heaving their deadly charge over the side of the aeroplane?

Strange hopes began to lift the tail of the Slavic fox again.

What was the man saying? One must talk to him anyhow until one knew. At
any moment the little brass door behind him might open with the news
of Brissago blown to atoms. Then it would be a delightful relief to the
present tension to arrest this chatterer forthwith. He might be killed
perhaps. What?

The king was repeating his observation. 'They have a ridiculous fancy
that your confidence is based on the possession of atomic bombs.'

King Ferdinand Charles pulled himself together. He protested.

'Oh, quite so,' said the ex-king, 'quite so.'

'What grounds?' The ex-king permitted himself a gesture and the ghost of
a chuckle--why the devil should he chuckle? 'Practically none,' he said.
'But of course with these things one has to be so careful.'

And then again for an instant something--like the faintest shadow of
derision--gleamed out of the envoy's eyes and recalled that chilly
feeling to King Ferdinand's spine.

Some kindred depression had come to Pestovitch, who had been watching
the drawn intensity of Firmin's face. He came to the help of his master,
who, he feared, might protest too much.

'A search!' cried the king. 'An embargo on our aeroplanes.'

'Only a temporary expedient,' said the ex-king Egbert, 'while the search
is going on.'

The king appealed to his council.

'The people will never permit it, sire,' said a bustling little man in a
gorgeous uniform.

'You'll have to make 'em,' said the ex-king, genially addressing all the
councillors.

King Ferdinand glanced at the closed brass door through which no news
would come.

'When would you want to have this search?'

The ex-king was radiant. 'We couldn't possibly do it until the day after
to-morrow,' he said.

'Just the capital?'

'Where else?' asked the ex-king, still more cheerfully.

'For my own part,' said the ex-king confidentially, 'I think the whole
business ridiculous. Who would be such a fool as to hide atomic bombs?
Nobody. Certain hanging if he's caught--certain, and almost certain
blowing up if he isn't. But nowadays I have to take orders like the rest
of the world. And here I am.'

The king thought he had never met such detestable geniality. He glanced
at Pestovitch, who nodded almost imperceptibly. It was well, anyhow,
to have a fool to deal with. They might have sent a diplomatist. 'Of
course,' said the king, 'I recognise the overpowering force--and a kind
of logic--in these orders from Brissago.'

'I knew you would,' said the ex-king, with an air of relief, 'and so let
us arrange----'

They arranged with a certain informality. No Balkan aeroplane was to
adventure into the air until the search was concluded, and meanwhile
the fleets of the world government would soar and circle in the sky. The
towns were to be placarded with offers of reward to any one who would
help in the discovery of atomic bombs....

'You will sign that,' said the ex-king.

'Why?'

'To show that we aren't in any way hostile to you.'

Pestovitch nodded 'yes' to his master.

'And then, you see,' said the ex-king in that easy way of his, 'we'll
have a lot of men here, borrow help from your police, and run through
all your things. And then everything will be over. Meanwhile, if I may
