Our opportunities for seeing Saturn vary greatly. As the earth at
one part of its orbit presents its south pole [Page 171] to the sun,
then its equator, then the north pole, so Saturn; and we, in the
direction of the sun, see the south side of the rings inclined at an
angle of 27 deg.; next the edge of the rings, like a fine thread of
light; then the north side at a similar inclination. On February
7th, 1878, Saturn was between Aquarius and Pisces, with the edge of
the ring to the sun. In 1885, the planet being in Taurus, the south
side of the rings will be seen at the greatest advantage. From 1881
till 1885 all circumstances will combine to give most favorable
studies of Saturn. Meanwhile study the picture of it. The outer ring
is narrow, dark, showing hints of another division, sometimes more
evident than at others, as if it were in a state of flux. The inner,
or second, ring is much brighter, especially on the outer edge, and
shading off to the dusky edge next to the planet. There is no sign
of division into a third dusky innermost ring, as was plainly seen
by Bond. This, too, may be in a state of flux.

The markings of the planet are delicate, difficult of detection,
and are not like those stark zebra stripes that are so often
represented.

The distance between the planet and the second ring seems to be
diminished one-half since 1657, and this ring has doubled its breadth
in the same time. Some of this difference may be owing to our greater
telescopic power, enabling us to see the ring closer to the planet;
but in all probability the ring is closing in upon the central
body, and will touch it by A.D. 2150. Thus the whole ring must
ultimately fall upon the planet, instead of making a satellite.

We are anxious to learn the nature of such a ring. [Page 172]
Laplace mathematically demonstrated that it cannot be uniform and
solid, and survive. Professor Peirce showed it could not be fluid,
and continue. Then Professor Maxwell showed that it must be formed
of clouds of satellites too small to be seen individually, and too
near together for the spaces to be discerned, unless, perhaps, we
may except the inner dark ring, where they are not near enough to
make it positively luminous. Indeed, there is some evidence that the
meteoroids are far enough apart to make the ring partially
transparent.

We look forward to the opportunities for observation in 1882 with
the brightest hope that these difficult questions will be solved.

_Satellites of Saturn._

The first discovered satellite of Saturn seen by Huyghens was in
1655, and the last by the Bonds, father and son, of Cambridge,
in 1848. These are eight in number, and are named:

                   Distant from Saturn's centre.
     I. Mimas              119,725 miles.
    II. Enceladus          153,630   "
   III. Tethys             190,225   "
    IV. Dione              243,670   "
     V. Rhea               340,320   "
    VI. Titan              788,915   "
   VII. Hyperion           954,160   "
  VIII. Japetus          2,292,790   "

Titan can be seen by almost any telescope; I., II., and III., only
by the most powerful instrument. All except Japetus revolve nearly
in the plane of the ring. Like the moons of Jupiter, they present
remarkable and unaccountable variations of brilliancy. An inspection
[Page 173] of the table reveals either an expectation that another
moon will be discovered between V. and VI., and about three more
between VII. and VIII., or that these gaps may be filled with groups
of invisible asteroids, as the gap between Mars and Jupiter. This
will become more evident by drawing Saturn, the rings, and orbits of
the moons all as circles, on a scale of 10,000 miles to the inch.
Saturn will be in the centre, 70,000 miles in diameter; then a gap,
decreasing twenty-nine miles a year to the first ring, of, say,
10,000 miles; a dark ring 9000 miles wide; next the brightest ring
18,300 miles wide; then a gap of 1750 miles; then the outer ring
10,000 miles wide; then the orbits of the satellites in order.

If the scenery of Jupiter is magnificent, that of Saturn must be
sublime. If one could exist there, he might wander from the illuminated
side of the rings, under their magnificent arches, to the darkened
side, see the swift whirling moons; one of them presenting ten times
the disk of the earth's moon, and so very near as to enable him
to watch the advancing line of light that marks the lunar morning
journeying round that orb.


URANUS.

Sign [Symbol]; the initial of Herschel, and sign of the world.

DISTANCE FROM THE SUN, 1,771,000,000 MILES. DIAMETER, 31,700 MILES.
AXIAL REVOLUTION UNKNOWN. ORBITAL, 84 YEARS. VELOCITY PER MINUTE,
252 MILES. MOONS, FOUR.

Uranus was presented to the knowledge of man as an unexpected reward
for honest work. It was first mistaken by its discoverer for a comet,
a mere cloud of vapor; but it proved to be a world, and extended the
[Page 174] boundaries of our solar system, in the moment of its
discovery, as much as all investigation had done in all previous
ages.

Sir William Herschel was engaged in mapping stars in 1781, when he
first observed its sea-green disk. He proposed to call it _Georgium
Sidus_, in honor of his king; but there were too many names of the
gods in the sky to allow a mortal name to be placed among them. It
was therefore called Uranus, since, being the most distant body of
our system, as was supposed, it might appropriately bear the name
of the oldest god. Finding anything in God's realms of infinite
riches ought not to lead men to regard that as final, but as a
promise of more to follow.

This planet had been seen five times by Flamsteed before its character
was determined--once nearly a century before--and eight times by
Le Monnier. These names, which might easily have been associated
with a grand discovery, are associated with careless observation.
Eyes were made not only to be kept open, but to have minds behind
them to interpret their visions. Herschel thought he discovered six
moons belonging to Uranus, but subsequent investigation has limited
the number to four. Two of these are seen with great difficulty by
the most powerful telescopes.

If the plane of our moon's orbit were tipped up to a greater
inclination, revolving it on the line of nodes as an axis until
it was turned 85 deg., the moon, still continuing on its orbit in that
plane, would go over the poles instead of about the equator, and
would go back to its old path when the plane was revolved 180 deg.;
but its revolution would now be from east to west, or [Page 175]
retrograde. The plane of the moons of Uranus has been thus inclined
till it has passed 10 deg. beyond the pole, and the moons' motions are
retrograde as regards other known celestial movements. How Uranus
itself revolves is not known. There are more worlds to conquer.


NEPTUNE.

God of the sea; sign [Symbol], his trident.

DISTANCE FROM THE SUN, 2,775,000,000 MILES. DIAMETER, 34,500 MILES.
VELOCITY PER MINUTE, 201.6 MILES. AXIAL REVOLUTION UNKNOWN. ORBITAL,
164.78 YEARS. ONE MOON.

Men sought for Neptune as the heroes sought the golden fleece.
The place of Uranus had been mapped for nearly one hundred years
by these accidental observations. On applying the law of universal
gravitation, a slight discrepancy was found between its computed
place and its observed place. This discrepancy was exceedingly
slight. In 1830 it was only 20"; in 1840,190"; in 1884, 2'. Two
stars that were 2' apart would appear as one to the keenest unaided
eye, but such an error must not exist in astronomy. Years of work
were given to its correction. Mr. John C. Adams, of Cambridge,
England, finding that the attraction of a planet exterior to Uranus
would account for its irregularities, computed the place of such
a hypothetical body with singular exactness in October, 1841; but
neither he nor the royal astronomer Airy looked for it. Another
opportunity for immortality was heedlessly neglected. Meanwhile,
M. Leverrier, of Paris, was working at the same problem. In the
summer of 1846 Leverrier announced the place of the exterior planet.
The conclusion was in striking coincidence with that of Mr. [Page
176] Clark. Mr. Challis commenced to search for the planet near the
indicated place, and actually saw and mapped the star August 4th,
1846, but did not recognize its planetary character. Dr. Galle, of
Berlin, on the 23d of September, 1846, found an object with a
planetary disk not plotted on the map of stars. It was the
sought-for world. It would seem easy to find a world seventy-six
times as large as the earth, and easy to recognize it when seen. The
fact that it could be discovered only by such care conveys an
overwhelming idea of the distance where it moves.

[Illustration: Fig. 66.--Perturbation of Uranus.]

The effect of these perturbations by an exterior planet is understood
from Fig. 66. Uranus and Neptune were in conjunction, as shown,
in 1822. But in 1820 it had been found that Uranus was too far
from the sun, and too much accelerated. Since 1800, Neptune, in
his orbit from F to E, had been hastening Uranus in his orbit D
from C to B, and also drawing it farther from the sun. After 1822,
Neptune, in passing from E to D, had been retarding Uranus in his
orbit from B to A.

We have seen it is easy to miss immortality. There is still another
instance. Lalande saw Neptune on May 8th and 10th, 1795, noted that
it had moved a little, and that the observations did not agree;
but, supposing the first was wrong, carelessly missed the glory
of once more doubling the bounds of the empire of the sun.

[Page 177]
It is time to pause and review our knowledge of this system. The
first view reveals a moon and earth endowed with a force of inertia
going on in space in straight lines; but an invisible elastic cord of
attraction holds them together, just counterbalancing this tendency
to fly apart, and hence they circle round their centre of gravity.
The revolving earth turns every part of its surface to the moon in
each twenty-four hours. By an axial revolution in the same time
that the moon goes round the earth, the moon holds the same point
of its surface constantly toward the earth. If we were to add one,
two, four, eight moons at appropriate distances, the result would
be the same. There is, however, another attractive influence--that
of the sun. The sun attracts both earth and moon, but their nearer
affection for each other keeps them from going apart. They both,
revolving on their axes and around their centre of gravity, sweep
in a vastly wider curve around the sun. Add as many moons as has
Jupiter or Saturn, the result is the same--an orderly carrying
of worlds through space.

There lies the unsupported sun in the centre, nearer to infinity
in all its capacities and intensities of force than our minds can
measure, filling the whole dome to where the stars are set with
light, heat, and power. It holds five small worlds--Vulcan, Mercury,
Venus, Earth, and Mars--within a space whose radius it would require
a locomotive half a thousand years to traverse. It next holds some
indeterminate number of asteroids, and the great Jupiter, equal in
volume to 13,000 earths. It holds Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, and
all their variously related satellites and rings. The two thoughts
that overwhelm us are distance and power. The period of [Page 178]
man's whole history is not sufficient for an express train to
traverse half the distance to Neptune. Thought wearies and fails in
seeking to grasp such distances; it can scarcely comprehend one
million miles, and here are thousands of them. Even the wings of
imagination grow weary and droop. When we stand on that outermost of
planets, the very last sentinel of the outposts of the king, the
very sun grown dim and small in the distance, we have taken only one
step of the infinite distance to the stars. They have not changed
their relative position--they have not grown brighter by our
approach. Neptune carries us round a vast circle about the centre of
the dome of stars, but we seem no nearer its sides. In visiting
planets, we have been only visiting next-door neighbors in the
streets of a seaport town. We know that there are similar neighbors
about Sirius and Arcturus, but a vast sea rolls between. As we said,
we stand with the outermost sentinel; but into the great void beyond
the king of day sends his comets as scouts, and they fly thousands
of years without for one instant missing the steady grasp of the
power of the sun. It is nearer almightiness than we are able to
think.

If we cannot solve the problems of the present existence of worlds,
how little can we expect to fathom the unsoundable depths of their
creation and development through ages measureless to man! Yet the
very difficulty provokes the most ambitious thought. We toil at
the problem because it has been hitherto unsolvable. Every error
we make, and discover to be such, helps toward the final solution.
Every earnest thinker who climbs the shining worlds as steps to
a higher thought is trying to solve the problem God has given us
to do.




[Page 179]
IX.

THE NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS.

"And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon
the face of the deep."--_Genesis_ i. 2.

[Page 180]
                                "A dark
    Illimitable ocean, without bound,
    Without dimension, where length, breadth, and height,
    And time, and place are lost."--MILTON.

"It is certain that matter is somehow directed, controlled, and
arranged; while no material forces or properties are known to be
capable of discharging such functions."--LIONEL BEALE.

"The laws of nature do not account for their own origin."--JOHN
STUART MILL.




[Page 181]
IX.

_THE NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS._

The method by which the solar system came into its present form
was sketched in vast outline by Moses. He gave us the fundamental
idea of what is called the nebular hypothesis. Swedenborg, that
prodigal dreamer of vagaries, in 1734 threw out some conjectures of
the way in which the outlines were to be filled up; Buffon followed
him closely in 1749; Kant sought to give it an ideal philosophical
completeness; as he said, "not as the result of observation and
computation," but as evolved out of his own consciousness; and
Laplace sought to settle it on a mathematical basis.

It has been modified greatly by later writers, and must receive
still greater modifications before it can be accepted by the best
scientists of to-day. It has been called "the grandest generalization
of the human mind;" and if it shall finally be so modified as to pass
from a tentative hypothesis to an accepted philosophy, declaring
the modes of a divine worker rather than the necessities of blind
force, it will still be worthy of that high distinction.

Let it be clearly noted that it never proposes to do more than to
trace a portion of the mode of working which brought the universe
from one stage to another. It only goes back to a definite point,
never to absolute beginning, nor to nothingness. It takes matter
from [Page 182] the hand of the unseen power behind, and merely
notes the progress of its development. It finds the clay in the
hands of an intelligent potter, and sees it whirl in the process of
formation into a vessel. It is not in any sense necessarily
atheistic, any more than it is to affirm that a tree grows by vital
processes in the sun and dew, instead of being arbitrarily and
instantly created. The conclusion reached depends on the spirit of
the observer. Newton could say, "This most beautiful system of the
sun, planets, and comets could only proceed from the counsel and
dominion of an intelligent and powerful being!" Still it is well to
recognize that some of its most ardent defenders have advocated it
as materialistic. And Laplace said of it to Napoleon, "I have no
need of the hypothesis of a god."

The materialistic statement of the theory is this: that matter
is at first assumed to exist as an infinite cloud of fire-mist,
dowered with power latent therein to grow of itself into every
possibility of world, flower, animal, man, mind, and affection,
without any interference or help from without. But it requires
far more of the Divine Worker than any other theory. He must fill
matter with capabilities to take care of itself, and this would
tax the abilities of the Infinite One far more than a constant
supervision and occasional interference. Instead of making the
vase in perfect form, and coloring it with exquisite beauty by
an ever-present skill, he must endow the clay with power to make
itself in perfect form, adorn itself with delicate beauty, and
create other vases.

The nebular hypothesis is briefly this: All the matter composing
all the bodies of the sun, planets, and satellites once existed
in an exceedingly diffused state; [Page 183] rarer than any gas with
which we are acquainted, filling a space larger than the orbit of
Neptune. Gravitation gradually contracted this matter into a
condensing globe of immense extent. Some parts would naturally be
denser than others, and in the course of contraction a rotary
motion, it is affirmed, would be engendered. Rotation would flatten
the globe somewhat in the line of its axis. Contracting still more,
the rarer gases, aided by centrifugal force, would be left behind as
a ring that would ultimately be separated, like Saturn's ring, from
the retreating body. There would naturally be some places in this
ring denser than others; these would gradually absorb all the ring
into a planet, and still revolve about the central mass, and still
rotate on its own axis, throwing off rings from itself. Thus the
planet Neptune would be left behind in the first sun-ring, to make
its one moon; the planet Uranus left in the next sun-ring, to make
its four moons from four successive planet-rings; Saturn, with its
eight moons and three rings not made into moons, is left in the
third sun-ring; and so on down to Vulcan.

The outer planets would cool off first, become inhabitable, and,
as the sun contracted and they radiated their own heat, become
refrigerated and left behind by the retreating sun. Of course the
outer planets would move slowly; but as that portion of the sun
which gave them their motion drew in toward the centre, keeping
its absolute speed, and revolving in the lessening circles of a
contracting body, it would give the faster motion necessary to
be imparted to Earth, Mercury, and Vulcan.

The four great classes of facts confirmatory of this hypothesis
are as follows: 1st. All the planets move [Page 184] in the same
direction, and nearly in the same plane, as if thrown off from one
equator; 2d. The motions of the satellites about their primaries are
mostly in the same direction as that of their primaries about the
sun; 3d. The rotation of most of these bodies on their axes, and
also of the sun, is in the same direction as the motion of the
planets about the sun; 4th. The orbits of the planets, excluding
asteroids, and their satellites, have but a comparatively small
eccentricity; 5th. Certain nebulae are observable in the heavens
which are not yet condensed into solids, but are still bright gas.

The materialistic evolutionist takes up the idea of a universe of
material world-stuff without form, and void, but so endowed as to
develop itself into orderly worlds, and adds to it this exceeding
advance, that when soil, sun, and chemical laws found themselves
properly related, a force in matter, latent for a million eons in
the original cloud, comes forward, and dead matter becomes alive
in the lowest order of vegetable life; there takes place, as Herbert
Spencer says, "a change from an indefinite, incoherent homogeneity,
into a definite, coherent heterogeneity, through continuous
differentiation and integration." The dead becomes alive; matter
passes from unconsciousness to consciousness; passes up from plant
to animal, from animal to man; takes on power to think, reason,
love, and adore. The theistic evolutionist may think that the same
process is gone through, but that an ever-present and working God
superintends, guides, and occasionally bestows a new endowment
of power that successively gives life, consciousness, mental,
affectional, and spiritual capacity.

Is this world-theory true? and if so, is either of the [Page 185]
evolution theories true also? If the first evolution theory is true,
the evolved man will hardly know which to adore most, the Being that
could so endow matter, or the matter capable of such endowment.

There are some difficulties in the way of the acceptance of the
nebular hypothesis that compel many of the most thorough scientists
of the day to withhold their assent to its entirety. The latest, and
