
Professor Wiener thought he could draw from his experiment a firm
conclusion on the point in dispute. He produced stationary waves with
light polarized at an angle of 45 deg.,[22] and established that, when
light is polarized in the plane of incidence, the fringes persist; but
that, on the other hand, they disappear when the light is polarized
perpendicularly to this plane. If it be admitted that a photographic
impression results from the active force of the vibratory movement of
the ether, the question is, in fact, completely elucidated, and the
discrepancy is abolished in Fresnel's favour.

[Footnote 22: That is to say, he reflected the beam of polarized light
by a mirror placed at that angle. See Turpain, _Lecons elementaires de
Physique_, t. ii. p. 311, for details of the experiment.--ED.]

M.H. Poincare has pointed out, however, that we know nothing as to the
mechanism of the photographic impression. We cannot consider it
evident that it is the kinetic energy of the ether which produces the
decomposition of the sensitive salt; and if, on the contrary, we
suppose it to be due to the potential energy, all the conclusions are
reversed, and Neumann's idea triumphs.

Recently a very clever physicist, M. Cotton, especially known for his
skilful researches in the domain of optics, has taken up anew the
study of stationary waves. He has made very precise quantitative
experiments, and has demonstrated, in his turn, that it is impossible,
even with spherical waves, to succeed in determining on which of the
two vectors which have to be regarded in all theories of light on the
subject of polarization phenomena the luminous intensity and the
chemical action really depend. This question, therefore, no longer
exists for those physicists who admit that luminous vibrations are
electrical oscillations. Whatever, then, the hypothesis formed,
whether it be electric force or, on the contrary, magnetic force which
we place in the plane of polarization, the mode of propagation
foreseen will always be in accord with the facts observed.


Sec. 3. THE ELECTROMAGNETIC ETHER

The idea of attributing the phenomena of electricity to perturbations
produced in the medium which transmits the light is already of old
standing; and the physicists who witnessed the triumph of Fresnel's
theories could not fail to conceive that this fluid, which fills the
whole of space and penetrates into all bodies, might also play a
preponderant part in electrical actions. Some even formed too hasty
hypotheses on this point; for the hour had not arrived when it was
possible to place them on a sufficiently sound basis, and the known
facts were not numerous enough to give the necessary precision.

The founders of modern electricity also thought it wiser to adopt,
with regard to this science, the attitude taken by Newton in
connection with gravitation: "In the first place to observe facts, to
vary the circumstances of these as much as possible, to accompany this
first work by precise measurements in order to deduce from them
general laws founded solely on experiment, and to deduce from these
laws, independently of all hypotheses on the nature of the forces
producing the phenomena, the mathematical value of these forces--that
is to say, the formula representing them. Such was the system pursued
by Newton. It has, in general, been adopted in France by the scholars
to whom physics owe the great progress made of late years, and it has
served as my guide in all my researches on electrodynamic
phenomena.... It is for this reason that I have avoided speaking of
the ideas I may have on the nature of the cause of the force emanating
from voltaic conductors."

Thus did Ampere express himself. The illustrious physicist rightly
considered the results obtained by him through following this wise
method as worthy of comparison with the laws of attraction; but he
knew that when this first halting-place was reached there was still
further to go, and that the evolution of ideas must necessarily
continue.

"With whatever physical cause," he adds, "we may wish to connect the
phenomena produced by electro-dynamic action, the formula I have
obtained will always remain the expression of the facts," and he
explicitly indicated that if one could succeed in deducing his formula
from the consideration of the vibrations of a fluid distributed
through space, an enormous step would have been taken in this
department of physics. He added, however, that this research appeared
to him premature, and would change nothing in the results of his work,
since, to accord with facts, the hypothesis adopted would always have
to agree with the formula which exactly represents them.

It is not devoid of interest to observe that Ampere himself,
notwithstanding his caution, really formed some hypotheses, and
recognized that electrical phenomena were governed by the laws of
mechanics. Yet the principles of Newton then appeared to be
unshakable.

Faraday was the first to demonstrate, by clear experiment, the
influence of the media in electricity and magnetic phenomena, and he
attributed this influence to certain modifications in the ether which
these media enclose. His fundamental conception was to reject action
at a distance, and to localize in the ether the energy whose evolution
is the cause of the actions manifested, as, for example, in the
discharge of a condenser.

Consider the barrel of a pump placed in a vacuum and closed by a
piston at each end, and let us introduce between these a certain mass
of air. The two pistons, through the elastic force of the gas, repel
each other with a force which, according to the law of Mariotte,
varies in inverse ratio to the distance. The method favoured by Ampere
would first of all allow this law of repulsion between the two pistons
to be discovered, even if the existence of a gas enclosed in the
barrel of the pump were unsuspected; and it would then be natural to
localize the potential energy of the system on the surface of the two
pistons. But if the phenomenon is more carefully examined, we shall
discover the presence of the air, and we shall understand that every
part of the volume of this air could, if it were drawn off into a
recipient of equal volume, carry away with it a fraction of the energy
of the system, and that consequently this energy belongs really to the
air and not to the pistons, which are there solely for the purpose of
enabling this energy to manifest its existence.

Faraday made, in some sort, an equivalent discovery when he perceived
that the electrical energy belongs, not to the coatings of the
condenser, but to the dielectric which separates them. His audacious
views revealed to him a new world, but to explore this world a surer
and more patient method was needed.

Maxwell succeeded in stating with precision certain points of
Faraday's ideas, and he gave them the mathematical form which, often
wrongly, impresses physicists, but which when it exactly encloses a
theory, is a certain proof that this theory is at least coherent and
logical.[23]

[Footnote 23: It will no doubt be a shock to those whom Professor
Henry Armstrong has lately called the "mathematically-minded" to find
a member of the Poincare family speaking disrespectfully of the
science they have done so much to illustrate. One may perhaps compare
the expression in the text with M. Henri Poincare's remark in his last
allocution to the Academie des Sciences, that "Mathematics are
sometimes a nuisance, and even a danger, when they induce us to affirm
more than we know" (_Comptes-rendus_, 17th December 1906).]

The work of Maxwell is over-elaborated, complex, difficult to read,
and often ill-understood, even at the present day. Maxwell is more
concerned in discovering whether it is possible to give an explanation
of electrical and magnetic phenomena which shall be founded on the
mechanical properties of a single medium, than in stating this
explanation in precise terms. He is aware that if we could succeed in
constructing such an interpretation, it would be easy to propose an
infinity of others, entirely equivalent from the point of view of the
experimentally verifiable consequences; and his especial ambition is
therefore to extract from the premises a general view, and to place in
evidence something which would remain the common property of all the
theories.

He succeeded in showing that if the electrostatic energy of an
electromagnetic field be considered to represent potential energy, and
its electrodynamic the kinetic energy, it becomes possible to satisfy
both the principle of least action and that of the conservation of
energy; from that moment--if we eliminate a few difficulties which
exist regarding the stability of the solutions--the possibility of
finding mechanical explanations of electromagnetic phenomena must be
considered as demonstrated. He thus succeeded, moreover, in stating
precisely the notion of two electric and magnetic fields which
are produced in all points of space, and which are strictly
inter-connected, since the variation of the one immediately and
compulsorily gives birth to the other.

From this hypothesis he deduced that, in the medium where this energy
is localized, an electromagnetic wave is propagated with a velocity
equal to the relation of the units of electric mass in the
electromagnetic and electrostatic systems. Now, experiments made known
since his time have proved that this relation is numerically equal to
the speed of light, and the more precise experiments made in
consequence--among which should be cited the particularly careful ones
of M. Max Abraham--have only rendered the coincidence still more
complete.

It is natural henceforth to suppose that this medium is identical with
the luminous ether, and that a luminous wave is an electromagnetic
wave--that is to say, a succession of alternating currents, which
exist in the dielectric and even in the void, and possess an enormous
frequency, inasmuch as they change their direction thousands of
billions of times per second, and by reason of this frequency produce
considerable induction effects. Maxwell did not admit the existence of
open currents. To his mind, therefore, an electrical vibration could
not produce condensations of electricity. It was, in consequence,
necessarily transverse, and thus coincided with the vibration of
Fresnel; while the corresponding magnetic vibration was perpendicular
to it, and would coincide with the luminous vibration of Neumann.

Maxwell's theory thus establishes a close correlation between the
phenomena of the luminous and those of the electromagnetic waves, or,
we might even say, the complete identity of the two. But it does not
follow from this that we ought to regard the variation of an electric
field produced at some one point as necessarily consisting of a real
displacement of the ether round that point. The idea of thus bringing
electrical phenomena back to the mechanics of the ether is not, then,
forced upon us, and the contrary idea even seems more probable. It is
not the optics of Fresnel which absorbs the science of electricity, it
is rather the optics which is swallowed up by a more general theory.
The attempts of popularizers who endeavour to represent, in all their
details, the mechanism of the electric phenomena, thus appear vain
enough, and even puerile. It is useless to find out to what material
body the ether may be compared, if we content ourselves with seeing in
it a medium of which, at every point, two vectors define the
properties.

For a long time, therefore, we could remark that the theory of Fresnel
simply supposed a medium in which something periodical was propagated,
without its being necessary to admit this something to be a movement;
but we had to wait not only for Maxwell, but also for Hertz, before
this idea assumed a really scientific shape. Hertz insisted on the
fact that the six equations of the electric field permit all the
phenomena to be anticipated without its being necessary to construct
one hypothesis or another, and he put these equations into a very
symmetrical form, which brings completely in evidence the perfect
reciprocity between electrical and magnetic actions. He did yet more,
for he brought to the ideas of Maxwell the most striking confirmation
by his memorable researches on electric oscillations.


Sec. 4. ELECTRICAL OSCILLATIONS

The experiments of Hertz are well known. We know how the Bonn
physicist developed, by means of oscillating electric discharges,
displacement currents and induction effects in the whole of the space
round the spark-gap; and how he excited by induction at some point in
a wire a perturbation which afterwards is propagated along the wire,
and how a resonator enabled him to detect the effect produced.

The most important point made evident by the observation of
interference phenomena and subsequently verified directly by M.
Blondlot, is that the electromagnetic perturbation is propagated with
the speed of light, and this result condemns for ever all the
hypotheses which fail to attribute any part to the intervening media
in the propagation of an induction phenomenon.

If the inducing action were, in fact, to operate directly between the
inducing and the induced circuits, the propagation should be
instantaneous; for if an interval were to occur between the moment
when the cause acted and the one when the effect was produced, during
this interval there would no longer be anything anywhere, since the
intervening medium does not come into play, and the phenomenon would
then disappear.

Leaving on one side the manifold but purely electrical consequences of
this and the numerous researches relating to the production or to the
properties of the waves--some of which, those of MM. Sarrazin and de
la Rive, Righi, Turpain, Lebedeff, Decombe, Barbillon, Drude, Gutton,
Lamotte, Lecher, etc., are, however, of the highest order--I shall
only mention here the studies more particularly directed to the
establishment of the identity of the electromagnetic and the luminous
waves.

The only differences which subsist are necessarily those due to the
considerable discrepancy which exists between the durations of the
periods of these two categories of waves. The length of wave
corresponding to the first spark-gap of Hertz was about 6 metres, and
the longest waves perceptible by the retina are 7/10 of a micron.[24]

[Footnote 24: See footnote 3.]

These radiations are so far apart that it is not astonishing that
their properties have not a perfect similitude. Thus phenomena like
those of diffraction, which are negligible in the ordinary conditions
under which light is observed, may here assume a preponderating
importance. To play the part, for example, with the Hertzian waves,
which a mirror 1 millimetre square plays with regard to light, would
require a colossal mirror which would attain the size of a
myriametre[25] square.

[Footnote 25: I.e., 10,000 metres.--ED.]

The efforts of physicists have to-day, however, filled up, in great
part, this interval, and from both banks at once they have laboured to
build a bridge between the two domains. We have seen how Rubens showed
us calorific rays 60 metres long; on the other hand, MM. Lecher, Bose,
and Lampa have succeeded, one after the other, in gradually obtaining
oscillations with shorter and shorter periods. There have been
produced, and are now being studied, electromagnetic waves of four
millimetres; and the gap subsisting in the spectrum between the rays
left undetected by sylvine and the radiations of M. Lampa now hardly
comprise more than five octaves--that is to say, an interval
perceptibly equal to that which separates the rays observed by M.
Rubens from the last which are evident to the eye.

The analogy then becomes quite close, and in the remaining rays the
properties, so to speak, characteristic of the Hertzian waves, begin
to appear. For these waves, as we have seen, the most transparent
bodies are the most perfect electrical insulators; while bodies still
slightly conducting are entirely opaque. The index of refraction of
these substances tends in the case of great wave-lengths to become, as
the theory anticipates, nearly the square root of the dielectric
constant.

MM. Rubens and Nichols have even produced with the waves which remain
phenomena of electric resonance quite similar to those which an
Italian scholar, M. Garbasso, obtained with electric waves. This
physicist showed that, if the electric waves are made to impinge on a
flat wooden stand, on which are a series of resonators parallel to
each other and uniformly arranged, these waves are hardly reflected
save in the case where the resonators have the same period as the
spark-gap. If the remaining rays are allowed to fall on a glass plate
silvered and divided by a diamond fixed on a dividing machine into
small rectangles of equal dimensions, there will be observed
variations in the reflecting power according to the orientation of the
rectangles, under conditions entirely comparable with the experiment
of Garbasso.

In order that the phenomenon be produced it is necessary that the
remaining waves should be previously polarized. This is because, in
fact, the mechanism employed to produce the electric oscillations
evidently gives out vibrations which occur on a single plane and are
subsequently polarized.

We cannot therefore entirely assimilate a radiation proceeding from a
spark-gap to a ray of natural light. For the synthesis of light to be
realized, still other conditions must be complied with. During a
luminous impression, the direction and the phase change millions of
times in the vibration sensible to the retina, yet the damping of this
vibration is very slow. With the Hertzian oscillations all these
conditions are changed--the damping is very rapid but the direction
remains invariable.

Every time, however, that we deal with general phenomena which are
independent of these special conditions, the parallelism is perfect;
and with the waves, we have put in evidence the reflexion, refraction,
total reflexion, double reflexion, rotatory polarization, dispersion,
and the ordinary interferences produced by rays travelling in the same
direction and crossing each other at a very acute angle, or the
interferences analogous to those which Wiener observed with rays of
the contrary direction.

A very important consequence of the electromagnetic theory foreseen by
Maxwell is that the luminous waves which fall on a surface must
exercise on this surface a pressure equal to the radiant energy which
exists in the unit of volume of the surrounding space. M. Lebedeff a
few years ago allowed a sheaf of rays from an arc lamp to fall on a
deflection radiometer,[26] and thus succeeded in revealing the
existence of this pressure. Its value is sufficient, in the case of
matter of little density and finely divided, to reduce and even change
into repulsion the attractive action exercised on bodies by the sun.
This is a fact formerly conjectured by Faye, and must certainly play a
great part in the deformation of the heads of comets.

[Footnote 26: By this M. Poincare appears to mean a radiometer in
which the vanes are not entirely free to move as in the radiometer of
Crookes but are suspended by one or two threads as in the instrument
devised by Professor Poynting.--ED.]

More recently, MM. Nichols and Hull have undertaken experiments on
this point. They have measured not only the pressure, but also the
energy of the radiation by means of a special bolometer. They have
thus arrived at numerical verifications which are entirely in
conformity with the calculations of Maxwell.

The existence of these pressures may be otherwise foreseen even apart
from the electromagnetic theory, by adding to the theory of
undulations the principles of thermodynamics. Bartoli, and more
recently Dr Larmor, have shown, in fact, that if these pressures did
not exist, it would be possible, without any other phenomenon, to pass
heat from a cold into a warm body, and thus transgress the principle
of Carnot.


Sec. 5. THE X RAYS

It appears to-day quite probable that the X rays should be classed
among the phenomena which have their seat in the luminous ether.
Doubtless it is not necessary to recall here how, in December 1895,
Roentgen, having wrapped in black paper a Crookes tube in action,
observed that a fluorescent platinocyanide of barium screen placed in
the neighbourhood, had become visible in the dark, and that a
photographic plate had received an impress. The rays which come from
the tube, in conditions now well known, are not deviated by a magnet,
and, as M. Curie and M. Sagnac have conclusively shown, they carry no
electric charge. They are subject to neither reflection nor
refraction, and very precise and very ingenious measurements by M.
Gouy have shown that, in their case, the refraction index of the
various bodies cannot be more than a millionth removed from unity.

We knew from the outset that there existed various X rays differing
from each other as, for instance, the colours of the spectrum, and
these are distinguished from each other by their unequal power of
passing through substances. M. Sagnac, particularly, has shown that
there can be obtained a gradually decreasing scale of more or less
absorbable rays, so that the greater part of their photographic action
is stopped by a simple sheet of black paper. These rays figure among
the secondary rays discovered, as is known, by this ingenious
physicist. The X rays falling on matter are thus subjected to
transformations which may be compared to those which the phenomena of
luminescence produce on the ultra-violet rays.

M. Benoist has founded on the transparency of matter to the rays a
sure and practical method of allowing them to be distinguished, and
has thus been enabled to define a specific character analogous to the
colour of the rays of light. It is probable also that the different
rays do not transport individually the same quantity of energy. We
have not yet obtained on this point precise results, but it is roughly
known, since the experiments of MM. Rutherford and M'Clung, what
quantity of energy corresponds to a pencil of X rays. These physicists
have found that this quantity would be, on an average, five hundred
times larger than that brought by an analogous pencil of solar light
to the surface of the earth. What is the nature of this energy? The
question does not appear to have been yet solved.

It certainly appears, according to Professors Haga and Wind and to
Professor Sommerfeld, that with the X rays curious experiments of
diffraction may be produced. Dr Barkla has shown also that they can
manifest true polarization. The secondary rays emitted by a metallic
surface when struck by X rays vary, in fact, in intensity when the
position of the plane of incidence round the primary pencil is
changed. Various physicists have endeavoured to measure the speed of
propagation, but it seems more and more probable that it is very
nearly that of light.[27]

[Footnote 27: See especially the experiments of Professor E. Marx
(Vienna), _Annalen der Physik_, vol. xx. (No. 9 of 1906), pp. 677 _et
seq._, which seem conclusive on this point.--ED.]

I must here leave out the description of a crowd of other experiments.
Some very interesting researches by M. Brunhes, M. Broca, M.
Colardeau, M. Villard, in France, and by many others abroad, have
permitted the elucidation of several interesting problems relative to
the duration of the emission or to the best disposition to be adopted
for the production of the rays. The only point which will detain us is
the important question as to the nature of the X rays themselves; the
properties which have just been brought to mind are those which appear
essential and which every theory must reckon with.

The most natural hypothesis would be to consider the rays as
ultra-violet radiations of very short wave-length, or radiations which
are in a manner ultra-ultra-violet. This interpretation can still, at
this present moment, be maintained, and the researches of MM. Buisson,
Righi, Lenard, and Merrit Stewart have even established that rays of
very short wave-lengths produce on metallic conductors, from the point
of view of electrical phenomena, effects quite analogous to those of
the X rays. Another resemblance results also from the experiments by
which M. Perreau established that these rays act on the electric
resistance of selenium. New and valuable arguments have thus added
force to those who incline towards a theory which has the merit of
bringing a new phenomenon within the pale of phenomena previously
known.

Nevertheless the shortest ultra-violet radiations, such as those of M.
Schumann, are still capable of refraction by quartz, and this
difference constitutes, in the minds of many physicists, a serious
