third embankment of a similar character is that of the Cummum tank,
situated in the Madras Presidency, and which, though ranking among the
earliest works of Hindoo history, is still in such a condition as to
fulfill its original intention. The area of the reservoir is about
fifteen square miles, the dam about 102 ft. high, with a breadth at the
crest of 76 ft., and of the section shown in the diagram.

The by-wash is cut in the solid rock altogether clear of the dam; the
outlet culverts, however, are carried under the bank. We will now
consider generally the methods employed in determining the site,
dimensions, and methods of construction of reservoir dams adapted to the
varying circumstances and requirements of modern times, with a few
references to some of the more important works constructed or in
progress, which it will be endeavored to make as concise and burdened
with as few enumerations of dimensions as possible.

The amount of the supply of water required, and the purposes to which it
is to be applied, whether for household, manufacturing, or irrigation
uses, are among the first considerations affecting the choice of the site
of the reservoir, and is governed by the amount of rainfall available,
after deducting for evaporation and absorption, and the nature of the
surface soil and vegetation. The next important point is to determine the
position of the dam, having regard to the suitability of the ground for
affording a good foundation and the impoundment of the requisite body of
water with the least outlay on embankment works.

It has been suggested that the floods of the valley of the Thames might
be controlled by a system of storage reservoirs, and notice was
especially drawn to this in consequence of the heavy floods of the winter
of 1875. From evidence given before the Royal Commission on Water Supply,
previous to that date it was stated that a rainfall of 1 in. over the
Thames basin above Kingston would give, omitting evaporation and
absorption, a volume of 53,375,000,000 gallons. To prevent floods, a
rainfall of at least 3 in. would have to be provided against, which would
mean the construction of reservoirs of a storage capacity of say
160,000,000,000 gallons. Mr. Bailey Denton, in his evidence before that
commission, estimated that reservoirs to store less than one tenth that
quantity would cost L1,360,000, and therefore a 3 in. storage as above
would require an outlay of, say, L15,000,000 sterling; and it will be
seen that 3 in. is by no means too great a rainfall to allow for, as in
July of 1875, according to Mr. Symons, at Cirencester, 3.11 in. fell
within twenty-four hours. Supposing serious attention were to be given to
such a scheme, there would, without doubt, be very great difficulty in
finding suitable situations, from an engineering and land owner's point
of view, for the requisite dams and reservoir areas.

In Great Britain and many European countries rain gauges have been
established at a greater or less number of stations for many years past,
and data thereby afforded for estimating approximately the rainfall of
any given district or catchment basin. The term "watershed" is one which
it appears to me is frequently misapplied; as I understand it, watershed
is equivalent to what in America is termed the "divide," and means the
boundary of the catchment area or basin of any given stream, although I
believe it is frequently made use of as meaning the catchment area
itself. When saying that the rain gauges already established in most of
the older civilized countries afford data for an approximate estimate
only, it is meant that an increase in the number of points at which
observations are made is necessary, previous to the design of a reservoir
dam on the catchment area above, the waters of which are proposed to be
impounded, and should be continuous for a series of five or six years,
and these must be compared with the observations made with the old
established rain gauges of the adjacent district, say for a period of
twenty years previously, and modified accordingly. This is absolutely
necessary before an accurate estimate of the average and maximum and
minimum rainfall can be arrived at, as the rainfall of each square mile
of gathering ground may vary the amount being affected by the altitude
and the aspect as regards the rainy quarter.

But this information will be of but little service to the engineer
without an investigation of the loss due to evaporation and absorption,
varying with the season of the year and the more or less degree of
saturation of the soil; the amount of absorption depending upon the
character of the ground, dip of strata, etc., the hydrographic area
being, as a rule, by no means equal to the topographic area of a given
basin. From this cursory view of the preliminary investigations necessary
can be realized what difficulties must attend the design of dams for
reservoirs in newly settled or uncivilized countries, where there are no
data of this nature to go on, and where if maps exist they are probably
of the roughest description and uncontoured; so that before any project
can be even discussed seriously special surveys have to be made, the
results of which may only go to prove the unsuitability of the site under
consideration as regards area, etc. The loss due to evaporation,
according to Mr. Hawksley, in this country amounts to a mean of about 15
in.; this and the absorption must vary with the geological conditions,
and therefore to arrive at a satisfactory conclusion regarding the amount
of rainfall actually available for storage, careful gaugings have to be
made of the stream affected, and these should extend over a lengthened
period, and be compounded with the rainfall. A certain loss of water, in
times of excessive floods, must, in designing a dam, be ever expected,
and under favorable conditions may be estimated at 10 per cent. of the
total amount impounded.

As regards the choice of position for the dam of a reservoir, supposing
that it is intended to impound the water by throwing an obstruction
across a valley, it may be premised that to impound the largest quantity
of water with the minimum outlay, the most favorable conditions are
present where a more or less broad valley flanked by steep hills suddenly
narrows at its lower end, forming a gorge which can be obstructed by a
comparatively short dam. The accompanying condition is that the nature of
the soil, i.e., the character, strata, and lie of the rock, clay, etc.,
as the case may be, is favorable to assuring a good foundation. In Great
Britain, as a rule, dams for reservoirs have been constructed of
earthwork with a puddle core, deemed by the majority of English engineers
as more suitable for this purpose than masonry.

Earthwork, in some instances combined with masonry, was also a form usual
in the ancient works of the East, already referred to; but it would
appear from the experience of recent years that masonry dams are likely
to become as common as those of earthwork, especially in districts
favorable to the construction of the former, where the natural ground is
of a rocky character, and good stone easily obtained.

As to the stability of structures of masonry for this purpose, as
compared with earthwork, experience would seem to leave the question an
open one. Either method is liable to failure, and there certainly are as
many cases on record of the destruction of masonry dams as there are of
those constructed of earthwork, as instanced in Algeria within the past
few years. As regards masonry dams, the question of success does not seem
so much to depend upon their design, as far as the mere determination of
the suitable profile or cross section is concerned, as that has been very
exhaustively investigated, and fairly agreed upon, from a mathematical
point of view, but to be principally due to the correctness of the
estimate of the floods to be dealt with, and a sufficient provision of
by-wash allowed for the most extreme cases; and, lastly, perhaps the most
important of all, the securing a thoroughly good foundation, and a
careful execution of the work throughout.

These remarks equally apply to earthwork dams, as regards sufficient
provision of by-wash, careful execution of work, and security of
foundation, but their area of cross section, supposing them to be
water-tight, on account of the flatness of their slopes and consequent
breadth of base, is, of course, far in excess of that merely required for
stability; but in these latter, the method adopted for the water supply
discharge is of the very greatest importance, and will be again referred
to.

Before commencing the excavation for the foundations of a dam, it is most
essential that the character of the soil or rock should be examined
carefully, by sinking a succession of small shafts, not mere borings,
along the site, so that the depth to which the trench will have to be
carried, and the amount of ground water likely to be encountered, can be
reliably ascertained, as this portion of the work cannot be otherwise
estimated, and as it may bear a very large proportion of the total
expense of construction, and in certain cases may demonstrate that the
site is altogether unsuitable for the proposed purpose.

The depth to which puddle trenches have been carried, for the purpose of
penetrating water-bearing strata, and reaching impenetrable ground, in
some cases, has been as much as 160 ft. below the natural surface of the
ground, and the expense of timbering, pumping, and excavation in such an
instance can be easily imagined. This may be realized by referring to
Fig. 4, giving a cross-section of the Yarrow dam, in which the bottom of
the trench is there only 85 ft. below the ground surface. In the Dale
Dyke dam, Fig. 2, the bottom of the trench was about 50 ft. below the
ground surface.

There is one other point which should be mentioned in connection with the
form of the base of the puddle trench--that instead of cutting the bottom
of the trench at the sides of the valley in steps, it should be merely
sloped, so that the puddle, in setting, tends to slide down each inclined
plane toward the bottom of valley, thereby becoming further compressed;
whereas, should the natural ground be cut in steps, the puddle in setting
tends to bulge at the side of each riser, as it may be termed, and so
cause fissures. It will be noticed that the slopes of these earthwork
dams vary from 7 to 1 to 2 to 1.

The depths to which some puddle trenches are carried has been objected to
by some engineers, and among them Sir Robert Rawlinson, as excessive and
unnecessary, and, in the opinion of the latter, the same end might be
obtained by going down to a depth say of 30 ft. only, and putting in a
thick bed of concrete, and also carrying up the concrete at the back of
the puddle trench, with a well for collecting water, and a pipe leading
the same off through the back of the dam to the down stream side. An
arrangement of this kind is shown in the Yarrow dam, Fig. 4.

The thickness of the puddle wall varies considerably in the different
examples given in the diagrams before you, a fair average being the Row
bank of the Paisley Water Works, Fig. 6; and although in instances of
dams made early in the century, such as the Glencorse dam--Fig. 5--of the
Edinburgh Water Works, the puddle was of very considerable thickness, and
it would appear rightly so. This practice does not seem to have been
followed in many cases, as, for instance, again referring to the Dale
Dyke dam, Fig. 2, where the thickness of the top was only 4 ft., with a
batter of 1 in 16 downward, giving a thickness of 16 ft. at the base. For
a dam 95 ft. in height this is very light, compared with that of the
Vehui dam at Bombay, of which the engineer was Mr. Conybeare--Fig.
7--where the puddle wall is 10 ft. wide at the top, with a batter
downward of 1 in 8, the Bann reservoir--Fig. 8--of Mr. Bateman's design,
where the puddle is 8 ft. broad at the top, and other instances. The same
dimension was adopted for the puddle wall of the Harelaw reservoir, at
Paisley, by Mr. Alexander Leslie, an engineer of considerable experience
in dam construction.

There appears to be a question as to what the composition of puddle
should be, some advocating a considerable admixture of gravel with clay.
There is no doubt that clay intended for puddle should be exposed to the
weather for as long previous to use as possible, and subject to the
action of the air at any rate, of sunshine if there be any, or of frost.
When deposited in the trench, it should be spread in layers of not more
than 6 in. in thickness, cut transversely in both directions, thoroughly
watered, and worked by stamping.

The position of the puddle wall is, as a rule, in the center of the bank
and vertical; but laying a thickness of puddle upon the inner or up
stream slope, say 3 ft. thick, protected by a layer of gravel and
pitching, has been advocated as preventing any portion of the dam from
becoming saturated. There are, however, evident objections to this
method, as the puddle being comparatively unprotected would be more
liable to damage by vermin, such as water rats, etc.; and in case of the
earthwork dam at the back settling, as would certainly be the case,
unless its construction extended over a very lengthened period, the
puddle would be almost certain to become fissured and leaky; in addition,
the comparative amounts of puddle used in this manner, as compared with
the vertical wall, would be so much increased. With the puddle wall in
the position usually adopted, unequal settlement of the bank on either
side is less liable to affect the puddle, being vertical.

It would be interesting to refer to the embankment of the Bann, or Lough
Island Reavy reservoir, Fig. 8, designed by Mr. Bateman, now nearly fifty
years ago, where a layer of peat was adopted both on the slope, 15 in.
thick, and in front or on the up stream side of the puddle wall, 3 ft.
thick. The object was, that should the puddle become fissured and leaky,
the draught so created would carry with it particles of peat, which would
choke up the cracks and so reduce the leakage that the alluvial matter
would gradually settle over it and close it up. On the same diagram will
be noticed curved lines, which are intended to delineate the way in which
the earthwork of the embankment was made up. The layers were 3 ft. in
thickness, laid in the curved layers as indicated.

It is a moot question whether, in making an earthwork embankment,
dependence, as far as stanchness is concerned, should be placed upon the
puddle wall alone or upon the embankments on either side, and especially
upon the up-stream side in addition. Supposing the former idea prevails,
then it can be of little moment as to how or of what material the bank on
either side is made up--whether of earth or stone--placed in thin layers
or tipped in banks of 3 ft. or 4 ft. high; but the opinion of the
majority of engineers seems to be in favor of making the banks act not
merely as buttresses to the puddle wall, and throwing the whole onus, as
it may be termed, of stanchness upon that, but also sharing the
responsibility and lessening the chances of rupture thereby. But to
insure this, the material must be of the very best description for the
purpose. Stones, if allowed at all--and in the author's opinion they
should not be--should be small, few, and far between. Let those that are
sifted out be thrown into the tail of the down stream slope. They will do
no harm there, but the layers of earth must not approach 3 ft. in
thickness nor 1 ft.--the maximum should be six in., and this applies also
to the puddle. Let the soil be brought on by say one-horse carts, spread
in six inch layers, and well watered. The traffic of the carts will
consolidate it, and in places where carts cannot traverse it should be
punned. In the Parvy reservoir dam a roller was employed for this
purpose. It comprised a small lorry body holding about a yard and a half
of stone, with two axles, on each of which was keyed a row of five or six
wheels.

At the Oued Meurad dam, in Algeria, 95 ft. high, constructed about 23
years ago, the earthwork layers were deposited normal to the outer slope,
and as the bank was carried up the water was admitted and allowed to rise
to near the temporary crest, and as soon as the bank had settled, the
earthwork continued another grade, and the same process repeated.

It was the practice until comparatively recently to make the discharge
outlet by laying pipes in a trench under the dam, generally at the lowest
point in the valley, or constructing a culvert in the same position and
carrying the pipes through this, and in the earlier works the valves or
sluices regulating the outflow were placed at the tail of the down stream
bank, the pipes under the bank being consequently at all times subject to
the pressure of the full head of the water in the reservoir. An instance
of the first mentioned method is afforded by the Dale Dyke reservoir,
Fig. 2, where two lines of pipes of 18 in. diameter were laid in a trench
excavated in the rock and resting upon a bed of puddle 12 in. in
thickness, and surrounded by puddle; the pipes were of cast iron, of the
spigot and faucet type, probably yarned and leaded at the joints as
usual, and the sluice valves were situated at the outer end of the pipes.
As the failure of this embankment was, as we all know, productive of such
terrible consequences, it may be of interest to enter a little more fully
into the details of its construction. It was situated at Bradfield, six
or seven miles from Sheffield, and at several hundred feet higher level.
Its construction was commenced in 1858, the puddle trench was probably
taken down to a depth of 40 ft. to 50 ft., a considerable amount of water
being encountered. This trench was 15 ft. to 20 ft. broad at the top, and
of course had to be crossed by the before mentioned line of pipes; and
although the trench was filled with puddle, and the gullet cut in the
rock already mentioned for carrying the pipes under the site of the dam
was "padded" with a layer of 12 in. of puddle, we can imagine that the
effect of the weight of the puddle wall and bank upon this line of pipes
would be very different at the point where they crossed the puddle trench
to what it would be where they were laid in the rock gullet and partially
protected from pressure by the sides of the latter. At the trench
crossing there would be a bed of puddle 50 ft. in thickness beneath the
pipe, in the gullet a bed of 1 ft. in thickness. So much as regards the
laying of the pipes.

The embankment had scarcely been completed when, on March 11, 1864, a
storm of rain came on and nearly filled it up to the by-wash, when the
bank began slowly to subside. The engineer was on the crest at the very
time, and remained until the water was running over his boots; he then
rushed down the other slope and was snatched out of the way as the bank
burst, and the whole body of water, about 250,000,000 gallons, rushed out
through the trench, carrying with it in the course of about twenty
minutes 92,000 cubic yards, or say one fourth of the total mass of
earthwork, causing the death of 250 human beings, not to mention cattle,
and destruction of factories, dwellings, and bridges, denuding the rock
of its surface soil, and, as it were, obliterating all the landmarks in
its course. The greatest depth of the bank from ground level to crest was
95 ft., the top width 12 ft., and the slopes, both on the up stream and
down stream sides, 21/2 to 1, and the area of the reservoir 78 acres.

Mr.--now Sir Robert--Rawlinson, together with Mr. Beadmore, were called
in to make a report, to lay before Parliament, upon this disaster; and
having made a careful examination of the ruins, and taken evidence, they
were of opinion that the mode of laying the pipes, and in such an
unprotected way, was faulty, and that subsidence of the pipes probably
occurred at the crossing of the puddle trench. A fissure in the puddle
was created, affording a creep for the water, which, once set up, would
rapidly increase the breach by scour; and this event was favored by the
manner in which the bank had been constructed and the unsuitability of
the material used, which, in the words of one engineer, had more the
appearance of a quarry tip than of a bank intended to store water. This
opinion of the cause of failure was, however, not adopted universally by
engineers, the line of pipes when examined being found to be, although
disjointed, fairly in line; and there having occurred a land slip in the
immediate neighborhood, it was suggested that the rupture might be caused
by a slip also having taken place here, especially as the substratum was
of flagstone rock tilted at a considerable angle. The formation was
millstone grit. This catastrophe induced an examination to be made of
other storage reservoir dams in the same district, and a report on the
subject was presented to Parliament by Sir Robert Rawlinson.

[Illustration: TYPICAL MASONRY AND EARTHWORK DAMS OF THE WORLD.]

The dam of Stubden reservoir, of the Bradford water supply, also on the
millstone grit, was constructed about 1859, and caused considerable
anxiety for a length of time, as leakage occurred in the culvert carrying
the pipes, under the embankment at a point a short distance on the down
stream side of the puddle trench. This was repaired to some extent by
lining with cast iron plates; and an entirely independent outlet was made
by driving a curved tunnel into the hill side clear of the ends of the
dam and lining it with cast iron plates. In this tunnel was then laid the
main of 2 ft. diameter, and as the original culvert again became leaky,
the water had to be lowered, the old masonry pulled out, and the space
filled in with puddle.

The Leeming compensation reservoir of the same water supply, with a dam
of 50 ft. in height, and culvert outlet, had to be treated somewhat in
the same manner, as, although the reservoir had never been filled with
water, in 1875, when it was examined previous to filling, it was found
that the culvert was cracked in all directions; and it was deemed best to
fill it up with Portland cement concrete, and drive a tunnel outlet
through the hill side, as described in the case of the Stubden reservoir.
The Leeshaw dam, which was being constructed at that time upon the same
lines, viz., with culvert outlet under the dam, was, at the advice of Sir
Robert Rawlinson, altered to a side tunnel outlet clear of the dam.

Some years previous to the failure of the Dale Dyke reservoir there
occurred, in 1852, a failure of a similar character--though, as far as
the author is aware, unattended by such disastrous results--at the
Bilberry reservoir at Holmfirth, near Huddersfield, which had never been
filled previous to the day of its failure, and arose from the dam having
sunk, and being allowed to remain at a level actually below that of the
by-wash; so that when the storm occurred, the dam was topped and
destroyed. An after examination proved that the bank was badly
constructed and the foundation imperfect.

Besides the above instances, there have been numerous failures within
recent times of earthwork dams in Spain, the United States, Algeria, and
elsewhere, such as that which occurred at Estrecho de Rientes, near
Lorca, in Murcia, where a dam 150 ft. high, the construction of which for
irrigation purposes was commenced in 1755 and completed in 1789, was
filled for the first time in February, 1802, and two months later gave
way, destroying part of the town of Lorca and devastating a large tract
of the most fertile country, and causing the death of 600 people. The
immediate cause of failure in this case the author has been unable to
ascertain. In Algeria the Sig and Tlelat dams were destroyed in 1865; and
in the United States of America, at Williamsburg, Hampshire Co.,
Massachusetts, in 1874, an earthwork dam gave way, by which 159 lives
were lost and much damage done to property. In another case, viz., that
of the Worcester dam, in the United States of America--impounding a
volume of 663,330,000 gallons, and 41 ft. high, 50 ft. broad at the
crest, and formed with a center wall of masonry, with earthwork on each
side--which gave way in 1875, four years after its completion; here, as
in almost all other instances of failure, the leakage commenced at a
point where the pipes traverse the dam. In this case they were carried in
a masonry culvert, and the leak started at about 20 ft. on the up stream
side of the central wall. The opinion of Mr. McAlpine as to the cause of
failure, which agrees with that of the most eminent of our own water
engineers, was to the effect that "earthen dams rarely fail from any
fault in the artificial earthwork, and seldom from any defect in the
natural soil. The latter may leak, but not so as to endanger the dam. In
nine tenths of the cases, the dam is breached along the line of the water
outlet passages."

The method of forming the discharge outlet by the construction of a
masonry culvert in the open has no doubt many advantages over that of
tunnel driving through the hill side clear of the dam, permitting as it
does of an easy inspection and control of the work as it proceeds; but a
slight leakage in the instance of a side tunnel probably means nothing
more than the waste of so much water, whereas in the case of the culvert
traversing the site of the bank, the same amount or less imperils the
stability of the bank, and in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred would,
if not attended to, sooner or later be the cause of its destruction. I
think the majority will therefore agree that the method of discharge
outlets under the site of embankments should not be tolerated where it is
possible to make an outlet in the flank of the hill, to one side, and
altogether clear of the dam.

At Fig. 9 is a diagram of the Roundwood dam of the Vartry Water Works,
supplying Dublin, which is a fair specimen of the class of earthwork dam
with the outlet pipes carried in a culvert under the embankment, and
which, perhaps, is one of the most favorable specimens of this method of
construction, as the inlet valves are on the up stream of the dam, and
consequently when necessary the water can be cut off from the length of
pipes traversing the dam. A short description will be given. This dam is
66 ft. high at the deepest point and 28 ft. wide at the crest, having to
carry a public road. The slope on the inner face is 3 to 1, and on the
outer 21/2 to 1. The by-wash is 6 ft. below the crest, which is about the
average difference. The storage capacity of the reservoir is
2,400,000,000 gallons, or sufficient for 200 days' supply to the city.
The puddle wall is 6 ft. wide at the top and 18 ft. at ground level, the
bottom of the puddle trench about 40 ft. below the surface of the ground.
The culvert was formed by cutting a gullet 14 ft. wide with nearly
vertical sides through the rock, and covering it with a semicircular arch
4 ft. in thickness. Through this tunnel are laid a 33 in. and 48 in.
main; the former for the water supply, and the latter for scouring or for
emptying the reservoir on an emergency. There is a plugging of brickwork
in cement under the center of the dam in the line of the puddle wall, and
then stop walls built at the end of the plugging, projecting 25 ft.
beyond the sides of the culvert and 8 ft. above, the space between them
being filled up with cement concrete tied into the rock, and on this the
puddle wall rests. This bank, like almost all others pierced by outlet
pipes or culverts, was not destined to be perfect. In 1867, four years
after the completion, spurts of water showed themselves in the culvert
in front of the puddle wall, which began to settle, and the water had to
be drawn off to admit of repairs. Diagram No. 10 shows a structure of a
different character to any of these already described. This character of
work is adopted on the North Poudre Irrigation Canal, in N.E. Colorado.
Timber is there plentiful, and a dam of this character can be rapidly
constructed, although probably not very durable, owing to liability to
decay of timber. That represented is about 25 ft. high.

The author has now concluded the consideration of earthwork dams, and
proposes making a few remarks upon those of masonry or concrete, with
reference to some of the most important, as shown on the diagrams. Their
stability, unlike those of earthwork, may be considerably increased where
the contour and nature of the ground is favorable by being curved in
plan, convex toward the water, and with a suitable radius. They are
