of the visible spots, or clouds, lie at a greater elevation than others,
and it has been observed that the deeper ones move more rapidly. This
fact has led some observers to conclude that the deep-lying spots may be
a part of the actual surface of the planet. But if we could think that
there is any solid nucleus, or core, in the body of Jupiter, it would
seem, on account of the slight mean density of the planet, that it can
not lie so near the visible surface, but must be at a depth of
thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, of miles. Since the telescope is
unable to penetrate the cloudy envelope we can only guess at the actual
constitution of the interior of Jupiter's globe. In a spirit of mere
speculative curiosity it has been suggested that deep under the clouds
of the great planet there may be a comparatively small solid globe, even
a habitable world, closed round by a firmament all its own, whose vault,
raised 30,000 or 40,000 miles above the surface of the imprisoned
planet, appears only an unbroken dome, too distant to reveal its real
nature to watchers below, except, perhaps, under telescopic scrutiny;
enclosing, as in a shell, a transparent atmosphere, and deriving its
illumination partly from the sunlight that may filter through, but
mainly from some luminous source within.

But is not Jupiter almost equally fascinating to the imagination, if we
dismiss all attempts to picture a humanly impossible world shut up
within it, and turn rather to consider what its future may be, guided by
the not unreasonable hypothesis that, because of its immense size and
mass, it is still in a chaotic condition? Mention has been made of the
resemblance of Jupiter to the sun by virtue of their similar manner of
rotation. This is not the only reason for looking upon Jupiter as being,
in some respects, almost as much a solar as a planetary body. Its
exceptional brightness rather favors the view that a small part of the
light by which it shines comes from its own incandescence. In size and
mass it is half-way between the earth and the sun. Jupiter is eleven
times greater than the earth in diameter and thirteen hundred times
greater in volume; the sun is ten times greater than Jupiter in diameter
and a thousand times greater in volume. The mean density of Jupiter, as
we have seen, is almost exactly the same as the sun's.

Now, the history of the solar system, according to the nebular
hypothesis, is a history of cooling and condensation. The sun, a
thousand times larger than Jupiter, has not yet sufficiently cooled and
contracted to become incrusted, except with a shell of incandescent
metallic clouds; Jupiter, a thousand times smaller than the sun, has
cooled and contracted until it is but slightly, if at all, incandescent
at its surface, while its thickening shell, although still composed of
vapor and smoke, and still probably hot, has grown so dense that it
entirely cuts off the luminous radiation from within; the earth, to
carry the comparison one step further, being more than a thousand times
smaller than Jupiter, has progressed so far in the process of cooling
that its original shell of vapor has given place to one of solid rock.

A sudden outburst of light from Jupiter, such as occurs occasionally in
a star that is losing its radiance through the condensation of
absorbing vapors around it, would furnish strong corroboration of the
theory that Jupiter is really an extinguished sun which is now on the
way to become a planet in the terrestrial sense.

Not very long ago, as time is reckoned in astronomy, our sun, viewed
from the distance of the nearer fixed stars, may have appeared as a
binary star, the brighter component of the pair being the sun itself and
the fainter one the body now called the planet Jupiter. Supposing the
latter to have had the same intrinsic brilliance, surface for surface,
as the sun, it would have radiated one hundred times less light than the
sun. A difference of one hundredfold between the light of two stars
means that they are six magnitudes apart; or, in other words, from a
point in space where the sun appeared as bright as what we call a
first-magnitude star, its companion, Jupiter, would have shone as a
sixth-magnitude star. Many stars have companions proportionally much
fainter than that. The companion of Sirius, for instance, is at least
ten thousand times less bright than its great comrade.

Looking at Jupiter in this way, it interests us not as the probable
abode of intelligent life, but as a world in the making, a world,
moreover, which, when it is completed--if it ever shall be after the
terrestrial pattern--will dwarf our globe into insignificance. That
stupendous miracle of world-making which is dimly painted in the grand
figures employed by the writers of Genesis, and the composers of other
cosmogonic legends, is here actually going on before our eyes. The
telescope shows us in the cloudy face of Jupiter the moving of the
spirit upon the face of the great deep. What the final result will be we
can not tell, but clearly the end of the grand processes there in
operation has not yet been reached.

The interesting suggestion was made and urged by Mr. Proctor that if
Jupiter itself is in no condition at present to bear life, its
satellites may be, in that respect, more happily circumstanced. It can
not be said that very much has been learned about the satellites of
Jupiter since Proctor's day, and his suggestion is no less and no more
probable now than it was when first offered.

There has been cumulative evidence that Jupiter's satellites obey the
same law that governs the rotation of our moon, viz., that which compels
them always to keep the same face turned toward their primary, and this
would clearly affect, although it might not preclude, their
habitability. With the exception of the minute fifth satellite
discovered by Barnard in 1892, they are all of sufficient size to retain
at least some traces of an atmosphere. In fact, one of them is larger
than the planet Mars, and another is of nearly the same size as that
planet, while the smallest of the four principal ones is about equal to
our moon. Under the powerful attraction of Jupiter they travel rapidly,
and viewed from the surface of that planet they would offer a wonderful
spectacle.

They are continually causing solar eclipses and themselves undergoing
eclipse in Jupiter's shadow, and their swiftly changing aspects and
groupings would be watched by an astronomer on Jupiter with undying
interest.

But far more wonderful would be the spectacle presented by Jupiter to
inhabitants dwelling on his moons. From the nearer moon, in particular,
which is situated less than 220,000 miles from Jupiter's surface, the
great planet would be an overwhelming phenomenon in the sky.

Its immense disk, hanging overhead, would cover a circle of the
firmament twenty degrees in diameter, or, in round numbers, forty times
the diameter of the full moon as seen from the earth! It would shed a
great amount of light and heat, and thus would more or less effectively
supply the deficit of solar radiation, for we must remember that Jupiter
and his satellites receive from the sun less than one twenty-fifth as
much light and heat as the earth receives.

The maze of contending motions, the rapid flow and eddying of cloud
belts, the outburst of strange fiery spots, the display of rich, varied,
and constantly changing colors, which astonish and delight the
telescopic observer on the earth, would be exhibited to the naked eye of
an inhabitant of Jupiter's nearest moon far more clearly than the
greatest telescope is able to reveal them to us.

Here, again, the mind is carried back to long past ages in the history
of the planet on which we dwell. It is believed by some that our moon
may have contained inhabitants when the earth was still hot and glowing,
as Jupiter appears to be now, and that, as the earth cooled and became
habitable, the moon gradually parted with its atmosphere and water so
that its living races perished almost coincidently with the beginning of
life on the earth. If we accept this view and apply it to the case of
Jupiter we may conclude that when that enormous globe has cooled and
settled down to a possibly habitable condition, its four attendant moons
will suffer the fate that overtook the earth's satellite, and in their
turn become barren and death-stricken, while the great orb that once
nurtured them with its light and heat receives the Promethean fire and
begins to bloom with life.




CHAPTER VII

SATURN, A PRODIGY AMONG PLANETS


One of the first things that persons unaccustomed to astronomical
observations ask to see when they have an opportunity to look through a
telescope is the planet Saturn. Many telescopic views in the heavens
disappoint the beginner, but that of Saturn does not. Even though the
planet may not look as large as he expects to see it from what he has
been told of the magnifying power employed, the untrained observer is
sure to be greatly impressed by the wonderful rings, suspended around it
as if by a miracle. No previous inspection of pictures of these rings
can rob them of their effect upon the eye and the mind. They are
overwhelming in their inimitable singularity, and they leave every
spectator truly amazed. Sir John Herschel has remarked that they have
the appearance of an "elaborately artificial mechanism." They have even
been regarded as habitable bodies! What we are to think of that
proposition we shall see when we come to consider their composition and
probable origin. In the meantime let us recall the main facts of
Saturn's dimensions and situation in the solar system.

Saturn is the second of the major, or Jovian, group of planets, and is
situated at a mean distance from the sun of 886,000,000 miles. We need
not consider the eccentricity of its orbit, which, although relatively
not very great, produces a variation of 50,000,000 miles in its distance
from the sun, because, at its immense mean distance, this change would
not be of much importance with regard to the planet's habitability or
non-habitability. Under the most favorable conditions Saturn can never
be nearer than 744,000,000 miles to the earth, or eight times the sun's
distance from us. It receives from the sun about one ninetieth of the
light and heat that we get.

[Illustration: SATURN IN ITS THREE PRINCIPAL PHASES AS SEEN FROM THE
EARTH. From a drawing by Bond.]

Saturn takes twenty-nine and a half years to complete a journey about
the sun. Like Jupiter, it rotates very rapidly on its axis, the period
being ten hours and fourteen minutes. Its axis of rotation is inclined
not far from the same angle as that of the earth's axis (26 deg.
49 min.), so that its seasons should resemble ours, although their
alternations are extremely slow in consequence of the enormous length
of Saturn's year.

Not including the rings in the calculation, Saturn exceeds the earth in
size 760 times. The addition of the rings would not, however, greatly
alter the result of the comparison, because, although the total surface
of the rings, counting both faces, exceeds the earth's surface about 160
times, their volume, owing to their surprising thinness, is only about
six times the volume of the earth, and their mass, in consequence of
their slight density, is very much less than the earth's, perhaps,
indeed, inappreciable in comparison.

Saturn's mean diameter is 73,000 miles, and its polar compression is
even greater than that of Jupiter, a difference of 7,000 miles--almost
comparable with the entire diameter of the earth--existing between its
equatorial and its polar diameter, the former being 75,000 and the
latter 68,000 miles.

We found the density of Jupiter astonishingly slight, but that of Saturn
is slighter still. Jupiter would sink if thrown into water, but Saturn
would actually float, if not "like a cork," yet quite as buoyantly as
many kinds of wood, for its mean density is only three quarters that of
water, or one eighth of the earth's. In fact, there is no known planet
whose density is so slight as Saturn's. Thus it happens that,
notwithstanding its vast size and mass, the force of gravity upon Saturn
is nearly the same as upon our globe. Upon visiting Venus we should find
ourselves weighing a little less than at home, and upon visiting Saturn
a little more, but in neither case would the difference be very
important. If the relative weight of bodies on the surfaces of planets
formed the sole test of their habitability, Venus and Saturn would both
rank with the earth as suitable abodes for men.

But the exceedingly slight density of Saturn seems to be most reasonably
accounted for on the supposition that, like Jupiter, it is in a vaporous
condition, still very hot within--although but slightly, if at all,
incandescent at the surface--and, therefore, unsuited to contain life.
It is hardly worth while to speculate about any solid nucleus within,
because, even if such a thing were possible, or probable, it must lie
forever hidden from our eyes. But if we accept the theory that Saturn is
in an early formative stage, and that, millions of years hence, it may
become an incrusted and habitable globe, we shall, at least, follow the
analogy of what we believe to have been the history of the earth, except
that Saturn's immense distance from the sun will always prevent it from
receiving an amount of solar radiation consistent with our ideas of what
is required by a living world. Of course, since one can imagine what he
chooses, it is possible to suppose inhabitants suited to existence in a
world composed only of whirling clouds, and a poet with the imagination
of a Milton might give us very imposing and stirring images of such
creatures and their chaotic surroundings, but fancies like these can
have no basis in human experience, and consequently can make no claim
upon scientific recognition.

Or, as an alternative, it might be assumed that Saturn is composed of
lighter elements and materials than those which constitute the earth and
the other solid planets in the more immediate neighborhood of the sun.
But such an assumption would put us entirely at sea as regards the forms
of organic life that could exist upon a planet of that description, and,
like Sir Humphry Davy in the Vision, that occupies the first chapter of
his quaintly charming Consolations in Travel, or, the Last Days of a
Philosopher, we should be thrown entirely upon the resources of the
imagination in representing to ourselves the nature and appearance of
its inhabitants. Yet minds of unquestioned power and sincerity have in
all ages found pleasure and even profit in such exercises, and with
every fresh discovery arises a new flight of fancies like butterflies
from a roadside pool. As affording a glimpse into the mind of a
remarkable man, as well as a proof of the fascination of such subjects,
it will be interesting to quote from the book just mentioned Davy's
description of his imaginary inhabitants of Saturn:

"I saw below me a surface infinitely diversified, something like that of
an immense glacier covered with large columnar masses, which appeared as
if formed of glass, and from which were suspended rounded forms of
various sizes which, if they had not been transparent, I might have
supposed to be fruit. From what appeared to me to be analogous to
bright-blue ice, streams of the richest tint of rose color or purple
burst forth and flowed into basins, forming lakes or seas of the same
color. Looking through the atmosphere toward the heavens, I saw
brilliant opaque clouds, of an azure color, that reflected the light of
the sun, which had to my eyes an entirely new aspect and appeared
smaller, as if seen through a dense blue mist.

"I saw moving on the surface below me immense masses, the forms of which
I find it impossible to describe. They had systems for locomotion
similar to those of the morse, or sea-horse, but I saw, with great
surprise, that they moved from place to place by six extremely thin
membranes, which they used as wings. Their colors were varied and
beautiful, but principally azure and rose color. I saw numerous
convolutions of tubes, more analogous to the trunk of the elephant than
to anything else I can imagine, occupying what I supposed to be the
upper parts of the body. It was with a species of terror that I saw one
of them mounting upward, apparently flying toward those opaque clouds
which I have before mentioned.

"'I know what your feelings are,' said the Genius; 'you want analogies,
and all the elements of knowledge to comprehend the scene before you.
You are in the same state in which a fly would be whose microscopic eye
was changed for one similar to that of man, and you are wholly unable to
associate what you now see with your former knowledge. But those beings
who are before you, and who appear to you almost as imperfect in their
functions as the zoophytes of the polar sea, to which they are not
unlike in their apparent organization to your eyes, have a sphere of
sensibility and intellectual enjoyment far superior to that of the
inhabitants of your earth. Each of those tubes, which appears like the
trunk of an elephant, is an organ of peculiar motion or sensation. They
have many modes of perception of which you are wholly ignorant, at the
same time that their sphere of vision is infinitely more extended than
yours, and their organs of touch far more perfect and exquisite.'"

After descanting upon the advantages of Saturn's position for surveying
some of the phenomena of the solar system and of outer space, and the
consequent immense advances that the Saturnians have made in
astronomical knowledge, the Genius continues:

"'If I were to show you the different parts of the surface of this
planet you would see the marvelous results of the powers possessed by
these highly intellectual beings, and of the wonderful manner in which
they have applied and modified matter. Those columnar masses, which seem
to you as if rising out of a mass of ice below, are results of art, and
processes are going on within them connected with the formation and
perfection of their food. The brilliant-colored fluids are the results
of such operations as on the earth would be performed in your
