sudden wreckage around us.

"Anita! Run!"

If I were seen with her, then her own disguise would probably be
discovered. That above everything, would be disaster.

"Anita, get away from me! I must try it alone!"

I could hide somewhere, repair the cloak perhaps. Or, since now I was
armed, why could not I boldly start an assault?

"Gregg, we must get you back to your cubby!" She was clinging to me in
panic.

"No. You run! Get away from me! Don't you understand? George Prince
has no business here with me! They'll kill you!"

"Gregg, let's get back to the deck."

I pushed at her, both of us in confusion.

From behind me there came a shout. That accursed steward! He had
returned, to investigate perhaps what George Prince was doing in this
corridor. He heard our voices. His shout in the silence of the ship
sounded horribly loud. The white-cloaked shape of him was in the
nearby doorway. He stood stricken with surprise at seeing me. And then
turned to run.

I fired my paralyzing cylinder through my cloak. Got him! He fell. I
shoved Anita violently.

"Run! Tell Miko to come--tell him you heard a shout. He won't suspect
you!"

"But, Gregg--"

"You mustn't be found out. You're our only hope, Anita! I'll hide, fix
the cloak, or get back to my cubby. We'll try again."

It decided her. She scurried down the corridor. I whirled the other
way. The steward's shout might not have been heard.

Then realization flashed to me. That steward would be revived. He was
one of Miko's men. He would be revived and tell what he had seen and
heard. Anita's disguise would be revealed.

A cold-blooded killing, I do protest, went against me. But it was
necessary. I flung myself upon him. I beat his skull with the metal of
my cylinder.

I stood up. My hood had fallen back from my head. I wiped my bloody
hands on my useless cloak. I had smashed the cylinder.

"Haljan!"

Anita's voice! A sharp note of horror and warning. I became aware that
in the corridor, forty feet down its dim length, Miko had appeared
with Anita behind him. His bullet projector was leveled. It spat at
me. But Anita had pulled at his arm.

The explosive report was sharply deafening in the confined space of
the corridor. With a spurt of flame the leaden pellet struck over my
head against the vaulted ceiling.

Miko was struggling with Anita. "Prince, you idiot!"

"Miko, it's Haljan! Don't kill him--"

The turmoil brought members of the crew. From the shadowed oval near
me they came running. I flung the useless cylinder at them. But I was
trapped in the narrow passage.

I might have fought my way out. Or Miko might have shot me. But there
was the danger that, in her horror, Anita would betray herself.

I backed against the wall. "Don't kill me! See, I will not fight!"

I flung up my arms. And the crew, emboldened and courageous under
Miko's gaze, leaped on me and bore me down.

The futile plans of humans! Anita and I had planned so carefully. And
in a few brief minutes of action it had come only to this!




XVII


"So, Gregg Haljan, you are not as loyal as you pretend!"

Miko was livid with suppressed anger. They had stripped the cloak from
me, and flung me back in my cubby. Miko was now confronting me: at the
door Moa stood watching. And Anita was behind her. I sat outwardly
defiant and sullen on my bunk. But I was tense and alert, fearful
still of what Anita's emotion might betray her into doing.

"Not so loyal," Miko repeated. "And a fool!"

"How did he get out of here? Prince, you came in here!"

My heart was wildly thumping. But Anita retorted with a touch of
spirit, "I came to tell him what you commanded. To check Hahn's latest
figures--and to be ready to take the controls when we approached the
asteroid."

"Well, how did he get out?"

"How should I know?" she parried. Little actress! Her spirit helped to
allay my fear. She held her cloak close around her in the fashion they
had come to expect from the George Prince who had just buried his
sister. "How should I know, Miko? I sealed his door."

"But did you?"

"Of course he did," Moa put in.

"Ask your lookouts," Anita said. "They saw me--I waved to them just as
I sealed the door."

I ventured, "I have been taught to open doors." I managed a sly,
lugubrious smile. "I shall not try it again, Miko."

Nothing had been said about my killing of the steward. I thanked my
constellations now that he was dead. "I shall not try it again," I
repeated.

A glance passed between Miko and his sister. Miko said abruptly, "You
seem to realize it is not my purpose to kill you. And you presume upon
it."

"I shall not again." I eyed Moa. She was gazing at me steadily. She
said, "Leave me with him, Miko...." She smiled. "Gregg Haljan, we are
no more than twenty thousand miles from the asteroid now. The
calculations for retarding are now in operation."

It was what had taken Miko below, that and trouble with the
ventilating system, which was soon rectified. But the retarding of the
ship's velocity when nearing a destination required accurate
manipulation. These brigands were fearful of their own skill. That was
obvious. It gave me confidence. I was really needed. They would not
harm me. Except for Miko's impulsive temper, I was in no danger from
them--not now, certainly.

Moa was saying, "I think I may make you understand, Gregg. We have
tremendous riches within our grasp."

"I know it," I said with sudden thought. "But there are many with whom
to divide this treasure...."

Miko caught my intended implication. "By the infernal, this fellow may
have thought he could seize this treasure for himself! Because he is a
navigator!"

Moa said vehemently, "Do not be an idiot, Gregg! You could not do it!
There will be fighting with Grantline!"

My purpose was accomplished. They seemed to see me a willing outlaw
like themselves. As though it were a bond between us.

"Leave me with him," said Moa.

Miko acquiesced. "For a few minutes only." He proffered a heat ray
cylinder but she refused it.

"I am not afraid of him."

Miko swung on me. "Within an hour we will be nearing the atmosphere.
Will you take the controls?"

"Yes."

He set his heavy jaw. His eyes bored into me. "You're a strange
fellow, Haljan. I can't make you out. I am not angry now. Do you
think, when I am deadly serious, that I mean what I say?"

His calm words set a sudden chill over me. I checked my smile.

"Yes," I said.

"Well then, I will tell you this: not for all of Prince's well-meaning
interference, or Moa's liking for you, or my own need of your skill,
will I tolerate more trouble from you. The next time, I will kill you.
Do you believe me?"

"Yes."

"That is all I want to say. You kill my men, and my sister says I must
not hurt you. I am not a child to be ruled by a woman!"

He held his huge fist before my face. "With these fingers I will twist
your neck! Do you believe it?"

"Yes." I did indeed.

He swung on his heel. "Moa wants to try and put sense in your head--I
hope she does it. Bring him to the lounge when you have finished.
Come, Prince, Hahn will need us." He chuckled grimly. "Hahn seems to
fear we will plunge into this asteroid like a wild comet gone suddenly
tangent!"

Anita moved aside to let him through the door. I caught a glimpse of
her set white face as she followed him down the deck. Then Moa's bulk
blocked the doorway. She faced me.

"Sit where you are, Gregg." She turned and closed the door upon us. "I
am not afraid of you. Should I be?"

"No."

She came and sat down beside me. "If you should attempt to leave this
room, the stern lookout has orders to bore you through."

"I have no intention of leaving this room," I retorted. "I do not want
to commit suicide."

"I thought you did. You seem minded in such a fashion. Gregg, why are
you so heedless?"

I said carefully, "This treasure--you are many who will divide it. You
have all these men on the _Planetara_. And in Ferrok-Shahn, others--"

I paused. Would she tell me? Could I make her talk of that other
brigand ship which Miko had said was waiting on Mars? I wondered if he
had been able to signal it. The distance from here to Mars was great;
yet upon other voyages Snap's signals had gotten through. My heart
sank at the thought. Our situation here was desperate enough. The
passengers soon would be cast upon the asteroid: there would be left
only Snap, Anita and myself. We might recapture the ship, but I
doubted it now. My thoughts were turning to our arrival on the Moon.
We three might, perhaps, be able to thwart the attack upon Grantline,
hold the brigands off until help from the Earth might come.

But with another brigand ship, fully manned and armed, coming from
Mars, the condition would be immeasurably worse. Grantline had some
twenty men, and his camp, I knew, would be reasonably fortified. I
knew too, that Johnny Grantline would fight to his last man.

Moa was saying, "I would like to tell you our plans, Gregg."

Her gaze was on my face. Keen eyes, but they were luminous now--an
emotion in them sweeping her. But outwardly she was calm.

"Well, why don't you tell me?" I said. "If I am to help...."

"Gregg, I want you with us. Don't you understand. And we are not many,
really. My brother and I are guiding this affair. With your help, I
would feel differently."

"The ship at Ferrok-Shahn--"

My fears were realized. She said, "I think our signals reached it.
Dean tried and Coniston was checking him."

"You think the ship is coming?"

"Yes."

"Where will it join us?"

"At the Moon. We will be there in thirty hours. Your figures gave
that, did they not?"

"Yes," I said. "And the other ship--how fast is it?"

"Quite fast. In eight days--perhaps nine, it will reach the Moon."

She seemed willing enough to talk. There was indeed, no reason why she
shouldn't: I could not, she naturally felt, turn the knowledge to
account. Certainly my position seemed desperately helpless.

"Manned--" I prompted.

"About forty men."

"And armed? Long range projectors?"

"You ask very avid questions, Gregg!"

"Why should I not? Don't you suppose I'm interested?" I touched her.
"Moa, did it ever occur to you, if once you and Miko trusted me--which
you don't--I might show more interest in joining you?"

The look on her face emboldened me. "Did you ever think of that, Moa?
And some arrangement for my share of this treasure? I am not like
Johnson, to be hired for a hundred pounds of gold leaf."

"Gregg, I will see that you get your share. Riches for you and me."

"I was thinking, Moa--when we land at the Moon tomorrow--where is our
equipment?"

The Moon, with its lack of atmosphere, needed special equipment. I had
never heard Captain Carter mention what apparatus the _Planetara_ was
carrying.

Moa laughed. "We have located air suits and helmets--a variety of
suitable apparatus, Gregg. But we were not foolish enough to leave
Greater New York on this voyage without our own apparatus. My brother
and Coniston and Prince--all of us snipped crates of freight consigned
to Ferrok-Shahn; and Rankin had special baggage marked 'theatrical
apparatus.'"

I understood it now. These brigands had boarded the _Planetara_ with
their own Moon equipment, disguised as freight and personal baggage.
Shipped in bond, to be inspected by the tax officials of Mars.

"It is on board now. We will open it when we leave the asteroid,
Gregg. We are well equipped."

She bent toward me. And suddenly her long, lean fingers were gripping
my shoulders.

"Gregg, look at me!"

I gazed into her eyes. There was passion there; and her voice was
intense.

"Gregg, I told you once a Martian girl goes after what she wants. It
is you I want--"

Not for me to play upon a woman's emotions! "Moa, you flatter me."

"I love you." She held me off, gazing at me. "Gregg--"

I must have smiled. Abruptly she released me.

"So you think it amusing?"

"No. But on Earth--"

"We are not on Earth. Nor am I of the Earth!" She was gauging me
keenly. No note of pleading was in her voice: a stern authority, and
the passion was swinging to anger.

"I am like my brother: I do not understand you, Gregg Haljan. Perhaps
you think you are clever?"

"Perhaps."
