"Got a squeamish stomach, eh, kid?" Loring laughed. He slapped Mason on
the back. "Our little Space Cadet is suddenly worrying about his
friends. The same friends that wanted to send him away to the prison
asteroid."

"Blast the ship if you want," said Roger coldly, "but don't hurt the
crew!"

"Listen, Manning!" snarled Loring. "If the crew gets hurt it ain't my
fault. If they're in the ship, that's tough. If not, then that's O.K.
with me. I ain't sending them any letter telling them I'm going to
blast their ship and then have them come up after me with a space
torpedo!"

Roger didn't answer. He turned away and climbed back to the radar
bridge. Loring followed him up the ladder.

"Don't get any ideas about warning your buddies, Manning, 'cause if you
do, I'll blast you before I blast them!"

"Don't worry," replied Roger. "It's daytime on the other side of Tara
now, where the _Polaris_ is. The crew might be out on a scouting mission
or making observations away from the ship. There's less chance of their
being on the ship. If we're going to do it, let's get it over with!"

"O.K. with me," said Loring. "Take this wagon up toward Alpha Centauri a
little way. Coming out of the sun, they won't see us. We'll use one of
the jet boats to deliver our little present. I'll set the fuse, put the
jet boat on automatic, and aim it right for the _Polaris_."

"All right," agreed Manning reluctantly. He turned to the chart table,
plotted a course, and issued orders to Shinny at the controls and to
Mason on the power deck. Soon the _Space Devil_ was blasting away from
the night side of the planet, heading toward the sun. When they reached
an altitude of a thousand miles above the surface of the planet, Loring
maneuvered the jet boat into position outside the ship and placed the
crude reactant bomb inside. Ready, he gave Roger the signal to make the
run out of the sun toward the _Polaris_. Roger relayed the orders to
Shinny and Mason, and the _Space Devil_ rocketed back toward the planet
again.

Loring, sitting inside the jet boat, waited until they had reached an
altitude of five hundred miles.

"All right, Manning," said Loring, "give me the course!"

Roger calculated the rotational speed of the planet, the _Space Devil's_
altitude, and the speed of the jet boat. He drew a line between the
_Space Devil_ and _Polaris_, checked it on the astro compass, and
reached for the intercom mike. He ran a dry tongue over his lips and
called out the course.

"Course is one forty-three--" He caught himself and stared at the chart.
Suppose Tom or Astro or anyone was near the ship? Even if he missed by
several hundred yards, the bomb would certainly be fatal. If he only
changed the course one degree, at a range of five hundred miles, it
would miss the _Polaris_ by several miles. And Loring wouldn't be able
to see anything because of the dust cloud.

"Course corrected," said Roger. "New course is one forty-two!"

"One forty-two!" repeated Loring.

Roger sat back and waited for the small space craft to blast off from
the ship. In his mind, he saw Loring setting the trigger on the bomb,
adjusting the controls, setting the automatic pilot, and then pressing
the acceleration button. Roger gripped the sides of the chart table and
stared at the radar scanner. A fast-moving blip was streaking across its
surface. Loring had started the jet boat.

His eyes showing his great fear, Roger watched the blip as it sped down
like a maddened hornet toward the _Polaris_ resting on its directional
fins in the green jungle. He could hear the hatch slam closed below as
Loring re-entered the ship, but he continued to watch the rapidly moving
blip.

Suddenly it disappeared, and Roger knew it had reached Tara. He slumped
back in his chair. His eyes were glassy, his ears deaf to the roar of
triumph from below as Loring and Mason, watching the flight of the jet
boat on the control deck teleceiver screen, saw it explode. Roger
couldn't move. He had fired a reactant bomb at Tom and Astro.


"By the craters of Luna," roared Connel, "we've been attacked!"

The four Earthmen, exploring a valley several miles north of the
_Polaris_, had been thrown to the ground when the bomb landed. Connel's
reaction was immediate and decisive.

"Get into the jet boat! All of you! We've got to get back to the
_Polaris_! If our ship is smashed, we'll spend the rest of our lives
fighting this jungle!"

In a matter of seconds the four spacemen were rocketing over the jungle
toward the _Polaris_. Presently they came to an enormous dust cloud that
had mushroomed out over the trees. It was so thick Tom found it
difficult to pilot the small craft.

"Any danger of radioactivity in this dust, sir?" asked Astro.

"Always that possibility, Astro," answered Connel. "We'll know soon
enough!" He flipped on a built-in Geiger counter on the dashboard of the
jet boat, and immediately the cabin was filled with a loud ticking that
warned of danger.

"The count is up to seven fifty, sir," said Astro. "Not enough to bother
you unless you're in it a long time."

"There's the _Polaris_, sir," yelled Tom. "She's still on her
directional fins! They missed her! She's O.K.!"

"By the blessed rings of Saturn, she is!" exclaimed Connel. "Go on, Tom,
give this baby the gun! If we have to die, let's die like spacemen, in
space, fighting with spaceman's weapons, not crawling around here in the
jungle like worms!"

The three boys smiled at their skipper's rousing statement. "This is the
time," thought Tom, "when I'd rather have Major Connel in command than
anyone else in the Solar Guard." If there was to be a fight, then they
certainly had found the man who knew how to do just that! Fight!

[Illustration]

Tom swooped over the treetops recklessly, and fearing the blast had
damaged the jet-boat air lock, brought the small craft to rest in the
blinding dust a few yards away from the _Polaris_.

Three minutes later the four spacemen had separated and were standing by
their respective posts. Hasty but thorough checks were made to determine
the damage, and finding none, they prepared to raise ship.

"All clear forward and up," Alfie reported in a high squeaking voice.

"Energize the cooling pumps," shouted Tom.

Astro had already started the mighty pumps, their vibrations rocking the
ship, and Tom began counting the seconds.

"Stand by to raise ship. Minus
five--four--three--two--one--_zeeroooooo!_"

Paying scant attention to the crush of sudden acceleration, Tom gave the
ship all the power she could take for the climb out of Tara's
atmosphere, and soon they were rocketing through the airless void of
space. Alfie and Connel hurriedly swept the area with the radar scanner
for the attacking intruder.

"There she is!" roared Connel. "There!" He placed a finger on a white
blip on the scanner. "By the craters of Luna, that's an Earth ship!" The
fear of an outer-space invasion by hostile people from another world had
been in the back of his mind, but he had been reluctant to voice his
fears in front of the cadets. "And she's an old one at that!" he
exclaimed. "Not even armed. I know that class vessel. Corbett!" he
shouted.

"Aye, aye, sir," replied Tom.

"Put the ship on automatic flight, attack-approach pattern number three.
Then stand by to send a message to whoever's manning that ship!"

"Aye, aye, sir!" replied Tom. He hurriedly set the delicate device that
would fly the ship in a preplanned course of zigzag maneuvers and opened
the circuits of the teleceivers.

"All set for the message, sir," reported Tom.

"Tell them," said Connel heavily, his voice cold, "whoever they are,
that I'll give them two minutes to surrender. If they don't, I'll blast
them into protons!"

"Very well, sir," said Tom. He turned to the teleceiver and began
twirling the dials.

"Attention! Attention! Rocket cruiser _Polaris_ to spaceship X.
_Polaris_ to spaceship X. You are ordered to surrender within two
minutes or we will attack. By order of Major Connel, Senior Line
Officer, Solar Guard."

He switched the teleceiver for reception and waited. In a moment the
screen blurred and then an image appeared. Tom gasped. It was Roger!

"Tom, Tom," yelled Roger. "Tom, this is me--Roger!"

"Roger! What're you doing out here? How'd you get here?"

"I can't explain now," said Roger. "I--I--"

Tom interrupted him. "Roger, you've been cleared! The investigation of
the crash on the station proved that Loring and Mason are guilty.
They're wanted for the crash and the deaths of Jardine and Bangs!"

"What! You mean--" stammered Roger.

"Yes. Loring and Mason did the whole thing!" supplied Tom.

"Look, Tom," pleaded Roger, "give me ten minutes. Don't fire for ten
minutes! I'm going to try an idea. If I'm not successful, then open up
and blast us back to Mars!"

"Roger, wait!" shouted Tom. "What's going on? What're you doing on that
ship?"

"I can't talk now," answered Roger. "Loring and Mason are on the ship
with me. Remember--ten minutes--and if I don't contact you, then open
fire!"




CHAPTER 13


Roger flipped off the teleceiver. He stared at the darkened screen and
began estimating the chances of success for a plan he had in mind.
Deciding that, regardless of what happened, he had to take over the
ship, he got up and turned toward the hatch and the gun locker. He
stopped cold. Loring stood framed in the doorway, a paralo-ray gun in
each hand.

"Just stand right where you are, spaceboy!" snapped Loring. "You want
ten minutes, huh? Ten minutes for what? I thought there was something
funny going on when we missed the _Polaris_ with that bomb!"

"You knew all along I didn't have anything to do with that crash back on
the station, didn't you?" shouted Roger. His eyes blazed angrily.

"Yeah. So what?" growled Loring. "Hey, Mason," he yelled over his
shoulder, "get up here in a hurry! We gotta work fast!"

"What are you going to do?" asked Roger.

"You're still valuable to us, Manning," said Loring with a crooked grin.
"You're going to ensure our getting what we came after!"

Mason stepped through the door. "Yeah, Loring?"

Loring quickly told him of Roger's attempt to work with Connel.

"Take our spaceboy down below and lock him in a storage compartment." He
handed over one of the paralo-ray guns, and Mason shoved the muzzle into
Roger's stomach.

"Get moving, Manning!" he snarled. "I'd like nothing better than to let
you have it right now!"

Roger smiled, knowing Mason still harbored a grudge for the beating he
had taken earlier on the trip.

"When you have him locked up, get back on the control deck," said
Loring. "We're going to do some old-fashioned bargaining with
'Blast-off' Connel!"

"Bargaining?" exclaimed Roger.

"Yeah! One slightly used Space Cadet for what we came after--the copper
satellite!"

"Connel won't bargain," said Roger. "Not for me, not for anything. You
don't know him!"

"I know this, Manning!" said Loring. "I'm going to get on the teleceiver
and tell Connel that if he doesn't blast away from here _right now_,
you're a dead Space Cadet!" He jerked his head toward the door. "All
right, take him below and tell Shinny to stand by on the power deck. In
case Connel won't bargain, we'll have to make a run for it!"

"Right," said Mason as he shoved the paralo-ray gun deeper into Roger's
stomach. "Move, Manning!"

Roger climbed down the ladder and through the long passageway of the
_Space Devil_. He passed Shinny on the way down.

"What's going on here?" demanded Shinny, seeing Mason with the
paralo-ray gun.

"We missed with the bomb," said Mason, "and Connel raised ship. He's
ready to blast us if we don't surrender right away. Loring's trying to
make a deal with him."

"What kind of a deal?" asked Shinny.

"Hot-shot Manning for the satellite!"

"He hasn't told you everything, Mr. Shinny," said Roger in his casual
drawl. "They are the ones who caused the crash of the _Annie Jones_ and
the deaths of Jardine and Bangs. They framed me!"

"Then," mused Shinny, "you're cleared?"

"Yeah," growled Mason, "he's cleared! Cleared for a long swim in space
if Connel doesn't do what Loring tells him! Get in there!" Mason shoved
Roger into the cramped storage compartment. He locked the door and
turned to Shinny.

"Loring wants you to stand by the power deck in case Connel won't play
ball. We might have to make a run for it."

"Yeah, yeah," said Shinny, "I'll stand by the power deck."

Mason turned and walked away. Shinny followed him, a curious gleam in
his eyes.

Up on the control deck, Loring was twisting the dials in front of the
teleceiver screen.

"_Space Devil_ to _Polaris_--_Space Devil_ to _Polaris_--come in,
_Polaris_." He twisted another dial and watched the darkened screen
anxiously. After a moment the screen blurred, and Tom's face gradually
came into sharp focus.

"Loring!" gasped Tom. "Where's Roger?"

"Never mind him, you punk!" snarled Loring. "Tell that fatheaded Connel
I wanta talk to him! Make it fast!"

Tom's face disappeared to be replaced by the raging features of Major
Connel. "You murdering space rat!" he roared. "I've given you two
minutes to surrender and, by the craters of Luna, you've only got thirty
seconds left!"

"It'll only take ten seconds to tell you that if you don't get outta
here Cadet Manning gets blasted!"

"What?" roared Connel.

"That's right," snarled Loring. "You're the one that's got thirty
seconds to get out of here, or Manning takes a swim in space!"

"Why, you--" Connel's face was twisted with rage. "You can't threaten
me!"

"I ain't threatening you," said Loring, "_I'm telling you!_ If you don't
get started, you'll never see Manning again. Or if you do, you won't
recognize him! Now make up your mind, Connel!"

The Solar Guard officer hesitated. "Give me two minutes," he said, "and
I'll call you back. Two minutes."

"Two minutes," repeated Loring, "and if I don't hear from you by then,
or if you try any funny stuff, Manning gets it!"

Aboard the _Polaris_, the screen darkened, and Connel, his fists
clenched, turned to Tom.

"We're helpless, Tom," he said softly. "Now that we have proof of
Roger's innocence, I have to do everything in my power to save him."

Tom didn't say anything. Suddenly Connel smashed one huge fist into
another. "But by the blessed rings of Saturn, when I _do_ get my hands
on that Loring, I'll--I'll--" He broke off suddenly and turned back to
the teleceiver. "I'm going to do what he wants, Tom. Roger's life is
worth a dozen like Loring, and we'll have to take a chance that Loring
will keep his word. After all," continued the big officer softly, "our
mission is complete. We've tested the transmitter and found it to be
more than we expected. No real reason why we should stay around here any
longer."

"Yes, sir," stammered Tom. "Sir, I--I--"

Connel waved him silent with his hand. "You don't need to say anything,
Tom. It's just one of those things. Still I can't help wondering what
they came out here for." He turned to the dials on the teleceiver and
began twisting them. "I'll call him, and you stand by to blast out of
here."


