that inventors send models. But the Commissioner may at his discretion
dispense with a model--this can be arranged beforehand.

MUNN & CO. take special care in preparation of drawings and
specifications.

If a case should for any cause be rejected it is investigated
immediately, and the rejection if an improper one set aside.

NO EXTRA CHARGE

is made to clients for this extra service. MUNN & CO. have skillful
experts in attendance to supervise cases and to press them forward
when necessary.

REJECTED CASES.

MUNN & CO. give very special attention to the examination and
prosecution of rejected cases filed by inventors and other attorneys.
In such cases a fee of $5 is required for special examination and
report; and in case of probable success by further prosecution and the
papers are found tolerably well prepared, MUNN & CO. will take up the
case and endeavor to get it through for a reasonable fee to be agreed
upon in advance of prosecution.

CAVEATS

Are desirable if an inventor is not fully prepared to apply for a
Patent. A Caveat affords protection for one year against the issue of
a patent to another for the same invention. Caveat papers should be
carefully prepared.

The Government fee on filing a Caveat is $10, and MUNN & CO.'s charge
for preparing the necessary papers is usually from $10 to $12.

REISSUES.

A patent when discovered to be defective may be reissued by the
surrender of the original patent, and the filing of amended papers.
This proceeding should be taken with great care.

DESIGNS, TRADE-MARKS, & COMPOSITIONS

Can be patented for a term of years, also new medicines or medical
compounds, and useful mixtures of all kinds.

When the invention consists of a medicine or compound, or a new
article of manufacture, or a new composition, samples of the article
must be furnished, neatly put up. There should also be forwarded a
full statement of its ingredients, proportions, mode of preparation,
uses, and merits.

CANADIANS and all other foreigners can now obtain patents upon the
same terms as citizens.

EUROPEAN PATENTS.

MUNN & CO. have solicited a larger number of European Patents than
any other agency. They have agents located at London, Paris, Brussels,
Berlin, and other chief cities. A pamphlet containing a synopsis of
the Foreign Patent Laws sent free.

MUNN & CO. could refer, if necessary, to thousands of patentees who
have had the benefit of their advice and assistance, to many of the
principal business men in this and other cities, and to members of
Congress and prominent citizens throughout the country.

All communications are treated as confidential.

_Address_

MUNN & CO.,
No. 37 Park Row,
_NEW  YORK._

       *       *       *       *       *




RECENT AMERICAN AND FOREIGN PATENTS.

_Under this heading we shall publish weekly notes of some of the more
prominent home and foreign patents._


       *       *       *       *       *


SELF-ACTING SHACKLE AND CAR BRAKE.--Lyman Alphonzo Russell,
Shrewsbury, Vt.--This invention relates to improvements in self-acting
shackles and car brakes, and consists in an improved connection of
the brakes with the shackle, for automatic operation, whereby the
connection may be readily so adjusted that the brakes will not be set
in action as when required to back up the train.

FEED BAGS FOR HORSES.--W. A. Hough, South Butler, N. Y.--This
invention relates to a new and useful improvement in feed bags for
horses, and consists in making the bag self-supplying, by means of
one or more reservoirs, the discharge orifices of which reservoirs are
closed by a valve or valves.

TRUSS.--Adam Hinoult, Montgomery, N. Y.--This invention has for its
object to furnish an improved truss, which shall be so constructed as
to yield freely to the various movements of the body of the wearer,
while holding the rupture securely in place.

GOVERNOR FOR STEAM ENGINES.--Charles A. Conde, Indianapolis,
Ind.--This invention relates to a new method of regulating the
movement of the balls of a steam governor, with a view of adjusting
the same in proportion to the increased or diminished centrifugal
force.

CIRCULAR SAW GUARD.--G. W. Shipman, Ischua, N. Y.--This invention
relates to a new and useful improvement in means for protecting the
operator and others, near running circular saws, from injury, and it
consists in a movable guard, operated by means of the saw carriage, in
such a manner that, during the period of danger (when the saw is not
cutting), the guard covers the saw, and is thrown back from the saw
when the latter is in actual use.

CARPET-CLEANING MACHINE.--J. C. Craft, Baltimore, Md.--This invention
relates to a machine, through which a carpet may be passed, and so
beaten and brushed, during its passage, as to come out of the
machine thoroughly cleansed. The invention consists in the peculiar
construction and arrangement of beaters and brushes for effecting this
result.

COMBINED COTTON AND CORN PLANTER.--L. A. Perrault, Natchez,
Miss.--This invention relates to improvements in machinery for
planting seed, and consists in a combination, in one machine, of a
seed-dropping apparatus, adapted for corn, and another adapted for
cotton, in a manner to utilize one running gear for the two kinds of
seed, and thereby save the expense of separate gear for each.

LIME KILN.--T. A. Kirk, Kansas City, Mo.--This invention has for its
object to furnish an improved lime kiln, which shall be so constructed
as to enable the kiln to be worked from the front, in firing and in
drawing the lime and ashes, which will not allow cold or unburnt rock
to pass through, and which will consume its own smoke.

CAR BRAKE.--S. D. Tripp, Lynn, and Luther Hill, Stoneham, Mass.--This
invention relates to improvements in railroad car brakes, and consists
in an arrangement, on the locomotive or tender, of a steam cylinder
and piston, and the arrangement, on the cars, in connection with the
brakes, of sliding rods, so that the rod of the car next to the
engine or tender, being moved backwards by the piston rod of the above
cylinder, will bring the brakes of the rear wheels down upon them, as
well as the brakes of the tender, and slacken the speed thereby, so
that the rear projecting end of the brake rod will come in contact
with the rod of the next car, and set its brakes in action in like
manner, and so on, throughout the train. The arrangement of the said
brake actuating rods is such that no matter which end of the car is
foremost, the wheels of one track will be acted on by the brakes.

COMBINED RULER, BLOTTER, AND PAPER CUTTER.--Hugh S. Ball,
Spartanburgh, S. C.--This invention relates to a new and useful
improvement in a combined ruler, blotter, and paper cutter, three
articles indispensable for the desk, combined in one.

REED FOR ORGANS AND MELODEONS.--Augustus Newell, Chicago, Ill.--The
object of this invention is to so construct the tongue-butts, or
shanks, of musical reeds, that the same cannot, during the vibratory
motion of the tongues, be raised from their seats.

ANTI-FRICTION COMPOUND.--Victory Purdy, Poughkeepsie, N. Y.--This
invention relates to a new and useful compound for lubricating
railroad car axle journals, and other journal bearings.

       *       *       *       *       *




QUERIES.

[_We present herewith a series of inquiries embracing a variety of
topics of greater or less general interest. The questions are simple,
it is true, but we prefer to elicit practical answers from our
readers, and hope to be able to make this column of inquiries and
answers a popular and useful feature of the paper._]


       *       *       *       *       *


1.--EMERY WHEELS.--Can I make emery wheels similar to those used in
a foot lathe, that will answer for sharpening fine tools, such as
gouges, rounds, and hollows, and if so, how shall I proceed?--F. W.

2.--BOILER FURNACE.--I have two boilers, twenty-four feet long and
four feet in diameter each, with five ten-inch flues. The fire passes
under the boiler, and enters the flues at the back end, passes through
the flues, and enters the smoke stack at the front end. I use hard
pine wood for fuel. Will some of your many readers give me the best
way of constructing the flue under the boiler, from the end of the
grate bars to where it enters the flues at the back end, and also
state the proper distance from the back wall to the end of the
boiler?--N. H.

3.--MEDAL CASTS.--I have some medals which I should like to copy.
Having tried several times, and failed, I thought that I would ask
advice through your query columns. I do not know of what the medals
are manufactured. They are, I suppose, made to imitate bronze. I have
tried casting them in plaster of Paris molds, but have had very poor
success, as the surface of the medals was covered with small holes.
The metal used was lead and antimony, seven to one. I should like to
know, if there be any metal that I can cast them of, and bring out the
bronze color afterwards, or if there be any metal that I can cast them
of, and afterwards color by some solution. Also, of what should I make
my molds?--J. E. M.

4.--REMOVING THE TASTE OF TAR FROM RAIN WATER.--Will some of your
correspondents tell me if rain water, which runs off a gravel roof,
and tastes very strongly of tar, is unhealthy, and if there be
anything that will prevent its tasting, as it is very disagreeable for
cooking purposes?--C. E. H.

5.--SORGHUM MOLASSES.--How can I separate the molasses from the sugar,
in sorghum sugar mush, to make a dry merchantable sugar?

6.--FLUX FOR ALUMINUM.--Will some of your readers tell me, through
your columns, the best flux to use in melting and mixing aluminum and
copper?

       *       *       *       *       *




INVENTIONS PATENTED IN ENGLAND BY AMERICANS.

[Compiled from the Commissioners of Patents' Journal.]

APPLICATIONS FOR LETTERS PATENT.


350.--BREECH-LOADING FIRE-ARMS.--Eli Whitney, New Haven, Conn.
February 10, 1871.

352.--GOVERNOR.--Stilliman B. Allen, ----, Mass. February 10, 1871.

357.--WINDMILL.--A. P. Brown, New York city. February 11, 1871.

332.--FURNITURE CASTERS.--F. A. Gardner and H. S. Turrell, Danbury
Conn. February 8, 1871.

339.--WIRE FABRICS FOR MATTRESSES.--Samuel Rogers, New York city.
February 9, 1871.

340.--SCREW PROPELLER CANAL BOATS.--Thomas Main, Pierpoint, N. Y.
February 9, 1871.

362.--FLYER FOR SPINNING MACHINERY.--Thomas Mayor and Geo. Chatterton,
Providence, R. I. February 14, 1871.

373.--TELEGRAPHIC APPARATUS AND DETECTORS.--W. B. Watkins, Jersey
City, N. J. February 14, 1871.

381.--STEAM AND OTHER SAFETY VALVES.--Walter Dawson Scranton, Pa.
February 15, 1871.

388.--IRON RAILS AND BARS, AND MODES OF MANUFACTURING THE
SAME.--Eldridge Wheeler, Philadelphia, Pa. February 15, 1871.

       *       *       *       *       *




OFFICIAL LIST OF PATENTS.

ISSUED BY THE U. S. PATENT OFFICE.

FOR THE WEEK ENDING MARCH 7, 1871.

_Reported Officially for the Scientific American._


SCHEDULE OF PATENT FEES

On each Caveat                                                   $10
On each Trade-Mark                                               $25
On filing each application for a Patent, (seventeen years)       $15
On issuing each original Patent                                  $20
On appeal to Examiners-in-Chief                                  $10
On appeal to Commissioner of Patents                             $20
On application for Reissue                                       $30
On application for Extension of Patent                           $50
On granting the Extension                                        $50
On filing a Disclaimer                                           $10
On an application for Design (three and a half years)            $10
On an application for Design (seven years)                       $15
On an application for Design (fourteen years)                    $30


_For Copy of Claim of any Patent issued within 30 years_          $1
_A sketch from the model or drawing, relating to such portion of
a machine as the Claim covers, from_                              $1
  _upward, but usually at the price above-named._

_The full Specification of any patent issued since Nov. 20, 1866 at
which time the Patent Office commenced printing them_          $1.25

_Official Copies of Drawings of any patent issued since 1836, we can
supply at a reasonable cost, the price depending upon the amount of
labor involved and the number of views._

_Full information, as to price of drawings, in each case, may be had
by addressing_

MUNN & CO., PATENT SOLICITORS, 37 PARK ROW, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


112,309.--HOSE SPRINKLER.--William Anderson, San Francisco, Cal.

112,310.--LOCOMOTIVE SPARK ARRESTER.--J. G. Armstrong, New Brunswick,
N. J.

112,311.--TOOL FOR CARRIAGE MAKERS' USE.--George Atkinson, San
Francisco, Cal.

112,312.--POTATO PROBE.--John A. Beal, Waterford, N. Y.

112,313.--HINGE FOR CARRIAGE DOORS.--George W. Beers, Bridgeport,
Conn.

112,314.--STOVE LEG.--James Birckhead, Jr., Baltimore, Md.

112,315.--CLOTHES PIN.--Orris A. Bishop, Chicago, Ill.

112,316.--MANUFACTURE OF ROCHELLE SALTS AND BORAX.--V. G. Bloede,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
