"They can't keep this thing up forever," said the officer. "Perhaps the
smoke will clear off after a while, and then we will have a chance."

"Not much hope of that, I am afraid," said the chemist who had originally
spoken. "This smoke could remain floating in the atmosphere for weeks,
and the only wonder to me is how they ever expect to get rid of it, when
they think their enemies have gone and they want some sunshine again."

"All that is mere speculation," said Mr. Edison; "let us get at something
practical. We must do one of two things: either attack them shielded
as they are, or wait until the smoke has cleared away. The only other
alternative, that of plunging blindly down through the curtain, is at
present not to be thought of."

"I am afraid we couldn't stand a very long siege ourselves," suddenly
remarked the chief commissary of the expedition, who was one of the
members of the flagship's company.

"What do you mean by that?" asked Mr. Edison sharply, turning to him.

"Well, sir, you see," said the commissary, stammering, "our provisions
wouldn't hold out."

"Wouldn't hold out?" exclaimed Mr. Edison, in astonishment, "why, we
have compressed and prepared provisions enough to last this squadron
for three years."

"We had, sir, when we left the earth," said the commissary, in apparent
distress, "but I am sorry to say that something has happened."

"Something has happened! Explain yourself!"


Accident to the Stores.

"I don't know what it is, but on inspecting some of the compressed stores,
a short time ago, I found that a large number of them were destroyed,
whether through leakage of air, or what, I am unable to say. I sent
to inquire as to the condition of the stores in the other ships in the
squadron and I found that a similar condition of things prevailed there."

"The fact is," continued the commissary, "we have only provisions enough,
in proper condition, for about ten days' consumption."

"After that we shall have to forage on the country, then," said the
army officer.

"Why did you not report this before?" demanded Mr. Edison.

"Because, sir," was the reply, "the discovery was not made until after we
arrived close to Mars, and since then there has been so much excitement
that I have hardly had time to make an investigation and find out what
the precise condition of affairs is; besides, I thought we should land
upon the planet and then we would be able to renew our supplies."

I closely watched Mr. Edison's expression in order to see how this
most alarming news would affect him. Although he fully comprehended its
fearful significance, he did not lose his self-command.


We Must Act Quickly.

"Well, well," he said, "then it will become necessary for us to act
quickly. Evidently we cannot wait for the smoke to clear off, even
if there were any hope of its clearing. We must get down on Mars now,
having conquered it first if possible, but anyway we must get down there,
in order to avoid starvation."

"It is very lucky," he continued, "that we have ten days' supply left. A
great deal can be done in ten days."

A few hours after this the commander called me aside, and said:

"I have thought it all out. I am going to reconstruct some of our
disintegrators, so as to increase their range and their power. Then I
am going to have some of the astronomers of the expedition locate for
me the most vulnerable points upon the planet, where the population is
densest and a hard blow would have the most effect, and I am going to
pound away at them, through the smoke, and see whether we cannot draw
them out of their shell."


A Plan Arranged.

With his expert assistants Mr. Edison set to work at once to transform
a number of the disintegrators into still more formidable engines of
the same description. One of these new weapons having been distributed
to each of the members of the squadron, the next problem was to decide
where to strike.

When we first examined the surface of the planet it will be remembered
that we had regarded the Lake of the Sun and its environs as being
the very focus of the planet. While it might also be a strong point
of defence, yet an effective blow struck there would go to the enemy's
heart and be more likely to bring the Martians promptly to terms than
anything else.

The first thing, then, was to locate the Lake of the Sun on the
smoke-hidden surface of the planet beneath us. This was a problem that
the astronomers could readily solve.

Fortunately, in the flagship itself there was one of the star-gazing
gentlemen who had made a specialty of the study of Mars. That planet, as I
have already explained, was now in opposition to the earth. The astronomer
had records in his pocket which enabled him, by a brief calculation,
to say just when the Lake of the Sun would be on the meridian of Mars
as seen from the earth. Our chronometers still kept terrestrial time;
we knew the exact number of days and hours that had elapsed since we had
departed, and so it was possible by placing ourselves in a line between
the earth and Mars to be practically in the situation of an astronomer
in his observatory at home.

Then it was only necessary to wait for the hour when the Lake of the Sun
would be upon the meridian of Mars in order to be certain what the true
direction of the latter from the flagship was.

Having thus located the heart of our foe behind its shield of darkness,
we prepared to strike.


The Smoke Must Be Shattered.

"I have ascertained," said Mr. Edison, "the vibration period of the smoke,
so that it will be easy for us to shatter it into invisible atoms. You
will see that every stroke of the disintegrators will open a hole through
the black curtain. If their field of destruction could be made wide
enough, we might in that manner clear away the entire covering of smoke,
but all that we shall really be able to do will be to puncture it with
holes, which will, perhaps, enable us to catch glimpses of the surface
beneath. In that manner we may be able more effectually to concentrate
our fire upon the most vulnerable points."


The Blow--And Its Effect.

Everything being prepared, and the entire squadron having assembled
to watch the effect of the opening blow and be ready to follow it up,
Mr. Edison himself poised one of the new disintegrators, which was too
large to be carried in the hand, and, following the direction indicated
by the calculations of the astronomers, launched the vibratory discharge
into the ocean of blackness beneath.


A Terrible Encounter.

The Martians and Our Warriors Fight a Battle to the Death.

Instantly there opened beneath us a huge well-shaped hole, from which
the black clouds rolled violently back in every direction.

Through this opening we saw the gleam of brilliant lights beneath.

We had made a hit.

"It is the Lake of the Sun!" shouted the astronomer who furnished the
calculation by means of which its position had been discovered.

And, indeed, it was the Lake of the Sun. While the opening in the clouds
made by the discharge was not wide, yet it sufficed to give us a view
of a portion of the curving shore of the lake, which was ablaze with
electric lights.

Whether our shot had done any damage, beyond making the circular opening
in the cloud curtain, we could not tell, for almost immediately the
surrounding black smoke masses billowed in to fill up the hole.

But in the brief glimpse we had caught sight of two or three large air
ships hovering in space above that part of the Lake of the Sun and its
bordering city which we had beheld. It seemed to me in the brief glance
I had that one ship had been touched by the discharge and was wandering
in an erratic manner. But the clouds closed in so rapidly that I not
be certain.


Penetrating the Cloud.

Anyhow, we had demonstrated one thing, and that was that we could
penetrate the cloud shield and reach the Martians in their hiding place.

It had been prearranged that the first discharge from the flagship
should be a signal for the concentration of the fire of all the other
ships upon the same spot.

A little hesitation, however, occurred, and a half a minute had elapsed
before the disintegrators from the other members of the squadron were
got into play.


The Martians' Artificial Day.

Then, suddenly we saw an immense commotion in the cloud beneath us. It
seemed to be beaten and hurled in every direction and punctured like
a sieve with nearly a hundred great circular holes. Through these gaps
we could see clearly a large region of the planet's surface, with many
airships floating above it, and the blaze of innumerable electric lights
illuminating it. The Martians had created an artificial day under the
curtain.

This time there was no question that the blow had been effective. Four
or five of the airships, partially destroyed, tumbled headlong toward
the ground, while even from our great distance there was unmistakable
evidence that fearful execution had been done among the crowded structures
along the shore of the Lake.

As each of our ships possessed but one of the new disintegrators, and
since a minute or so was required to adjust them for a fresh discharge, we
remained for a little while inactive after delivering the blow. Meanwhile
the cloud curtain, though rent to shreds by the concentrated discharge
of the disintegrators, quickly became a uniform black sheet again,
hiding everything.

We had just had time to congratulate ourselves on the successful opening
of our bombardment, and the disintegrator of the flagship was poised
for another discharge, when suddenly out of the black expanse beneath,
quivered immense electric beams, clear cut and straight as bars of steel,
but dazzling our eyes with unendurable brilliance.

It was the reply of the Martians to our attack.


Devastating Our Army.

Three or four of the electrical ships were seriously damaged, and one,
close beside the flagship, changed color, withered and collapsed, with the
same sickening phenomena that had made our hearts shudder when the first
disaster of this kind occurred during our brief battle over the asteroid.

Another score of our comrades were gone, and yet we had hardly begun
the fight.

Glancing at the other ships, which had been injured, I saw that the
damage to them was not so serious, although they were evidently hors de
combat for the present.

Our fighting blood was now boiling and we did not stop long to count
our losses.

"Into the smoke!" was the signal, and the ninety and more electric ships
which still remained in condition for action immediately shot downward.




Chapter XI.


A Dash Into the Smoke.

It was a wild plunge. We kept off the decks while rushing through the
blinding smoke, but the instant we emerged below, where we found ourselves
still a mile above the ground, we were out again, ready to strike.

I have simply a confused recollection of flashing lights beneath, and a
great, dark arch of clouds above, out of which our ships seemed dropping
on all sides, and then the fray burst upon and around us, and no man
could see or notice anything except by half-comprehended glances.

Almost in an instant, it seemed, a swarm of airships surrounded us,
while from what, for lack of a more descriptive name, I shall call
the forts about the Lake of the Sun, leaped tongues of electric fire,
before which some of our ships were driven like bits of flaming paper
in a high wind, gleaming for a moment, then curling up and gone forever!


Never Was Such a Conflict.

It was an awful sight; but the battle fever was raging in us, and we,
on our part, were not idle.

Every man carried a disintegrator, and these hand instruments, together
with those of heavier calibre on the ships poured their resistless
vibrations in every direction through the quivering air.

The airships of the Martians were destroyed by the score, but yet they
flocked upon us thicker and faster.

We dropped lower and our blows fell upon the forts, and upon the
widespread city bordering the Lake of the Sun. We almost entirely
silenced the fire of one of the forts; but there were forty more in full
action within reach of our eyes!

Some of the metallic buildings were partly unroofed by the disintegrators
and some had their walls riddled and fell with thundering crashes, whose
sound rose to our ears above the hellish din of battle. I caught glimpses
of giant forms struggling in the ruins and rushing wildly through the
streets, but there was no time to see anything clearly.


The Flagship Charmed!

Our flagship seemed charmed. A crowd of airships hung upon it like a
swarm of angry bees, and, at times, one could not see for the lightning
strokes--yet we escaped destruction, while ourselves dealing death on
every hand.

It was a glorious fight, but it was not war; no, it was not war. We really
had no more chance of ultimate success amid that multitude of enemies
than a prisoner running the gauntlet in a crowd of savages has of escape.

A conviction of the hopelessness of the contest finally forced itself
upon our minds, and the shattered squadron, which had kept well together
amid the storm of death, was signalled to retreat.

Shaking off their pursuers, as a hunted bear shakes off the dogs, sixty
of the electrical ships rose up through the clouds where more than ninety
had gone down!

Madly we rushed upward through the vast curtain and continued our flight
to a great elevation, far beyond the reach of the awful artillery of
the enemy.


Forced to Retreat.

Looking back it seemed the very mouth of hell that we had escaped from.

The Martians did not for an instant cease their fire, even when we
were far beyond their reach. With furious persistence they blazed away
through the cloud curtains, and the vivid spikes of lightning shuddered
so swiftly on one another's track that they were like a flaming halo of
electric lances around the frowning helmet of the War Planet.

But after a while they stopped their terrific sparring, and once more
the immense globe assumed the appearance of a vast ball of black smoke,
still wildly agitated by the recent disturbance, but exhibiting no
opening through which we could discern what was going on beneath.

Evidently the Martians believed they had finished us.


Despair Seizes Us.

At no time since the beginning of our adventure had it appeared to me
quite so hopeless, reckless and mad as it seemed at present.

We had suffered fearful losses, and yet what had we accomplished? We had
won two fights on the asteroid, it is true, but then we had overwhelming
numbers on our side.

Now we were facing millions on their own ground, and our very first
assault had resulted in a disastrous repulse, with the loss of at least
thirty electric ships and 600 men!

Evidently we could not endure this sort of thing. We must find some
other means of assailing Mars or else give up the attempt.

But the latter was not to be thought of. It was no mere question of
self-pride, however, and no consideration of the tremendous interests
at stake, which would compel us to continue our apparently vain attempt.


No Hope in Sight.

Our provisions could last only a few days longer. The supply would not
carry us one-quarter of the way back to the earth, and we must therefore
remain here and literally conquer or die.

In this extremity a consultation of the principal officers was called
upon the deck of the flagship.

Here the suggestion was made that we should attempt to effect by strategy
what we had failed to do by force.

An old army officer who had served in many wars against the cunning
Indians of the West, Colonel Alonzo Jefferson Smith, was the author of
this suggestion.

"Let us circumvent them," he said. "We can do it in this way. The chances
are that all of the available fighting force of the planet Mars is now
concentrated on this side and in the neighborhood of the Lake of the Sun."


Formulating a "Last Hope."

"Possibly, by some kind of X-ray business, they can only see us dimly
through the clouds, and if we get a little further away they will not
be able to see us at all."

"Now, I suggest that a certain number of the electrical ships be withdrawn
from the squadron to a great distance, while the remainder stay here;
or, better still, approach to a point just beyond the reach of those
streaks of lightning, and begin a bombardment of the clouds without
paying any attention to whether the strokes reach through the clouds
and do any damage or not."

"This will induce the Martians to believe that we are determined to
press our attack at this point."

"In the meantime, while these ships are raising a hullabaloo on this
side of the planet, and drawing their fire, as much as possible, without
running into any actual danger, let the others which have been selected
for the purpose, sail rapidly around to the other side of Mars and take
them in the rear."

It was not perfectly clear what Colonel Smith intended to do after the
landing had been effected in the rear of the Martians, but still there
seemed a good deal to be said for his suggestion, and it would, at any
rate, if carried out, enable us to learn something about the condition
of things on the planet, and perhaps furnish us with a hint as to how
we could best proceed in the further prosecution of the siege.

Accordingly it was resolved that about twenty ships should be told off
for this movement, and Colonel Smith himself was placed in command.

At my desire I accompanied the new commander in his flagship.


Flank Movements.

Rising to a considerable elevation in order that there might be no risk
of being seen, we began our flank movement while the remaining ships,
in accordance with the understanding, dropped nearer the curtain of
cloud and commenced a bombardment with the disintegrators, which caused
a tremendous commotion in the clouds, opening vast gaps in them, and
occasionally revealing a glimpse of the electric lights on the planet,
although it was evident that the vibratory currents did not reach the
ground. The Martians immediately replied to this renewed attack, and
again the cloud-covered globe bristled with lightning, which flashed so
fiercely out of the blackness below that the stoutest hearts among us
quailed, although we were situated well beyond the danger.

But this sublime spectacle rapidly vanished from our eyes when, having
attained a proper elevation, we began our course toward the opposite
