field inside a coil really, but if these figures are right, it means
that we can project that field to a considerable distance even in air.
It'll be a beam of power that will cause all molecules in its path to
move at right angles to it, and in the direction we choose, by reversing
the power in the projector. That means that no matter how big the thing
is, we can tear it to pieces; we'll use its own powers, its own
energies, to rip it, or crush it.

"Imagine what would happen if we directed this against the side of a
mountain--the entire mass of rock would at once fly off at unimaginable
speed, crashing ahead with terrific power, as all the molecules suddenly
moved in the same direction. Nothing in all the Universe could hold
together against it! It's a disintegration ray of a sort--a ray that
will tear, or crush, for we can either make one half move away from the
other--or we can reverse the power, and make one half drive toward the
other with all the terrific power of its molecules! It is
omnipotent--hmmm--" Arcot paused, narrowing his eyes in thought.

"It has one limitation. Will it reach far in the air? In vacuum it
should have an infinite range--in the atmosphere all the molecules of
the air will be affected, and it will cause a terrific blast of icy
wind, a gale at temperatures far below zero! This will be even more
effective here on Venus!

"But we must start designing the thing at once! Take some of the
Immorpho and give me some, and we can let the sleep accumulate till we
have more time! Look--we're in Sonor already! Land us, Fuller--right
where we were, and then come back here. We're going to need you!"

The gorgeous display of a Venerian dawn was already coloring the east as
the great buildings seemed to rise silently about them. The sky, which
had been a dull luminous gray, a gray that rapidly grew brighter and
brighter, was now like molten silver, through which were filtering the
early rays of the intense sun. As the sun rose above the horizon, though
invisible for clouds, it still was traceable by the wondrous shell pink
that began to suffuse the ten mile layer of vapor. The tiny droplets
were, however, breaking the clear light into a million rainbows, and all
about the swiftly deepening pink were forming concentric circles of
blue, of green, orange, and all the colors of the rainbow, repeated time
after time--a wondrous halo of glowing color, which only the doubly
intense sun could create.

"It's almost worth missing the sun all day to see their sunrises and
sunsets," Fuller commented. The men were watching it, despite their
need for haste. It was a sight the like of which no Earthman had ever
before seen.

Immediately, then, they plunged into the extremely complex calculation
of the electrical apparatus to produce the necessary fields. To get the
effect they wanted, they must have two separate fields of the director
ray, and a third field of a slightly different nature, which would cause
the director ray to move in one direction only. It would be
disconcerting, to say the least, if the director ray, by some mistake,
should turn upon them!

The work went on more swiftly than they had considered possible, but
there was still much to be done on the theoretical end of the job alone
when the streets about them began to fill. They noticed that a large
crowd was assembling, and shortly after they had finished, after some of
these people had stood there for more than an hour and a half, the crowd
had grown to great size.

"From the looks of that collection, I should say we are about to become
the principals in some kind of a celebration that we know nothing about.
Well, we're here, and in case they want us, we're ready to come."

The guard that always surrounded the _Solarite_ had been doubled, and
was maintaining a fairly large clear area about the ship.

Shortly thereafter they saw one of the high officials of Lanor come down
the walk from the governmental building, walking toward the _Solarite_.

"Time for us to appear--and it may as well be all of us this time. I'll
tell you what they say afterward, Wade. They've evidently gone to
considerable trouble to get up this meeting, so let's cooperate. I hate
to slow up the work, but we'll try to make it short."

The four Terrestrians got into their cooling suits, and stepped outside
the ship. The Lanorian dignitary left his guard, walked up to the
quartet from Earth with measured tread, and halted before them.

"Earthmen," he began in a deep, clear voice, "we have gathered here this
morning to greet you and thank you for the tremendous service you have
done us. Across the awful void of empty space you have journeyed forty
million miles to visit us, only to discover that Venerians were making
ready to attack your world. Twice your intervention has saved our city.

"There is, of course, no adequate reward for this service; we can in no
way repay you, but in a measure we may show our appreciation. We have
learned from the greatest psychologist of our nation, Tonlos, that in
your world aluminum is plentiful, but gold and platinum are rare, and
that morlus is unknown. I have had a small token made for you, and your
friends. It is a little plaque, a disc of morlus, and on it there is a
small map of the Solar System. On the reverse side there is a globe of
Venus, with one of Earth beside it, as well as our men could copy the
small globe you have given us. The northern hemisphere of each is
depicted--America, your nation, and Lanor, ours, thus being shown. We
want you, and each of your friends, to accept these. They are symbols of
your wonderful flight across space!" The Venerians turned to each of the
Terrestrians and presented each with a small metal disc.

Arcot spoke for the Terrestrians.

"On behalf of myself and my friends here, two of whom have not had an
opportunity to learn your language, I wish to thank you for your great
help when we most needed it. You, perhaps, have saved more than a
city--you may have made it possible to save a world--our Earth. But the
battle here has only begun.

"There are now in the Kaxorian camp eighteen great ships. They have been
badly defeated in the three encounters they have had with the _Solarite_
so far. But no longer will they be vulnerable to our earlier methods of
attack. Your spies report that the first plane, the plane which was
first attacked by the _Solarite_, is still undergoing repairs. These
will be completed within two days, and then, when they can leave a base
guard of two ships, they will attack once more. Furthermore, they will
attack with a new weapon. They have destroyed the usefulness of our
weapon, invisibility, and in turn, now have it to use against us! We
must seek out some new weapon. I hope we are on the right track now, but
every moment is precious, and we must get back to the work. This address
must be short. Later, when we have completed our preliminary work, we
will have to give plans to your workmen, which you will be able to turn
into metal, for we lack the materials. With this help we may succeed,
despite our handicap."

The address was terminated at once. The Lanorians were probably
disappointed, but they fully realized the necessity for haste.

"I wish Terrestrian orators spoke like that," remarked Morey as they
returned to the ship. "He said all there was to say, but he didn't run
miles of speech doing it. He was a very forceful speaker, too!"

"People who speak briefly and to the point generally are," Arcot said.

It was nearly noon that day before the theoretical discussion had been
reduced to practical terms. They were ready to start work at once, but
they had reason to work cheerfully now. Even through air they had found
their ray would be able to reach thirty-five miles! They would be well
out of the danger zone while attacking the gigantic planes of Kaxor.

Morey, Wade and Arcot at once set to work constructing the electrical
plant that was to give them the necessary power. It was lucky indeed
that they had brought the great mass of spare apparatus! They had more
than enough to make all the electrical machinery. The tubes, the coils,
the condensers, all were there. The generator would easily supply the
power, for the terrific forces that were to destroy the Kaxorian ships
were to be generated in the plane itself. It was to destroy itself; the
_Solarite_ would merely be the detonator to set it off!

       *       *       *       *       *

While the physicists were busy on this, Fuller was designing the
mechanical details of the projector. It must be able to turn through a
spherical angle of 180 degrees, and was necessarily controlled
electrically from the inside. The details of the projector were worked
out by six that evening, and the numerous castings and machined pieces
that were to be used were to be made in the Venerian machine shops.

One difficulty after another arose and was overcome. Night came on, and
still they continued work. The Venerian workmen had promised to have the
apparatus for them by ten o'clock the next morning--or what corresponded
to ten o'clock.

Shortly after three o'clock that morning they had finished the
apparatus, had connected all the controls, and had placed the last of
the projector directors. Except for the projector they were ready, and
Morey, Wade and Fuller turned in to get what sleep they could. But
Arcot, telling them there was something he wished to get, took another
dose of Immorpho and stepped out into the steaming rain.

A few minutes after ten the next morning Arcot came back, followed by
half a dozen Venerians, each carrying a large metal cylinder in a
cradle. These were attached to the landing gear of the _Solarite_ in
such fashion that the fusing of one piece of wire would permit the
entire thing to drop free.

"So _that's_ what you hatched out, eh? What is it?" asked Wade as he
entered the ship.

"Just a thing I want to try out--and I'm going to keep it a deep, dark
secret for a while. I think you'll get quite a surprise when you see
those bombs in action! They're arranged to be released by turning
current into the landing lights. We'll have to forgo lights for the
present, but I needed the bombs more.

"The mechanics have finished working on your projector parts, Fuller,
and they'll be over here in a short time. Here comes the little gang I
asked to help us. You can direct them." Arcot paused and scowled with
annoyance. "Hang it all--when they drill into the outer wall, we'll lose
the vacuum between the two walls, and all that hot air will come in.
This place will be roasting in a short time. We have the molecular
motion coolers, but I'm afraid they won't be much good. Can't use the
generator--it's cut off from the main room by vacuum wall.

"I think we'd better charge up the gas tanks and the batteries as soon
as this is done. Then tonight we'll attack the Kaxorian construction
camp. I've just learned that no spy reports have been coming in, and I'm
afraid they'll spring a surprise."

Somewhat later came the sound of drills, then the whistling roar as the
air sucked into the vacuum, told the men inside that the work was under
way. It soon became uncomfortably hot as, the vacuum destroyed, the heat
came in through all sides. It was more than the little molecular coolers
could handle, and the temperature soon rose to about a hundred and
fifteen. It was not as bad as the Venerian atmosphere, for the air
seemed exceedingly dry, and the men found it possible to get along
without cooling suits, if they did not work. Since there was little they
could do, they simply relaxed.

It was nearly dark before the Lanorians had finished their work, and the
gas tanks had been recharged. All that time Arcot had spent with Tonlos
determining the position of the Kaxorian construction camp. Spy reports
and old maps had helped, but it was impossible to do very accurate work
by these means.

It was finally decided that the Kaxorian construction camp was about
10,500 miles to the southwest. The _Solarite_ was to start an hour after
dark. Travelling westward at their speed, they hoped to reach the camp
just after nightfall.




VIII


The _Solarite_ sped swiftly toward the southwest. The sky slowly grew
lighter as the miles flashed beneath them. They were catching up with
the sun. As they saw the rolling ocean beneath them give way to low
plains, they realized they were over Kaxorian land. The _Solarite_ was
flying very high, and as they showed no lights, and were not using the
invisibility apparatus, they were practically undetectable. Suddenly
they saw the lights of a mighty city looming far off to the east.

"It's Kanor. Pass well to the west of it. That's their capital. We're on
course." Arcot spoke from his position at the projector, telling Wade
the directions to follow on his course to the berth of the giant planes.

The city dropped far behind them in moments, followed by another, and
another. At length, veering southward into the dusk, they entered a
region of low hills, age-old folds in the crust of the planet, rounded
by untold millennia of torrential rains.

"Easy, Wade. We are near now." Mile after mile they flashed ahead at
about a thousand miles an hour--then suddenly they saw far off to the
east a vast glow that reached into the sky, painting itself on the
eternal clouds miles above.

"There it is, Wade. Go high, and take it easy!"

Swiftly the _Solarite_ climbed, hovering at last on the very rim of the
cloud blanket, an invisible mote in a sea of gray mist. Below them they
saw a tremendous field carved, it seemed, out of the ancient hills. From
this height all sense of proportion was lost. It seemed but an ordinary
field, with eighteen ordinary airplanes resting on it. One of these now
was moving, and in a moment it rose into the air! But there seemed to be
no men on all the great field. They were invisibly small from this
height.

Abruptly Arcot gave a great shout. "That's their surprise! They're ready
far ahead of the time we expected! If all that armada gets in the air,
we're done! Down, Wade, to within a few hundred feet of the ground, and
close to the field!"

The _Solarite_ flashed down in a power dive--down with a sickening
lurch. A sudden tremendous weight seemed to crush them as the ship was
brought out of the dive not more than two hundred feet from the ground.
Close to blacking out, Wade nevertheless shot it in as close to the
field as he dared. Anxiously he called to Arcot, who answered with a
brief "Okay!" The planes loomed gigantic now, their true proportions
showing clearly against the brilliant light of the field. A tremendous
wave of sound burst from the loudspeaker as the planes rolled across the
ground to leap gracefully into the air--half a million tons of metal!

From the _Solarite_ there darted a pale beam of ghostly light, faintly
gray, tinged with red and green--the ionized air of the beam. It moved
in a swift half circle. In an instant the whirr of the hundreds,
thousands of giant propellers was drowned in a terrific roar of air.
Great snowflakes fell from the air before them; it was white with the
solidified water vapor. Then came a titanic roar and the planet itself
seemed to shake! A crash, a snapping and rending as a mighty fountain of
soil and rock cascaded skyward, and with it, twisting, turning, hurled
in a dozen directions at once, twelve titanic ships reeled drunkenly
into the air!

For a barely perceptible interval there was an oppressive silence as the
ray was shut off. Then a bedlam of deafening sound burst forth anew, a
mighty deluge of unbearable noise as the millions of tons of pulverized
rock, humus and metal fell back. Some of it had ascended for miles; it
settled amid a howling blizzard--snow that melted as it touched the
madly churned airfield.

High above there were ten planes flying about uncertainly. Suddenly one
of these turned, heading for the ground far below, its wings screaming
their protest as the motors roared, ever faster, with the gravity of the
planet aiding them. There was a rending, crackling crash as the wings
suddenly bent back along the sides. An instant later the fuselage tore
free, rocketing downward; the wings followed more slowly--twisting,
turning, dipping in mile-long swoops.

The _Solarite_ shot away from the spot at maximum speed--away and up,
with a force that nailed the occupants to the floor. Before they could
turn, behind them flared a mighty gout of light that struck to the very
clouds above, and all the landscape, for miles about, was visible in the
glare of the released energy.

As they turned, they saw on the plain, below a tremendous crater, in
its center a spot that glowed white and bubbled like the top of a huge
cauldron.

Nine great planes were circling in the air; then in an instant they were
gone, invisible. As swiftly the _Solarite_ darted away with a speed that
defied the aim of any machine.

High above the planes they went, for with his radar Arcot could trace
them. They were circling, searching for the _Solarite_.

The tiny machine was invisible in the darkness, but its invisibility was
not revealed by the Kaxorian's radio detectors. In the momentary lull,
Fuller asked a question.

"Wade, how is it that those ships can be invisible when they are driven
by light, and have the light stored in them? They're perfectly
transparent. Why can't we see the light?"

"They are storing the light. It's bound--it can't escape. You can't see
light unless it literally hits you in the eye. Their stored light can't
reach you, for it is held by its own attraction and by the special field
of the big generators."

They seemed to be above one of the Kaxorian planes now. Arcot caught the
roar of the invisible propellers.

"To the left, Wade--faster--hold it--left--ah!" Arcot pushed a button.

Down from the _Solarite_ there dropped a little canister, one of the
bombs that Arcot had prepared the night before. To hit an invisible
target is ordinarily difficult, but when that target is far larger than
the proverbial side of a barn, it is not very difficult, at that. But
now Arcot's companions watched for the crash of the explosion, the flash
of light. What sort of bomb was it that Arcot hoped would penetrate that
tremendous armor?

Suddenly they saw a great spot of light, a spot that spread with
startling rapidity, a patch of light that ran, and moved. It flew
through the air at terrific speed. It was a pallid light, green and wan
and ghostly, that seemed to flow and ebb.

For an instant Morey and the others stared in utter surprise. Then
suddenly Morey burst out laughing.

"Ho--you win, Arcot. That was one they didn't think of, I'll bet!
Luminous paint--and by the hundred gallon! Radium paint, I suppose, and
no man has ever found how to stop the glow of radium. That plane sticks
out like a sore thumb!"

Indeed, the great luminous splotch made the gigantic plane clearly
evident against the gray clouds. Visible or not, that plane was marked.

Quickly Arcot tried to maneuver the _Solarite_ over another of the great
ships, for now the danger was only from those he could not see. Suddenly
he had an idea.

"Morey--go back to the power room and change the adjustment on the
meteorite avoider to half a mile!" At once Morey understood his plan,
and hastened to put it into effect.

The illuminated plane was diving, twisting wildly now. The _Solarite_
flashed toward it with sickening speed, then suddenly the gigantic bulk
of the plane loomed off to the right of the tiny ship, the great metal
hull, visible now, rising in awesome might. They were too near; they
shot away to a greater distance--then again that ghostly beam reached
out--and for just a fraction of a second it touched the giant plane.

The titanic engine of destruction seemed suddenly to be in the grip of
some vastly greater Colossus--a clutching hand that closed! The plane
jumped back with an appalling crash, a roar of rending metal. For an
instant there came the sound like a mighty buzz-saw as the giant
propellers of one wing cut into the body of the careening plane. In that
instant, the great power storage tank split open with an impact like the
bursting of a world. The _Solarite_ was hurled back by an explosion that
seemed to rend the very atoms of the air, and all about them was a
torrid blaze of heat and light that seemed to sear their faces and hands
with its intensity.

Then in a time so brief that it seemed never to have happened, it was
gone, and only the distant drone of the other ships' propellers came to
them. There was no luminous spot. The radium paint had been destroyed
in the only possible way--it was volatilized through all the atmosphere!

The Terrestrians had known what to expect; had known what would happen;
and they had not looked at the great ship in that last instant. But the
Kaxorians had naturally been looking at it. They had never seen the sun
directly, and now they had been looking at a radiance almost as
brilliant. They were temporarily blinded; they could only fly a straight
course in response to the quick order of their squadron commander.

And in that brief moment that they were unable to watch him, Arcot
dropped two more bombs in quick succession. Two bright spots formed in
the black night. No longer did these planes feel themselves
invulnerable, able to meet any foe! In an instant they had put on every
last trace of power, and at their top speed they were racing west, away
from their tiny opponent--in the only direction that was open to them.

But it was useless. The _Solarite_ could pick up speed in half the time
they could, and in an instant Arcot again trained his beam on the mighty
splotch of light that was a fleeing plane.

Out of the darkness came a ghostly beam, for an instant of time so short
that before the explosive shells of the other could be trained on it,
the _Solarite_ had moved. Under that touch the mighty plane began
crumbling, then it splintered beneath the driving blow of the great
wing, as it shot toward the main body of the plane at several miles a
second--driving into and through it! The giant plane twisted and turned
as it fell swiftly downward into the darkness--and, again there came
that world-rocking explosion, and the mighty column of light.

Again and yet again the _Solarite_ found and destroyed Kaxorian
super-planes, protected in the uneven conflict by their diminutive size
and the speed of their elusive maneuvering.

But to remind the men of the _Solarite_ that they were not alone, there
came a sudden report just behind them, and they turned to see that one
of the energy bombs had barely fallen short! In an instant the
comparative midget shot up at top speed, out of danger. It looped and
