ship!

Rip grabbed Koa's arm. "Let's move away from the cave a little farther."

The two of them stepped away from the cave and stood in full view as the
snapper-boat moved cautiously down toward the asteroid. Rip planned what
he would say. "Commander O'Brine, this is Foster!"

No, that wouldn't do. Connies would know that Kevin O'Brine commanded the
_Scorpius_, and if they had taken over the Planeteers on the asteroid,
they would also have learned Rip's name. He had to say something that
would identify him beyond a doubt.

The snapper-boat was closing in slowly. Rip knew the pilot and gunner must
be tense, frightened, ready to blast with their guns at the first wrong
move on the asteroid. He groped with his good arm and turned up his helmet
communicator to full volume.

The fighting rocket drew closer, cut in its nose tube, and hovered only a
few hundred feet above the Planeteers.

Rip summoned enough strength to make his voice sharp and clear. His words
sped through space into the bubble of the pilot, echoed in the helmet and
were picked up by the pilot's microphone, then hurled through the
snapper-boat circuit through space to the control room of the cruiser.

O'Brine stiffened as the speaker threw Rip's voice at him, amplified and
hollow-sounding from reverberations in the boat pilot's helmet.

"_O'Brine is so ugly he won't look at his face in a clean blast tube! That
no-good Irishman wouldn't know what to do with an asteroid if he had
one!_"

The commander turned purple with rage. He bellowed, "Foster!"

A junior space officer hid a grin and murmured, "Looks like the Planeteers
still have the asteroid."

O'Brine bent over the communicator and yelled, "Deputy commander! Launch
landing boats. Get those Planeteers and bring them here, under armed
guard. Ram it!"

The snapper-boat pilot through whose circuit Rip had yelled turned to look
wide-eyed at his gunner. "Did you hear that? Throw a light down on the
asteroid. It must have come from there."

The gunner threw a switch and a searchlight port opened in the boat's
belly. Its beam searched downward, swept past, then steadied on two
space-clad figures.

"It worked," Rip said tiredly. He closed his eyes to guard them against
the brilliant glare, then waved his good arm.

Santos called from the cave entrance. "Sir, landing boats are being
launched!"

"Bring out the prisoners," Rip ordered. "Line them up. Planeteers fall in
behind them."

The landing boats, with snapper-boats in watchful attendance, blasted down
to the surface of the asteroid. Spacemen jumped out, awkward at first on
the no-weight surface. An officer glided to meet Rip, and he had a pistol
in his hand.

"It's all right," Rip told him. "The Connies are our prisoners. You won't
need guns."

The spaceman snapped, "You're under arrest."

Rip stared incredulously. "What for?"

"The commander's orders. Don't give me any arguments. Just get aboard."

"I can't argue with a loaded gun," Rip said wearily. He called to his men.
"We're under arrest. I don't know why. Don't try to resist. Do as the
spacemen order."

Rip got aboard the nearest landing boat, his head spinning. O'Brine had
made a mistake of some kind. The landing boats, loaded with Planeteers and
Connies, lifted from the asteroid to the cruiser. They slid smoothly into
the air locks and settled. The massive lock doors slid closed and lights
flickered on. Rip waited, trying to keep consciousness from slipping away.

The lock gauges registered normal air, and the inner valves slid open.
Commander O'Brine stepped through, his square jaw outthrust and his face
flushed with anger. He bellowed, "Where's Foster?"

His voice was so loud Rip heard him faintly even through the bubble. He
stepped out of the landing boat and faced the irate commander.

O'Brine ordered, "Get him out of that suit." Two spacemen jumped forward.
One twisted Rip's bubble free and lifted it off. The heavy air of the ship
hit him with physical force.

O'Brine grated, "You're under arrest, Foster, for firing on the
_Scorpius_, for insubordination, and for conduct unbecoming an officer.
Get out of that suit and get flaming. It's the spacepot for you."

Rip had to grin. He couldn't help it. He started to reply, but the heavy
air of the cruiser, so much richer and denser than that of the suits, was
too much. He slumped unconscious.

There was no gravity to pull him to the floor, but the action of his
relaxing muscles swung him slowly until he lay face down in the air a few
feet above the floor.

Commander O'Brine stared for a moment, then he took the unconscious
Planeteer and swung him upright. His quick eyes took in the patch on the
arm, the safety line tied tightly. He roared, "Quick! Get him to the wound
ward!"

Rip came back to consciousness on the operating table. The wound in his
arm had been neatly repaired, and below the wound, where his arm had
frozen, a plastic temperature bag was slowly bringing the cold flesh back
to normal. On his other side, a pulsing pressure pump forced new blood
from the ship's supplies into his veins.

A senior space officer with the golden lancet of the medical service on
his blue tunic bent over him. "How do you feel?"

Rip's voice surprised him. It was as full and strong as ever. "I feel
wonderful. Can I get up?"

"When we get enough blood into you and your arm is fully restored."

Commander O'Brine appeared in the door frame. "Can he talk?"

"Yes. He's fine, sir."

O'Brine glared down at Rip. "Can you give me a good reason why I shouldn't
have you treated for space madness, then toss you in the spacepot until we
reach earth?"

"Best reason in the galaxy," Rip said cheerfully. "But before we talk
about it, I want to know how my men are. One got cut and another had his
bubble cracked. Also, one of the Connies got badly cut, another had some
broken bones, and a third one bled into high vack when Koa cracked his
bubble."

The doctor answered Rip's question. "Your men are all right. We put the
one with the cracked bubble into high compression for a while, just to
relieve his pain a little. The other one didn't bleed much. He's back in
the squadroom right now. Two of the prisoners are patched up, but the
third one is in the other operating room. I don't know whether we can save
him or not. We're trying."

O'Brine nodded. "Thanks, doctor. Now, Foster, start talking. You fired on
this ship, scored a hit, and broke the airseal. No casualties,
fortunately. But by forcing us to accelerate at optimum speed, you caused
so much breakage of ship's stores that we'll have to put into Marsport for
new stocks. And on top of all that, you insulted me within the hearing of
every man on the ship. I don't mind being insulted by Planeteers. I'm used
to it. But when it's done over the ship's communications system, it's bad
for discipline."

Rip tried to keep a straight face. He said mildly, "Sir, I'm surprised you
even give me a chance to explain."

"I wouldn't have," O'Brine said frankly. "I would have shot off a special
message to earth relieving you of command and asking for Discipline Board
action. But when I saw those Connie prisoners, I knew there was more to
this than just a young space-pup going vack-wacky."

"There was, Commander." Rip recited the events of the past few hours while
the Irishman listened with growing amazement. He finished with, "I had to
convince you in a hurry that we still held the asteroid, so I used some
insulting phrases that would let you know who was talking without any
doubt at all. And you did know, didn't you, sir?"

O'Brine flushed. For a long moment his glance locked with Rip's, then he
roared with laughter.

Rip grinned his relief. "My apologies, sir."

"Accepted," O'Brine chuckled. "I'm sorry I won't have an excuse for
dumping you in the spacepot, Foster. Your explanation is acceptable, but I
have a suspicion that you enjoyed calling me names."

"I might have," Rip admitted, "but I wasn't in very good shape. The only
thing I could think of was getting into air so I could have my arm
treated. Commander, we've moved the asteroid. Now we have to correct
course. And we have to get some new equipment, including nuclite
shielding. Also, sir, I'd appreciate it if you'd let my men clean up and
eat. They haven't been in air since we left the cruiser."

For answer, O'Brine strode to the operating room communicator. "Get it,"
he called. "The deputy commander will prepare landing boat one and issue
new space suits and helmets for all Planeteers with damaged equipment. Put
in two rolls of nuclite. Sergeant-major Koa will see that all Planeteers
have an opportunity to clean up and eat immediately. The Planeteers will
return to the asteroid in one hour."

Rip asked, "Will I be able to go into space by then?"

The doctor replied. "Your arm will be normal in about twenty minutes. It
will ache some, but you'll have full use of it. We'll bring you back to
the ship in about twenty-four hours for another look at it, just to be
sure."

Sixty minutes later, clean, fed, and contented, the Planeteers were again
on the thorium planet while the _Scorpius_, riding the same orbit, stood
by a few miles out in space.

The asteroid and the great cruiser arched high above the belt of tiny
worlds in the orbit Rip had set, traveling together toward distant Mars.





CHAPTER TWELVE - MERCURY TRANSIT


The long hours passed, and only Rip's chronometer told him when the end of
a day was reached. The Planeteers alternately worked on the surface and
rested in the air of the landing boat compartment while the asteroid sped
steadily on its way.

When a series of sightings over several days gave Rip enough exact data to
work on, he recalculated the orbit, found the amount that the course had
to be corrected, and supervised the cutting of new and smaller holes in
the metal.

Tubes of ordinary rocket fuel were placed in these and fired, and the
thrust moved the asteroid slightly, just enough to make the corrections
Rip needed. It was not necessary to take to the landing boat for these
blasts. The Planeteers retired to their cave, which was now lined with
nuclite as a protection against radiation.

Rip watched his dosimeter climb steadily as the radiation dosage mounted.
Then he took the landing boat to the _Scorpius_, talked the problem over
with the ship's medical department and arranged for his men to take
injections that would keep them from coming down with radiation sickness.

They left the asteroid belt far behind, and passed within ten thousand
miles of Mars. The _Scorpius_ sent its entire complement of snapper-boats
to the asteroid for protection, in case Consops made another try, then
flamed off to Marsport to put in new supplies to replace those damaged
when Rip had forced sudden and disastrous acceleration.

The asteroid had reached earth's orbit before the cruiser returned. Of
course, earth was on the other side of the sun. Rip ordered a survey and
found the best place on the dark side to make a new base. The Planeteers
cut out a cave with the torch, lined it with nuclite, and moved in their
supplies. It would be their permanent base to the end of the trip.

The sun was very hot now. On the sunny side of the asteroid the
temperature had soared far past the boiling point of water. But on the
dark side, Rip measured temperatures close to absolute zero.

When the _Scorpius_ returned he arranged with Commander O'Brine for the
Planeteers to take turns going to the cruiser for showers and decent
meals.

The asteroid approached the orbit of Venus, but the bright planet was some
distance away, at its greatest elongation to the east of the sun. Mercury,
however, loomed larger and larger. They would pass close to the hot
planet.

O'Brine recalled Rip to the _Scorpius_ and handed him a message.

  ASTEROID NOW WITHIN PROTECTION REACH OF MERCURY AND TERRA BASES. YOUR
 ESCORT NO LONGER REQUIRED. PROCEED IMMEDIATELY TITAN, TAKE ON CARGO AND
                                PERSONNEL.

The commander sighed. "Looks like I'll never get to earth long enough to
see my family."

Rip sympathized. "Tough, sir. Perhaps the cargo from Titan will be
scheduled for Terra."

"That's what I hope," O'Brine agreed. "Well, here's where we part. Is
there anything you need?"

Rip made a mental check on supplies. He had more than enough. "The only
thing we need is a long-range communicator, sir. If you're leaving, we'll
have no way to contact the planet bases."

"I'll see that you get one." The Irishman thrust out his hand. "Stay out
of high vack, Foster. Too bad you didn't join us instead of the
Planeteers. I might have made a decent officer out of you."

Rip grinned. "That's a real compliment, sir. I might return it by saying
I'd be glad to have you as a Planeteer corporal any time."

O'Brine chuckled. "All right. Let's declare a truce, Planeteer. We'll meet
again. Space isn't very big."

A short time later Rip stood in front of his asteroid base and watched the
great cruiser drive into space. A short distance away a snapper-boat was
lashed to the landing boat. O'Brine had insisted on leaving it, with a
word of warning.

"These Connies are plenty smart. I don't like leaving you unprotected,
even within reach of Mercury and Terra, but orders are orders. Keep the
snapper-boat and you'll at least be able to put up a fight if you bump
into trouble."

The asteroid sped on its lonely way for two days and then a cruiser came
out of space, its nuclear drive glowing. The Planeteers manned the rocket
launcher and Rip and Santos stood by the snapper-boat just in case, but
the cruiser was the _Sagittarius_, out of Mercury.

Captain Go Sian-tek, a Chinese Planeteer officer, arrived in one of the
cruiser's landing boats accompanied by three enlisted Planeteers. They
were all from the Special Order Squadron on Mercury.

Captain Go greeted Rip and his men, then handed over a plastic stylus
plate ordering Rip to deliver six cubic meters of thorium for use on
Mercury. While Koa supervised the cutting of the block, Rip and the
captain chatted.

The Mercurian Planeteer base was in the twilight zone, but the Planeteers
did all their work on the sun side, using special alloy suits to mine the
precious nuclite that only the hot planet provided.

At some time during its first years, Mercury had been so close to the sun
that its temperature was driven high enough to permit a subatomic
thermo-nuclear reaction. The reaction had shorn some elements of their
electrons and left a thin coating of material composed almost entirely of
neutrons. The nuclite was incredibly dense. It could be handled only in
low gravity because of its weight. But nothing else provided the shielding
against radiation and meteors half so well and it was in great demand for
spaceship skins.

"Things aren't so bad," Go told Rip. "The base is comfortable and we only
work a two hour shift out of each ten. We've had a plague of silly dillies
recently. They got into one man's suit while we were working, but mostly
they're just a nuisance."

Rip had heard of the creatures. They were like earth armadillos, except
that they were silicon animals and not carbon like those of earth. They
were drawn to oxygen like iron to a magnet, and their diamond hard
tongues, used for drilling rock in order to get the minerals on which they
lived, could drive right through a space suit. Or, if they could work
undetected for a short while, they could drill through the shell of a
space station.

_Scralabus primus_ was the scientific name of the creature, but the fact
that it looked like a silicon armadillo had given it the popular name of
"silly dilly." Apart from its desire for oxygen it was harmless.

Koa reported, "Sir, the block of thorium is ready. We've hung it on a line
behind the landing boat. The blast won't hurt it, and it's too big to get
inside the boat."

"Fine, Koa. Well, Captain, that does it."

The Mercurian Planeteers got into their craft and blasted off, trailing
the block of thorium in their exhaust. Rip watched the cruiser take the
craft and thorium aboard, then drive toward Mercury, brilliant sunlight
reflecting from its sleek sides. The planet was only a short distance away
by spaceship. It was the largest thing in space, except for the sun, as
seen from the asteroid. To Rip it looked about three times the size of the
