"We've been working along those lines ever since you reported," Rodebush
said, "and we're beginning to see light. And in that same connection
it's no wonder that we couldn't handle our super-ship. We had some good
ideas, but they were wrongly applied. However, things look quite
promising now. We have that transformation of iron all worked out in
theory, and as soon as we get a generator going we can straighten out
everything else in short order. And think what that unlimited power
means! All the power we want--power enough even to try out such hitherto
purely theoretical possibilities as the neutralization of gravity, and
even of the inertia of matter!"

"Hold on!" protested Samms. "You certainly can't do _that_! Inertia
is--_must_ be--a basic attribute of matter, and surely cannot be done
away with without destroying the matter itself. Don't start anything
like that. Fred--I don't want to lose you and Lyman, too."

"Don't worry about us, Chief." Rodebush replied with a smile. "If you
will tell me what matter is, fundamentally, I may agree with you ... No?
Well, then, don't be surprised at anything that happens. We are going to
do a lot of things that nobody ever thought of doing before."

Thus for a long time the argument and discussion went on, to be
interrupted by the voice of the secretary.

"Sorry to disturb you, Mr. Samms, but some things have come up that you
will have to handle. Knobos is calling from out near Mars. He has caught
the _Endymion_, and has killed about half her crew doing it. Milton has
finally reported from Venus, after being out of touch for five days. He
trailed the Wintons into Thalleron swamp. They crashed him there, but he
won out and has what he went after. And just now I got a flash from
Fletcher, in the asteroid belt. I think that he has finally traced that
dope line. But Knobos is on now--what do you want him to do about the
_Endymion_?"

"Tell him to--no, put him on here, I'd better tell him myself," Samms
directed, and his face hardened in ruthless decision as the horny,
misshapen face of the Martian lieutenant appeared upon the screen. "What
do you think, Knobos? Shall they come to trial or not?"

"No."

"I don't think so, either. It is better that a few gangsters should
disappear in space than run the risk of another uprising. See to it."

"Right." The screen darkened and Samms spoke to his secretary. "Put
Milton and Fletcher on whenever their rays come in." He then turned to
his guests. "We've covered the ground quite thoroughly. Good-bye--I wish
I could go with you, but I'll be pretty well tied up for the next week
or two."

"Tied up, doesn't half express it," Rodebush remarked as the two
scientists walked along a corridor toward an elevator. "He probably is
the busiest man on the three planets."

"As well as the most powerful," Cleveland supplemented. "And very few
men could use his power as fairly--but he's welcome to it, as far as I'm
concerned. I'd have the pink fantods for a month if I had to do only
once what he's just done--and to him it's just part of a day's work."

"You mean the _Endymion_? What else could he do?"

"Nothing--that's just what I'm talking about. It had to be done, since
bringing them to trial would probably mean killing half the people of
Morseca; but at the same time it's a ghastly thing to have to order a
job of deliberate, cold-blooded, and illegal murder."

"You're right, of course, but you would...." he broke off, unable to put
his thoughts into words. For while inarticulate, manlike, concerning
their deepest emotions, in both men was ingrained the code of their
organization; both knew that to every man chosen for it _The Service_
was everything, himself nothing.

"But enough of that, we'll have plenty of grief of our own right here,"
Rodebush changed the subject abruptly as they stepped into a vast room,
almost filled by the immense bulk of the _Boise_--the sinister
space-ship which, although never flown, had already lined with black so
many pages of Triplanetary's roster. She was now, however, the center of
a furious activity. Men swarmed over her and through her, in the orderly
confusion of a fiercely driven but carefully planned program of
reconstruction.

"I hope your dope is right, Fred!" Cleveland called, as the two
scientists separated to go to their respective laboratories. "If it is,
we'll make a perfect lady out of this unmanageable man-killer yet!"




CHAPTER VIII

  The Super-Ship Is Launched


After weeks of ceaseless work, during which was lavished upon her every
resource of mind and material afforded by three planets, the _Boise_ was
ready for her maiden flight. As nearly ready, that is, as the thought
and labor of man could make her. Rodebush and Cleveland had finished
their last rigid inspection of the craft and, standing beside the center
door of the main airlock, were talking with their chief.

"You say that you think that it's safe, and yet you won't take a crew,"
Samms argued. "In that case it isn't safe enough for you men, either. We
need you too badly to permit you to take such chances."

"You've _got_ to let us go; because we are the only ones who are
thoroughly familiar with her theory," Rodebush insisted. "I said, and
still say, that I _think_ it is safe. I can't prove it, however, except
mathematically; because she's altogether too full of too many new and
untried mechanisms, too many extrapolations beyond all existing or
possible data. Theoretically, she is sound, but you know that theory can
go only so far, and that mathematically negligible factors may become
operative at those velocities. We do not need a crew for a short trip.
We can take care of any minor mishaps, and if our fundamental theories
are wrong, all the crews between here and Jupiter wouldn't do any good.
Therefore we two are going--alone."

"Well, be very careful, anyway. Start out slow and take it easy."

"Start out slow? We can't! We can't neutralize half of gravity, nor half
of the inertia of matter--it's got to be everything or nothing, as soon
as the neutralizers go on. We could start out on the projectors, of
course, instead of on the neutralizers, but that wouldn't prove anything
and would only prolong the agony."

"Well, then, be as careful as you can."

"We'll do that, Chief," Cleveland put in. "We think a lot of us, and we
aren't committing suicide just yet if we can help it. And remember about
everybody staying inside when we take off--it's barely possible that
we'll take up a lot of room. Good-bye to all of you."

"Good-bye, fellows!"

The massive insulating doors were shut, the metal side of the mountain
opened, and huge, squat caterpillar tractors came roaring and clanking
into the room. Chains and cables were made fast and, mighty steel rails
groaning under the load, the space-ship upon her rolling ways was
dragged out of the Hill and far out upon the level floor of the surface
before the tractors cast off and returned to the fortress.

"Everybody is under cover." Samms informed Rodebush. The chief was
staring intently into his plate, upon which was revealed the control
room of the untried super-ship. He heard Rodebush speak to Cleveland;
heard the observer's brief reply; saw the navigator throw his
switches--then the communicator plate went blank. Not the ordinary
blankness of a cut-off, but a peculiarly disquieting fading out into
darkness. And where the great space-ship had rested there was for an
instant nothing. Exactly nothing--a vacuum. Vessel, falsework, rollers,
trucks, the enormous steel I-beams of the tracks, even the deep-set
concrete piers and foundations and a vast hemisphere of the solid
ground; all had disappeared utterly and instantaneously. But almost as
suddenly as it had been formed the vacuum was filled by a cyclonic rush
of air. There was a detonation as of a hundred vicious thunderclaps made
one, and, through the howling, shrieking blasts of wind, there rained
down upon the valley, plain and metaled mountain a veritable avalanche
of debris: bent, twisted, and broken rails and beams, splintered
timbers, masses of concrete, and thousands of cubic yards of soil and
rock. For inertia and gravitation had not been neutralized at precisely
the same instant, and for a moment everything within the radius of
action of the iron-driven gravity nullifiers of the _Boise_ had
continued its absolute motion with inertia unimpaired. Then, left behind
immediately by the almost infinite velocity of the cruiser, all this
material had again become subject to all of Nature's everyday laws and
had crashed back to the ground.

"Could you hold your beam, Randolph?" Samm's voice cut sharply through
the daze of stupefaction which held spellbound most of the denizens of
the Hill. But all were not so held--no conceivable emergency could take
the attention of the chief ultra-wave operator from his instruments.

"No, sir," Radio Center shot back. "It faded out and I couldn't recover
it. I put everything I've got behind a tracer on that beam, but haven't
been able to lift a single needle off the pin."

"And no wreckage of the vessel itself," Samms went on, half audibly.
"Either they have succeeded far beyond their wildest hopes or else ...
more probably...." He fell silent and switched off the plate. Were his
two friends, those intrepid scientists, alive and triumphant, or had
they gone to lengthen the list of victims of that man-killing
space-ship? Reason told him that they were gone. They _must be_ gone, or
else his ultra-beams--energies of such unthinkable velocity of
propagation that man's most sensitive instruments had never been able
even to estimate it--would have held the ship's transmitter in spite of
any velocity attainable by any matter under any conceivable conditions.
The ship must have been disintegrated as soon as Rodebush released his
forces. And yet, had not the physicist dimly foreseen the possibility of
such an actual velocity--or had he? However, individuals could came and
could go, but Triplanetary went on. Samms squared his shoulders
unconsciously, and slowly, grimly, made his way back to his private
office.

He had scant time to mourn. Scarcely had he seated himself at his desk
when an emergency call came snapping in; a call of such import that his
secretary's usually calm voice trembled as she put it on his plate.

"Commissioner Hinkle is calling, sir," she announced. "Something
terrible is going on again, out toward Orion. Here he is," and there
appeared upon the screen the face of the Commissioner of Public Safety,
the commander of Triplanetary's every armed force--whether of land or of
water, of air or of empty space.

"They've come back, Samms!" the Commissioner rapped out, without
preliminary or greeting. "Four vessels gone--a freighter and a passenger
liner, with her escort of two heavy cruisers. All in Sector M; Dx about
151. I have ordered all traffic out of space for the duration of the
emergency, and since even our warships seem useless, every ship is
making for the nearest dock at maximum. How about that new flyer of
yours--got anything that will do us any good?" No one beyond the
"Hill's" shielding screens knew that the _Boise_ had already been
launched.

"I don't know. We don't even know whether we have a super-ship or not,"
and Samms described briefly the beginning--and very probably the
ending--of the trial flight, concluding: "It looks bad, but if there was
any possible way of handling her, Rodebush and Cleveland did it. All our
tracers are negative yet, so nothing definite has...."

He broke off as a frantic call came in from the Pittsburgh station for
the Commissioner, a call which Samms both heard and saw.

"The city is being attacked!" came the urgent message. "We need all the
reinforcements you can send us!" and a picture of the beleaguered city
appeared in ghastly detail upon the screens of the observers; a view
being recorded from the air. It required only seconds for the
commissioner to order every available man and engine of war to the seat
of conflict; then, having done everything they could, Hinkle and Samms
stared in helpless, fascinated horror into their plates, watching the
scenes of carnage and destruction depicted there.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Nevian vessel--the sister-ship, the craft which Costigan had seen in
mid-space as it hurtled earthward in response to Nerado's summons--hung
poised in full visibility, high above the metropolis. Scornful of the
pitiful weapons wielded by man she hung there, her sinister beauty of
line sharply defined against the cloudless sky. From her shining hull
there reached down a tenuous but rigid rod of crimson energy; a rod
which slowly swept hither and thither as the detectors of the amphibians
searched out the richest deposits of the precious iron for which the
inhuman visitors had come so far. Iron, once solid, now a viscous red
liquid, was sluggishly flowing in an ever-thickening stream up that
intangible crimson duct and into the capacious storage tanks of the
Nevian raider; and wherever that flaming beam went there went also ruin,
destruction, and death. Office buildings, skyscrapers towering
majestically in their architectural symmetry and beauty, collapsed into
heaps of debris as their steel skeletons were abstracted. Deep into the
ground the beam bored; flood, fire, and explosion following in its wake
as the mazes of underground piping disappeared. And the humanity of the
buildings died: instantaneously and painlessly, never knowing what
struck them, as the life-bearing iron of their bodies went to swell the
Nevian stream.

Pittsburgh's defenses had been feeble indeed. A few antiquated railway
rifles had hurled their shells upward in futile defiance, and had been
quietly absorbed. The district planes of Triplanetary, newly armed with
iron-driven ultra-beams, had assembled hurriedly and had attacked the
invader in formation, with but little more success. Under the impact of
their beams the stranger's screens had flared white, then poised ship
and flying squadron alike had been lost to view in a murkily opaque
shroud of crimson flame. The cloud had soon dissolved, and from the
place where the planes had been there had floated or crashed down a
litter of non-ferrous wreckage. And now the cone of space-ships from the
Buffalo base of Triplanetary was approaching Pittsburgh, hurling itself
toward the Nevian plunderer and toward known, gruesome and hopeless
defeat.

"Stop them, Hinkle!" Samms cried. "It's sheer slaughter! They haven't
got a thing--they aren't even equipped yet with the iron drive!"

"I know it," the commissioner groaned, "and Admiral Barnes knows it as
well as we do, but it can't be helped--wait a minute! The Washington
cone is reporting. They're as close as the other, and they have the new
armament. Philadelphia is close behind, and so is New York. Now perhaps
we can do something!"

The Buffalo flotilla slowed and stopped, and in a matter of minutes the
detachments from the other bases arrived. The cone was formed and
iron-driven vessels in the van, the old-type craft far in the rear, it
bore down upon the Nevian, vomiting from its hollow front a solid
cylinder of annihilation. Once more the screens of the Nevian flared
into brilliance, once more the red cloud of destruction was flung
abroad. But these vessels were not entirely defenseless. Their
iron-driven ultra-generators threw out screens of the Nevians' own
formulae, screens of prodigious power to which the energies of the
amphibians clung and at which they clawed and tore in baffled, wildly
coruscant displays of power unthinkable. For minutes the furious
conflict raged, while the inconceivable energy being dissipated by those
straining screens hurled itself in terribly destructive bolts of
lightning upon the city far beneath.

No battle of such incredible violence could long endure. Triplanetary's
ships were already exerting their utmost power, while the Nevians,
contemptuous of Solarian science, had not yet uncovered their full
strength. Thus the last desperate effort of mankind was proved futile as
the invaders forced their beams deeper and deeper into the overloaded,
defensive screens of the war-vessels; and one by one the supposedly
invincible space-ships of humanity dropped in horribly dismembered
wreckage upon the ruins of what had once been Pittsburgh.




CHAPTER IX

  Specimens


Only too well founded was Costigan's conviction that the submarine of
the deep-sea fishes had not been able to prevail against Nerado's
formidable engines of destruction. For days the Nevian lifeboat with its
three Terrestrial passengers hurtled through the interstellar void
without incident, but finally the operative's fears were realized--his
far-flung detector screens reacted; upon his observation plate lay
revealed Nerado's mammoth space-ship, in full pursuit of its fleeing
lifeboat!

"On your toes, folks--it won't be long now!" Costigan called, and
Bradley and Clio hurried into the tiny control room.

Armor donned and tested, the three Terrestrials stared into the
observation plates, watching the rapidly enlarging pictures of the
Nevian space-ship. Nerado had traced them and was following them, and
such was the power of the great vessel that the nearly inconceivable
velocity of the lifeboat was the veriest crawl in comparison to that of
the pursuing cruiser.

"And we've hardly started to cover the distance back to Tellus. Of
course you couldn't get in touch with anybody yet?" Bradley stated,
rather than asked.

"I kept on trying until they blanketed my wave, but all negative.
Thousands of times too far for my transmitter. Our only hope of reaching
