
So ran the popular fancy, guided by Tarrano. We were given our
pseudo-liberty, watched always by the unseen eyes of Tarrano's guards.
And there was nothing we could do but accept our status. Tarrano was
guiding his destiny cleverly. Yet underneath it all, unseen forces were
at work. We sensed them. The _slaans_--submissive at their menial tasks,
but everywhere with sullen, resentful glances. Perhaps Tarrano realized
his danger; but I do not think that he, any more than the rest of us,
realized what the Water Festival was to bring forth.

That night--our first night on Venus--midway between the darkness of
sunset and the dawn--we buried Wolfgar. The air was soft and warm, with
a gentle breeze that riffled the placid waters of the lake. Overhead,
the sky gleamed with a myriad stars--reddish stars, all of them like Red
Mars himself as seen through the heavy Venus atmosphere. Largest of
them, the Earth. My birthplace! Save Elza here with me on Venus, that
tiny red spot in the heavens, red like the tip of a lighted
arrant-cylinder, held all that was dear to me!

The funeral cortege--a solemn line of panoplied boats, started from the
palace. Boats hung with purple fabric. In single file they wended their
way through the city streets. From every landing, balcony, window and
roof-top, the people stared down at us. The street corners were hung
with shaded tubes of light, shining down with spots of color to the
water.

As we passed, the people bowed their heads, hands to their foreheads,
palms outward. The gesture of grief. From one building came a low
musical chant.

"Honor to Wolfgar! The man who gave his life for our Princess. Honor to
Wolfgar!"

We came to the edge of the city. The lake here narrowed to a river--a
length of winding river opening to the pond which was the burial place
of Eternal Peace. On Tarrano's barge, with Elza and Georg, we led the
way. Maida was not with us. I asked Tarrano where she was, but solemnly
he denied me.

At the burial waters--on the sloping banks of which a silent throng had
gathered--we landed. And following us, the other vessels of the cortege
came along and stopped beside us. The pond was dotted with white markers
for the graves. The whole scene unlighted, save for the stars, and the
red and purple aural lights of the Venus heavens, which mounted the sky
at this midnight hour. A great, glowing arc--the reflected glow from a
myriad cluster of tiny moons and moon-dust, encircling Venus. The soft
light from it flooded the water and the tombs with a flush of red and
purple.

As we lay there against the bank, with that silent throng breathlessly
watching, from down the river came the last vessel of our cortege. It
made a scene I shall never forget. The bier. Draped in purple. A single,
half-naked _slaan_ propelling it with a sweep from its stern. The body
of Wolfgar lying on its raised prow--his dead, white face, with peace
upon it. Beside the body, the lone figure of Maida, kneeling at
Wolfgar's head, with her white, braided hair falling down over her
shoulders. Kneeling and staring, almost expressionless; but I knew that
with her whole heart she was speeding the soul of Wolfgar to its eternal
peace.




CHAPTER XX

_Unseen Menace_


That day following the burial of Wolfgar, there was nothing of
importance occurred. No news from the Earth could get in. I felt that
the Earth might be planning an attack. Probably was, since war had been
declared. Yet that of course was months away.

Tarrano apparently was engaged in the pleasurable triumph of the coming
Water Festival. All day he seemed engaged in planning it. But I knew
that he was engaged secretly with far sterner things concerning the Cold
Country, which lay a day's journey from us. But what they were, I did
not know.

The Water Festival was all we talked of. That afternoon, Tarrano
describing it, said smilingly:

"They say it is for me. But, Lady Elza--it is _I_ who plan it--for you.
You have not seen the Red Woman." A gleam of amusement played upon his
lips; but as he regarded Elza, I saw another look--of speculation, as
though he were gauging her.

"The Red Woman, Lady Elza. She will preside tonight. You will find
her--very interesting. We will watch her together, you and I."

I did not know then what he meant; but I remembered the words later, and
understood only too well.

Just after sundown, when I chanced to be in a small boat alone, near the
palace, the first of two significant incidents occurred. From the
shadows beneath a house, the head of a swimming man emerged. A _slaan_,
and he gripped the sides of my boat as I drifted.

"Wait, Earth man." He spoke in the quaint universal language, which I
understood, though imperfectly.

I gazed at him. A bullet-like head, with sullen, blazing eyes. He added:
"We do not blame you--or your woman, Elza--or the Princess Maida. Have
no fear, but guard yourself well tonight."

Before I could speak he had sunk into the water, swimming beneath it. I
could see the phosphorescence of his moving body as he swam away into
the shadows beyond my line of vision.

The other incident came a moment later. As I was gazing down into the
water I saw a moving metal shape. A triangular metal head, as of a
diver's cap. More than that, it turned upward; and behind its pane was a
man's face. Unfamiliar to me--yet the face of an Anglo-Saxon man of
Earth! Unmistakable! It stared at me a moment--no more than three or
four feet below my boat. And then it moved away and vanished.

I had no opportunity to speak alone with Elza, or Georg or Maida that
entire evening. Always Tarrano was with us. We sat upon the palace
balcony, we men smoking our arrant-cylinders. Tarrano talked and joked
like a care-free youth. He was very courteous to Elza, with a holiday
spirit upon him. But his eyes never relaxed; and often I could see him
measuring her.

The aural lights mounted the sky. The holiday spirit which was on
Tarrano was spreading everywhere throughout the city. Boats gayly
bedecked--in such contrast to the funeral cortege of poor Wolfgar just
the night before--began passing the palace on their way to the festival
waters. Men and laughing girls thronged them. All with red masks
covering their faces. The men in grey tight-fitting garments, with
conical caps and flowing plumes; the girls in bright-colored, flowing
robes, and tresses dangling with flowers entwined in them.

The balcony upon which we sat was close above the water level. The
barges, of every size and kind, glided past. Sometimes the girls would
shower us with flower petals. One small boat paused before us. A girl
stood up to wave at me. Her hand, held up with the loose robe falling
back from her slim white arm, offered me a huge scarlet blossom. The
love offering. As I hesitated, her laughter rippled out. She tore the
mask from her face. Her red mouth was smiling; her eyes, provocative,
were dancing with mischief. She tossed the flower into my face as her
escort, with a shout of mock anger, pulled her back to him.

Their boats glided on.

Other boats passed; some with girls gayly strumming instruments of
music. One boat with a man strumming, and a girl on a small dais,
dancing with a whirl of black veils. As they came opposite to us another
man in the boat reached up and pushed the girl overboard. She fell into
the water with a scream of laughter; came up like a mermaid and they
pulled her aboard, the veils and her hair clinging to her.

At last Tarrano signified that we must go. It was upon me then to make
an effort to draw back, to keep Elza and Maida at the palace with Georg
and me. My heart was heavy with foreboding. Amid all this laughter and
music--pleasure of the senses reigning supreme here in the Great City
tonight--I could not miss a sense of impending evil. The _slaans_
propelling the boats were stolid and grim. Not for them, this dalliance.
Not for their women, this music and laughter, these daring costumes to
display their beauty. The _slaan_ women, drab with work, were slinking
about unnoticed. Often I would see a boat of them slip by, furtively, in
the shadows. Drab women, watching these beauties, resentful, sullen--and
with what purpose smouldering in their hearts I could only guess.

The very air--to me at least--seemed pregnant with impending evil. I
know that Georg felt it too. Often I had caught his eye as he regarded
me. Once he started to whisper to me aside, but like a flash, Tarrano
with his microphonic ear, turned to interrupt us.

I wanted to stay with Elza at the palace. Suddenly I was afraid of
Tarrano, more afraid for Elza than I had ever been. And who, and what
was this Red Woman? Maida knew, of course. Maida had been very solemn
for hours; thoughtful, almost grim.

And the _slaan_ in the water who said he did not blame us. He had warned
us to guard ourselves. But how? There were no weapons. On this night of
pleasure nothing would have been more incongruous.

And that metal cap in the water with a man's face behind it? An Earth
man of my own race! What did it mean?

I was perturbed--frightened. But I did not demur when Tarrano led us to
his flower-bedecked barge. Of what use?

We were paired. Georg with Maida; Elza with Tarrano. And I? Tarrano told
me curtly--and with a smile of ironic amusement--that when we reached
the festival so handsome a man as I would have no trouble engaging the
attention of some Venus maiden.

On cushions in the barge we reclined while our _slaans_ poled us along
the streets. Tarrano was feeding sweets to Elza as though they were gay
young lovers. Poor little Elza! She was frightened. Her face was a
trifle pale, her lips set. But she, too, knew that we were wholly in
Tarrano's power, and she made the best of the situation. Sometimes she
would laugh gayly; but I could not miss the note of fear in it.

The progress of our barge was slow. Boats clustered around us, their
occupants pelting us with flowers. A deluge spray of perfume was turned
on us--a heavy, exotic scent, almost cloying. It lay redolent on our
garments for hours.

Presently Tarrano gave us masks. And long robes for Maida and Elza to
cover the gay holiday dresses they were wearing.

At the edge of the city a canal had been dug through the hillside. We
passed slowly through it, under archways of dangling colored lights,
around a sharp bend and came upon the Water Festival. And--with
impending tragedy for the moment forgotten--I gazed for this first time
at such a scene of pleasure and beauty as I had never even imagined.




CHAPTER XXI

_Love, Music--and a Warning_


The Water Festival! As our barge rounded a bend in the canal, under the
archways of dangling colored lights, the festival spread before us.
Involuntarily I stood up to gaze. The canal opened into an artificial
lake--a broad circular sheet of water some 800 _helans_[17] in diameter.
Sloping hillsides enclosed the lake--hillsides which I saw were terraced
with huge banks of seats in tiers one above the other.

[Footnote 17: About 4,000 feet.]

The seats were crowded with people. White ribbons of roads gave access
from the neighboring countryside for land-surface vehicles, and there
were stages for the accommodation of air-craft. The rural populace, and
people from the nearby smaller cities, had gathered to view this
national spectacle--a million or more of them probably, with their
individual electrical telescopes for direct distant vision, and small
pocket mirrors for that which otherwise would be hidden. A million
people at least, seated here on these gigantic spreading tiers.

The lake itself was thus the stage as it were, of a tremendous arena.
Tiny artificial islands dotted the lake--a hundred of them. Islands,
some no more than a few feet broad; some larger, and in the center of
the lake, one quite large. All the islands were covered with luxuriant
vegetation. The tiny ones were no more than shadowed nooks of leaves and
flowers.

Between the islands, crooked lanes of the placid water wended their way
in and out, broadening into occasional lagoons. Bridges crossed the
lanes; archways of lights spanned them at intervals.

From this distance the whole scene was a riot of color and great red and
purple auroral lights of Venus, which at this midnight hour rode the
upper sky, tinged everything vividly. The archway lights were soft rose,
silver and gold. Some of the tiny islands, from sources hidden were
bathed in bright silver. Others darker, in deep purple and red; still
others, quite unlighted, dim and shadowed, touched only by the reflected
glow from those near them.

From the main island lights were flashing into the sky; occasional color
bombs mounted and burst, painting the heavens.

A riot of color. And then as we approached, I became aware of sound and
movement as well. Music from scores of unseen sources. Music from single
isolated instruments floating softly over the water--lovers playing
accompaniment to their pleading voices; or again, groups of voices--the
curiously mellow voices of young girls--and, on an island apart, music
from an aerial carrying strains from the public _concelan_.[18]

[Footnote 18: Orchestra.]

It was all music of a type unfamiliar to me of Earth. The
intellectuality of our Earth music was missing. This music of Venus was
built upon queer minor strains; unfinished cadences; a rhythm of the
sort we of Earth could never encompass. I listened, and felt the appeal
of my senses. The lavish, abandoned music of barbarism? I had almost
thought it that. Yet it was not. Rather was it decadent. This whole
scene; the color, the music, the heavy cloying scents with which the
night air was redolent; the warm, sensuous abandonment, felt rather than
made obvious--it was not barbarism, but decadence. And I realized then
how close are the two extremes. A reversion to type, merely. And I knew,
then, that from the pinnacle of civilization which we of Earth had
reached, naught lay before us but this.

Music everywhere throughout the festival. And movement. As we floated
out of the canal, passing slowly along one of the broader waterways,
boats and barges slipped past us. Barges crowded with revelers. And the
small boats, generally with but a man and a girl--fugitive couples with
the holiday spirit upon them, seeking the shadowed nooks of islands for
their love-making.

In one lagoon we came upon such a boat. The man in it--a gay youth in
red and black motley, with the mask fallen from his laughing, perspiring
face--was in its stern, manipulating it with a long, thin paddle. The
girl was lying face down on cushions in its prow. She was facing
forward, with her long white hair tumbling about her. Around the boat
were clustered a number of other boats. Each was small, with only a man
in it. A ring of boats, besieging the girl. Our barge paused to watch. A
boat would dash forward, its occupant standing up to thrust it on. But
the girl, swung to meet it by the efforts of her escort, would turn her
cylinder of _alcholite_[19] upon the attacker. Befuddled, her adversary
would retreat; or another, momentarily drunk, would fall into the water
to be sobered.

[Footnote 19: A scent or perfume, highly intoxicating.]

All with gay shouts of laughter; until at last the couple were
victorious and scurried away to their island.

We passed on. There were mimic battles often on the islands. A hidden
couple found out and dragged back. A lone man attacked and pelted with
flowers by a band of marauding girls. A diving platform at one end of an
oval lagoon. Girls mounting it to dive into the red-shimmering water,
where waiting youths were swimming, and by their prowess in downing
other contenders would seize upon the girls and carry them off to where
a barge was loading its passengers for the main island.

To this main island we came at last. It was heavily wooded, and indented
with shallow, placid waterways. In one of them we landed; and amid a
sudden quiet and awe at the presence of Tarrano, we went ashore. Georg
walking with Maida; Tarrano forcing Elza to hold his arm; and I, beside
Elza until Tarrano sternly bade me walk behind.

We were masked, but the revelers knew us. Amid the throng with which the
island was packed, we moved slowly forward toward a gay pavilion which
was in the center of the grove. Music came from it--a broad, roofed-over
pavilion with a dancing floor in the depression of its center space, and
tiers of balconies above it.

Within the pavilion, where the air was heavy with the smell of wine,
arrant-smoke, intoxicating whiffs of surreptitiously used
alcholite-cylinders and sensuous perfumes upon the garments of the
women--in here, the throng pressed around us; the dancers stopped to
gaze; the music momentarily hushed; the spectators on the
balconies--girls reclining on cushions with young gallants seated beside
them with trays of food and drink--all turned to crane down at us.

"Honor to the Master Tarrano!"

A girl shouted it. A murmur of applause swept about us.

Abruptly Tarrano removed his mask. His face, which had been concealed,
showed with the flush of pleasure and his lips were parted with a smile
of gratification and triumph. But, as the red silk mask was doffed,
another took its place--the mask of imperturbability--that grave,
inscrutable look with which he always masked his real emotions.

"Honor to the Master Tarrano!"

Tarrano raised his hand; his quiet, calm voice carried throughout the
silent room.

"There is no Master here tonight. No Master--only the Mistress of Love.
Let us honor her. Let _her_ rule us all--tonight."

For just an instant his gaze seemed to linger upon Elza; then he gravely
replaced his red mask. Applause swept the room; the music started again.
The lights overhead began whirling their kaleidoscope of colors down
upon the dancers.

We took our places in a canopied enclosure upon the first balcony, some
twenty feet above the dance floor. Tarrano refused the cushions; he
placed Elza deferentially upon them, and spread food and drink and
sweet-meats before her. Near them sat Georg and Maida. I would have sat
between Elza and Georg, but Tarrano pulled me away from them.

"You are wanted below." He said it very softly, for my ears alone; but
through his mask I could see his eyes blazing at me.

"They are diving into the pool outside--cannot you hear them, Jac
Hallen?" Impatience came to his voice; in truth, I must have been
staring at him witless. "Maidens out there, Jac Hallen, who are seeking
handsome youths like yourself for escort. Must I speak plainly? You are
not wanted here. Go!"

"I----"

"Another word will be your last." His voice was still almost
emotionless, but I did not miss the gesture of his hand to his belt.
"You had best obey, Jac Hallen."

I was hardly so witless as not to realize the truth of his admonition. I
turned away; and with all the laughter and movement around us, I think
that Georg, Maida and Elza did not see me go.

For the space of an hour or more, I stood alone on the lower floor of
the pavilion, watching the balcony where Tarrano and the others sat.
Stood there alone, feeling helpless and with my heart heavy with
foreboding. Beneath my grey robe I was dressed in holiday fashion of the
Great City--beribboned and gartered, with feathers at my scarlet
shoulders for all the world like a male _nada_.[20] My red mask I kept
on, and folded my cloak around me.

[Footnote 20: A popinjay--fop.]

The dance floor was crowded. I saw now that it was cut into small
circles marked with black--circles in diameter about the length of a
man. At intervals--perhaps five minutes apart--a signal in the music
caused each of the dancing couples to select a circle and to dance
wholly within it. And then one of the circles, by mechanical device, was
raised into the air above all the others. The couple on it, thus
prominent, danced at their best, to be judged by Tarrano for a prize.

For an hour I stood there. I could see Elza plainly. She had removed her
mask. Her face was flushed, her lips laughing. Once, in a chance
silence, her shout of applause rang out. The quality of abandonment in
it turned me cold. Did I see Tarrano's hand move back to his belt? Was
he intoxicating her? Then I saw Maida make a gesture--wave something
from beneath her cloak at Elza. A scent to sober her? It seemed so, for
Elza looked confused; and I saw Maida flash her a look of warning.

Abruptly, from an alcove near me, a group of girls rushed out. Their
cloaks and white veils fell from them as they came my way--laughing as
they ran for the doorway leading outside to the pool. I was in their way
and they bumped into me; one of them gripped me. I tried to jerk loose,
but she clung. A slim girl, enveloped in her long, white tresses. Her
eyes laughed at me; her red mouth went up alluringly to my face.

"I love you--_you_, Jac Hallen." Her arms wound about my neck as she
clung. I was trying to cast her off when her fingers lifted a corner of
my mask.

"I was afraid you were _not_ Jac Hallen." Her whisper was relieved, and
it had suddenly turned swift and vehement. "I am sister to Maida--my
name, Alda. I am to warn you. When Tarrano dances with the Red
Woman--when they go up on the raised circle--_you drop to the floor_!
You understand? Keep down, or the rays might strike you! But be here,
