"Oh?"

"Yes." Major Quillan looked broodingly at his drink for a moment. "There
they sit," he remarked suddenly, "with their stupid plastic faces
hanging out! Rows of them. You feed them something you don't understand.
They don't understand it either. Nobody can tell me they can. But they
kick it around and giggle a bit, and out comes some ungodly suggestion."

"So they helped you find me?" she said cautiously. It was clear that the
major had strong feelings about computers.

"Oh, sure," he said. "It usually turns out it was a good idea to do what
those CCs say. Anything unusual that shows up in the area you're working
on gets chunked into the things as a matter of course. We were on the
liners. Dawn City reports back a couple of murders. 'Dawn City to the
head of the list!' cry the computers. Nobody asks why. They just plow
into the ticket purchase records. And right there are the little Argee
thumbprints!"

He looked at Trigger. "My own bet," he said, somewhat accusingly, "was
that you were one of those that had just taken off. We didn't know about
that ticket reservation."

"What I don't see," Trigger said, changing the subject, "is why two
murders should seem so very unusual. There must be quite a few of them,
after all."

"True," said Quillan. "But not murders that look like catassin
killings."

"Oh!" she said startled. "Is that what these were?"

"That's what Ship Security thinks."

Trigger frowned. "But what could be the connection--"

Quillan reached across the table and patted her hand. "You've got it!"
he said with approval. "Exactly! No connection. Some day I'm going to
walk down those rows and give them each a blast where it will do the
most good. It will be worth being broken for."

Trigger said, "I thought that catassin planet was being guarded."

"It is. It would be very hard to sneak one out nowadays. But somebody's
breeding them in the Hub. Just a few. Keeps the price up."

Trigger grimaced uncomfortably. She'd seen recordings of those swift,
clever, constitutionally murderous creatures in action. "You say it
looked like catassin killings. They haven't found it?"

"No. But they think they got rid of it. Emptied the air from most of the
ship after they surfaced and combed over the rest of it with life
detectors. They've got a detector system set up now that would spot a
catassin if it moved twenty feet in any direction."

"Life detectors go haywire out of normal space, don't they?" she said.
"That's why they surfaced then."

Quillan nodded. "You're a well-informed doll. They're pretty certain
it's been sucked into space or disposed of by its owner, but they'll go
on looking till we dive beyond Garth."

"Who got killed?"

"A Rest Warden and a Security officer. In the rest cubicle area. It
might have been sent after somebody there. Apparently it ran into the
two men and killed them on the spot. The officer got off one shot and
that set off the automatic alarms. So pussy cat couldn't finish the job
that time."

"It's all sort of gruesome, isn't it?" Trigger said.

"Catassins are," Quillan agreed. "That's a fact."

Trigger took another sip. She set down her glass. "There's something
else," she said reluctantly.

"Yes?"

"When you said you'd come on board to see I got to Manon, I was thinking
none of the people who'd been after me on Maccadon could know I was on
the Dawn City. They might though. Quite easily."

"Oh?" said Quillan.

"Yes. You see I made two calls to the ticket office. One from a street
ComWeb and one from the bank. If they already had spotted me by that
tracer material, they could have had an audio pick-up on me, I suppose."

"I think we'd better suppose it," said Quillan. "You had a tail when you
came out of the bank anyway." His glance went past her. "We'll get back
to that later. Right now, take a look at that entrance, will you?"

Trigger turned in the direction he'd indicated.

"They do look like they're somebody important," she said. "Do you know
them?"

"Some of them. That gentleman who looks like he almost has to be the
Dawn City's First Captain really is the Dawn City's First Captain. The
lady he's escorting into the lounge is Lyad Ermetyne. The Ermetyne.
You've heard of the Ermetynes?"

"The Ermetyne Wars? Tranest?" Trigger said doubtfully.

"They're the ones. Lyad is the current head of the clan."

The history of Hub systems other than one's own became so involved so
rapidly that its detailed study was engaged in only by specialists.
Trigger wasn't one. "Tranest is one of the restricted planets now, isn't
it?" she ventured.

"It is. Restriction is supposed to be a handicap. But Tranest is also
one of the wealthiest individual worlds in the Hub."

Trigger watched the woman with some interest as the party moved along a
dim corridor, followed by the viewer circuit's invisible pick-up. Lyad
Ermetyne didn't look more than a few years older than she was herself.
Rather small, slender, with delicately pretty features. She wore
something ankle-length and long-sleeved in lusterless gray with an odd,
smoky quality to it.

"Isn't she the empress of Tranest or something of the sort?" Trigger
asked.

Quillan shook his head. "They've had no emperors there, technically,
since they had to sign their treaty with the Federation. She just owns
the planet, that's all."

"What would she be doing, going to Manon?"

"I'd like to know," Quillan said. "The Ermetyne's a lady of many
interests. Now--see the plump elderly man just behind her?"

"The ugly one with the big head who sort of keeps blinking?"

"That one. He's Belchik Pluly and--"

"Pluly?" Trigger interrupted. "The Pluly Lines?"

"Yes. Why?"

"Oh--nothing really. I heard--a friend of mine--Pluly's got a yacht out
in the Manon System. And a daughter."

Quillan nodded. "Nelauk."

"How did you know?"

"I've met her. Quite a girl, that Nelauk. Only child of Pluly's old age,
and he dotes on her. Anyway, he's been on the verge of being
black-listed by Grand Commerce off and on through the past three
decades. But nobody's ever been able to pin anything more culpable on
him than that he keeps skimming extremely close to the limits of a large
number of laws."

"He's very rich, I imagine?" Trigger said thoughtfully.

"Very. He'd be much richer even if it weren't for his hobby."

"What's that?"

"Harems. The Pluly harems rate among the most intriguing and best
educated in the Hub."

Trigger looked at Pluly again. "Ugh!" she said faintly.

Quillan laughed. "The Pluly salaries are correspondingly high. Viewer's
dropping the group now, so there's just one more I'd like you to notice.
The tall girl with black hair, in orange."

Trigger nodded. "Yes. I see her. She's beautiful."

"So she is. She's also Space Scout Intelligence. Gaya. Comes from
Farnhart where they use the single name system. A noted horsewoman, very
wealthy, socially established. Which is why we like to use her in
situations like this."

Trigger was silent a moment. Then she said, "What kind of situation is
it? I mean, what's she doing with Lyad Ermetyne and the others?"

"She probably attached herself to the group as soon as she discovered
Lyad had come on board. Which," Quillan said, "is exactly what I would
have told Gaya to do if I'd spotted Lyad first."

Trigger was silent a little longer this time. "Were you thinking this
Lyad could be...."

"One of our suspects? Well," said Quillan judiciously, "let's say Lyad
has all the basic qualifications. Since she's come on board, we'd better
consider her. When something's going on that looks more than usually
tricky, Lyad is always worth considering. And there's one point that
looks even more interesting to me now than it did at first."

"What's that?"

"Those two little old ladies I eased out of their rightful cabin."

Trigger looked at him. "What about them?"

"This about them. The Askab of Elfkund is, you might way, one of the
branch managers of the Ermetyne interests in the Hub. He is also a
hard-working heel in his own right. But he's not the right size to be
one of the people we're thinking about. Lyad is. He might have been
doing a job for her."

"Job?" she asked. She laughed. "Not with those odd little grannies?"

"We know the odd little grannies. They're the Askab's poisoners and
pretty slick at it. They were sizing you up while you were having that
little chat, doll. Probably not for a coffin this time. You were just
getting the equivalent of a pretty thorough medical check-up.
Presumably, though, for some sinister ultimate purpose."

"How do you know?" Trigger asked, very uncomfortably.

"One of those little suitcases in their cabin was a diagnostic recorder.
It would have been standing fairly close to the door while you were
there. If they didn't take your recordings out before I got there,
they're still inside. They're being watched and they know it. It seemed
like a good idea to keep the Askab feeling fairly nervous until we found
out whether those sweethearts of his had been parked next door to you on
purpose."

"Apparently they were," Trigger admitted. "Nice bunch of people!"

"Oh, they're not all bad. Lyad has her points. And old Belchik, for
example, isn't really a heel. He just had no ethics. Or morals. And
revolting habits. Anyway, all this brings up the matter of what we
should do with you now."

Trigger set her glass down on the table.

"Refill?" Quillan inquired. He reached for the iced crystal pitcher
between them.

"No," she said. "I just want to make a statement."

"State away." He refilled his own glass.

"For some reason," said Trigger, "I've been acting lately--the last two
days--in a remarkably stupid manner."

Quillan choked. He set his glass down hastily, reached over and patted
her hand. "Doll," he said, touched, "it's come to you! At last."

She scowled at him. "I don't usually act that way."

"That," said Quillan, "was what had me so baffled. According to the
Commissioner and others, you're as bright in the head as a diamond,
usually. And frankly--"

"I know it," Trigger said dangerously. "Don't rub it in!"

"I apologize," said Quillan. He patted her other hand.

"At any rate," Trigger said, drawing her hands back, "now that I've
realized it, I'm going to make up for it. From here on out, I'll
cooperate."

"To the hilt?"

She nodded. "To the hilt! Whatever that is."

"You can't imagine," said Quillan, "how much that relieves me." He
filled her glass, giving her a relieved look. "I had definite
instructions, of course, not to do anything like grabbing you by the
back of the neck, flinging you into a rest cubicle and sitting on it,
guns drawn, until we'd berthed in Precol Port. But I was tempted, I can
tell you."

He paused and thought. "You know," he began again, "that really would be
the best."

"No!" Trigger said indignantly. "When I said cooperate, I meant
actively. Mihul said I'm considered one of the gang in this project.
From now on I'll behave like one. And I'll also expect to be treated
like one."

"Hm," said Quillan. "Well, there is something you can do, all right."

"What's that?"

"Go on display here, now."

"What for?" she asked.

"As bait, you sweet ninny! If the boss grabber is on this ship, we
should draw a new nibble from him." He appraised the green dress in the
mirror again. His expression grew absent. It might be best, Trigger
suspected, a trifle uneasily, to keep Major Quillan's thoughts turned
away from things like nibbling.

"All right," she said briskly. "Let's do that. But you'll have to brief
me."





13


She had felt somewhat self-conscious for the first two or three minutes.
But it helped when she caught a glimpse of their own table drifting by
among the others and realized that the smiling red-headed viewer image
over there looked completely at her ease.

It helped, too, that Major Quillan turned suddenly into the
light-but-ardent-conversation type of companion. In the short preceding
briefing he had pointed out that a bit of flirting, etc., was a
necessary, or at least nearly necessary, part of the act. Trigger was
going along with the flirting; he could be right about that. She
intended to stay on the alert for the etc.

They got nibbles very promptly. But not quite the right kind.

The concealed table ComWeb murmured, "A caller requests to be connected
with Major Quillan. Is it permitted?"

"Oho!" Quillan said poisonously. "I suspected we should have stayed off
circuit! Who's the caller?"

"The name given is Keth Deboll."

Quillan laughed. "Give the little wolf Major Quillan's regards and tell
him it was a good try. I'll look him up tomorrow."

He gave Trigger gentle wink. "Let 'em pant," he said. "At a distance!"

She smiled uncertainly. If he had a mustache, she thought, he'd be
twirling it.

There were two more calls in the next few minutes, of similar nature.
Quillan rebuffed them cheerfully. It was rather flattering in a way. She
wondered how so many people in the cocktail lounge happened to know
Quillan by name.

When the ComWeb reported the fourth caller, it sounded awed.

"The name given is the Lady Lyad Ermetyne!" it said.

Quillan beamed. "Lyad? Bless her heart! A pleasure. Put her through."

A screen shaped itself on the wall mirror to the right. Lyad Ermetyne's
face appeared in it.

"Heslet Quillan!" She smiled. "So you aren't permanently lost to your
friends, after all!" It was a light, liquid voice. It suited her
appearance perfectly.

"Only to the frivolous ones," Quillan said. His thick black brows went
up. His face took on a dedicated look. "I'm headed for Manon on duty."

She nodded. "Still with the Subspace Engineers?"

"And with the rank of major by now," Quillan said.

"Congratulations! But I'd already observed that your fabulous good
fortune hasn't deserted you in the least." Lyad's glance switched to
Trigger; she smiled again. It was a pleasant, easy smile that showed
white teeth. "Would you shield your ComWeb, Quillan?"

"Shield it?" Quillan looked surprised. "Why, certainly!" He reached
under the edge of the table. The drifting viewer images vanished. "Go
ahead."

Lyad's eyes turned back to Trigger. They were off-color eyes, like amber
or a light wine, fringed with long black lashes. Very steady, very
knowing eyes. Trigger felt herself tensing.
