hands, fumbling to catch her wrists, but before I could succeed she
toppled forward and fell partly over me.

I heard Miela give a cry of fright. I struggled free and raised myself up
to a half-sitting position. Baar's wife lay beside me dead, with the slave
woman's knife buried to the hilt in her back.

Reaching over, I took the knife from the dead woman's fingers, and with it
cut the cords that bound my ankles. I sprang to my feet. The slave had
retreated and stood shrinking against the side of the room, terrified at
what she had done. I paid no more attention to her for the moment, but
hastened to release Miela.

We searched the house hurriedly, calling to Lua; but she did not answer,
nor could we find her. When we returned the slave woman was still standing
where we had left her, staring with horrified eyes at the body of her
mistress.

"Tell her what she did was right," I said. "She may have saved the king.
Tell her to go to your house and wait for us."

The woman nodded eagerly when Miela told her what to do, and fell on her
knees before us.

"She says she will serve us always. She has been very badly treated,
Alan."

We sent the woman away, and with a last hasty glance around hurriedly left
the house alone with its single dead occupant. A large wooden mortar and
pestle, used for pounding rice, stood in the kitchen. I carried the pestle
away with me; it was nearly five feet long and quite heavy--an excellent
weapon.

We hastened up through the city--Miela half walking, half flying, and I
carrying this bludgeon and running with twelve-foot strides. But it was
now hardly more than three-quarters of an hour since we had passed this
way before, and there were still few people about to see us. Baar and his
men had started some twenty minutes before us, I figured, and we must
reach the castle before them.

I made extraordinary progress over the level country. But I could not run
uphill for long, and soon had to slow down to a walk. Miela kept closer to
me now. We approached the castle grounds.

"Where will the guards be, Miela? We must avoid them if we can. They might
try to stop us."

Miela did not know where they would be; but under the circumstances, as
Baar had told his men, she believed the guards would disappear from the
vicinity. This conjecture proved to be correct. The guards, not wishing to
be concerned in the affair at all, had simply disappeared. We saw nothing
of Baar and his men on the way up the mountain, although I had hoped we
might overtake them.

As we passed hurriedly through the palm gardens surrounding the castle I
saw its huge front doors were closed.

"Miela, we can't get in that way. A side entrance--or some other way--"

"I know," she said. "There is a smaller door below, and others on the
side."

We hastened on. Suddenly I gripped Miela by the arm.

"What's that--over there--see, beyond the grove?"

There seemed to be furtive figures lurking among the palms.

"Those cannot be Baar's men, Miela--there are too many. What can it--"

We had reached a little doorway under the front terrace. There was no time
to investigate these advancing figures. Baar and his men might already be
inside the castle.

I slid through the doorway, every muscle tense. Miela had brought the
knife from Baar's shack, and with it clenched in her hand was close beside
me. I wanted to make her stay outside, where she could fly away if danger
threatened, but she pleaded to follow me, and I let her come. I needed
her, since I had no idea of the interior arrangements of the building.

We passed along a dim hallway and up a narrow flight of stone steps. Not a
sound came to us; the interior of the castle was silent as a tomb. At the
top of the steps we came almost directly into the inner patio of the
building. Across a bed of tall flowers, nodding gently in a little morning
breeze that swept down from above, I saw the head and shoulders of a man
standing in the center of the courtyard; the lower part of his body was
hidden by the flowers. I tried to duck out of sight, but he had seen me.

He was not over forty feet away. I stepped back, believing I could reach
him in a single leap; but Miela held me.

"Not you, Alan. He would cry out. The noise would bring others." She
raised her knife, and her eyes blazed into mine. "Never have I thought to
kill a human. But now I--a woman--must kill. Stand quiet, Alan."

She flew swiftly up and poised over the man. He had started toward us.
Evidently he was, so far, as anxious for silence as we, for he made no
sound. I saw now he was one of those who had come to Baar's shack. His
naked shoulders, his thick neck, and bullet head were all that showed
above the flower stems as he plowed his way through them directly toward
me; but the hand he swung aloft to aid his progress held a knife.

He glanced up at Miela, poised in the air above him, and saw the weapon in
her hand. At this new enemy he stopped, confused.

Miela swooped down at him, and he struck at her with his knife; but she
avoided it with an incredibly swift turn, and a second later had passed
him and was crossing the courtyard.

Round and round she flew, her great wings flapping audibly, a giant bird
circling its prey. The man turned continually to face her. Several times
she swooped toward him, and as swiftly avoided his blow. From every side
she threatened. The man stood now bewildered, striking wild in a frenzy,
as one strikes at a darting wasp. At last, with an agonized cry, he turned
and ran. Instantly she dropped upon him; there was a flash of her white
arm; the man's body crumpled and lay still among the flowers.

Miela was back beside me. Her breast was heaving; her eyes were full of
tears; she trembled.

"A terrible thing, Alan, my husband, for a woman to do; but it had to be."

I pressed her hand with silent understanding.

"Come, Alan," she said. "They will have heard his cry. The others--we must
meet them, too."

"We must get to the king. I--"

A vibrant scream rang out from the silence of the house--a man's voice,
shrill with agony--then suddenly stilled.

"Good God, Miela! The king--where is he? Take me there."

She pulled me back through the doorway. A man scurried past. I leaped at
him and struck him a glancing blow with the heavy wooden pestle. He
stumbled to his knees. Without thought of giving quarter, I hit him again
before he could rise. He sank back, senseless or dead.

Miela was ahead of me, and I ran after her along a hallway. The sound of
scurrying footsteps sounded from overhead; a woman screamed.

A broad, curving stairway fronted us. I passed Miela halfway up, and,
reaching the top, ran full into another man who darted from a doorway
close by. The impact of my heavier body flung him backward to the floor. I
leaped over him with a shout of warning to Miela, and ran on into the
room.

A man was standing stock still in its center. It was Baar. He flung his
knife at me as I appeared, but it went wild. Two other men were coming
toward me from opposite sides of the room. I swung the bludgeon about me
viciously, keeping them away. Suddenly Baar shouted a command, and before
I could reach any one of them they had scurried away like rats.

A low bed with a huge canopy of silk stood against the wall. A woman knelt
on the floor beside it, and against her knees huddled a little half-grown
boy.

I heard Miela's voice shouting in her own language. The sound of men
running came from below. Then Miela's half-hysterical laughter, and then
the words: "They are running away, Alan--all of them. I have been calling
you to bring me the light-ray. And they are running away."

I turned to the bed, pushing its curtains aside, and then hurriedly
closing them again with a shudder.

Miela was beside me.

"The king is dead, Miela. No--you must not look."

Her eyes widened; her hand went to her breast.

"There is one who needs you." I pointed to the woman on the floor.

She was staring at us, unseeing, one arm flung about the child
protectingly, holding him partially under one of her long, sleek red
wings. The fingers of her other hand clutched convulsively at the bed
coverings; she was moaning softly with a grief and terror all the more
intense because it was restrained.

"There is one who needs you, Miela," I repeated. "Comfort her--for we have
come too late."

The castle now was in thorough confusion. Several waiting maids rushed
into the room, stared at their mistress and the little prince, and, seeing
what had happened, stood silently wringing their hands in fright, or fled
aimlessly through the halls. One of the king's councilors had come in,
stopping, bewildered, at the scene that met him.

"Tell him what has occurred, Miela," I said.

There came now faintly to my ears from outside the castle sounds of a
gathering crowd--murmurs and vague muffled shouts. The cries grew louder.
A rain of missiles struck the castle; a stone came through a near-by
window, falling almost at my feet. All at once I remembered the lurking
figures we had seen among the palms in the garden.

"Miela!" I cried. "Hear that, outside! A crowd is gathering. The men we
saw--out there! People whom Baar has--Miela, ask him, for God's sake, to
tell us how we can get weapons. Where are the other councilors? Send for
them. We must do something--now, at once. This is revolution, Miela--don't
you understand? Revolution!"

I felt so impotent. Here in this crisis I could talk to no one but
Miela--could issue no direct commands--could understand the words of no
one but her.

Suddenly, from over our heads, a great, solemn deep-throated bell began
tolling.

"What is that? What does that mean?"

A girl rushed into the room.

"It is the bell of danger," said Miela quickly. "The girls are ringing it
to arouse the city. Up here then will the people hurry to find out what it
is that threatens."

"They're outside now," I retorted. "Order all the king's councilors here
at once. Find out if any guards are about the place. Send them here. Where
is the head of the city's police? Send him here to me! Tell him to call
out all his men."

What was I saying? I had forgotten the one vital thing!

"Miela! The light-ray! These men of science who guard it, where are they?
Send for their leader. Get him here to me at once--we must have the ray!"

Miela stood very quietly beside me. Her face was white; her eyes blazed,
but she seemed calm and unfrightened.

"He will come," she said, "and armed with the ray. The bell will bring
him. Your other commands I will see are obeyed."

The old councilor, who had been standing by, dazed, came slowly forward at
Miela's call. The king's councilor! And all the others were like him. The
king was dead, and here was the little prince huddled in his mother's arm!
Realization had been slow in coming, but now it broke upon me like a great
light.

I flung the bludgeon away from me, and stood erect.

"Miela," I cried, "tell him--tell them all--their king is dead. It is _I_
who command now. There is no one else--and I have the power. Tell them
that. It is I, the man from earth, who commands!"



CHAPTER XIX.


THE NEW RULER.


The solemn bell continued pealing out its knell; the shouts and tumult
outside were growing louder. Miela spoke hurriedly to the old man, then
turned to leave the room.

"Your commands shall be obeyed, my husband," she said quietly.

I felt again that sudden sense of helplessness as I saw her leave.

"Be careful, Miela. Order every one in the castle to the roof. Here! Tell
the queen before you go. Send every one up there with me. The mob may come
in. We'll make our stand up there."

I understood Baar's plot better now. He had gathered his mob of peons to
surround the castle and make a demonstration in his favor. Then, with the
king dead and the queen and her little son held by him and his men--their
lives as forfeits--he hoped to be able to treat with the men of science
who controlled the light-ray, and who, I did not doubt, represented the
better element among the people.

It seemed a mad plan at best; and now that it had gone wrong, I wondered
what Baar would attempt to do. Evidently he and his henchmen had all left
the castle, fearing the light-ray, which Miela pretended I held. They were
outside now, among the mob, I assumed. Would the mob attempt to enter?

Miela hurried away to send every one inside the building to its roof. The
queen, following Miela's commands unquestioningly, took the little prince
by the hand and, signing to me to follow, led me upstairs.

There was only one stairway leading to the roof, I found with
satisfaction, and it was narrow--an excellent place for defense. The roof
was broad and flat, flanked at the ends by two towers which rose
considerably above it.

It was a frightened little group who gathered about me--the queen and her
son, two of the king's councilors, and perhaps half a dozen young girls
whom I took to be the queen's attendants. Others came up each moment.

I sat the queen down on a little white stone bench in the center of the
garden, and bowed before her respectfully. Then I smiled upon them all. I
think they were reassured and trusted me, and I found my commands were
obeyed without question.

The queen was a woman of perhaps thirty-five--tall and slender, with black
hair and eyes. She was dressed in a single garment of heavy white silk, a
dress that fell ungathered at the waist from above her breast under the
arms to her ankles. It was, I judged, her sleeping robe. Her hair hung in
two long braids over her shoulders; her feet were incased in sandals.

She was unquestionably a beautiful woman. I remember my vague surprise, as
I saw her, with her son by her side, and her long sleek wings unmutilated.
And then I saw that her wings were fastened together in two places by
little metal chains. She, then, like other married women, was not
permitted to fly, although the beauty of her wings was unspoiled.

I sent two of the old men to stand by the head of the stairs. Miela had
given me her knife, and I handed it now to one of them, trying to make him
understand that he was to bar the passage of any one who should not be
allowed up. He shuddered, but he took the knife and stood where I
indicated.

The crowd in the garden below had seen us on the roof now, and the tumult
of shouts was doubled. I went to the parapet and looked over.

The garden was full of a struggling, confused mass of people. Those
nearest the castle were mostly peons. I noticed men and a few women armed
with various implements of agriculture, and any sort of rude weapon they
could obtain. They were standing about in little groups or rushing
excitedly to and fro in aimless, uncommanded activity.

Many of them held stones in their hands, which occasionally they cast at
the building. It was one of those mobs that gather ready for trouble, is
swayed in almost any direction by any chance leadership, and most
frequently accomplishes nothing.

I felt a sudden sense of relief. The garden was rapidly filling up with
men and women of the more intelligent classes, who mingled with the
others, learned what had occurred--for I did not doubt but that the
knowledge of the king's death had spread about--and then stood waiting to
see what would happen.

The air was full of excited girls flying over the castle. A few alighted
for a moment on the roof, but I did not fear them. Where was Baar? I could
not hope to distinguish him among the crowd, but still I saw no sign of
his leadership. Had he seen the failure of his plan and, fearing the
results of his regicide, fled the vicinity? I hoped so fervently.

As I showed myself at the parapet a great shout arose. Some of the men--I
knew at once it was those who had heard I possessed the
light-ray--scattered in terror at my appearance. I determined then, if no
issue were raised that would demand my using this supposed weapon, I could
continue to command the situation.

I stood there a moment looking down. At the edge of the crowd I saw a few
figures whom I took to be members of the city's police. They were standing
idle, taking no part in what was going on. There seemed nothing I could do
until Miela returned. If only I could speak to the crowd! I wondered if I
dared descend among them and disperse the mob of peons. I went to the head
of the stairway. Three or four of the king's councilors were standing
there.

There was no one on the stairs; evidently every one living in the castle
was now on its roof--some thirty of them altogether. The crowd outside
quite evidently had no present intention of entering the building. The mob
of peons Baar had gathered were greatly in the minority now, and I felt
that matters were steadily improving. I wondered where Miela was, and then
while I was standing there I saw her coming up the stairs, a man following
close behind her.

I think I have never been so glad to see any one as I was to see her at
this moment. Her face was grave; her demeanor calm, as before.

"He is here," she said as she came to the head of the stairs. "This is
Fuero, Alan, leader of the men of science, who have the ray."

As he came out onto the roof I saw this man was easily the most dominant
personality I had so far encountered on Mercury. He was tall for his race,
although several inches shorter than I, a man of sixty, perhaps, with
iron-gray hair falling long about his ears.

He wore sandals and a pair of the usual knee-length, wide-cut trousers.
But what distinguished him in his dress was a broad panel of heavy silk,
hanging from neck to knee, both in back and front, with an opening at the
top through which his head was thrust. This silken panel was some eighteen
inches wide, light gray in color, and richly embroidered in gold in
various designs. It hung free, except for a slight fastening at the waist
line. Beneath it the man's naked torso--and his bare arms--showed
powerfully muscled.

His face was smooth shaven, with strong, regular features. I noticed, too,
there was a slight cleft in his square chin. His forehead was high, his
blue eyes kindly, yet with a searching, piercing quality about them.

It was not so much the man's general appearance as his bearing that made
me realize he was a forceful character. There was about him unmistakable
poise. I knew at once he felt his power, his authority. That he would use
it wisely I could not doubt.

He stood regarding me gravely--an appraising regard under which I felt
myself flushing a little. Miela spoke to him swiftly, and he inclined his
head to me by way of introduction, his glance meanwhile taking in the
scene on the roof.

With Miela as interpreter we held a hurried conversation. I learned then
that Fuero and his associates had many years before organized a society
for the development of the light-ray in its various forms. They had soon
realized in their experiments its diabolical power of destruction, and had
taken oath then that they would not use it, or allow it to be used, except
under the most critical circumstances of the nation's welfare.

Realizing, too, the power it gave them as individuals, they had sworn to
remain men of science only, taking no part in public affairs, remaining
rigidly aloof from all national affairs. Most of their work concerned the
development of the light-ray for industrial purposes. In these forms it
developed heat, but had very little power of projection.

All this Miela told me in a few brief sentences.

"How did Tao get the ray?" I demanded.

"Some members of the society proved false," she answered. "When Tao was
