metallic salts, as of mercury, steel, zinc, and copper, in small
quantities, have been repeatedly used in pulmonary consumption; and may
have relieved some of the symptoms. As mercury cures venereal ulcers, and
as pulmonary ulcers resemble them in their not having a disposition to
heal, and in their tendency to enlarge themselves, there were hopes, from
analogy, that it might have succeeded. Would a solution of gold in aqua
regia be worth trying? When vinegar is applied to the lips, it renders them
instantly pale, by promoting the venous absorption; if the whole skin was
moistened with warmish vinegar, would this promote venous absorption in the
lungs by their sympathy with the skin? The very abstemious diet on milk and
vegetables alone is frequently injurious. Flesh-meat once a day, with small
wine and water, or small beer, is preferable. Half a grain of opium twice a
day, or a grain, I believe to be of great use at the commencement of the
disease, as appears from the subsequent case.

Miss ----, a delicate young lady, of a consumptive family, when she was
about eighteen, had frequent cough, with quick pulse, a pain of her side,
and the general appearances of a beginning consumption. She took about five
drops of laudanum twice a day in a saline draught, which was increased
gradually to ten. In a few weeks she recovered, was afterwards married,
bore three or four children, and then became consumptive and died.

The following case of hereditary consumption is related by a physician of
great ability and very extensive practice; and, as it is his own case,
abounds with much nice observation and useful knowledge; and, as it has
been attended with a favourable event, may give consolation to many, who
are in a similar situation; and shews that Sydenham's recommendation of
riding as a cure for consumption is not so totally ineffectual, as is now
commonly believed.

    "J. C. aged 27, with black hair, and a ruddy complexion, was subject to
    cough from the age of puberty, and occasionally to spitting of blood.
    His maternal grandfather died of consumption under thirty years of age,
    and his mother fell a victim to this disease, with which she had long
    been threatened, in her 43d year, and immediately after she ceased to
    have children. In the severe winter of 1783-4, he was much afflicted
    with cough; and being exposed to intense cold, in the month of February
    he was seized with peripneumony. The disease was violent and dangerous,
    and after repeated bleedings as well as blisterings, which he supported
    with difficulty, in about six weeks he was able to leave his bed. At
    this time the cough was severe, and the expectoration difficult. A
    fixed pain remained on the left side, where an issue was inserted;
    regular hectic came on every day about an hour after noon, and every
    night heat and restlessness took place, succeeded towards morning by
    general perspiration.

    The patient, having formerly been subject to ague, was struck with the
    resemblance of the febrile paroxysm, with what he had experienced under
    that disease, and was willing to flatter himself it might be of the
    same nature. He therefore took bark in the interval of fever, but with
    an increase of his cough, and this requiring venesection, the blood was
    found highly inflammatory. The vast quantity of blood which he had lost
    from time to time, produced a disposition to fainting, when he resumed
    the upright posture, and he was therefore obliged to remain almost
    constantly in a recumbent position. Attempting to ride out in a
    carriage, he was surprised to find that he could sit upright for a
    considerable time, while in motion, without inconvenience, though, on
    stopping the carriage, the disposition to fainting returned.

    At this time, having prolonged his ride beyond the usual length, he one
    day got into an uneven road at the usual period of the recurrence of
    the hectic paroxysms, and that day he missed it altogether. This
    circumstance led him to ride out daily in a carriage at the time the
    febrile accession might be expected, and sometimes by this means it was
    prevented, sometimes deferred, and almost always mitigated.

    This experience determined him to undertake a journey of some length,
    and Bristol being, as is usual in such cases, recommended, he set out
    on the 19th of April, and arrived there on the 2d of May. During the
    greater part of this journey (of 175 miles) his cough was severe, and
    being obliged to be bled three different times on the road, he was no
    longer able to sit upright, but at very short intervals, and was
    obliged to lie at length in the diagonal of a coach. The hectic
    paroxysms were not interrupted during the journey, but they were
    irregular and indistinct, and the salutary effects of exercise, or
    rather of gestation, were impressed on the patient's mind.

    At Bristol he stayed a month, but reaped no benefit. The weather was
    dry and the roads dusty; the water insipid and inert. He attempted to
    ride on horseback on the downs, but was not able to bear the fatigue
    for a distance of more than a hundred yards. The necessity of frequent
    bleedings kept down his strength, and his hectic paroxysms continued,
    though less severe. At this time, suspecting that his cough was
    irritated by the west-winds bearing the vapour from the sea, he
    resolved to try the effects of an inland situation, and set off for
    Matlock in Derbyshire.

    During the journey he did not find the improvement he expected, but the
    nightly perspirations began to diminish; and the extraordinary fatigue
    he experienced proceeded evidently from his travelling in a
    post-chaise, where he could not indulge in a recumbent position. The
    weather at Bristol had been hot, and the earth arid and dusty. At
    Matlock, during the month of June 1784, there was almost a perpetual
    drizzle, the soil was wet, and the air moist and cold. Here, however,
    the patient's cough began to abate, and at intervals he found an
    opportunity of riding more or less on horseback. From two or three
    hundred yards at a time, he got to ride a mile without stopping; and at
    length he was able to sit on horseback during a ride from Mason's Bath
    to the village of Matlock along the Derwent, and round on the opposite
    banks, by the works of Mr. Arkwright, back to the house whence he
    started, a distance of five miles. On dismounting, however, he was
    seized with diliquium, and soon after the strength he had recovered was
    lost by an attack of the haemorrhoids of the most painful kind, and
    requiring much loss of blood from the parts affected.

    On reflection, it appeared that the only benefit received by the
    patient was during motion, and continued motion could better be
    obtained in the course of a journey than during his residence at any
    particular place. This, and other circumstances of a private but
    painful nature, determined him to set out from Matlock on a journey to
    Scotland. The weather was now much improved, and during the journey he
    recruited his strength. Though as yet he could not sit upright at rest
    for half an hour together without a disposition to giddiness, dimness
    of sight, and deliquium, he was able to sit upright under the motion of
    a post-chaise during a journey of from 40 to 70 miles daily, and his
    appetite began to improve. Still his cough continued, and his hectic
    flushings, though the chills were much abated and very irregular.

    The salutary effects of motion being now more striking than ever, he
    purchased a horse admirably adapted to a valetudinarian in
    Dumfriesshire, and being now able to sit on horseback for an hour
    together, he rode out several times a day. He fixed his residence for a
    few weeks at Moffat, a village at the foot of the mountains whence the
    Tweed, the Clyde, and the Annan, descend in different directions; a
    situation inland, dry, and healthy, and elevated about three hundred
    feet above the surface of the sea. Here his strength recovered daily,
    and he began to eat animal food, which for several months before he had
    not tasted. Persevering in exercise on horseback, he gradually
    increased the length of his rides, according to his strength, from four
    to twenty miles a day; and returning on horseback to Lancashire by the
    lakes of Cumberland, he arrived at Liverpool on the first of September,
    having rode the last day of his journey forty miles.

    The two inferences of most importance to be drawn from this narrative,
    are, first, the extraordinary benefit derived from gestation in a
    carriage, and still more the mixture of gestation and exercise on
    horseback, in arresting or mitigating the hectic paroxysm; and
    secondly, that in the florid consumption, as Dr. Beddoes terms it, an
    elevated and inland air is in certain circumstances peculiarly
    salutary; while an atmosphere loaded with the spray of the sea is
    irritating and noxious. The benefit derived in this case from exercise
    on horseback, may lead us to doubt whether Sydenham's praise of this
    remedy be as much exaggerated as it has of late been supposed. Since
    the publication of Dr. C. Smyth on the effects of swinging in lowering
    the pulse in the hectic paroxysm, the subject of this narrative has
    repeated his experiments in a great variety of cases, and has confirmed
    them. He has also repeatedly seen the hectic paroxysm prevented, or cut
    short, by external ablution of the naked body with tepid water.

    So much was his power of digestion impaired or vitiated by the immense
    evacuations, and the long continued debility he underwent, that after
    the cough was removed, and indeed for several years after the period
    mentioned, he never could eat animal food without heat and flushing,
    with frequent pulse and extreme drowsiness. If this drowsiness was
    encouraged, the fever ran high, and he awoke from disturbed sleep,
    wearied and depressed. If it was resolutely resisted by gentle
    exercise, it went off in about an hour, as well as the increased
    frequency of the pulse. This agitation was however such as to
    incapacitate him during the afternoon for study of any kind. The same
    effects did not follow a meal of milk and vegetables, but under this
    diet his strength did not recruit; whereas after the use of animal food
    it recovered rapidly, notwithstanding the inconvenience already
    mentioned. For this inconvenience he at last found a remedy in the use
    of coffee immediately after dinner, recommended to him by his friend
    Dr. Percival. At first this remedy operated like a charm, but by
    frequent use, and indeed by abuse, it no longer possesses its original
    efficacy.

    Dr. Falconer, in his Dissertation on the Influence of the Passions and
    Affections of the Mind on Health and Disease, supposes that the
    cheerfulness which attends hectic fever, the ever-springing hope, which
    brightens the gloom of the consumptive patient, increases the diseased
    actions, and hastens his doom. And hence he is led to enquire, whether
    the influence of fear might not be substituted in such cases to that of
    hope with advantage to the patient? This question I shall not presume
    to answer, but it leads me to say something of the state of the mind in
    the case just related.

    The patient, being a physician, was not ignorant of his danger, which,
    some melancholy circumstances served to impress on his mind. It has
    already been mentioned, that his mother and grandfather died of this
    disease. It may be added, that in the year preceding that on which he
    himself was attacked, a sister of his was carried off by consumption in
    her 17th year; that in the same winter in which he fell ill, two other
    sisters were seized with the same fatal disorder, to which one of them
    fell a victim during his residence at Bristol, and that the hope of
    bidding a last adieu to the other was the immediate cause of his
    journey to Scotland, a hope which, alas! was indulged in vain. The day
    on which he reached the end of his journey, her remains were committed
    to the dust! It may be conjectured from these circumstances, that
    whatever benefit may be derived from the apprehension of death, must in
    this case have been obtained. The expectation of this issue was indeed
    for some time so fixed that it ceased to produce much agitation; in
    conformity to that general law of our nature, by which almost all men
    submit with composure to a fate that is foreseen, and that appears
    inevitable. As however the progress of disease and debility seemed to
    be arrested, the hope and the love of life revived, and produced, from
    time to time, the observations and the exertions already mentioned.

    Wine and beer were rigorously abstained from during six months of the
    above history; and all the blood which was taken was even to the last
    buffy." Feb. 3, 1795.

8. _Febris scrophulosa._ The hectic fever occasioned by ulcers of the
lymphatic glands, when exposed to the air, does not differ from that
attending pulmonary consumption, being accompanied with night-sweats and
occasional diarrhoea.

M. M. The bark. Opium internally. Externally cerussa and bark in fine
powder. Bandage. Sea-bathing. See Class I. 2. 3. 21. and II. 1. 4. 13.

9. _Febris ischiadica._ A hectic fever from an open ulcer between the
muscles of the pelvis, which differs not from the preceding. If the matter
in this situation lodges till part of it, I suppose, becomes putrid, and
aerates the other part; or till it becomes absorbed from some other
circumstance; a similar hectic fever is produced, with night-sweats, or
diarrhoea.

Mrs. ----, after a lying in, had pain on one side of her loins, which
extended to the internal part of the thigh on the same side. No fluctuation
of matter could be felt; she became hectic with copious night-sweats, and
occasional diarrhoea, for four or five weeks; and recovered by, I suppose,
the total absorption of the matter, and the reunion of the walls of the
abscess. See Class II. 1. 2. 18.

10. _Febris Arthropuodica._ Fever from the matter of diseased joints. Does
the matter from suppurating bones, which generally has a very putrid smell,
produce hectic fever, or typhus? See Class II. 1. 4. 16.

11. _Febris a pure contagioso._ Fever from contagious pus. When the
contagious matters have been produced on the external habit, and in process
of time become absorbed, a fever is produced in consequence of this
reabsorption; which differs with the previous irritability or
inirritability, as well as with the sensibility of the patient.

12. _Febris variolosa secundaria._ Secondary fever of small-pox. In the
distinct small-pox the fever is of the sensitive irritated or inflammatory
kind; in the confluent small-pox it is of the sensitive inirritated kind,
or typhus gravior. In both of them the swelling of the face, when the
matter there begins to be absorbed, and of the hands, when the matter there
begins to be absorbed, shew, that it stimulates the capillary vessels or
glands, occasioning an increased secretion greater than the absorbents can
take up, like the action of the cantharides in a blister; now as the
application of a blister on the skin frequently occasions the strangury,
which shews, that some part of the cantharides is absorbed; there is reason
to conclude, that a part of the matter of small-pox is absorbed, and thus
produces the secondary fever. See Class II. 1. 3. 9. And not simply by its
stimulus on the surface of the ulcers beneath the scabs. The exsudation of
a yellow fluid from beneath the confluent eruptions on the face before the
height is spoken of in Class II. 1. 3. 2.

The material thus absorbed in the secondary fever of small-pox differs from
that of open ulcers, as it is only aerated through the elevated cuticle;
and secondly, because there is not a constant supply of fresh matter, when
that already in the pustules is exhausted, either by absorption, or by
evaporation, or by its induration into a scab. Might not the covering the
face assiduously and exactly with plasters, as with cerate of calamy, or
with minium plaster, by precluding the air from the pustules, prevent their
contracting a contagious, or acescent, or fever-producing power? and the
secondary fever be thus prevented entirely. If the matter in those pustules
on the face in the confluent small-pox were thus prevented from
oxygenation, it is highly probable, both from this theory, and from the
facts before mentioned, that the matter would not erode the skin beneath
them, and by these means no marks or scars would succeed.

13. _Febris carcinomatosa._ Fever from the matter of cancer. In a late
publication the pain is said to be relieved, and the fever cured, and the
cancer eradicated, by the application of carbonic acid gas, or fixed air.
See Class II. 1. 4. 16.

14. _Febris venerea._ From the absorption of the matter from venereal
ulcers and suppurating bones. See Syphilis, II. 1. 5. 2.

M. M. Any mercurial calx. Sarsaparilla? Mezereon?

15. _Febris a sanie putrida._ Fever from putrid sanies. When parts of the
body are destroyed by external violence, as a bruise, or by mortification,
a putrefaction soon succeeds; as they are kept in that degree of warmth and
moisture by their adhesion to the living parts of the body, which most
forwards that process. Thus the sloughs of mortified parts of the tonsils
give fetor to the breath in some fevers; the matter from putrefying teeth,
or other suppurating bones, is particularly offensive; and even the scurf,
which adheres to the tongue, frequently acquires a bitter taste from its
incipient putridity. This material differs from those before mentioned, as
its deleterious property depends on a chemical rather than an animal
process.

16. _Febris puerpera._ Puerperal fever. It appears from some late
dissections, which have been published, of those women who have died of the
puerperal fever, that matter has been formed in the omentum, and found in
the cavity of the abdomen, with some blood or sanies. These parts are
supposed to have been injured by the exertions accompanying labour; and as
matter in this viscus may have been produced without much pain, this
disease is not attended with arterial strength and hard full pulse like the
inflammation of the uterus; and as the fever is of the inirritative or
typhus kind, there is reason to believe, that the previous exhaustion of
the patient during labour may contribute to its production; as well as the
absorption of a material not purulent but putrid; which is formed by the
delay of extravasated or dead matter produced by the bruises of the
omentum, or other viscera, in the efforts of parturition, rather than by
purulent matter, the consequence of suppuration. The pulse is generally
about 120 when in bed and in the morning; and is increased to 134, or more,
when the patient sits up, or in the evening paroxysm. The pulse of all very
weak patients increases in frequency when they sit up; because the
expenditure of sensorial power necessary to preserve an erect posture
deducts so much from their general strength; and hence the pulse becomes
weaker, and in consequence quicker. See Sect. XII. 1. 4.

In this fever time must be allowed for the absorption of the matter. Very
large and repeated quantities of the bark, by preventing sufficient food
from being taken, as bread, and wine, and water, I have thought has much
injured the patient; for the bark is not here given as in intermittent
fevers to prevent the paroxysm, but simply to strengthen the patient by
increasing the power of digestion. About two ounces of decoction of bark,
with four drops of laudanum, and a dram of sweet spirit of vitriol, once in
six hours, and a glass of wine between those times, with panada, or other
food, I have thought of most advantage, with a small blister occasionally.

Where not only the stomach but also the bowels are much distended with air,
so as to sound on striking them with the fingers, the case is always
dangerous, generally hopeless; which is more so in proportion to the
quickness of the pulse. Where the bowels are distended two drops of oil of
cinnamon should be given in the panada three or four times a day.

17. _Febris a sphacelo._ Fever from mortification. This fever from
absorption of putrid matter is of the inirritative or typhus kind. See the
preceding article.

M. M. Opium and the bark are frequently given in too great quantity, so as
to induce consequent debility, and to oppress the power of digestion.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Sensation._

GENUS VII.

_With increased Action of the Organs of Sense._

SPECIES.

1. _Delirium febrile._ Paraphrosyne. The ideas in delirium consist of those
excited by the sensation of pleasure or pain, which precedes them, and the
trains of other ideas associated with these, and not of those excited by
external irritations or by voluntary exertion. Hence the patients do not
know the room which they inhabit, or the people who surround them; nor have
they any voluntary exertion, where the delirium is complete; so that their
efforts in walking about a room or rising from their bed are unsteady, and
produced by their catenations with the immediate affections of pleasure or
pain. See Section XXXIII. 1. 4.

By the above circumstances it is distinguished from madness, in which the
patients well know the persons of their acquaintance, and the place where
they are; and perform all the voluntary actions with steadiness and
determination. See Sect. XXXIV. 2. 2.

Delirium is sometimes less complete, and then a new face and louder voice
stimulate the patient to attend to them for a few moments; and then they
relapse again into perfect delirium. At other times a delirium affects but
one sense, and the person thinks he sees things which do not exist; and is
at the same time sensible to the questions which are asked him, and to the
taste of the food which is offered to him.

This partial delirium is termed an hallucination of the disordered organ;
and may probably arise from the origin of one nerve of sense being more
liable to inflammation than the others; that is, an exuberance of the
sensorial power of sensation may affect it; which is therefore thrown into
action by slighter sensitive catenations, without being obedient to
external stimulus, or to the power of volition.

The perpetual flow of ideas in delirium is owing to the same circumstance,
as of those in our dreams; namely, to the defect or paralysis of the
voluntary power; as in hemiplagia, when one side of the body is paralytic,
and thus expends less of the sensorial power, the limbs on the other side
are in constant motion from the exuberance of it. Whence less sensorial
power is exhausted in delirium, than at other times, as well as in sleep;
and hence in fevers with great debility, it is perhaps, as well as the
stupor, rather a favourable circumstance; and when removed by numerous
blisters, the death of the patient often follows the recovery of his
understanding. See Class I. 2. 5. 6. and I. 2. 5. 10.

Delirium in diseases from inirritability is sometimes preceded by a
propensity to surprise. See Class I. 1. 5. 11.

M. M. Fomentations of the shaved head for an hour repeatedly. A blister on
the head. Rising from bed. Wine and opium, and sometimes venesection in
small quantity by cupping, if the strength of the arterial system will
allow it.

2. _Delirium maniacale._ Maniacal delirium. There is another kind of
delirium, described in Sect. XXXIII. 1. 4. which has the increase of
pleasureable or painful sensation for its cause, without any diminution of
the other sensorial powers; but as this excites the patient to the exertion
of voluntary actions, for the purpose of obtaining the object of his
pleasureable ideas, or avoiding the object of his painful ones, such as
perpetual prayer, when it is of the religious kind, it belongs to the
insanities described in Class III. 1. 2. 1, and is more properly termed
hallucinatio maniacalis.

3. _Dilirium ebrietatis._ The drunken delirium is in nothing different from
the delirium attending fevers except in its cause, as from alcohol, or
other poisons. When it is attended with an apoplectic stupor, the pulse is
generally low; and venesection I believe sometimes destroys those, who
would otherwise have recovered in a few hours.

M. M. Diluting liquids. An emetic.

4. _Somnium._ Dreams constitute the most complete kind of delirium. As in
these no external irritations are attended to, and the power of volition is
entirely suspended; so that the sensations of pleasure and pain, with their
associations, alone excite the endless trains of our sleeping ideas; as
explained in Sect. XVIII. on Sleep.

5. _Hallucinatio visus._ Deception of sight. These visual hallucinations
are perpetual in our dreams; and sometimes precede general delirium in
fevers; and sometimes belong to reverie, and to insanity. See Class III. 1.
2. 1. and 2. and must be treated accordingly.

Other kinds of visual hallucinations occur by moon-light; when objects are
not seen so distinctly as to produce the usual ideas associated with them,
but appear to us exactly as they are seen. Thus the trunk of a tree appears
a flat surface, instead of a cylinder as by day, and we are deceived and
alarmed by seeing things as they really are seen. See Berkley on Vision.

6. _Hallucinatio auditus._ Auricular deception frequently occurs in dreams,
and sometimes precedes general delirium in fevers; and sometimes belongs to
vertigo, and to reverie, and to insanity. See Sect. XX. 7. and Class III.
1. 2. 1. and 2.

7. _Rubor a calore._ The blush from heat is occasioned by the increased
action of the cutaneous vessels in consequence of the increased sensation
of heat. See Class I. 1. 2. 1. and 3.

8. _Rubor jucunditatis._ The blush of joy is owing to the increased action
of the capillary arteries, along with that of every moving vessel in the
body, from the increase of pleasurable sensation.

9. _Priapismus amatorius._ Amatorial priapism. The blood is poured into the
cells of the corpora cavernosa much faster than it can be reabsorbed by the
vena penis, owing in this case to the pleasurable sensation of love
increasing the arterial action. See Class I. 1. 4. 6.

10. _Distentio mamularum._ The teats of female animals, when they give
suck, become rigid and erected, in the same manner as in the last article,
from the pleasurable sensation of the love of the mother to her offspring.
Whence the teat may properly be called an organ of sense. The nipples of
men do the same when rubbed with the hand. See Class I. 1. 4. 7.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Sensation._

GENUS I.

_Of the General System._

SPECIES.

1. _Stultitia insensibilis._ Folly from insensibility. The pleasure or pain
generated in the system is not sufficient to promote the usual activity
either of the sensual or muscular fibres.

2. _Taedium vitae._ Ennui. Irksomeness of life. The pain of laziness has
been thought by some philosophers to be that principle of action, which has
excited all our industry, and distinguished mankind from the brutes of the
field. It is certain that, where the ennui exists, it is relieved by the
exertions of our minds or bodies, as all other painful sensations are
relieved; but it depends much upon our early habits, whether we become
patient of laziness, or inclined to activity, during the remainder of our
lives, as other animals do not appear to be affected with this malady;
which is perhaps left owing to deficiency of pleasurable sensation, than to
the superabundancy of voluntary power, which occasions pain in the muscles
by its accumulation; as appears from the perpetual motions of a squirrel
confined in a cage.

3. _Paresis sensitiva._ Weakness of the whole system from insensibility.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Sensation._

GENUS II.

_Of Particular Organs._

SPECIES.

1. _Anorexia._ Want of appetite. Some elderly people, and those debilitated
by fermented liquors, are liable to lose their appetite for animal food;
which is probably in part owing to the deficiency of gastric acid, as well
as to the general decay of the system: elderly people will go on years
without animal food; but inebriates soon sink, when their digestion becomes
so far impaired. Want of appetite is sometimes produced by the putrid
matter from many decaying teeth being perpetually mixed with the saliva,
and thence affecting the organ of taste, and greatly injuring the
digestion.

M. M. Fine charcoal powder diffused in warm water held in the mouth
frequently in a day, as in Class I. 2. 4. 12. or solution of alum in water.
Extract the decayed teeth. An emetic. A blister. Chalybeates. Vitriolic
acid. Bile of an ox inspissated, and made into pills; 20 grains to be taken
before dinner and supper. Opium half a grain twice a day.

All the strength we possess is ultimately derived from the food, which we
are able to digest; whence a total debility of the system frequently
follows the want of appetite, and of the power of digestion. Some young
ladies I have observed to fall into this general debility, so as but just
to be able to walk about; which I have sometimes ascribed to their
voluntary fasting, when they believed themselves too plump; and who have
thus lost both their health and beauty by too great abstinence, which could
never be restored.

I have seen other cases of what may be termed anorexia epileptica, in which
a total loss of appetite, and of the power of digestion, suddenly occurred
along with epileptic fits. Miss B. a girl about eighteen, apparently very
healthy, and rather plump, was seized with fits, which were at first called
hysterical; they occurred at the end of menstruation, and returned very
frequently with total loss of appetite. She was relieved by venesection,
blisters, and opiates; her strength diminished, and after some returns of
the fits, she took to her bed, and has survived 15 or 20 years; she has in
general eaten half a potato a day, and seldom speaks, but retains her
senses, and had many years occasional returns of convulsion. I have seen
two similar cases, where the anorexia, or want of appetite, was in less
degree; and but just so much food could be digested, as supplied them with
sufficient strength to keep from the bed or sofa for half the day. As well
as I can recollect, all these patients were attended with weak pulse, and
cold pale skin; and received benefit by opium, from a quarter of a grain to
a grain four times a day. See Class III. 1. 1. 7. and III. 1. 2. 1. and
III. 1. 2. 20.

2. _Adipsia._ Want of thirst. Several of the inferior people, as farmers
wives, have a habit of not drinking with their dinner at all, or only take
a spoonful or two of ale after it. I have frequently observed these to
labour under bad digestion, and debility in consequence; which I have
ascribed to the too great stimulus of solid food undiluted, destroying in
process of time the irritability of the stomach.

3. _Impotentia_ (agenesia). Impotency much seldomer happens to the male sex
than sterility to the female sex. Sometimes a temporary impotence occurs
from bashfulness, or the interference of some voluntary exertion in the
production of an effect, which should be performed alone by pleasurable
sensation.

One, who was soon to be married to a lady of superior condition to his own,
expressed fear of not succeeding on the wedding night; he was advised to
take a grain of opium before he went to bed, and to accustom himself to
sleep with a woman previously, but not to enjoy her, to take off his
bashfulness; which succeeded to his wish.

M. M. Chalybeates. Opium. Bark. Tincture of cantharides.

4. _Sterilitas._ Barrenness. One of the ancient medical writers asserts,
that the female sex become pregnant with most certainty at or near the time
of menstruation. This is not improbable, since these monthly periods seem
to referable the monthly venereal orgasm of some female quadrupeds, which
become pregnant at those times only; and hence the computation of pregnancy
is not often erroneous, though taken from the last menstruation. See
Section XXXVI. 2. 3.

M. M. Opium a grain every night. Chalybeates in very small doses. Bark.
Sea-bathing.

5. _Insensibilitas artuum._ As in some paralytic limbs. A great
insensibility sometimes accompanies the torpor of the skin in cold fits of
agues. Some parts have retained the sense of heat, but not the sense of
touch. See Sect. XVI. 6.

M. M. Friction with flannel. A blister. Warmth.

6. _Dysuria insensitiva._ Insensibility of the bladder. A difficulty or
total inability to make water attends some fevers with great debility,
owing to the insensibility or inirritability of the bladder. This is a
dangerous but not always a fatal symptom.

M. M. Draw off the water with a catheter. Assist the patient in the
exclusion of it by compressing the lower parts of the abdomen with the
hands. Wine two ounces, Peruvian bark one dram in decoction, every three
hours alternately. Balsam of copaiva. Oil of almonds, with as much camphor
as can be dissolved in it, applied as a liniment rubbed on the region of
the bladder and perinaeum, and repeated every four hours, was used in this
disease with success by Mr. Latham. Med. Comment. 1791, p. 213.

7. _Accumulatio alvina._ An accumulation of feces in the rectum, occasioned
by the torpor, or insensibility, of that bowel. But as liquids pass by
these accumulations, it differs from the constipatio alvi, which is owing
to too great absorption of the alimentary canal.

Old milk, and especially when boiled, is liable to induce this kind of
costiveness in some grown persons; which is probably owing to their not
possessing sufficient gastric acid to curdle and digest it; for as both
these processes require gastric acid, it follows, that a greater quantity
of it is necessary, than in the digestion of other aliments, which do not
previously require being curdled. This ill digested milk not sufficiently
stimulating the rectum, remains till it becomes a too solid mass. On this
account milk seldom agrees with those, who are subject to piles, by
inducing costiveness and large stools.

M. M. Extract the hardened scybala by means of a marrow-spoon; or by a
piece of wire, or of whale-bone bent into a bow, and introduced. Injections
of oil. Castor oil, or oil of almonds, taken by the mouth. A large clyster
of smoak of tobacco. Six grains of rhubarb taken every night for many
months. Aloes. An endeavour to establish a habit of evacuation at a certain
hour daily. See Class I. 1. 3. 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO III.

_Retrograde Sensitive Motions._

GENUS I.

_Of Excretory Ducts._

The retrograde action of the oesophagus in ruminating animals, when they
bring up the food from their first stomach for the purpose of a second
mastication of it, may probably be caused by agreeable sensation; similar
to that which induces them to swallow it both before and after this second
mastication; and then this retrograde action, properly belongs to this
place, and is erroneously put at the head of the order of irritative
retrograde motions. Class I. 3. 1. 1.

SPECIES.

1. _Ureterum motus retrogressus._ When a stone has advanced into the ureter
from the pelvis of the kidney, it is sometimes liable to be returned by the
retrograde motion of that canal, and the patient obtains fallacious ease,
till the stone is again pushed into the ureter.

2. _Urethrae motus retrogressus._ There have been instances of bougies
being carried up the urethra into the bladder most probably by an inverted
motion of this canal; for which some have undergone an operation similar to
that for the extraction of a stone. A case is related in some medical
publication, in which a catgut bougie was carried into the bladder, and
after remaining many weeks, was voided piece-meal in a semi-dissolved
state. Another case is related of a French officer, who used a leaden
bougie; which at length found its way into the bladder, and was, by
injecting crude mercury, amalgamated and voided.

In the same manner the infection from a simple gonorrhoea is probably
carried further along the course of the urethra; and small stones
frequently descend some way into the urethra, and are again carried up into
the bladder by the inverted action of this canal.

3. _Ductus choledochi motus retrogressus._ The concretions of bile, called
gall-stones, frequently enter the bile-duct, and give violent pain for some
hours; and return again into the gall-bladder, by the retrograde action of
this duct. May not oil be carried up this duct, when a gall-stone gives
great pain, by its retrograde spasmodic action? See Class I. 1. 3. 8.

M. M. Opium a grain and half.

       *       *       *       *       *


_The Orders and Genera of the Third Class of Diseases._

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS III.

DISEASES OF VOLITION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Volition._

GENERA.

  1. With increased actions of the muscles.
  2. With increased actions of the organs of sense.

ORDO II.

_Decreased Volition._

GENERA.

  1. With decreased actions of the muscles.
  2. With decreased actions of the organs of sense.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Orders, Genera, and Species, of the Third Class of Diseases._

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS III.

DISEASES OF VOLITION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Volition._

GENUS I.

_With Increased Actions of the Muscles._

SPECIES.

   1. _Jactitatio._              Restlessness.
   2. _Tremor febrilis._         Febrile trembling.
   3. _Clamor._                  Screaming.
   4. _Risus._                   Laughter.
   5. _Convulsio._               Convulsion.
      ---- _debilis._            ---- weak.
   6. ---- _dolorifica._         ---- painful.
   7. _Epilepsia._               Epilepsy.
   8. ---- _dolorifica._         ---- painful.
   9. _Somnambulismus._          Sleep-walking.
  10. _Asthma convulsivum._      Asthma convulsive.
  11. ---- _dolorificum._        ---- painful.
  12. _Stridor dentium._         Gnashing of the teeth.
  13. _Tetanus trismus._         Cramp of the jaw.
  14. ---- _dolorificus._        ---- painful.
  15. _Hydrophobia._             Dread of water.

GENUS II.

_With increased Actions of the Organs of Sense._

SPECIES.

   1. _Mania mutabilis._             Mutable madness.
   2. _Studium inane._               Reverie.
   3. _Vigilia._                     Watchfulness.
   4. _Erotomania._                  Sentimental love.
   5. _Amor sui._                    Vanity.
   6. _Nostalgia._                   Desire of home.
   7. _Spes religiosa._              Superstitious hope.
   8. _Superbia stemmatis._          Pride of family.
   9. _Ambitio._                     Ambition.
  10. _Maeror._                      Grief.
  11. _Taedium vitae._               Irksomeness of life.
  12. _Desiderium pulchritudinis._   Loss of beauty.
  13. _Paupertatis timor._           Fear of poverty.
  14. _Lethi timor._                 ---- of death.
  15. _Orci timor._                  ---- of hell.
  16. _Satyriasis._                  Lust.
  17. _Ira._                         Anger.
  18. _Rabies._                      Rage.
  19. _Citta._                       Depraved appetite.
  20. _Cacositia._                   Aversion to food.
  21. _Syphilis imaginaria._         Imaginary pox.
  22. _Psora imaginaria._            ---- itch.
  23. _Tabes imaginaria._            ---- tabes.
  24. _Sympathia aliena._            Pity.
  25. _Educatio heroica._            Heroic education.

ORDO II.

_Decreased Volition._

GENUS I.

_With decreased Actions of the Muscles._

SPECIES.

   1. _Lassitudo._                     Fatigue.
   2. _Vacillatio senilis._            See-saw of old age.
   3. _Tremor senilis._                Tremor of old age.
   4. _Brachiorum paralysis._          Palsy of the arms.
   5. _Raucedo paralytica._            Paralytic hoarseness.
   6. _Vesicae urinariae paralysis._   Palsy of the bladder.
   7. _Recti paralysis._               Palsy of the rectum.
   8. _Paresis voluntaria._            Voluntary debility.
   9. _Catalepsis._                    Catalepsy.
  10. _Hemiplegia._                    Palsy of one side.
  11. _Paraplegia._                    Palsy of the lower limbs.
  12. _Somnus._                        Sleep.
  13. _Incubus._                       Night-mare.
  14. _Lethargus._                     Lethargy.
  15. _Syncope epileptica._            Epileptic fainting.
  16. _Apoplexia._                     Apoplexy.
  17. _Mors a frigore._                Death from cold.

GENUS II.

_With decreased Actions of the Organs of Sense._

SPECIES.

  1. _Recollectionis jactura._      Loss of recollection.
  2. _Stultitia voluntaria._        Voluntary folly.
  3. _Credulitas._                  Credulity.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLASS III.

DISEASES OF VOLITION.

ORDO I.

_Increased Volition._

GENUS I.

_Increased Actions of the Muscles._

We now step forward to consider the diseases of volition, that superior
faculty of the sensorium, which gives us the power of reason, and by its
facility of action distinguishes mankind from brute animals; which has
effected all that is great in the world, and superimposed the works of art
on the situations of nature.

Pain is introduced into the system either by excess or defect of the action
of the part. (Sect. IV. 5.) Both which circumstances seem to originate from
the accumulation of sensorial power in the affected organ. Thus when the
skin is exposed to great cold, the activity of the cutaneous vessels is
diminished, and in consequence an accumulation of sensorial power obtains
in them, because they are usually excited into incessant motion by the
stimulus of heat, as explained in Sect. XII. 5. 2. Contrarywise, when the
vessels of the skin are exposed to great heat, an excess of sensorial power
is also produced in them, which is derived thither by the increase of
stimulus above what is natural.

This accounts for the relief which is received in all kinds of pain by any
violent exertions of our muscles or organs of sense; which may thus be in
part ascribed to the exhaustion of the sensorial power by such exertions.
But this relief is in many cases so instantaneous, that it seems
nevertheless probable, that it is also in part owing to the different
manner of progression of the two sensorial powers of sensation and
volition; one of them commencing at some extremity of the sensorium, and
being propagated towards the central parts of it; and the other commencing
in the central parts of the sensorium, and being propagated towards the
extremities of it; as mentioned in Sect. XI. 2. 1.

These violent voluntary exertions of our muscles or ideas to relieve the
sensation of pain constitute convulsions and madness; and are distinguished
from the muscular actions owing to increased sensation, as in sneezing, or
coughing, or parturition, or ejectio feminis, because they do not
contribute to dislodge the cause, but only to prevent the sensation of it.
In two cases of parturition, both of young women with their first child, I
have seen general convulsions occur from excess of voluntary exertion, as
above described, instead of the actions of particular muscles, which ought
to have been excited by sensation for the exclusion of the fetus. They both
became insensible, and died after some hours; from one of them the fetus
was extracted in vain. I have heard also of general convulsions being
excited instead of the actions of the musculi acceleratores in the ejectio
feminis, which terminated fatally. See Class III. 1. 1. 7.
