He blinked.

She threw her arms around him.

"Oh, White Bear! I do want you back."

She crawled closer to him, pushing her body against his rigid form.

She felt pressure against her back, pulling her closer to him. His hand.

Then his other hand.

She felt his chest rising and falling against hers.

Strong arms were holding her.

She looked up into his face, and color had come into the pale cheeks.
The brown eyes were looking down at her, warm with love. She forgot the
rain and the cold, and nestled in his arms.

She saw tears spill out of his eyes, mingling with the rain on his face.
She, too, was crying. She had been crying ever since she sat down with
him. She held him tight.

Looking past him, she saw in the doorway of the wickiup the small form
of Eagle Feather, staring at them.




12

The War Whoop


Owl Carver held the watch up by its chain; his smile of approval showed
he'd lost a tooth in front since White Bear left with Star Arrow.

"A handsome gift. I thank you for it. But what do you mean by saying it
tells us the time? Do we not _know_ the time?"

White Bear scoured his brain for a way to explain.

Sitting close to the old shaman, White Bear saw that age had bent him a
bit more and carved deeper lines in his brown face. Besides the
megis-shell necklace White Bear remembered, Owl Carver wore a new
necklace made of tiny beads forming a red, yellow, blue and white floral
design, from which hung a sunburst pendant.

They sat facing each other in front of the shaman's wickiup in the
center of the British Band's winter camp. In the fenced-off corral
dozens of horses stamped their hooves and blew steamy breath into the
gray sky. The hunters had returned with braces of pheasant and geese,
with deer slung from poles, with buffalo and elk carcasses mounted on
travois dragging behind their horses. White Bear felt his nostrils
expand to take in the smells of meats being roasted and stewed. In a few
days all the chiefs of the Sauk and Fox, along with representatives of
the Winnebago, Potawatomi and Kickapoo, would be gathering here at Black
Hawk's invitation.

Even sooner, though, a ceremony would take place that meant much more to
White Bear. Tomorrow night he and Redbird would at last be married. And
he had come to Redbird's father today to give him the only present he
had to offer.

White Bear pointed to the dial of the watch. "Father of my bride, if
you want to know when the sun will rise tomorrow, you look at where
these two arrows are at sunrise today. When they are in the same place
again, it will be half the time till the next sunrise. When they are in
the same place after that, it will be sunrise the next day." He
faltered. To himself, his explanation sounded at once useless and
ridiculously complicated. "... Almost. In truth, the sun does not rise
at the same time every day," he finished weakly.

Owl Carver stared at him as if he had uttered nonsense. "The sun rises
at sunrise."

He remembered how Frank Hopkins always reset his clock at sunset. "Yes,
but in summer the days are long and in winter the days are short. But
the arrows on this watch cannot keep pace with the sun."

Owl Carver shook his head. "Many things the pale eyes make are useful,
but I do not understand the use of this thing."

_What a struggle!_

White Bear had a sudden inspiration. "It is true, this watch cannot tell
you as much as the sun does, but it can tell you one thing."

"What is that?" Owl Carver frowned, weighing the watch in his hand.

"It can tell you when a pale eyes will do something."

Owl Carver grunted. "Well, it is pretty to look at. And it moves and
makes sounds."

White Bear snapped open the back of the case, where the key was kept,
and showed Owl Carver how to wind the watch, impressing on him the need
to handle it very gently. Then the shaman went into his wickiup to put
the watch in his medicine bundle.

White Bear sighed. He missed talking with Elysee, missed the library at
Victoire, from which he'd managed to take only one book.

_Well, this world of sky and trees and rivers and animals is a library
too. Owl Carver knows how to read in it, and he has taught me._

The old shaman came out with a long-stemmed pipe. He filled and lit it
with a twig from the fire in his wickiup and smoked thoughtfully for a
while before speaking. White Bear, sensing that Owl Carver had something
important to say to him, waited quietly.

"We need to know more about the pale eyes than we can learn from that
time-teller," Owl Carver said. "We need to know what they will do if we
cross the Great River to Saukenuk next spring."

White Bear felt his heartbeat quicken.

"Is that what Black Hawk plans?"

"If he can get enough Sauk and Fox warriors and their families to follow
him. At the council all the chiefs will hear Black Hawk. The Winnebago
Prophet, Flying Cloud, is coming to the council from his town up the
Rock River. He will add his voice to Black Hawk's. But the chiefs will
also hear the snake's voice of He Who Moves Alertly." He spat
contemptuously.

White Bear knew well why Owl Carver despised He Who Moves Alertly.
During what the pale eyes called the War of 1812, while Black Hawk and
his warriors were away fighting on the British side, the civil chiefs
had appointed He Who Moves Alertly a war chief in case the Americans
should attack the Sauk towns on the Great River. Not only had the new
war chief never fought, he spoke much of the need to make peace with the
Americans. He had about as many followers among the Sauk and Fox as
Black Hawk did, people who believed that the tribes would fare best if
they did whatever the pale eyes demanded. After the war He Who Moves
Alertly was quick to make himself known to the Americans as a friend. In
turn the long knives' chiefs showered him with gifts and honors, even
taking him and his wives to Washington City to visit the Great Father,
James Monroe. He had, in fact, been in the East when Star Arrow had come
to Saukenuk to take White Bear to Victoire.

"Why does He Who Moves Alertly say we should not go back to Saukenuk?"
White Bear asked cautiously. He did not want to anger Owl Carver by
saying so, but he himself was sure that crossing the Great River could
only lead to calamity.

Owl Carver said, "He Who Moves Alertly has always been a friend to the
long knives, and they treat him as if he was a great chief and give
presents to him. Last summer, when we went to plant corn at Saukenuk, he
went among Black Hawk's followers and persuaded many of them to flee
back across the river." The old shaman smiled at White Bear. "But now we
have you, who have also been East and know the ways of the pale eyes.
You will be able to answer him."

_But all I can say is that he speaks the truth._

The words trembled on his lips: _The long knives are more powerful than
you can imagine. We cannot stand against them._

And yet he did not want to speak. He feared that Owl Carver would think
him a traitor, as he did He Who Moves Alertly. And, in a way, he felt as
Owl Carver and Black Hawk did. He became angry every time he thought
about how the tribe had been driven from its homeland.

Owl Carver puffed on his pipe. "You will answer He Who Moves Alertly not
just as one who has been among the pale eyes. The day after tomorrow,
you must go to the cave of the ancestors and seek another vision."

White Bear's heart sank. "But I am to marry Redbird tomorrow night.
Would you have me leave her the next day to seek a vision?"

Owl Carver spread his hands. "The council starts in three days." He
grinned, showing the space where the tooth had been. "And it is not as
if you and Redbird have never known the joy of the marriage bed."

White Bear felt his face grow hot, and he lowered his eyes. Since his
return they had tried to crowd into a few nights all the pleasures they
had missed over the last six years.

"You will not be gone from her for long," Owl Carver said.

"But why do you not prophesy?" White Bear asked. "You have been the
shaman since long before I was born."

Owl Carver nodded sadly. "I have tried. It seems the spirits have
nothing to say to me."

_Maybe because you do not want to hear what they say._

As he thought about seeking a vision, White Bear began to feel more
hopeful. He might not have to displease Owl Carver and Black Hawk by
speaking of the strength of the long knives and sounding like He Who
Moves Alertly. Instead, the Turtle, in that sacred cave looking over the
river, would tell him what he should say. It was sure to be wiser
counsel than anything he could think of himself.

He remembered his boyhood dream of being a prophet for the Sauk. Now he
would be able to tell them where their future lay.

But then he remembered words Owl Carver himself had once spoken to him.
They had stayed in his memory because they had made him so uneasy.

_Many times the people do not want to listen to the shaman. The truer
his words, the less they hear him._

The next night White Bear and Redbird sat facing each other on opposite
sides of the wedding fire before Owl Carver's wickiup. White Bear's
fringed shirt and trousers of soft doeskin, worked until it was nearly
white, were a gift from a brave whose wife Sun Woman had helped with a
difficult childbirth.

Redbird's dress was of white doeskin as well. Around her neck hung the
necklace of the small, striped megis shells that had belonged to Sun
Woman.

White Bear looked beyond the fire. Hundreds of men and women were
standing in the shadows watching the ceremony, those of Redbird's Eagle
Clan on her side of the fire, the Thunder Clan, kin of Sun Woman and
himself, on this side. The daughter of the shaman was marrying the son
of a pale eyes father and a medicine woman, and White Bear had returned
from a long journey among the pale eyes and was a shaman himself. It was
a wedding that people wanted to see.

Wind Bends Grass, standing behind Redbird, spoke of her daughter's
character. Even though she had spent all of her life scolding her,
tonight she extolled her to the skies. She was beautiful, loving,
skilled, obedient. Then Wind Bends Grass instructed Redbird in her
wifely duties, making one small change from the usual speech. Instead of
telling her to give White Bear sons, she told her to give White Bear
_more_ sons.

Strangely, at this moment, White Bear found himself thinking of Nancy
Hale. Was she still longing for him somewhere across the Great River?

If Raoul had not driven him out of Victoire, his promise to Pierre might
have kept him there. He might never have come back here, not found out
till much later that he had a son, never have been united with Redbird
as he was tonight. Truly this was coming home. He felt so at peace, he
could almost be grateful to Raoul.

White Bear was especially honored to have as his wedding sponsor the
Thunder Clan's most prominent member--Black Hawk himself.

Black Hawk addressed Redbird and her relatives in his harsh, sombre
voice. "I have known this young man since he was born. His father, Star
Arrow, was a pale eyes, but he was a French pale eyes, and the French
were always the best friends of the Sauk and Fox, even better than the
British. White Bear has been trained in the way of the shaman, and he
has lived among the pale eyes and learned their secrets as well."

_What have I learned that my people can really use?_ White Bear wondered
ruefully. _All I can tell them is that they cannot win a war with the
long knives._

"You must cherish Redbird and protect her," Black Hawk said to White
Bear. "You must give her the benefit of your wisdom. Because you
yourself are a shaman, your responsibility to her is all the greater."

Then Owl Carver stood before the fire, between the bride and the groom,
and raised his arms. "O Earthmaker, bless this man and this woman. May
they walk with honor on the path they follow as one."

Redbird sang a wedding song to White Bear. Her voice rose clear and pure
into the night air, and it seemed to White Bear that even the crackling
fire quieted itself to listen.

    "I will build a lodge for you,
    I will grind the corn for you.
    I have no home but where you are;
    The trail you walk is also mine."

Then White Bear got up and went around the fire to Redbird. He handed
Redbird a bouquet of pink roses that Sun Woman had carefully collected,
dried and preserved. The orange glow of the fire danced in her black
eyes, and White Bear felt an answering love blaze up within himself.

He was so much taller than Redbird that he had to bend his knees deeply
so that Redbird could throw her braids over his shoulders, and he heard
some chuckles and giggles from the watching people. But as her braids
fell lightly on him he thought that he had never in his life been
happier than at this moment.

Together they walked sunwise around the marriage fire, keeping it on
their right: and on the east, south, west and north sides White Bear
said loudly, "Redbird is now my wife!"

Eyes gleamed at him out of the darkness when he came back to the east
side. Standing to the side and just a little behind Black Hawk was Wolf
Paw. White Bear could not resist feeling a little thrill of triumph at
the realization that he had won Redbird despite the best efforts of this
mighty warrior, this chief's son, this man who owned many horses.

_Not because I deserve it_, he reminded himself. _Only because Redbird
would have it so._

_And now, because she would have it so, we will be together forever._

Owl Carver bade them depart with the good wishes of the tribe, and
White Bear and Redbird walked to the new wickiup they had built on the
edge of the camp. Eagle Feather would live there with them, but tonight
Eagle Feather would stay with his grandmother, Sun Woman.

Tonight they would have it to themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next day, in mid-afternoon, White Bear stood again in the center of the
camp wearing the same black bearskin he had worn six years ago. Owl
Carver did a shuffling sunwise dance around him, shaking a gourd rattle
and chanting:

    "Go forth and dance with the spirits,
    Become a spirit yourself.
    Bring back a gift for the people,
    Bring back the words of the spirits."

Black Hawk, standing in the circle that had gathered to watch, stared at
him with an intensity that frightened him. Sun Woman and Redbird stood
with smiles of quiet pride. This time Redbird need not fear that he
would freeze to death on his spirit journey.

It would be painful to be away from Redbird, he thought, as he looked
into her eyes, saying a silent good-bye. Now, after a brief feast of
love, they must go hungry again. But only for a night or two.

White Bear turned his back on the declining sun. The ceremonial bearskin
swung heavily on his head and shoulders as he trotted out of the camp
toward the trail that ran along the river's edge. As he entered the
woods, another pair of eyes, hostile, suspicious, caught his. Wolf Paw
again, standing with folded arms.

_Wolf Paw still loves Redbird. And hates me._

He felt much stronger than he had when he arrived at the camp.
Alternately walking and running, he moved quickly and surely down the
Ioway River, and he remembered the way to the bluff of the sacred cave.
Several times along the way he met Sauk and Fox warriors. They
recognized the sacred bearskin, with the bear's skull covering his own
as a partial mask, and stepped aside with eyes averted as he passed
them.

The sun had sunk behind him by the time he had come to the end of the
almost-imperceptible trail to the top of the bluff. He stood there a
moment, looking out across the clear blue sheet of water that was the
Great River. He stared at the Illinois shore, the rich, flat bottomland
at the river's edge, the wooded bluffs, much like the one he was
standing on, forming a wall, beyond which rolled the autumn-tan, endless
prairie.

A beautiful and fertile land, from which his people--and he himself--had
been exiled. Would his vision show them a way back?

He scrambled down the face of the bluff to the cave and swung into the
entrance.

In the shadows he could barely make out Owl Carver's wooden owl standing
over the row of skulls with their stone necklaces; or the white bear
statue guarding the unknown depths of the cave.

He settled himself facing the entrance and chewed some scraps of sacred
mushroom Owl Carver had given him. Nothing to do now but sit and wait.
Surely no watch made by pale eyes could measure the passage of this kind
of time.

He heard a scraping and a grumbling from deep in the cave. He felt no
fear now, only a warmth, as at the approach of an old friend. The White
Bear, he now understood, was himself in a spirit form.

The huge snuffling Bear was at his side, and confidently he rose to step
out of the cave, the Bear accompanying him with its rolling walk. He
stepped on clouds, violet and gold and white and soft as snow under his
feet.

The pathway through the sky turned northward. Through breaks in the
clouds he looked down and caught glimpses of the river, a glistening
blue snake. Ahead he could see clouds piling up on clouds, shot through
with pale, blended rainbow colors, like the ornaments carved from shells
gathered along the eastern sea.

Then he was inside the cloud tower, peering beyond the Tree of Life at
the Turtle on his crystal perch. Drop by drop from the Turtle's heart
flowed the waters of the Great River.

"What would you ask me, White Bear?" said the ancient voice like distant
thunder.

"Is my father with you?"

"Your father walks the Trail of Souls far in the West," said the Turtle.
"He will come back to earth soon, and he will be a great teacher of the
people."

"Owl Carver and Black Hawk have sent me to ask, should the British Band
go back to Saukenuk?"

The wrinkled voice said, "Behold."

The clouds changed to the walls of a room big enough to hold a Sauk
camp, where curtained windows alternated with mirrors in gilded frames.
Under each mirror was a fireplace. Three glittering chandeliers hung
from the high ceiling. In the center of a vast flower-patterned carpet
stood Black Hawk.

To White Bear's astonishment, Black Hawk was wearing the blue uniform of
a long knife, with ropes of gold on his arms and fringes of gold on his
sleeves and shoulders. But he carried no weapons. His face as usual was
gloomy.

There were other men in the room, but White Bear could only clearly see
one. A pale eyes.

He was exceedingly tall and thin; his hair was white, and his bright
blue eyes stared piercingly at Black Hawk. He wore a black cutaway
jacket and tight black trousers with shiny black leather shoes; and a
white stock, a strip of silk, wound around his throat.

White Bear had seen this man before and recognized him at once.

He was known to red men as Sharp Knife--Andrew Jackson, President of the
United States.

The man Raoul had called "a good old Indian killer."

Black Hawk was talking, and Sharp Knife was listening. But White Bear
could not hear what Black Hawk was saying.

The room seemed to change. Black Hawk and Sharp Knife disappeared, and
where Sharp Knife had been standing there was now another tall, thin
man. He also wore black, but he had a black ribbon at his neck. A black
beard covered his chin, and the expression on his sun-browned face was
one of inconsolable grief. His sadness reminded White Bear of Black
Hawk's.

All at once White Bear was on a broad field covered with short grass,
divided by stone walls and wooden fences, with clumps of trees growing
here and there. Terror clutched his belly as he saw coming at him
thousands of long knives in blue uniforms with rifles and bayonets. He
looked about frantically for a place to hide, but there was none. He was
caught in the open.

But before the men could reach him they began to die.

Blood spurted from their blue tunics. They stopped running, staggered
and fell to the ground, dropping their rifles. Faces vanished in bursts
of red vapor. Arms and legs and heads flew through the air. Flashes of
flame and smoke and flying shards of iron tore bodies to bits.

But no matter how many of them died, more and more of the white men in
their blue jackets and trousers came marching over the horizon holding
their bayonets before them. There was no end to them.

White Bear felt as if his heart might stop. He put his hands over his
eyes.

And when he looked again he was back in the cloudy hall of the Turtle.

"What have you shown me?" he asked.

"I have shown you the future of both the red people and the white people
on this island between two oceans," the Turtle rumbled. "It is given to
you to know two futures because two streams of blood flow in you. You
belong to both, and to neither."

It was painful to hear this. The Turtle was uttering thoughts that had
occurred to White Bear many times; he had always tried to put them out
of his mind. Could he not forget his years among the pale eyes and
become entirely a Sauk?

Wisps of cloud drifted around the Turtle's scaly body. White Bear heard
the drip-drip of water from the Turtle's heart into the blue-black,
fish-crowded pool that fed the Great River. The sound was like the
ringing of a hammer on an anvil, reverberating through the vast space in
which they stood.

The Turtle spoke again. "Earthmaker has willed that the pale eyes shall
fill this world of ours from the eastern sea to the western sea."

"_Why?_" cried White Bear in anguish.

"Earthmaker bestows evil as well as good on his children. Sickness and
hunger and death come from Earthmaker, just as strong bodies, and good
things to eat, and love."

"Will all Earthmaker's red children die?"

"Great numbers will die, and those who remain will be driven to unkind
lands."

"What of the Sauk?" White Bear asked, trembling.

"The many who follow Black Hawk across the Great River will be few when
they cross back."

_Oh, no!_

This was what he had come here to learn, but hearing it was like being
cast down from this lodge in the clouds to crash to the earth.

"Then the British Band should not go back to Saukenuk?"

"You cannot stop them. For you as for all of my people, this is to be a
time of testing and pain. I charge you to see that those who hurt my
children do not gain from it. You will be the guardian of the land that
has been placed in your keeping."

"But I have already lost that land," White Bear cried.

As if he had not heard White Bear, the Turtle said, "Know that long
after all who live now have walked the Trail of Souls, my children will
be many again, and let the knowing lift up your heart." The Turtle
touched his own claws to the deep crevice in his under-shell from which
the water perpetually dripped.

White Bear knew it was time to go.

When he awoke in his body he would grieve. He saw nothing but heavy,
unending sorrow ahead for him and for those he loved.

       *       *       *       *       *

Black Hawk slowly stood up. A mantle of buffalo fur draped over his
shoulders and a crown of red and black feathers woven into his scalplock
made him look even bigger and taller than he was.

White Bear sat close to the fire for its heat. The day was cold and
overcast, and the damp air around him and the chill ground under him
made him shiver in the white doeskin shirt he had worn for his wedding.
Because Owl Carver had asked him, on the band's behalf, to seek a
vision, he could now consider himself fully a shaman. He had costumed
himself accordingly--three red streaks painted across his forehead,
three more on each cheekbone, silver disks hanging from his ears, a
three-strand necklace of megis shells around his neck. Silver clasps on
his arms and silver bracelets around his wrists. All these things had
been supplied by Owl Carver or traded for by Sun Woman. If he had to
speak he might at least hope his words would be greeted with respect.

Redbird pressed against him, and her nearness warmed him. Flames danced
over the pile of blackened logs in the center of the British Band's
winter camp. Light gray smoke rose from the fire, the same color as the
blanket of cloud that hid the afternoon sun.

Fear twisted its knife in White Bear's stomach. He did not want to tell
this assembly what he knew. Most of them would hate him. The chiefs and
braves and warriors of the British Band, Black Hawk and all the rest,
would never forgive him. Owl Carver would feel betrayed.

_Let them settle this without me._

But he knew it was a forlorn hope. When Owl Carver had asked him what he
learned in his vision, he had answered evasively. And now Owl Carver was
counting on him.

Around the fire sat the council of seven chiefs who governed the Sauk
and Fox tribes, including Jumping Fish, Broth and Little Stabbing Chief.
Beside them sat He Who Moves Alertly, the friend of the long knives, the
war chief who had never made war. Prominent braves like Wolf Paw sat
with them. The older and the younger shamans of the British Band sat
there, Owl Carver and White Bear.

And there was another shaman at the fire as well, Flying Cloud, better
known as the Winnebago Prophet. He was a broad man with a wolfskin
thrown over his shoulders. Unlike nearly all the men of the tribes that
lived along the Great River, he had a thick black mustache that drooped
over the corners of his mouth. A silver nose ring rested on the
mustache. He was head man of a Winnebago village called Prophet's Town,
a day's journey up the Rock River from Saukenuk.

In the quiet that greeted Black Hawk, White Bear heard, over the crackle
of the fire, the rattle of the war chief's bone bracelets as he held out
his hand.

"I only want to go back to the land that belongs to me and dwell there
and raise corn there. I will not be cheated. I will not be driven out."

Black Hawk did not have a pleasing speaking voice; it was hoarse and
grating. But the assembly listened intently, because for over twenty
summers there had been no greater warrior among the Sauk and Fox.

"With this hand I have killed seventy and three of the long knives.
Every Sauk and Fox brave, every Winnebago and Potawatomi and Kickapoo,
can do as much. Yes, we know the long knives outnumber us. But we can
show them that if they want to steal Saukenuk from us, they will have to
trade too many of their young men's lives for it.

"Last summer the long knives surrounded us and drove us out of Saukenuk.
But that was because we were not ready to fight, and some of us were not
_willing_ to fight."

Black Hawk looked pointedly at He Who Moves Alertly, who sat
expressionless, as if unaware of Black Hawk's disapproving gaze. His
face was round and ruddy, like the full moon when it first appears
above the horizon. He wore his glossy black hair long under an
impressive buffalo headdress with gleaming horns, and had wrapped
himself in a buffalo-hide robe painted with sunbursts.

Black Hawk said, "Next summer, it will be different. I have had messages
from the Winnebago and the Potawatomi promising to help us if the long
knives attack us. The Chippewa, up in the north, say they want to help
us."

A burning log split in two with a noise like a gunshot, and the halves
fell deeper into the fire with a shower of sparks.

Looking over the heads of those seated near him, White Bear saw columns
of smoke from a dozen or more other campfires rising into the late
afternoon sky. Around those campfires, feasting and gossiping, sat most
of the people of the British Band and their guests from other Sauk and
Fox bands, as well as some Winnebago, Potawatomi and Kickapoo braves.
What was being decided here now would mean life or death to all who
chose to follow these leaders.

Black Hawk said, "The pale eyes say we sold our land. I say that land
cannot be sold. Earthmaker gives land to those who need it to live on,
to grow food on, to hunt on, as he gives us air and water.

"The land has been good to us. It has given us game and fish, fruit and
berries. It has let us grow our squash, beans, pumpkins and corn on it,
and bury our mothers and fathers in it. The pale eyes are destroying the
land, cutting down the trees, fencing off the prairie and plowing it up.
The land is the mother of us all. When a man's mother is dishonored, he
must fight. Earthmaker will give us this victory, because he is our
father and he loves us."

With a chill that did not come from the air, White Bear remembered the
words of the Turtle: _Earthmaker bestows evil as well as good on his
children._

White Bear prayed his own prayer to Earthmaker: that he not be asked to
speak to this gathering.

Black Hawk lifted his rasping voice in a shout. "I, Black Hawk, raise
the war whoop!"

He threw out his chest, lifted his head, and let loose an ululating cry
that seemed to pierce the very clouds that hung over the camp. Wolf Paw,
Iron Knife, Little Crow, Three Horses and a dozen other Sauk and Fox
braves leaped up, waving rifles, tomahawks, bows and arrows, scalping
knives, screaming their battle cries. Owl Carver beat furiously on a
drum painted with a picture of the Hawk spirit.

The Winnebago Prophet lunged to his feet and joined the outcry, his
gestures so wild and his shouts so loud that he almost seemed to be
competing with Black Hawk.

Redbird spoke softly, close by White Bear's ear. "They are drunk on
war."

The outcry died down. Black Hawk crossed his arms over his chest to show
that he had finished speaking. The Winnebago Prophet remained standing
and raised his arms.

"I have come to promise Black Hawk and his braves that if he goes to
Saukenuk and the long knives attack him, the warriors of Prophet's Town
will help them to fight back."

The chiefs and braves seated around the fire greeted this with much
stamping and clapping. White Bear glanced at He Who Moves Alertly, who
sat a quarter of the way around the circle from him. The face under the
buffalo headdress was as still as if carved from wood.

Flying Cloud said, "I have sent messages to all the tribes that live
near the Great River--Winnebago, Potawatomi, Kickapoo, Piankeshaw,
Chippewa. When Black Hawk raises the tomahawk, they will raise the
tomahawk too. And I have had a message from our allies of old, the
British in Canada, who say the Americans have done us a great wrong, and
we should not give up any more land to them. If American long knives
attack us, the British long knives will come to our aid. With ships,
with big guns, with rifles, powder and shot and food for us, with
hundreds of red-coat soldiers. Now is the best of times to tell the long
knives they cannot push us any further. Let all who are truly men take
to the trail of war with Black Hawk!"

White Bear sensed deadly falsehood in the words of the Winnebago
Prophet. When White Bear was in New York City he had heard many times
that the enmity between Americans and British was a thing of the past.
White Bear did not believe that the British up there in Canada had any
intention of getting into a war between whites and Indians in Illinois.
But how could he prove that what Flying Cloud said was untrue?

With a cry of "Ei! Ei!" Wolf Paw shook his rifle over his head. He
snapped it to his shoulder and fired it with a deafening boom and a red
flash and a big cloud of white smoke.

_Someday he may wish he had not wasted that powder._

As White Bear and Redbird sat silently, braves all around them were up
and shrieking, waving rifles and tomahawks, thrusting out arms and legs
in the movements of a war dance. Owl Carver and some of the chiefs
slapped the palms of their hands against the taut, painted deerskin of
their drumheads.

A few other men did not join the shouts of approval, among them the
round-faced He Who Moves Alertly.

White Bear sat with his fists clenched in his lap, wondering whether
anyone would notice that the youngest of the three shamans among them
was not shouting for war. He felt Redbird's hand grip his arm tightly,
helping him to feel stronger.

Only to Redbird had White Bear told all of his vision. She shared his
fear that if the British Band followed Black Hawk to war they would be
destroyed, and she had insisted on sitting with him at the council fire.
White Bear knew it was not the custom for a wife to sit with her husband
at a council, but she had argued and pleaded until he had given in and
brought her with him.

Her presence beside him both comforted him and made him uneasy. Owl
Carver, when he came to the fire, had stared at his daughter, frowned
and looked away. Wolf Paw had eyed them and smiled scornfully.

As the tumult inspired by the Winnebago Prophet quieted down, He Who
Moves Alertly looked around the circle of chiefs and braves, his eyes
pausing at anyone who had not joined the outcry for war. His gaze met
White Bear's for an instant, and he nodded almost imperceptibly. White
Bear had an eerie feeling that He Who Moves Alertly knew what was in his
mind.

The chief who favored the long knives stood up.

A sullen muttering spread through the men around the council fire. Most
of those who agreed with He Who Moves Alertly had stayed away from this
council. White Bear felt admiration for anyone who could look so
confident, standing before a crowd in which so many were against him.

"War is loud, and peace is quiet," He Who Moves Alertly began. "But
peace keeps us alive. The real way to defeat the long knives is to stay
alive."

His voice was deep and pleasant, and he smiled as if every man there
were his friend.

"When is it right for a brave to go to war? When he must avenge himself
on those who have done wrong to him. Black Hawk says we should fight
the pale eyes because they have stolen land from us. But I have seen the
papers with the marks of our chiefs on them. Seven different times Sauk
and Fox chiefs have made their marks on papers agreeing to give up all
claim to the land east of the Great River. The long knives say our
chiefs were paid in gold for the land."

As his benign gaze swept the assembly, he said, "It is right for a brave
to go to war when he is strong enough to make war. He does not go
because he wants to be killed, because he wants to leave his women and
children unprotected. He knows he may die, but he does not look for
death."

He Who Moves Alertly was no longer smiling. He touched his fingertips to
his eyes, then raised his arms to the sky. "May Earthmaker strike me
blind if I do not speak the truth.

"We are not strong enough to make war on the long knives. I have
traveled in the lands of the Americans, all the way to the eastern sea.
I have seen so many long knives that I could not count them all."

White Bear felt more and more uneasy as he listened. Black Hawk and all
the other braves of the British Band looked on He Who Moves Alertly as
an enemy. But White Bear knew that the chief in the buffalo headdress
was speaking the truth. Perhaps not about the treaties, but surely about
the vast numbers of long knives.

White Bear saw again the thousands of blue-uniformed soldiers he had
seen marching in New York on the Fourth of July a year ago, and the
other thousands he had seen in his vision, fighting and dying but still
advancing on some strange battlefield.

He Who Moves Alertly said, "Owl Carver and Black Hawk say the Potawatomi
and Winnebago will aid the British Band, and other tribes from farther
away. I say none of them will help. This quarrel over Saukenuk is not
their quarrel, and they have made their own peace with the long knives.

"The Winnebago Prophet says the British will send us guns and
ammunition, even men. I say this is foolish talk. You call yourselves
the British Band, and think the British are your great friends. Many
summers ago, yes, the British were at war with the Americans and got
Sauk and Fox and many other tribes to help them. But when that war was
over, our people gained nothing and lost much. Many tribes had to give
up land to pay for fighting on the British side. Now the British do not
care about us. The British pale eyes and the American pale eyes are at
peace.

"I say to those who will listen to me--come with me. I will lead you
deep into this Ioway country, where there will be no pale eyes farmers
to bother us. Their Great Father will show his gratitude to those who do
not fight them. He will give us money and food and help us find good
land. We will live!

"For those who follow Black Hawk, I grieve. They will not live."

He Who Moves Alertly's closing words rang. He crossed his hands over his
chest and sat down amidst a silence touched by the crackling of the
fire.

White Bear heard in his mind the rumbling voice: _The many who follow
Black Hawk across the Great River will be few when they cross back._ He
trembled inwardly.

The clouds overhead had broken up, and the rays of the sun, about to
set, fell upon many faces full of anger and contempt. But White Bear
also saw lips pursed in thought, eyes lowered.

White Bear could find little wrong with what He Who Moves Alertly said,
but he did not like the way it pointed. To admit that the long knives
could do whatever they wanted to the Sauk, to hope like little children
that if they obeyed the Great Father in Washington City he would be kind
to the Sauk and give gifts of food, clothing and shelter--was that not
merely a slower kind of death?

He Who Moves Alertly did not seem to see that if the Sauk let the whites
push them westward, there would be no end to it. Eventually the pale
eyes would take all the land there was.

_To drive a people from their home is to make them prey to hunger,
disease, enemy tribes. It is to destroy them, even if not a single shot
is fired._

_If we must die, would it not be better to avenge ourselves on the pale
eyes for their cruelty to us? Is it not better to die with pride than to
just give up our good hunting and farming lands and go meekly into the
desert?_

He felt Redbird press against him. He had a sudden, strong feeling that
they should follow He Who Moves Alertly farther into the Ioway country.
That way they would surely live. How could he, White Bear, demand or
permit that his wife and son endure the sufferings and the danger those
who followed Black Hawk would face?

But at the thought of deserting the British Band he felt an unbearable
anguish. One winter long ago he had found a trap that had been sprung.
In the trap was the rear paw and part of the leg of a raccoon, ending in
a bloody mass. The animal had chewed its own leg off to escape. He had
seen a trail of blood leading into the woods. The raccoon had limped off
to die, but to die free.

What He Who Moves Alertly offered was a trap. What Black Hawk offered
was freedom, but with it the prospect of death.

He and Redbird could pack their belongings and leave after this council
was over. White Bear was sure other families would be doing that.

But could he turn his back on Black Hawk, who had just spoken for him at
