Daoud let out a slow sigh of relief as he saw d'Ucello push the box to
one side. It was becoming easier and easier to believe that he was
saved.

In spite of the pain that stabbed at a thousand places on his body,
Daoud was able to smile. "I know why it is lucky for me. Why for you?"

"Cardinal Ugolini and his niece went to the Contessa di Monaldeschi and
insisted that you were innocent, that you were the cardinal's guest.
They begged her to command me to release you at once. The contessa is
very simple in her way, and she likes to do favors for churchmen. So she
sent a message to me that I must stop your torture and come to her at
once."

Daoud could not think. He felt so light-headed that it might have been
easy now for d'Ucello to extract admissions from him. He had been in
pain and had not eaten or slept in over a day. He must pay careful
attention to what he was saying. It would never do to be careless with
d'Ucello.

D'Ucello smiled at Daoud, a humorless grimace that stretched his thin
mustache.

"I am not going to ask your forgiveness," d'Ucello said. "I was doing
what I thought right."

Daoud said nothing. He felt d'Ucello was being frank with him, but he
could not find it in his heart to forgive a man who had caused him so
much pain and nearly killed him. Still, searching his heart, as Sheikh
Saadi would have recommended, he found that he felt no hatred for
d'Ucello. Just the wariness he would have felt toward a very large
crocodile.

"I have stopped torturing you not because the contessa told me to,"
d'Ucello went on. "I probably could have changed her mind. But then she
and I spoke of something else. A Ghibellino army from Siena is about to
assault Orvieto. The contessa insisted that the militia, which I
command, defend Orvieto to the last drop of our blood." He smiled, again
without mirth.

_As I suspected_, Daoud thought triumphantly. _He wants me to intercede
for him with the Ghibellini of Siena._

And another happy thought came to him: _At last Lorenzo returns._

"How many men have the Sienese?" Daoud asked.

"According to reports I have from the peasants who live north of here,
they number over four thousand men. I am amazed that even so prosperous
a city as Siena could hire such a large army."

_You would be even more amazed to know where they got the money_,
thought Daoud.

D'Ucello went on. "So, we are hopelessly outnumbered. Of course, this
rock of Orvieto is the most defensible position in Italy. Even with only
our few hundred we could hold the Sienese off for some weeks, perhaps
even months. But not indefinitely. The Holy Father knew that, which is
why he left. The city will be taken and sacked. The people will suffer
greatly. If I am not killed in the fighting, I will surely be hanged.
And after I and all the defenders are dead, the contessa will consider
the honor of the city satisfied and will make peace with the Sienese."

"Well, you will have done what you thought right," said Daoud, after the
podesta had finished listing all these evil consequences. D'Ucello's
eyebrows twitched and his lips quirked, showing that he caught the
irony.

Daoud would enjoy this conversation more, he thought, if his feet did
not throb, if his legs did not ache, if his torn back did not burn as if
he were lying on hot coals, if his head were not swimming.

"I may hold this post at the contessa's pleasure, but she does not have
the right to tell me to die needlessly. And, as podesta, my first
concern is the welfare of Orvieto. If I can come to terms with the
Ghibellini, the city will be spared destruction."

Daoud held up a hand. The pain of the gesture was excruciating.

"Are you not a loyal Guelfo? Are you not faithful to the papal cause?
How can you speak of coming to terms with the Ghibellini?" What a
pleasure it was to goad d'Ucello.

The podesta squinted at Daoud, as if to see how serious his question
was.

"This is a Guelfo city, and normally I would take that side. But I have
no personal feelings one way or the other. What I do care about is the
responsibility I have accepted, of governing this city. I carry out that
responsibility best by preserving it from ruin."

_And at the same time saving your own life_, thought Daoud. _And biting
your thumb at the Contessa di Monaldeschi who has been treating you like
a servant. Oh, there are many reasons why you want to surrender to the
Sienese._

But Daoud was in terrible pain, and so tired that fatigue itself was now
as much a torment as anything he had suffered earlier. He longed to cut
this conversation short.

"What has all this to do with me?"

"To display my good faith to the Ghibellini, I have decided to free
you."

"Why should the Ghibellini care, one way or the other, what happens to
me?" said Daoud. Slowly he rolled over on his side, to make it easier to
look at d'Ucello. Pain flared in his arms and legs, in his back and
chest. His hands barely had the strength to pull the blue cloak with
him.

"You still deny that you are of that party?" d'Ucello asked.

"I am David of Trebizond."

D'Ucello rose to answer a knock at the door. Daoud lifted himself on one
elbow to see who it was. In the shadowed corridor a white-robed friar,
taller than d'Ucello, was peering in, trying to see Daoud.

"We are not quite ready for you, Fra Bernardino," said d'Ucello,
half-closing the door.

"Wait, Signore," the Dominican said, putting out a pale hand. "Cardinal
Ugolini has come here with men-at-arms and is demanding that you release
this man David to him at once."

Ugolini, here? Daoud felt a lightness in his heart. Freedom was that
much closer.

"Make sure the cardinal is comfortable and is offered refreshments, Fra
Bernardino," said d'Ucello, "and tell him he will not have to wait
long."

_Better and better._

When the door was shut, d'Ucello walked over to the bed and stared into
Daoud's eyes. "If I let you go, will you speak on my behalf to the
Ghibellini?"

Daoud smiled. "In my capacity as a trader?"

D'Ucello clenched his fists. "Damn you! You are too stubborn."

"So"--Daoud kept the smile fixed on his face--"you have arrested and
tortured me for a night and a day. You very nearly did to me something
so horrible, even now it hurts me to think about it. And you would have
done it, too, if the contessa's summons had not delayed you. Now,
because you have stopped doing these things to me, you expect me to be
overflowing with gratitude and glad to help you make peace with the
Ghibellini."

D'Ucello smiled back. "For my sparing you from torture, from mutilation,
from death, you should be grateful, yes."

_If he were another kind of man, he would have destroyed me with Greek
Fire and let this city be ruined while he fought the Sienese. In spite
of what he did to me, this is a wise man, and he deserves to live and to
rule here._

But Daoud could not resist another thrust. "What I should do, if, as you
think, I have influence with the Sienese, is have them do to you what
you have done to me. And not spare you at the end." He felt himself
getting angry as he thought of all he had been through, even though he
knew anger was foolish. "I know where you keep your flask of Greek
Fire."

D'Ucello's black eyes held Daoud's. "Yes. You could do that. But I think
I have come to know something about you during these hours you have
suffered at my hands."

"Yes?"

"I do not know what you are, but I know that you are much more than you
seem to be. And you are not the sort who takes revenge on a man for
doing his duty."

Daoud did not care to haggle anymore. "Allow any messenger of mine
freedom to come and go through the city gates."

"Agreed."

The podesta was right, he thought. He would not seek revenge after
d'Ucello surrendered to the Sienese any more than he would kill a
prisoner of war. Men like Qutuz did that sort of thing, to satisfy their
vanity. Men like Baibars did not. He thanked God for making him more
like Baibars.

And he thanked God for bringing him alive and whole out of the valley of
death.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her first sight of Daoud was a cruel blow to Sophia's heart. His blond
hair, dark with dirt and sweat, spread in lank locks on the pillow. His
bloodshot eyes looked at her out of blackened lids. His lips were
cracked. His face looked hollow, as if he had grown thinner just in the
day d'Ucello had held him.

She ran to him across the tiled floor of Ugolini's reception hall.

He was alive, but how badly hurt was he? She prayed that when she lifted
the blanket that covered him she would see that his body was sound.

He raised his hands to her as she bent over the litter. She saw that the
fingernails were blackened and bloody, and her own fists clenched as she
felt what they must have done to his hands. She slid her arms around his
shoulders and pressed her face against his. Perhaps the men-at-arms and
servants should not see the cardinal's niece embracing the trader from
Trebizond, but at that moment nothing mattered to her but to hold his
living body in her arms.

She heard him gasp. She was hurting him. What a fool she was!

"Forgive my clumsiness, David. I am so sorry."

He gently squeezed her hand as she drew away from him. "Your arms feel
like an angel's wings."

Ugolini called his steward, Agostino, and rattled off a list of
necessaries for treating Daoud's wounds--water, a pot and a brazier,
clean cloths, medicine jars from the cardinal's cabinet.

Sophia walked beside the litter as Ugolini's men carried Daoud to his
room on the third floor. Her hand rested lightly on his shoulder. Her
feelings alternated between agony, as she imagined what he had gone
through, and singing elation that he was back with her. With joy she
felt movement and life in the hard muscle under her fingertips.

"Tilia and I did what we could for you," she said when the men had
deposited him on his bed.

"I know," said Daoud. "Ugolini told me about your visit to the contessa.
Had she not sent for d'Ucello when she did--as you persuaded her to
do--I would be dead now."

She sat on the edge of his bed and put her hands over her face and wept
for joy. It had all meant something, her rushing to Tilia before dawn,
her going with Ugolini to the contessa, her falling to her knees before
the old woman.

As the men-at-arms left, Ugolini came in with Agostino and two servants
bearing a brazier and a tripod, pots of water, cloths, and jars of
ointments and powders from Ugolini's shelves. Two other servants brought
a table into Daoud's room, and Ugolini had the medications arranged on
it.

"He also let me go because the Ghibellini from Siena are about to
besiege the city," said Daoud. "He wants my help in surrendering to
them."

"A pity the Sienese could not have gotten here in time to catch the
Tartars and de Verceuil," said Sophia when the servants had left.

Ugolini looked up from the powders he was mixing for poultices and
frowned. "Catch them? Why?"

Sophia stared at Ugolini. Then the news had somehow missed him. She felt
sorry for him. Even though Tilia was very much alive, this was going to
be a terrible shock.

Daoud said, "In the dungeon I heard something had happened at Tilia's
house."

Ugolini's eyes grew huge. "Tilia! My God, what was it?"

"Tilia is well, Cardinal," Sophia said quickly. "Luckily for her, she
was here when it happened." She wondered how much Daoud knew about what
had happened, and how he felt about it. Her heart still ached for poor
Rachel. Where was the child now, right at this moment? Somewhere on the
road to Perugia. Being abused, perhaps, by that beast of a Tartar.

"When _what_ happened?" Ugolini cried. "In the name of Christ and the
Virgin, speak out!"

Sophia told the cardinal and Daoud how she and Tilia had gone to Tilia's
house, and of the death and destruction they had found there. It hurt
her to see the anguish in their eyes. Especially Daoud's. He _must_ feel
a terrible guilt about having sent Rachel there in the first place. Now
he had to suffer that, along with pain d'Ucello had inflicted on him.

"The Tartars and de Verceuil!" Ugolini shouted, shaking clenched fists.
"May God send a flood to drown them on the road to Orvieto! May all the
devils in hell roast them!" He paced the floor furiously, his red robes
rustling. "I must go to Tilia at once," he cried.

"No," said Daoud. "Too many people would see you."

"But she has no one to protect her."

"She has hired guards," said Sophia. "And those who ruined her house are
gone."

Daoud's head fell back against the pillow, and his eyelids closed. His
face looked masklike to Sophia, almost as if he were dead. She realized,
with sudden anxiety, that he might be suffering terribly, without
complaint. That would be like him. And she and Ugolini stood here
talking. She must see to Daoud's hurts at once. He might have injuries
within, injuries from which he could not recover.

"Send some of your trusted men-at-arms to protect Tilia," said Daoud
without opening his eyes, his voice faint. "Riccardo and some others. Do
not go yourself."

"Of course," said Ugolini, looking abashed. "Even though you have been
tortured, your head is sounder than mine. But, you understand, _I_ am
tortured by the thought of what has happened to Tilia."

"I, too," said Daoud. "And to her people. And to Rachel."

"Tomorrow you can tell me what happened to you," said Ugolini at the
door. "I will let you rest now." He drew a breath, hesitated, bit his
lip. Sophia wished he would go.

Daoud raised his head and opened his eyes. "You want to ask something.
What is it?"

"Did you--did d'Ucello--learn anything?"

"God willed that he learn nothing from me," said Daoud, sinking back
again.

"_Your_ will had something to do with that," said Sophia.

_He held out against them. What a magnificent man._

But what price had he paid for his strength?

"God's will is my will," Daoud whispered.

"God be with you, then," said Ugolini, and left, pulling the door shut
behind him.

Daoud's eyes opened. The sight of his eyes woke a warmth in her breast
as if a small sun had risen inside her.

"Do you want to sleep?" she asked him.

"Yes, with you beside me."

Joy blazed up inside her at those words. She had been so afraid that
torture would somehow destroy his caring for her.

"Oh, yes," she said. "Nothing would make me happier."

"But first I need you to wash and dress my wounds."

Daoud gritted his teeth and winced as first she lifted off the purple
cloak that covered him, then inch by inch drew the yellow tunic up from
his body and over his head. He groaned aloud when, with her propping up
his heavy body, he raised his arms.

"O Kriste!" she whispered. She wept anew as her eyes traveled over the
golden body she loved and saw huge, broken blisters and patches of red
skin; swollen black bruises the size of hen's eggs; long, deep
lacerations filled with crusted blood; the many little black scabs of
puncture wounds.

"When Lorenzo and the Ghibellini get here, we will have d'Ucello and his
torturers torn to pieces," she raged. She went to the table, folded a
linen cloth, and dipped it in the water.

"I do not hate d'Ucello," said Daoud as she began, very carefully, to
clean his wounds. "He has his work and I have mine. As for his
torturer--Erculio is his name--d'Ucello does not know it, but his
torturer is one of us."

Sophia's hand, moving the cloth lightly over a long, shallow cut that
ran across the smooth, almost hairless skin of his chest, paused. Was he
delirious?

"One of _us_? The torturer?"

Daoud looked amused. "I do not know where Erculio comes from, but he is
a good servant of the God of Islam and of the sultan, who placed him
there for my protection."

"For your protection? You mean he would have killed you."

Her body turned to ice as she faced the reality of how close she had
come to losing him.

"Yes," said Daoud. "I thought I would never see you again." He reached
out his arms, grimacing with pain. She put down the cloth and let him
hold her. Her heart swelled up in her throat and tears burned her eyes.

And suddenly, as if a curtain were lifted, she saw that life with this
man would always be this way. Whenever she was with him, there would
always be a yesterday in which some miracle of good fortune kept him
alive. There would always be a tomorrow in which he must face death yet
again.

Her head rested on his chest for a moment; then she wiped her face and
went back to cleaning and covering his wounds. Never mind her pain.
Whatever he was feeling must be much worse.

He told her how to make poultices for his burns using wet cloths and
powdered medicinal herbs Ugolini had prepared. It was like what she had
done for his arrow wound, only now there were many more hurts to treat.
Silently, in Greek, she cursed d'Ucello and cursed the torturer. She did
not care whether Daoud forgave them. She would never forgive what they
had done to her man.

When he was in the cellar of the Palazzo del Podesta being tortured, had
he grieved at the thought of losing her, as she had sorrowed for him?

She worked her way down his body from head to foot, tying the poultices
in place with strips of cloth. Thank God, they had done nothing to his
manly part. That was often the first place a torturer went for. When
would they make love again, she wondered. That depended on how long it
took him to recover. Perhaps weeks, perhaps even months.

When she was finished with his front, he turned over with her help.
Again she could not hold back her tears. Pain, not bodily, but real just
the same, struck her at the sight of his tormented flesh. For a moment
her eyes were covered with darkness. The skin of his back and buttocks
had been whipped away in large red slashes. She shook her head
violently, spoke a few more curses in her mind, and went to work. Daoud,
who had endured most of her healing efforts in silence, cried out when
she put a wet cloth on a torn spot.

"What more can you tell me about Rachel?" he asked. She suspected he
wanted to take his mind off the pain.

She repeated everything Tilia's women had reported, ending that looking
out the windows they had seen Rachel riding off in a cart with the old
Franciscan who interpreted for the Tartars.

"I am glad to hear that old priest still lives," said Daoud, sighing.
"Ah, Sophia, Rachel is a slave to that Tartar only because she had the
ill luck to cross my path. I have brought destruction to many, many
people."

Slowly, painfully, he turned on his back again, with Sophia helping.
Lovingly she stroked the few patches of his skin that were not torn or
burned or bruised.

When he was settled, he looked up at her and smiled in what she thought
was a strange way. She did not see the cause of his smile at first,
until he looked down at himself, and she followed his eyes. She saw that
his key of life had begun to raise itself.

"Daoud! After all you have been through?"

"I want you, Sophia, _because_ of what I have been through. Because of
what I nearly lost. I will tell you more tomorrow about what, God be
thanked, did not happen. For now"--he reached out a hand to her--"come
to me."

She understood. He must feel like a man who had come back from the dead.
Life was more precious to him than ever--and love. Tired and pain-racked
though he was, he wanted this moment of being with her again, which must
seem to him like a gift from God. And, indeed, perhaps that was exactly
what it was.

He lay back on the bed, his tortured body naked except for the cloth
wrappings tied over the worst of his wounds. His beautiful circumcised
phallos pulsed as it grew larger. She wanted to be naked with him, and
she threw off her outer tunic, unbelted her red silk gown, and pulled it
over her head. Her shift followed. Then she stepped out of the purple
felt slippers and stood before him, her arms held away from her body, to
let him see her.

She felt the warmth of her own desire for him spread through her.

He said, "You are a spring that gushes out of barren rock. I thirst for
you."

Carefully she climbed on the bed, straddling him. Slowly, so as not to
hurt him, she lowered herself over him, guiding him into her with gentle
fingers. A long sigh escaped him. She moved for both of them.

The instant after he groaned and reached his peak of love and pleasure,
he fell asleep, still lying on his back. He had just enough strength to
couple with me, she thought.

She rose from him and blew out the candles on the bedside table. The
night was cool, and she closed the casement windows of his room.

There was space between Daoud and the wall for her to lie beside him.
She stretched out there and stayed awake only long enough to kiss his
bare shoulder.

       *       *       *       *       *

Forcing himself to wake up seemed as much torture for Daoud as anything
Erculio had done to him. He could only lie there and struggle against
the agony he felt in every part of his body. His head ached. His tongue
felt like a lump of dried camel dung. His throbbing muscles and bones
begged him to sink back into unconsciousness. How long had he slept?
Only an hour or two, he was sure.

The yellow glow of a lighted candle filled the room. Lorenzo was
standing near the bed holding the candle, glowering at Daoud from under
thick, dark brows as if he were angry at him.

_Lorenzo._

Daoud wanted to laugh and leap out of bed and throw his arms around
Lorenzo. He managed only to sit up, too quickly. Fires shot from his
joints into his neck to coalesce in a burst of agony in the back of his
head. He did not want to cry out in front of Lorenzo, but a groan forced
itself through his cracked lips.

Sophia, wearing her red silk gown and standing by the bed--_How did she
get out of bed and dressed before Lorenzo got in here?_--took Daoud's
shoulders gently and lowered him back to the bed.

Lorenzo set the candle on the table beside Daoud and sat beside him.

"What the devil did those bastards do to you?"

Daoud saw the rage in the penetrating dark eyes, and it delighted him,
because Lorenzo was furious for his sake.

"Nothing that I will not recover from. More quickly, now that I see your
infidel face. Have you come here to parley with the podesta?"

"Yes, Duke Rinaldo has sent his son, Lapo, and me to meet with d'Ucello
here at Ugolini's."

Lorenzo had accomplished everything Daoud asked of him, and more. His
timely arrival had saved Daoud's life. To think that Daoud had once
wanted to be rid of him. Except for Sophia, he had never in his life
felt so happy to see anyone as this grizzled Sicilian.

Sophia said, "I have tended your wounds enough for tonight, David. I
leave you in Lorenzo's care." She smiled at Lorenzo and put her hand
briefly on his shoulder.

As she went to the door, Lorenzo scooped something from the floor,
jumped up, and handed it to her. "I believe this is yours, Madonna." He
held out her red leather belt.

Sophia swept it from his hand. "Thank you, Messere," she said coolly.

"Good night, Sophia," said Daoud with a smile. "You have brought me
great comfort tonight."

"Good night, David," she said, and shot him a burning look that he hoped
Lorenzo did not see.

After the door closed behind her, Lorenzo chuckled softly as he sat down
again. "Tending your wounds with her gown off, was she? And no light in
the room till I brought this candle in? You and she are not as discreet
as you were before I left."

_We could never fool Lorenzo_, thought Daoud ruefully.

"The pope is gone, the Tartars are gone, the French are gone," said
Daoud. "There is no one left in Orvieto that we need deceive. Find some
soft cloths on the table to bind my feet." Creating the barrier between
his mind and the pain, Daoud swung his legs over the edge of the bed.
Lorenzo stared at him, his mouth falling open.

"What in the name of hell are you doing? You cannot get up! What wounds
are under those bandages?"

"I do not mind the pain," said Daoud. "I want to meet this duke's son.
Where is your army camped?"

Lorenzo's grin stretched his thick black mustache. "In the valley to
the north. You should see it. After I climbed up to the main gate of
Orvieto I looked down and saw the hundreds of campfires twinkling. It
was as if the world had turned over, and I was looking down into the
starry sky."

Daoud wished he could go to the city walls to see what Lorenzo had
described. But he had barely strength enough to walk from his room to
Ugolini's cabinet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four men--Daoud, Lorenzo, Ugolini, and Lapo di Stefano--sat around
Ugolini's worktable discussing the fate of Orvieto. The servants had
moved the table to the center of the cabinet and had replaced the
cardinal's usual clutter of philosophical instruments with platters of
meat, loaves of bread baked fresh in the cardinal's kitchen, and trays
of steaming pastries. Daoud had no appetite and was in too much pain to
eat.

"When does your King Manfred intend to come up from the south?" Lapo
asked Daoud. He twisted the carcass of a roasted pigeon between thick,
juice-stained fingers. His nose had been broken in some accident or
fight; air whistled in and out of the flattened nostrils. Daoud judged
him to be about twenty, the same age as Simon de Gobignon.

As far as Lapo knew, Daoud was an agent of the king of southern Italy
and Sicily. It might have shocked him to discover that he was dealing
with a Muslim from Egypt.

Daoud had to evade Lapo's question. He had no idea what plans Manfred
had, if any. He could only hope that when he met with Manfred at Lucera
he would be able to persuade him to invade the Papal States.

"King Manfred would come from the south much more quickly," Daoud said,
"if he could count on being recognized by the cities of the north as
king of a united Italy."

"That must be between my father and him," said Lapo, and his breath
wheezed through his nostrils as he bit into the pigeon's breast. "After
all, no such title exists. There has never been a king of Italy."

And yet there easily could be, thought Daoud, seeing the shape of the
peninsula in his mind. And if that single ruler were a man like Manfred,
what a strong barrier Italy could be between the Abode of Islam and the
barbaric kingdoms of Christian Europe.

But in fact, thought Daoud, for all that Lapo di Stefano wore the
Ghibellino symbol, the black, two-headed Hohenstaufen eagle, on the
breast of his red silk surcoat, he and his father might still prefer
that Manfred stay where he was. As long as Manfred remained cut off
from the northern cities like Siena by the band of the Papal States
running across the center of Italy, the Ghibellini of the north could do
as they pleased.

"When the French invade," said Daoud, "a united Italy can keep them out.
If the cities of the north are divided, the French will take them over
one by one."

"How do you know the French will invade?" Lapo asked. "We have heard
that King Louis has no desire to wage war in Italy."

Daoud was beginning to feel a strong dislike for this coarse young
nobleman who seemed both very sure of himself and very ignorant. He was
about to reply when a man-at-arms entered and whispered to Ugolini.

"D'Ucello is here," Ugolini said.

"Have him wait below until we send for him," said Daoud quickly. He
turned back to Lapo.

