could think.

The door closed. He was within the shell, standing on a smooth metal
floor. The others were beside him. Dully he wondered what wild
adventure was ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had expected--he hardly knew what. But there should have been
machinery of some sort. If this weird balloon thing was actually to
carry them, there must be some mechanism, some propelling power. And
instead he saw nothing but the shining walls of the circular room and
at the exact center, reaching from floor to ceiling, a six-inch metal
post that thickened to a boxlike form on a level with his eyes. There
was a plate on the side of that box, a cover, and clamps that held it
in place, and on an adjoining side two little levers, one near the top
of the box, the other near the bottom.

His one all-inclusive glance showed him bull's-eye windows in the
ceiling. There were more of them in the floor. One curved bar,
circling the room, was mounted on brackets against the wall. They were
telling him by signs that he was to put his hands on it and hang on.
One of the men was beside that central post. He too gripped at a
projecting hand-hold. His other hand was on the lower lever.

Rawson knew his disappointment was unreasonable, but his weary mind
was tired of mysteries. Some understandable bit of machinery would
have been reassuring. And then in his next thought he asked himself
what difference did it make. If this childish balloon thing were
really capable of carrying them somewhere, what of it? It could only
mean more of this hideous inner world that grew more unbearably
fantastic with each new experience.

His life had been saved. True, but for what end? The girl's eyes were
upon him, reading the expression on his face. She smiled
encouragingly. Then Rawson's hands tightened upon the metal bar. The
man who stood by the central post had moved one lever the merest
trifle. Rawson felt the floor lifting beneath him. Then the shell,
like a bubble of metal, pitched and tossed as the powerful air
currents caught it.

       *       *       *       *       *

His own lightness saved him from injury. He gripped the bar and held
himself free of the wall. The round top of their strange craft grated
against the domed roof. Then again the ship steadied and seemed
motionless, and Rawson knew they had slipped up into the still air of
that upper shaft.

For one wild instant, filled with impossible hope, Rawson saw this as
a means of ascent to his own world. Then reason tore those wild hopes
to shreds.

"It's closed up above," he thought. "It must be. That's why it sounded
that way. That's why the air drove off through those side passages."

The next instant held no time for thought. Rawson's whole attention
was concentrated upon the bar to which he clung. For, quicker than
thought, the metal shell, the little cylindrical world in which he and
these others were, fell swiftly beneath them.

His body twisted in mid-air. He knew the others were being thrown in
the same manner. Then, what an instant before had been the ceiling was
now a floor beneath his feet, pressing up against him and giving him
weight--and by the whistling rush of the air that tore past their
shell he knew they had fallen with marvelous swiftness straight down
through the throat of that lower shaft.

And now what had been down was up. The ceiling of this strange room
was now their floor, but Rawson was not deceived. "Acceleration," he
said. "It's crowding us. The shell tends to fall faster than we do.
It's like an elevator traveling downward at a swifter rate than a free
falling body."

       *       *       *       *       *

He had glimpsed the glassy-side of that well into which he knew they
had been flung. He knew that the shrieks that filled the room time and
again were caused by the touching of their shell's guiding and
protecting bars against one glassy wall. Those sounds came always from
the same side and Rawson found momentary satisfaction in his own
understanding of the phenomenon.

"We're falling free," he argued within his own mind, "falling toward
the center of the earth. And a falling body wouldn't follow a vertical
course. It would tend to hug against one wall." And by that he knew
something of their speed. The necessity for it was apparent a moment
later.

Above his head the bull's-eyes pointing forward in the direction of
their flight were faintly red. Swiftly they changed to crimson. Rawson
was standing beside a window in the wall of their craft. That, too,
grew quickly to an area of dazzling brightness. Slowly the heat struck
in. The air in the little room was stifling. He saw the girl turn her
head and give a sharp order.

The man by the central post responded with another slight movement of
the lever. Beneath Rawson's feet the floor pressed upward in a surge
of speed that bent his knees and bore him downward. Under his hands
the rod to which he clung was hot. The shining walls were dimly
glowing. They were being hurled through the very heart of hell....

       *       *       *       *       *

And then it was past. The crimson horror beyond those windows grew
dull and then black. In the blunt nose of their craft a tiny crevice
must have opened. The one who drove that projectile in its shrieking
flight had touched another control that Rawson had not before seen.
And with a piercing shriek a thin jet of cold air drove down into the
hot room.

No wine could have been one-half so potent. That thin jet filled the
room with buffeting whirlwinds that grew quickly cold.

Then their speed was checked. Abruptly Rawson was weightless, his body
hanging in air, moved only as he moved his hand upon the bar. Only a
few feet away was the body of the girl floating weightless like
himself. The others were shouting loud words of satisfaction, but her
face was turned toward Rawson, her eyes were smiling into his; while,
outside the little shell that fell in meteor flight, were only
shrieking winds and the blackness into which they plunged.




CHAPTER XVII

_Gor_


Through an ordinary experience, Dean Rawson, like any other man, would
have kept unconscious measurement of the passing time. An hour, no
matter how crowded, would still have been an hour that his mind could
measure and grasp. But now he had no least idea of the hours or
minutes that had marked their flight. Each lagging second was an age
in passing. Even the flashing thoughts that drove swiftly through his
mind seemed slow and laborious. Painstakingly he marshaled his few
facts.

"They know what they're about, that's one thing dead sure. They're
onto their job, and they've got something here that beats anything
we've ever had." He mentally nailed that one fact down and passed on
to the next. "And that's the bow end of our ship, up there." He looked
above him at a dented place in the ceiling, the ceiling that had been
the floor of the room when first he stepped into it. "There isn't any
up or down any more. I've been flipped back and forth every time we
slowed down or accelerated until I don't know where I'm at, but I saw
that dented plate in the floor when I got in and we started falling in
that direction. But whether we're falling toward the center of the
earth still or whether we passed the center back there at that hot
spot and now this crazy, senseless shell is flying on and up, perhaps
these people know--I don't!"

Then fact No. 3. "They live somewhere inside here. They're taking me
there, of course. It must mean there's a race of them--and they don't
like the mole-men. They know the way back, too, and if they'll help
me.... Perhaps the fighting's not over yet!"

Through more endless, age-long seconds there passed through Rawson's
mind entrancing visions. An army of men like these White Ones, himself
at their head. They were armed with strange weapons; they were
invading the mole-men's world....

The girl was reaching toward him. She laid one hand upon his, then
pointed overhead.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rawson looked quickly above. The glowing bull's-eyes startled him,
then he knew it was white-light he was seeing, not the red threat of
glowing rock. Their speed had been steadily cut down as the air
pressure lessened. "They're decompressing," he thought. "They're
working slowly into the lesser pressure."

The passing air no longer shrieked insanely. Above its soft rushing
sound he heard the girl's voice; it was clear, vibrant with happiness.
Her hand closed convulsively over his; her eyes beneath their long
lashes smiled unspoken words of welcome, of comradeship, and of
something more.

Within their room her light, which at close range seemed only a
slender bar of metal with a brilliantly glowing end, had been clamped
in a bracket against the wall. The illumination had seemed brilliant,
now suddenly it was pale and dim.

Through the bull's-eyes above, a brighter light was shining, clear and
golden, like the light of the sun on a brilliant and cloudless day.
And to Rawson, who felt that he had spent a lifetime in the gloomy
dungeons of that inner world, that flooding brilliance was more than
mere light. It was the promise of release, the very essence of hope.
His eyes clung to these little round windows; then the larger glass
beside him blazed forth with the bright sunlight of an open world that
was unbearable to one who had lived so long in darkness.

He held tightly to that slim hand that remained so confidingly within
his own.

"It isn't true," Rawson was telling himself frantically. "It can't be
true. It must be a delusion, another dream."

He gripped the girl's hand in what must have been a painful clasp. He
told himself that she at least was real. Her lovely face was before
him when at last he could bear to open his eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

About him were the others. The cylinder rested firmly upon a surface
of pale-rose quartz. Inside the shell he saw the floor where he had
stood, and with that he added one more fact to the few he had gotten
together. There was no dent in the floor. The shell's position was
reversed. What had been up was now down. Rawson knew he was standing
firmly, with what seemed his normal earth weight, upon a smooth
surface of rock; he knew that he was standing head down as compared
with his position at the beginning of their flight--as compared, too,
with the way he had stood in the mole-men's world and in his own world
up above.

"I've passed the center of the world." The words were ringing in his
brain. And then reason shot in a quick denial. "You're as heavy as you
were on earth," he told himself. "You'd have to go through and on to
the other side, the opposite surface of the world, before your weight
would come back like that!"

"What could it mean?" he was demanding as his eyes came back from the
machine and swept around over a gorgeous, glittering panorama of
crystal mountains, rose and white. Fields of strange plants, vividly
green; a whole world that rioted madly in a luxury of color. Before
him the girl stood smiling. Every line of her quivering figure spoke
eloquently of her joy in seeing this world through Rawson's eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

A man was approaching, a man like the others, yet whose oval face
strangely resembled that of the girl. She led Rawson toward him, then
Rawson, stopping, jerked backward in uncontrollable amazement, for the
tall man drawing near had spoken. His lips were open, moving, and from
them came sounds which to Rawson were absolutely unbelievable:

"Stranger," said the newcomer, "in the name of the Holy Mountain, and
in the Mountain's language and words, I bid you welcome."

And Rawson, too stunned for coherent thought, could only stammer in
what was half a shout: "But you're speaking my language. You're
talking the way we talk on earth. Am I crazy? Stark, raving crazy?"

But even the sound of the man's voice could not have prepared him for
what followed. There was amazement written on the face of the man. And
the girl who stood beside him--her eyes that had been smiling were
wide and staring in utter fear. Then she and the man and the other
white figures nearby dropped suddenly to kneel humbly before him.
Their faces were hidden from him, covered by their hands as they bent
their heads low. He heard the man's voice:

"He speaks with the tongue of the Mountain! He comes from the Land of
the Sun, from Lah-o-tah, at the top of the world! And I, Gor, am
permitted to hear his voice!"




CHAPTER XVIII

_The Dance of Death_


Through an airplane's thick windows of shatter-proof glass, so tough
and resilient that a machine-gun bullet would only make a temporary
dent, the midday sun flashed brightly as the big ship rolled. Along
each side of the small room, high up under the curve of the cabin
roof, windows were ranged. Others like them were in the floor. And,
above, the same glass made a transparent dome from which an observer
could see on all sides.

Outside was the thunderous roar of ten giant motors, but inside the
cabin--the fire-control room of a dreadnought of the air--that blast
of sound became more a reverberation and a trembling than actual
noise.

Certainly the sound of motors and of slashing propellers, as the
battle plane roared up into the sky, did not prevent free
conversation among the three men in the room. Yet there was neither
laughter nor idle talk.

At a built-in desk, before a battery of instruments, sat Farrell, the
captain of the ship. Farther aft, in solidly anchored chairs, Colonel
Culver and Smithy were seated. Occasionally the captain spoke into a
transmitter, cutting in by phone on different stations about the ship.

"Check up on that right-wing gun, Sergeant--number two of the top
wing-battery. Recoil mechanism is reported stiff.... Tell Chicago,
Lieutenant, we will want one thousand gallons in the air--gas only--no
oil needed.... Gun room? Have the gun crews get some sleep. They'll
have to stand by later on...."

Colonel Culver spoke musingly. "Guerilla warfare, the hardest kind to
meet."

       *       *       *       *       *

Smithy nodded absently. He rose and stared from one of the side
windows that was just level with his eyes. He could see nothing but
the broad expanse of wing, a sheet of smooth gray metal. Along its
leading edge was a row of shimmering disks where great propellers
whirled. From the top of the wing a two-inch Rickert recoilless thrust
forth its snout; it rose in air till the whole weapon was visible,
then settled again and buried itself inside the wing.

They were testing a gun. Smithy knew that inside that wing section
were other guns, and men, and smoothly running motors. The whole ship
was only a giant flying wing of which their own central section was
merely a thickening.

He looked down through a bull's-eye in the floor. The city they had
just left was beneath them. Washington, the nation's capital; the
golden dome of the Capitol Building was slipping swiftly astern. Only
then did he make a belated reply to Culver's statement.

"Well," he said shortly, "they'll have to meet it their own way. We
told them all we knew. And a lot of good that did--not!"

"Five days!" said Culver. "It seems more like five years since the
devils first came out. Nobody knows where they will hit next. But
they're working north--and there's no trouble in telling where they've
been."

Smithy's voice was hot in reply, hot with the intense anger of a
young, aggressive man when confronted by the ponderous motion of a big
organization getting slowly under way.

"If only we'd gone down underground," he exclaimed; "carried the fight
to them! They live there--there must be a whole world underground. We
could have carried in power lines, lighting the place as we went
along. We could have fought 'em with gas. We'd have paid for it, sure
we would, but we'd have given them enough hell to think of down below
so they wouldn't raise so much of it up above.

"But no! We had to fight according to the textbooks. And those red
devils don't fight that way; they never learned the rules."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Guerilla warfare," Colonel Culver repeated. "There are certain
difficulties about fighting enemies you can't see."

"They're clever," Smithy admitted. "We taught them their lesson down
there in the desert--they've never been seen in daylight since. Out at
night--and their invisible heat-rays setting fire to a city a mile
away, then mopping up with their green flame-throwers if anyone's
left. They pick our planes out of the sky even when they're flying
without lights. Darkness means nothing to them! It was murder to send
troops in against them, troops wiped out to a man! Artillery--that's
no good either when we don't know how many of the devils there are, or
where they are. There's no profit in shelling the place when the
brutes have gone back underground."

Colonel Culver shot a warning glance from Smithy to the seated
officer. "About a hundred square miles of the finest fruit country on
earth laid waste," he admitted gravely; then sought to turn Smithy
from his rebellious mood:

"What's underground, I wonder? Must be a world of caves. Or perhaps
these mole-men can follow up a mere crack or a fault line and open it
out with their flame-throwers to make a tunnel they can go through."

