
It is _a priori_ evident that stars, in general, must have proper
motions, when once we admit the universality of gravitation. That any
fixed star should be entirely at rest would require that the attractions
on all sides of it should be exactly balanced. Any change in the
position of this star would break up this balance, and thus, in general,
it follows that stars must be in motion, since all of them cannot occupy
such a critical position as has to be assumed. If but one fixed star is
in motion, this affects all the rest, and we cannot doubt but that
every star, our sun included, is in motion by an amount which varies
from small to great. If the sun alone had a motion, and the other stars
were at rest, the consequence of this would be that all the fixed stars
would appear to be retreating _en masse_ from that point in the sky
towards which we were moving. Those nearest us would move more rapidly,
those more distant less so. And in the same way, the stars from which
the solar system was receding would seem to be approaching each other.
If the stars, instead of being quite at rest, as just supposed, had
motions proper to themselves, then we should have a double complexity.
They would still appear to an observer in the solar system to have
motions, and part of these motions would be truly proper to the stars,
and part would be due to the advance of the sun itself in space.

Observations can show us only the _resultant_ of these two motions.
It is for reasoning to separate this resultant into its two components.
At first the question is to determine whether the results of observation
indicate any solar motion at all. If there is none, the proper motions
of stars will be directed along all possible lines. If the sun does
truly move, then there will be a general agreement in the resultant
motions of the stars near the ends of the line along which it moves,
while those at the sides, so to speak, will show comparatively less
systematic effect. It is as if one were riding in the rear of a railway
train and watching the rails over which it has just passed. As we recede
from any point, the rails at that point seem to come nearer and nearer
together.

If we were passing through a forest, we should see the trunks of the
trees from which we were going apparently come nearer and nearer
together, while those on the sides of us would remain at their constant
distance, and those in front would grow further and further apart.

These phenomena, which occur in a case where we are sensible of our own
motion, serve to show how we may deduce a motion, otherwise unknown,
from the appearances which are presented by the stars in space.

In this way, acting upon suggestions which had been thrown out
previously to his own time by LAMBERT, MAYER, and BRADLEY, HERSCHEL
demonstrated that the sun, together with all its system, was moving
through space in an unknown and majestic orbit of its own. The centre
round which this motion is directed cannot yet be assigned. We can
only know the point in the heavens towards which our course is
directed--"the apex of solar motion."

By a study of the proper motions assigned by MASKELYNE to the brighter
stars, HERSCHEL was able to define the position of the solar apex with
an astonishing degree of accuracy. His calculations have been several
times repeated with the advantage of modern analytical methods, and of
the hundred-fold material now at our disposition, but nothing essential
has been added to his results of 1805, which were based upon such scanty
data; and his paper of 1782 contains the announcement of the discovery
itself.

His second paper on the _Direction_ and _Velocity_ of the solar system
(1805) is the best example that can possibly be given of his marvellous
skill in reaching the heart of a matter, and it may be the one in which
his philosophical powers appear in their highest exercise. For sustained
reflection and high philosophic thought it is to be ranked with the
researches of NEWTON in the _Principia_.


           _Researches on the Construction of the Heavens._

HERSCHEL'S papers on the Construction of the Heavens, as he named it,
extended over his whole scientific life. By this he specially means the
method according to which the stars, the clusters, the nebulae, are
spread through the regions of space, the causes that have led to this
distribution, and the laws to which it is subjected.

No single astronomical fact is unimportant in the light which it may
throw on the scheme of the whole, and each fact is to be considered in
this light. As an instance: his discovery of the variable star
_[alpha] Herculis_, which has a period of sixty days, was valuable in
itself as adding one more to the number of those strange suns whose
light is now brighter, now fainter, in a regular and periodic order.
But the chief value of the discovery was that now we had an instance of
a periodic star which went through all its phases in sixty days, and
connected, as it were, the stars of short periods (three to seven days)
with those of very long ones (three hundred to five hundred days), which
two groups had, until then, been the only ones known. In the same way
all his researches on the parallaxes of stars were not alone for the
discovery of the distance of any one or two single stars, but to gain a
unit of celestial measure, by means of which the depths of space might
be sounded.

Astronomy in HERSCHEL'S day considered the bodies of the solar system as
separated from each other by distances, and as filling a cubical space.
The ideas of near and far, of up and down, were preserved, in regard to
them, by common astronomical terms. But the vast number of stars seemed
to be thought of, as they appear in fact to exist, lying on the surface
of a hollow sphere. The immediate followers of BRADLEY used these fixed
stars as points of reference by which the motions within the solar
system could be determined, or, like LACAILLE and LALANDE, gathered
those immense catalogues of their positions which are so indispensable
to the science. MICHELL and HERSCHEL alone, in England, occupied their
thoughts with the nature and construction of the heavens--the one in his
study, the other through observation.[34] They were concerned with all
three of the dimensions of space.

In his memoir of 1784, HERSCHEL says:

    "Hitherto the sidereal heavens have, not inadequately for the
    purpose designed, been represented by the concave surface of a
    sphere, in the centre of which the eye of an observer might be
    supposed to be placed.

    "It is true the various magnitudes of the fixed stars even then
    plainly suggested to us, and would have better suited, the idea of
    an expanded firmament of three dimensions; but the observations upon
    which I am now going to enter still farther illustrate and enforce
    the necessity of considering the heavens in this point of view. In
    future, therefore, we shall look upon those regions into which we
    may now penetrate by means of such large telescopes, as a naturalist
    regards a rich extent of ground or chain of mountains containing
    strata variously inclined and directed, as well as consisting of
    very different materials. The surface of a globe or map, therefore,
    will but ill delineate the interior parts of the heavens."

HERSCHEL'S method of study was founded on a mode of observation which he
called _star-gauging_. It consisted in pointing a powerful telescope
toward various parts of the heavens, and ascertaining by actual count
how thick the stars were in each region. His twenty-foot reflector was
provided with such an eye-piece that, in looking into it, he saw a
portion of the heavens about 15' in diameter. A circle of this size on
the celestial sphere has about one quarter the apparent surface of the
sun, or of the full moon. On pointing the telescope in any direction, a
greater or less number of stars were visible. These were counted, and
the direction in which the telescope pointed was noted. Gauges of this
kind were made in all parts of the sky, and the results were tabulated
in the order of right ascension.

The following is an extract from the gauges, and gives the average
number of stars in each field at the points noted in right ascension and
north polar distance:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------
              |    N. P. D.       ||           |    N. P. D.
      R. A.   |78 deg. to 80 deg. ||   R. A.   |92 deg. to 94 deg.
              |  No. of Stars.    ||           | No. of Stars.
  ------------|-------------------||-----------|-------------------
      H.  M.  |                   ||  H.  M.   |
      11   6  |       3.1         ||  15  10   |      9.4
      12  31  |       3.4         ||  15  22   |     10.6
      12  44  |       4.6         ||  15  47   |     10.6
      12  49  |       3.9         ||  16   8   |     12.1
      13   5  |       3.8         ||  16  25   |     13.6
      14  30  |       3.6         ||  16  37   |     18.6
  -----------------------------------------------------------------

In this small table, it is plain that a different law of clustering or
of distribution obtains in the two regions. Such differences are still
more marked, if we compare the extreme cases found by HERSCHEL, as
R. A. = 19h 41m, N. P. D. = 74 deg. 33', number of stars per field = 588;
and R. A. = 16h 10m, N. P. D. = 113 deg. 4', number of stars = 1.1.

The number of stars in certain portions is very great. For example, in
the Milky Way, near _Orion_, six fields of view promiscuously taken gave
110, 60, 70, 90, 70, and 74 stars each, or a mean of 79 stars per field.
The most vacant space in this neighborhood gave 60 stars. So that as
HERSCHEL'S sweeps were two degrees wide in declination, in one hour
(15 deg.) there would pass through the field of his telescope 40,000 or
more stars. In some of the sweeps this number was as great as 116,000
stars in a quarter of an hour.

When HERSCHEL first applied his telescope to the Milky Way, he believed
that it completely resolved the whole whitish appearance into small
stars. This conclusion he subsequently modified. He says:

    "It is very probable that the great stratum called the Milky Way is
    that in which the sun is placed, though perhaps not in the very
    centre of its thickness.

    "We gather this from the appearance of the Galaxy, which seems to
    encompass the whole heavens, as it certainly must do if the sun is
    within it. For, suppose a number of stars arranged between two
    parallel planes, indefinitely extended every way, but at a given
    considerable distance from each other; and calling this a sidereal
    stratum, an eye placed somewhere within it will see all the stars in
    the direction of the planes of the stratum projected into a great
    circle, which will appear lucid on account of the accumulation of
    the stars, while the rest of the heavens, at the sides, will only
    seem to be scattered over with constellations, more or less crowded
    according to the distance of the planes, or number of stars
    contained in the thickness or sides of the stratum.

    "If the eye were placed somewhere without the stratum, at no very
    great distance, the appearance of the stars within it would assume
    the form of one of the smaller circles of the sphere, which would be
    more or less contracted according to the distance of the eye; and,
    if this distance were exceedingly increased, the whole stratum might
    at last be drawn together into a lucid spot of any shape, according
    to the length, breadth, and height of the stratum.

    "Suppose that a smaller stratum should branch out from the former in
    a certain direction, and that it also is contained between two
    parallel planes, so that the eye is contained within the great
    stratum somewhere before the separation, and not far from the place
    where the strata are still united. Then this second stratum will not
    be projected into a bright circle like the former, but it will be
    seen as a lucid branch proceeding from the first, and returning
    into it again at a distance less than a semicircle. If the bounding
    surfaces are not parallel planes, but irregularly curved surfaces,
    analogous appearances must result."

The Milky Way, as we see it, presents the aspect which has been just
accounted for, in its general appearance of a girdle around the heavens
and in its bifurcation at a certain point, and HERSCHEL'S explanation of
this appearance, as just given, has never been seriously questioned. One
doubtful point remains: are the stars scattered all through space? or
are they near its bounding planes, or clustered in any way within this
space so as to produce the same result to the eye as if uniformly
distributed?

HERSCHEL assumed that they were nearly equably arranged all through the
space in question. He only examined one other arrangement, _viz._, that
of a ring of stars surrounding the sun, and he pronounced against such
an arrangement, for the reason that there is absolutely nothing in the
size or brilliancy of the sun to cause us to suppose it to be the centre
of such a gigantic system. No reason, except its importance to us
personally, can be alleged for such a supposition. Every star will have
its own appearance of a Galaxy or Milky Way, which will vary according
to the situation of the star.

Such an explanation will account for the general appearances of the
Milky Way and of the rest of the sky, supposing the stars equally or
nearly equally distributed in space. On this supposition, the system
must be deeper where the stars appear most numerous.

HERSCHEL endeavored, in his early memoirs, to explain this inequality of
distribution on the fundamental assumption that the stars were nearly
equably distributed in space. If they were so distributed, then the
number of stars visible in any gauge would show the thickness of the
stellar system in the direction in which the telescope was pointed.
At each pointing, the field of view of the instrument includes all the
visible stars situated within a cone, having its vortex at the
observer's eye, and its base at the very limits of the system, the angle
of the cone (at the eye) being 15'. Then the cubes of the
perpendiculars let fall from the eye, on the plane of the bases of the
various visual cones, are proportional to the solid contents of the
cones themselves, or, as the stars are supposed equally scattered within
all the cones, the cube roots of the numbers of stars in each of the
fields express the relative lengths of the perpendiculars. A _section_
of the sidereal system along any great circle can be constructed from
the data furnished by the gauges in the following way:

The solar system is within the mass of stars. From this point lines are
drawn along the different directions in which the gauging telescope was
pointed. On these lines are laid off lengths proportional to the cube
roots of the number of stars in each gauge. The irregular line joining
the terminal points will be approximately the bounding curve of the
stellar system in the great circle chosen. Within this line the space is
nearly uniformly filled with stars. Without it is empty space. A similar
section can be constructed in any other great circle, and a combination
of all such would give a representation of the shape of our stellar
system. The more numerous and careful the observations, the more
elaborate the representation, and the 863 gauges of HERSCHEL are
sufficient to mark out with great precision the main features of the
Milky Way, and even to indicate some of its chief irregularities.

On the fundamental assumption of HERSCHEL (equable distribution), no
other conclusion can be drawn from his statistics but the one laid down
by him.

This assumption he subsequently modified in some degree, and was led to
regard his gauges as indicating not so much the _depth of the system_ in
any direction, as the _clustering power or tendency_ of the stars in
those special regions. It is clear that if in any given part of the sky,
where, on the average, there are ten stars (say) to a field, we should
find a certain small portion having 100 or more to a field, then, on
HERSCHEL'S first hypothesis, rigorously interpreted, it would be
necessary to suppose a spike-shaped protuberance directed from the
earth, in order to explain the increased number of stars. If many such
places could be found, then the probability is great that this
explanation is wrong. We should more rationally suppose some real
inequality of star distribution here. It is, in fact, in just such
details that the method of HERSCHEL breaks down, and a careful
examination of his system leads to the belief that it must be greatly
modified to cover all the known facts, while it undoubtedly has, in the
main, a strong basis.

The stars are certainly not uniformly distributed, and any general
theory of the sidereal system must take into account the varied tendency
to aggregation in various parts of the sky.

In 1817, HERSCHEL published an important memoir on the same subject, in
which his first method was largely modified, though not abandoned. Its
fundamental principle was stated by him as follows:

    "It is evident that we cannot mean to affirm that the stars of the
    fifth, sixth, and seventh magnitudes are really smaller than those
    of the first, second, or third, and that we must ascribe the cause
    of the difference in the apparent magnitudes of the stars to a
    difference in their relative distances from us. On account of the
    great number of stars in each class, we must also allow that the
    stars of each succeeding magnitude, beginning with the first, are,
    one with another, further from us than those of the magnitude
    immediately preceding. The relative magnitudes give only relative
    distances, and can afford no information as to the real distances at
    which the stars are placed.

    "A standard of reference for the arrangement of the stars may be had
    by comparing their distribution to a certain properly modified
    equality of scattering. The equality which I propose does not
    require that the stars should be at equal distances from each other,
    nor is it necessary that all those of the same nominal magnitude
    should be equally distant from us."

