The form of the pupa does not differ very much from the maggot, but
the skin has hardened and changed to a chestnut brown color, and they
remain in this stage about two weeks in the summer, when the perfect
flies emerge. There are successive broods during the season, and the
winter is passed in the pupa stage.

The following remedies have been suggested:

Scattering dry, unleached wood ashes over the plants as soon as they
are up, while they are wet with dew, and continuing this as often as
once a week through the month of June, is said to prevent the deposit
of eggs on the plants.

Planting the onions in a new place as remote as possible from where
they were grown the previous year has been found useful, as the flies
are not supposed to migrate very far.

Pulverized gas lime scattered along between the rows has been useful
in keeping the flies away.

Watering with liquid from pig pens collected in a tank provided for
the purpose, was found by Miss Ormerod to be a better preventive than
the gas lime.

When the onions have been attacked and show it by wilting and changing
color, they should either be taken up with a trowel and burned, or
else a little diluted carbolic acid, or kerosene oil, should be
dropped on the infested plants to run down them and destroy the
maggots in the roots and in the soil around them.

Instead of sowing onion seed in rows, they should be grown in hills,
so that the maggots, which are footless, cannot make their way from
one hill to another.


THE CABBAGE BUTTERFLY.

_Pieris rapae_ (Linn.)


In the New England States there are three broods of this insect in a
year, according to Mr. Scudder, the butterflies being on the wing in
May, July, and September; but as the time of the emergence varies, we
see them on the wing continuously through the season.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

The expanded wings, Fig. 12, male, measure about two inches, are white
above, with the base dusky. Both sexes have the apex black and a black
spot a little beyond the middle, and the female, Fig. 13, has another
spot below this. The under side of the fore wings is white, yellowish
toward the apex, and with two black spots in both sexes corresponding
to those on the upper side of the female. A little beyond the middle
of the costa, on the hind wings, is an irregular black spot on the
upper surface, while the under surface is pale lemon yellow without
marks, but sprinkled more or less with dark atoms. The body is black
above and white beneath.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

The caterpillars of this insect feed on the leaves of cabbage,
cauliflower, turnip, mignonette, and some other plants.

The female lays her eggs on the under side of the leaves of the food
plants, generally, but sometimes on the upper sides or even on the
leaf stalks. They are sugar loaf shaped, flattened at the base, and
with the apex cut off square at the top, pale lemon yellow in color,
about one twenty-fifth of an inch long and one fourth as wide, and
have twelve longitudinal ribs with fine cross lines between them.

The eggs hatch in about a week, and the young caterpillars, which are
very pale yellow, first eat the shells from which they have escaped,
and then spin a carpet of silk, upon which they remain except when
feeding. They now eat small round holes through the leaves, but as
they grow older change to a greenish color, with a pale yellow line
along the back, and a row of small yellow spots along the sides, and
eat their way down into the head of the cabbage.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

Having reached its full growth, the caterpillar, Fig. 14, a, which is
about an inch in length, wanders off to some sheltered place, as under
a board, fence rail, or even under the edge of clapboards on the side
of a building, where it spins a button of silk, in which to secure its
hind legs, then the loop of silk to support the forward part of the
body.

It now casts its skin, changing to a chrysalis, Fig. 14, b, about
three-fourths of an inch in length, quite rough and uneven, with
projecting ridges and angular points on the back, and the head is
prolonged into a tapering horn. In color they are very variable, some
are pale green, others are flesh colored or pale ashy gray, and
sprinkled with numerous black dots. The winter is passed in the
chrysalis stage.

After the caterpillar changes to a chrysalis, their minute parasites
frequently bore through the outside and deposit their eggs within.
These hatch before the time for the butterflies to emerge, and feeding
on the contents, destroy the life of the chrysalis.

Birds and spiders are of great service in destroying these insects.

The pupae should be collected and burned if the abdomen is flexible;
but if the joints of the abdomen are stiff and cannot be easily moved,
they should be left, as they contain parasites.

Several applications of poisons have been used, the best results being
obtained from the use of pyrethrum as a powder blown on to the plants
by a hand bellows, during the hottest part of the day, in the
proportion of one part to four or five of flour.

As the eggs are laid at different times, any application, to be
thoroughly tested, must be repeated several times.


THE APPLE TREE TENT CATERPILLAR.

_Clisiocampa Americana_ (Harr.)


Large, white, silken web-like tents, Fig. 15, are noticed by the
roadsides, in the early summer, on wild cherry trees, and also on
fruit trees in orchards, containing numerous caterpillars of a
blackish color, with fine gray hairs scattered over the body.

This well known pest has been very abundant throughout the State for
several years past, and the trees in many neglected orchards have been
greatly injured by it, some being entirely stripped of their leaves.
The trees in these orchards and the neglected ones by the roadsides
form excellent breeding places for this insect, and such as are of
little of no value should be destroyed. If this were well done, and
all fruit growers in any given region were to destroy all the tents on
their trees, even for a single season, the work of holding them in
check or destroying them in the following year would be comparatively
light.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

The moths, Fig. 16, appear in great numbers in July, their wings
measuring, when expanded, from one and a quarter to one and a half
inches or more. They are of a reddish brown color, the fore wings
being tinged with gray on the base and middle, and crossed by two
oblique whitish stripes.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

The females lay their eggs, about three hundred in number, in a belt,
Fig. 15, c, around the twigs of apple, cherry, and a few other trees,
the belt being covered by a thick coating of glutinous matter, which
probably serves as a protection against the cold weather during
winter.

The following spring, when the buds begin to swell, the egg hatch and
the young caterpillar seek some fork of a branch, where they rest side
by side. They are about one-tenth of an inch long, of a blackish
color, with numerous fine gray hairs on the body. They feed on the
young and tender leaves, eating on an average two apiece each day.
Therefore the young of one pair of moths would consume from ten to
twelve thousand leaves; and it is not uncommon to see from six to
eight nests or tents on a single tree, from which no less than
seventy-five thousand leaves would be destroyed--a drain no tree can
long endure.

As the caterpillars grow, a new and much larger skin is formed
underneath the old one, which splits along the back and is cast off.
When fully grown, Fig. 15, a and b, which is in about thirty-five to
forty days after emerging from the eggs, they are about two inches
long, with a black head and body, with numerous yellowish hairs on the
surface, with a white stripe along the middle of the back, and minute
whitish or yellowish streaks, which are broken and irregular along the
sides; and there is also a row of transverse, small, pale blue spots
along each side of the back.

As they move about they form a continuous thread of silk from a fleshy
tube on the lower side of the mouth, which is connected with the
silk-producing glands in the interior of the body, and by means of
this thread they appear to find their way back from the feeding
grounds. It is also by the combined efforts of all the young from one
belt of eggs that the tents are formed.

These caterpillars do not feed during damp, cold weather, but take two
meals a day when it is pleasant.

After reaching their full growth, they leave their tents and scatter
in all directions, seeking for some protected place where each one
spins its spindle-shaped cocoon of whitish silk intermingled with
sulphur colored powder, Fig. 15, d. They remain in these cocoons,
where they have changed to pupae, from twenty to twenty-five days,
after which the moths emerge, pair, and the females lay their eggs for
another brood.

Several remedies have been suggested, a few of which are given below.
Search the trees carefully, when they are bare, for clusters of eggs;
and, when found, cut off the twigs to which they are attached, and
burn them.

As soon as any tents are observed in the orchard they should be
destroyed, which may be readily and effectually done by climbing the
trees, and with the hand protected by a mitten or glove, seize the
tent and crush it with its entire contents; also swab them down with
strong soapsuds or other substances; or tear them down with a rounded
bottle brush.

Burning with a torch not only destroys the caterpillars but injures
the trees.

It should be observed, however, since the caterpillars, are quite
regular in taking their meals, in the middle of the forenoon and
afternoon, that they should be destroyed only in the morning or
evening, when all are in the tent.

Another remedy is to shower the trees with Paris green in water, in
the proportion of one pound to one hundred and fifty gallons of water.


THE FOREST TENT CATERPILLAR.

_Clisiocampa disstria_ (Huebner.)


This species, commonly known as the forest tent caterpillar, closely
resembles the apple tree tent caterpillar, but does not construct a
visible tent. It feeds on various species of forest trees, such as
oak, ash, walnut, hickory, etc., besides being very injurious to apple
and other fruit trees. The moth, Fig. 17, b, expands an inch and a
half or more. The general color is brownish yellow, and on the fore
wings are two oblique brown lines, the space between them being darker
than the rest of the wing. The eggs, Fig. 17, c and d, which are about
one twenty fifth of an inch long and one fortieth wide, are arranged,
three or four hundred in a cluster, around the twigs of the trees,
Fig. 17, a. These clusters are uniform in diameter and cut off
squarely at the ends. The eggs are white, and are firmly fastened to
the twigs and to each other, by a brown substance, like varnish, which
dries, leaving the eggs with a brownish covering.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.]

The eggs hatch about the time the buds burst, or before, and the young
caterpillars go for some time without food, but they are hardy and
have been known to live three weeks with nothing to eat, although the
weather was very cold.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

As soon as hatched they spin a silken thread wherever they go, and
when older wander about in search for food. The caterpillars are about
one and a half inches long when fully grown, Fig. 18. The general
color is pale blue, tinged with greenish low down on the sides, and
everywhere sprinkled with black dots or points, while along the middle
of the back is a row of white spots each side of which is an orange
yellow stripe, and a pale, cream yellow stripe below that. These
stripes and spots are margined with black. Each segment has two
elevated black points on the back, from each of which arise four or
more coarse black hairs. The back is clothed with whitish hairs, the
head is dark bluish freckled with black dots, and clothed with black
and fox-colored hairs, and the legs are black, clothed with whitish
hairs.

At this stage the caterpillars may be seen wandering about on fences,
trees, and along the roads in search of a suitable place to spin their
cocoons, which are creamy white, and look very much like those of the
common tent caterpillar, except that they are more loosely
constructed.

Within the cocoons, in two or three days they transform to pupae of a
reddish brown color, densely clothed with short pale yellowish hairs.
The moths appear in two or three weeks, soon lay their eggs and then
die. The insects are not abundant many years in succession, as their
enemies, the parasites, increase and check them.

Many methods have been suggested for their destruction, but the most
available and economical are to remove the clusters of eggs whenever
found, and burn them, and to shower the trees with Paris green in the
proportion of one pound to one hundred and fifty gallons of water.


THE STALK BORER.

_Gortyna nitela_ (Gruen.)


The perfect moth, Fig. 19, 1, expands from one to one and a half
inches. The fore wings are a mouse gray color, tinged with lilac and
sprinkled with fine yellow dots, and distinguished mainly by a white
band extending across the outer part. The moths hibernate in the
perfect state, and in April or May deposit their eggs singly on the
outside of the plant upon which the young are to feed. As soon as the
eggs hatch, which is in about a month, the young larvae, or
caterpillars, gnaw their way from the outside into the pith.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

The plant does not show any sign of decay until the caterpillar is
fully grown, when it dies. The caterpillar, Fig. 19, 2, is about one
and one-fourth inches long, of a reddish brown color, with whitish
stripes along the body. The stripes on the sides are not continuous,
and the shading of the body varies, being darker on the anterior than
on the posterior portion. When fully grown, Fig. 20, the color is
lighter and the stripes are broader. At this stage of life it burrows
into the ground just beneath the surface, and changes into the pupa
state. The pupa is three-fourths of an inch long, and of a mahogany
brown color. The perfect moth appears about the first of September,
and there is only one brood in a season.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

The caterpillars feed in the stalks of corn, tomatoes, potatoes,
dahlias, asters, and also in young currant bushes, besides feeding on
many species of weeds. By a close inspection of the plants about the
beginning of July, the spot where the borer entered, which is
generally quite a distance from the ground, may be detected, and the
caterpillar cut out without injury to the plant. This plan is
impracticable for an extensive crop, but by destroying the borers
found in the vines that wilt suddenly, one can lessen the number
another year.


THE PYRAMIDAL GRAPEVINE CATERPILLAR.

_Pyrophila pyramidoides_ (Guen.)


This caterpillar, Fig. 21, is generally found on grapevines early in
June, but also feeds on apple, plum, raspberry, maple, poplar, etc. It
is about an inch and a half in length, with the body tapering toward
the head; of a whitish green color, darker on the sides; with a
longitudinal white stripe on the back, broader on the last segments.
Low down on each side is a bright yellow stripe, between this and the
one on the back is another less distinct, and the under surface of the
body is pale green.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

The caterpillar is fully grown about the middle or last of June, when
it descends to the ground, draws together some of the fallen leaves,
and makes a cocoon, in which it soon changes to a mahogany brown pupa.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]

In the latter part of July the perfect moth, Fig. 22, emerges,
measuring, when its wings are expanded, about one and three-fourths
inches; the fore wings are dark brown shaded with lighter, with dots
and wavy lines of dull white. The hind wings are reddish, or of a
bright copper color, shading to brown on the outer angle of the front
edge of the wing, and paler toward the hinder and inner angle.

The under surface of the wings is lighter than the upper, and the body
is dark brown, with its posterior portion banded with lines of a paler
hue.

This pest may be destroyed by hand picking, or by jarring the trees or
vines on which they are feeding, when they will fall to the ground and
may be crushed or burned.


THE GRAPE BERRY MOTH.

_Eudemis botrana_ (S.V.)


The moths emerge and fly early in June, and are quite small,
measuring, when the wings are expanded, only two-fifths of an inch,
Fig. 23, a, enlarged. The fore wings are purplish or slate brown from
the base to the middle, the outer half being irregularly marked with
dark and light brown.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

These insects are two-brooded and the first brood feeds not only on
the leaves of the grape, but on tulip, sassafras, vernonia and
raspberry. The caterpillars of the second brood emerge when the grapes
are nearly grown, and bore in them a winding channel to the pulp,
continuing to eat the interior of the berry till the pulp is all
consumed, Fig. 23, d, when, if not full grown, they draw one or two
other berries close to the first and eat the inside of those.

The mature caterpillar, Fig. 23, b, measures about half an inch in
length, is dull greenish, with head and thoracic shield somewhat
darker; the internal organs give the body a reddish tinge. It then
leaves the grape and forms its cocoon by cutting out a piece of a
leaf, leaving it hinged on one side; then rolling the cut end over,
fastens it to the leaf, thus making for itself a cocoon in which to
pupate. The pupa is dark reddish brown.

The second generation passes the winter in the pupa state, attached to
leaves which fall to the ground; therefore, if all the dead and dried
leaves be gathered in the fall and burned, also all the decayed fruit,
a great many of these insects would be destroyed. As the caterpillars
feed inside of the berry, no spraying of the vines with poisons would
reach them. The caterpillar makes a discolored spot where it enters
the berry, Fig. 23, c. Therefore the infested fruit may be easily
detected and destroyed.

There is a small parasite that attacks this insect and helps to keep
it in check. The insect has been known in Europe over a hundred years.
It is not certain when it was introduced into America, but it is now
found from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico, and from the Atlantic to the
Pacific Ocean.


THE CODLING MOTH.

_Carpocapsa pomonella_ (Linn.)


This well known insect has a world-wide reputation, and is now found
wherever apples are raised.

[Illustration: FIG. 24.]

The moths are on the wing about the time the young apples are
beginning to set, and the female lays a single egg in the blossom end
of each apple. The fore wings of the moths when expanded, Fig. 24, g
(f, with the wings closed), measure about half an inch across, and are
marked with alternate wavy, transverse streaks of ashy gray and brown,
and have on the inner hind angle a large tawny brown, horseshoe shaped
spot, streaked with light bronze or copper color. The hind wings and
abdomen are light brown with a luster of satin.

Each female lays about fifty eggs, which are minute, flattened,
scale-like bodies of a yellowish color. In about a week the eggs hatch
and the tiny caterpillar begins to eat through the apple to the core,
Fig. 24, a, pushing its castings out through the hole where it
entered, Fig. 24, b. Oftentimes these are in sight on the outside in a
dark colored mass, thus making wormy apples plainly seen at quite a
distance.

The caterpillar is about two-fifths of an inch in length, of a glossy,
pale yellowish white color, with a light brown head. The skin is
transparent and the internal organs give to it a reddish tinge.

When mature the caterpillars, Fig. 24, e, top of head and second
segment, h, emerge from the apples and seek some sheltered place, such
as crevices of bark, or corners of the boxes or barrels in which the
fruit is stored, where they spin a tough whitish cocoon, Fig. 24, i,
in which they remain unchanged all winter, and transform to pupae, Fig.
24, d, the next spring, the perfect moths emerging in time to lay
their eggs in the new crop of apples.

One good remedy is to gather all the fallen apples, and feed them to
hogs; another is to let swine and sheep run in the orchard, and eat
the infested fruit.

It has been recommended to place bands of cloth or hay around the
trunks of the trees for the caterpillars to spin their cocoons
beneath, and to remove them at the proper time, and put them in
scalding water to destroy the worms.

By far the most successful method as yet adopted is to shower the
apple trees with Paris green in water, one pound to one hundred and
fifty gallons of water, when the apples are about the size of peas,
and again in about a week.


THE CABBAGE LEAF MINER.

_Plutella cruciferarum_ (Zell.)


The cabbage leaf miner is not a native of this country, but was
imported from Europe.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

The perfect moth, Fig. 25, f, with the wings expanded (h, with the
wings closed, g, a dark variety), measures three-quarters of an inch.
The fore wings are ashy gray, and on the hinder margin is a white or
