"Our ancestors, and many other advanced nations, began to burrow
toward the hot interior of the earth. We to-day have no idea of the
labor that went into the digging of our underground home. We are
becoming degenerate. More and more of us, even those who still use the
vita-lights, are becoming pale and flabby. There are hardly enough
technies to keep the automatic machinery in order. What will happen
when those technies also deteriorate, and lose the will to work? For
deteriorate they must, just as Senator Mollon and his still active
allies will. Just as I will, if I live long enough. There is a great
force that we never know here. It is called the cosmic ray. It never
penetrates to our depth. And our vita-lights do not produce it."

He then spoke of the proposed Exodus, argued, pleaded, painted a rosy
picture of the outer world, of a Sun come back, a world of brightness
and life. At the conclusion of his speech a sigh arose from the
assembled millions--a sigh of hope, of half belief. Had the vote been
taken then the Frozen Gate would have been opened.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Senator Mollon was on the rostrum, holding up a square, well
manicured hand for attention. In his deep rumbling bass he tore the
arguments for the Exodus to shreds. With the whip of fear he drove
away hope.

"If our savage ancestors lived on the inhospitable outer shell of the
earth," he shouted, "is that a reason for our taking that retrograde
step? Read your histories. What happened to our neighboring nation of
Atlantica only a short 15,000 years ago? They did just as this man is
urging--opened their outer gate. It promptly froze open, and liquid
air, the remnant of what in primordial days was an outer atmosphere,
poured down the tunnels. The whole nation died, and we saved ourselves
only by blasting the connecting passages between them and us with
fulminite."

A wave of fear passed over the tiny massed figures. For centuries the
race had been rapidly losing all initiative, except for those few
leaders who, through superior stamina and religious devotion to the
artificial sun-rays, had maintained something of their pristine
energy.

Now they were hysterical with fear of the unknown. Even as Mich'l Ares
adjusted the parabolic antenna of the thought-receptor vote-counting
machine, he knew what the verdict would be. In a moment the vote was
flashed on a screen on the ceiling: 421 in favor of the Exodus and
2,733,485 against it. There was an eery cheer from the people, and
they began to dissolve like smoke. Mollon rose, bowed politely and
smilingly, and walked out to where his magnetic car awaited him.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was with a feeling of deep depression that Mich'l Ares went to work
the next morning. His despair was shared by the technies under him
with whom he talked. At the telestereo station he found a bitter young
man broadcasting a prepared commentary on the election ordered by
Senator Mollon. It was congratulatory in nature, designed to confirm
popular opinion that the nation had been saved from a great
catastrophe and to glorify the principles of Mollon's party.

"... And so once more this great nation has demonstrated its ability
to govern itself, to protect itself against dangerous and unsocial
experiments. The voice of the people is the voice of God. The
Government claims for itself no credit for this momentous decision.
Each citizen has done his share toward the continuation of our safety,
our prosperity...."

The young man finished the document, smiled a charming smile, and
turned off the switch. Then he grimaced his disgust and lapsed into a
glum meditation.

"What say, Kratz?" Mich'l asked.

"Trouble again on the west sector. Had trouble getting power enough.
Generators ought to be overhauled." He made a helpless gesture.

"How about conscripting a little labor?"

"Tried it this morning. Most of the people are still in a daze from
chewing too much merclite. Those that're sober are too busy preening
themselves for voting on the winning side."

Kratz informed Mich'l that Mollon had that morning given up all
pretense of constitutional government, had preempted the treasury, and
was consolidating his position as avowed dictator.

"He probably wanted to do that a long time," Mich'l commented. "He
didn't quite dare till that Referendum yesterday gave him the real
measure of the public. Well, I've got to be going."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mich'l took one of the small mechanical service tunnels back to his
office. This latest news had hardly affected him, so keen was his
disappointment over the defeat of the Exodus. But he wanted to be
alone. He walked through vast halls full of machinery, abandoned and
rusting, through dark corridors that had once roared with industrial
life. What would happen when the present overloaded machinery should
break down; wear out? The remnants of the great technical army could
hardly serve what was left. Each passing year these silent, useless
hulks became more numerous. The specter of famine was stalking amid
the dusty pipes and empty vats of the chemical plants; the horrors of
darkness lurked amid the tarnished compression spheres and the long,
hooded monstrosities of the power plants, inadequately served by
harassed and overworked technies.

In the middle of his office Mich'l found the telucid counterpart of
Mila, sister of Nida Mane. She was younger than Nida, hardly more than
sixteen. Her eyes were wide with terror as she sought Mich'l. Her
cheeks were wet with tears, and her silken brown hair fell in careless
disarray.

"Mich'l!" she cried, as soon as she saw him. "Lane Mollon has taken
Nida!"

"Taken her!"

"And Father is under arrest. Lane came this morning, crazy with
merclite gum. He had four or five soldiers with him. When Nida refused
to see him they broke down the door and went to her room. They dragged
her out to Lane's car, and he took her to his warren near the
Presidential quarters."

"She there now?"

"Yes. Father followed Lane's car. Guards kept him out of Lane's
warren, so he went to see Mollon. That devil only laughed at him,
offered to call another Referendum. Father had a small pocket
needle-ray and--"

"Good! He killed Mollon?"

"No. But he managed to burn a hole through his arm. He was rushed off
to one of the cells. And Mollon says he will call a Referendum to
decide Father's fate."

"It would be just like that devil's sense of humor to let the people
decree their only friend's death."

       *       *       *       *       *

"They'll do it, too!" Mila exclaimed tragically. "Oh, how I wish
Mother were alive!"

"And each one will feel deep within him that he has done a great,
commendable and original thing!" Mich'l added, with keen insight.

Mila sank to the floor.

"Go to your room," Mich'l said, gently stern. "Mollon and his gang
have reckoned without the technies." A woman's image appeared,
stooping commiseratingly over Mila--a friend of the family. Mich'l
ordered her to care for Mila. Then, he took a deep breath. Gone was
his feeling of helpless sorrow, leaving only an overwhelming,
steadying, satisfying anger. He flung the telucid switch, barked
cracking orders.

In half an hour every technical man of Subterranea was in a large
storeroom near Mich'l's office. They were mostly young, keen and
alert, their skins red or brown from the actinic lights, their hair
showing more or less bleaching from the same cause. As Mich'l talked
they became intent: they listened with a cold, deadly silence that
would perhaps have made the smug millions of Subterranea quake with
fear.

This affront put upon the only man in the Government who could speak
their language, who could comprehend their ideals: the peril of the
girl they all knew and loved: these things set their long-repressed
resentment flaring to white heat. They were ready for desperate
things. A turn of a valve and water would thunder through the maze of
galleries; a mishap far, far down toward the earth's hot core, and
steam would rush up--

       *       *       *       *       *

But Mich'l steadied them. After all, Subterranea was their country.
Anarchy was far from the technie ideals. He had a plan.

"Nothing is to be done until we have Senator Mane and Nida," Mich'l
instructed them. "Remember that! Do nothing until you hear from me.
Each of you go to your station. Set all adjustments so that they will
not need attention for some weeks, at least. Those of you who have
families, tell them to be ready to move to another residence. Say
nothing about any trouble--understand?"

There were nods of assent.

"You will proceed to your posts and keep busy. When I come it'll be by
telucid. I will say nothing. I will simply wave my hand. That means
you are to take your wives, your families, your sweethearts, to
Substation No. 37X."

There were audible gasps.

"Not 37X!" exclaimed one of the older men. "Why, that's twenty miles
up, near the Frozen Gate!"

"Yes!" Mich'l smiled with tight lips. "You men willing?"

There was an instantaneous shout of approval. Curiously enough,
seizure of the Gate by force had not occurred to any of this
law-abiding, well-disciplined group. But Mollon's lawless seizure of
the Government had removed all inhibitions of that sort. Seizure of
the Gate would bring at one stroke the realization of the dream that
the technies had tried for generations to win by political means.
Surely, when the Gate was open, and they could see the glorious,
half-mythical Sun for themselves, the people would consent to the
Exodus!

For the technies, even in the bitterness of defeat, were not
anti-social. They hoped and worked for the devitalized races of
Subterranea, for the betterment of their condition, more than for
their own. The technies were the fittest; they had demonstrated their
ability to survive unchanged under adverse condition. They would be
least helped by the Exodus. Yet they had worked for it all their
lives, as had their fathers before them, out of unselfish love for
humanity. There have always been such men. Through the murk of history
we see their lives as small, steady lights, infrequent and lonely.
With the opening of the Frozen Gate suddenly a possibility, the
technies forgot their exasperation with the stupid mob.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Gate is guarded," said an elderly man dubiously.

"A small guard," Gobet Hanlon remarked quickly, "and probably dazed
with merclite. Nothing to fear."

"Stay away from the Gate," Mich'l instructed. "Give no cause for
alarm. If an emergency arises while I'm gone, see Gobet."

"Don't go alone, Mich'l," Gobet begged. "A few of us with ray-needles
can storm the detention cells. We can clean out Lane's warren."

"We might, but the Senator and Nida would be gone. The alarm would be
given. In a few minutes there'd be a mob."

The technies were already dispersing eagerly. Mich'l pressed his
friend's hand, saying:

"I'll take my needle-ray, and I know every way to get around there is.
Alone, I'll attract no attention. Till later, Gobet!" And he was gone.

Mich'l's way was through the smaller, less frequented communication
passages used principally by the technies. Occasionally he did meet
citizens, still light-headed after their election victory celebration,
and lost, but he paid them no heed. He came to the ventilation center
of that level.

For ages no air had entered Subterranea from the outside. All of the
air had to be regularly reconditioned, and so was returned, through a
systematic network of air ducts, to a vast, central chemical plant. It
was a latter-day Cave of the Winds, where the north, south, east and
west winds of that buried empire regularly returned for a brief few
minutes of play amid chemical sprays, condensers, humidifiers,
oxydisers, to be again dispatched to their drudgery. This hall was
truly colossal, filled to the shadowy ceilings, a thousand feet high,
with gigantic pipes, tanks, wind-turbines.

       *       *       *       *       *

The technie in charge had not yet returned, but Mich'l consulted the
distribution plan, and soon located the duct that led to Lane Mollon's
warren. In a few minutes he was running, helped along by a strong
current of fresh air. The map had shown the warren to be about a mile
away. For the benefit of the technies who had to work there, the duct
was plainly marked; and the lighting, by infrequent emanation bulbs,
was adequate, though dim.

Mich'l had made no plans for a course of action after arriving at his
destination. He felt reasonably sure that if he could get into the
warren he would have a good chance to escape with Nida. In the
confusion he could hide her nearby, and perhaps effect the release of
the senator also. He had no doubt about his fate if he were caught.
Lane's pose of good sportsmanship having failed to impress Nida, he
had adopted simple, brutal coercion. Mich'l's fate, if caught
interfering, would be summary execution.

Mich'l found the grating which he sought. It bore the key number of
Lane's establishment. The key which would unlock it was of course in
the hands of the police; but the bars were badly corroded, and Mich'l
managed to bend them enough to permit the passage of his body.

He found himself in a small chamber, from which ducts led to all parts
of the warren. These ducts were too small to permit passage of his
body, however; it would be necessary to come into the open. A small
metal door promised egress. Mich'l climbed out, and faced a surprised
cook in the kitchen, engaged in flavoring synthetic food drinks.
Mich'l said explanatorily:

"Inspection, air service."

The cook did not know the regulations about keeping the air tunnels
locked. Moreover, he, like all other servants of the mighty, worked
unwillingly, being conscripted. He only grunted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mich'l made a pretense of testing the air currents. Presently he
stepped into one of the communicating corridors. The warren was
planned something like a house of the Surface Age, with luxuriously
furnished rooms, baths, dining halls, and all the appurtenances of
wealth. Arriving at a rotunda, in the center of which was a glowing
fountain, Mich'l encountered a guard. Boldly he asked him:

"Where is Mr. Mollon? I wish to see him."

The guard looked surprised.

"About Nida Mane, sir? I would hardly dare."

Mich'l looked at the man sharply, but there was no hint of recognition
in the stupid, phlegmatic face.

"What about Nida Mane? It is about her I wish to speak."

There was a slight stirring of interest in the soldier's face.

"He will be glad to see you, sir, if you bring news of her."

"Eh, yes? Perhaps what I have to tell will be of no interest to him."

"If you can tell him where she is he will ask no more of you."

"She made good her escape then?"

Slow suspicion was dawning at last.

"For one who brings news you ask a lot of questions," the guard
remarked heavily, as his hand slipped to the needle-ray weapon at his
side. "Show your pass!"

Like a flash Mich'l was upon him, his hand at the thick throat, the
other grasping the wrist. Although the soldier, like the majority of
the populace, lacked the intense vitality of the technies, he had
stubborn strength, and he fought effectively in the drilled, automatic
way of his kind. Mich'l was further handicapped by the necessity of
maintaining silence. One shout, and a dozen needle-rays would no doubt
perforate his body with holes and slash his flesh with smoldering
cuts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grunting and sweating, they fought all around the rose-colored curb of
the fountain. At last Mich'l succeeded in forcing his adversary over
the low stone, and they went over together with a resounding splash.
The straining body of the guard suddenly relaxed, and a spreading red
