gas. A continuous spectrum shows only that the molecules are crowded
together, or are so numerous that the body to which they belong is not
transparent and gives no further information. The body may be solid,
liquid, or gaseous, but in the latter case the gas must be under
considerable pressure or of great extent.

A second principle is: The lines which appear in a spectrum are
characteristic of the source from which the light came--e. g., the
double line in the yellow part of the spectrum at the extreme left in
Fig. 47 is produced by sodium vapor in and around the electric arc and
is never produced by anything but sodium. When by laboratory experiments
we have learned the particular set of lines corresponding to iron, we
may treat the presence of these lines in another spectrum as proof that
iron is present in the source from which the light came, whether that
source be a white-hot poker in the next room or a star immeasurably
distant. The evidence that iron is present lies in the nature of the
light, and there is no reason to suppose that nature to be altered on
the way from star to earth. It may, however, be altered by something
happening to the source from which it comes--e. g., changing temperature
or pressure may affect, and does affect, the spectrum which such a
substance as iron emits, and we must be prepared to find the same
substance presenting different spectra under different conditions, only
these conditions must be greatly altered in order to produce radical
changes in the spectrum.

[Illustration: FIG. 50.--The chief lines in the spectrum of
sunlight.--HERSCHEL.]

86. WAVE LENGTHS.--To identify a line as belonging to and produced by
iron or any other substance, its position in the spectrum--i. e., its
wave length--must be very accurately determined, and for the
identification of a substance by means of its spectrum it is often
necessary to determine accurately the wave lengths of many lines. A
complicated spectrum may consist of hundreds or thousands of lines, due
to the presence of many different substances in the source of light, and
unless great care is taken in assigning the exact position of these
lines in the spectrum, confusion and wrong identifications are sure to
result. For the measurement of the required wave length a tenth meter
(§ 75) is the unit employed, and a scale of wave lengths expressed in
this unit is presented in Fig. 50. The accuracy with which some of these
wave lengths are determined is truly astounding; a ten-billionth of an
inch! These numerical wave lengths save all necessity for referring to
the color of any part of the spectrum, and pictures of spectra for
scientific use are not usually printed in colors.

87. ABSORPTION SPECTRA.--There is another kind of spectrum, of greater
importance than either of those above considered, which is well
illustrated by the spectrum of sunlight (Fig. 50). This is a nearly
continuous spectrum crossed by numerous _dark_ lines due to absorption
of radiant energy in a comparatively cool gas through which it passes on
its way to the spectroscope. Fraunhofer, who made the first careful
study of spectra, designated some of the more conspicuous of these lines
by letters of the alphabet which are shown in the plate, and which are
still in common use as names for the lines, not only in the spectrum of
sunlight but wherever they occur in other spectra. Thus the double line
marked _D_, wave length 5893, falls at precisely the same place in the
spectrum as does the double (sodium) line which we have already seen in
the yellow part of the arc-light spectrum, which line is also called _D_
and bears a very intimate relation to the dark _D_ line of the solar
spectrum.

The student who has access to colored crayons should color one edge of
Fig. 50 in accordance with the lettering there given and, so far as
possible, he should make the transition from one color to the next a
gradual one, as it is in the rainbow.

Fig. 50 is far from being a complete representation of the spectrum of
sunlight. Not only does this spectrum extend both to the right and to
the left into regions invisible to the human eye, but within the limits
of the figure, instead of the seventy-five lines there shown, there are
literally thousands upon thousands of lines, of which only the most
conspicuous can be shown in such a cut as this.

The dark lines which appear in the spectrum of sunlight can, under
proper conditions, be made to appear in the spectrum of an arc light,
and Fig. 51 shows a magnified representation of a small part of such a
spectrum adjacent to the _D_ (sodium) lines. Down the middle of each of
these lines runs a black streak whose position (wave length) is
precisely that of the _D_ lines in the spectrum of sunlight, and whose
presence is explained as follows:

The very hot sodium vapor at the center of the arc gives off its
characteristic light, which, shining through the outer and cooler layers
of sodium vapor, is partially absorbed by these, resulting in a fine
dark line corresponding exactly in position and wave length to the
bright lines, and seen against these as a background, since the higher
temperature at the center of the arc tends to broaden the bright lines
and make them diffuse. Similarly the dark lines in the spectrum of the
sun (Fig. 50) point to the existence of a surrounding envelope of
relatively cool gases, which absorb from the sunlight precisely those
kinds of radiant energy which they would themselves emit if
incandescent. The resulting dark lines in the spectrum are to be
interpreted by the same set of principles which we have above applied to
the bright lines of a discontinuous spectrum, and they may be used to
determine the chemical composition of the sun, just as the bright lines
serve to determine the chemical elements present in the electric arc.
With reference to the mode of their formation, bright-line and dark-line
spectra are sometimes called respectively _emission_ and _absorption_
spectra.

[Illustration: FIG. 51.--The lines reversed.]

88. TYPES OF SPECTRUM.--The sun presents by far the most complex
spectrum known, and Fig. 50 shows only a small number of the more
conspicuous lines which appear in it. Spectra of stars, _per contra_,
appear relatively simple, since their feeble light is insufficient to
bring out faint details. In Chapters XIII and XIV there are shown types
of the different kinds of spectra given by starlight, and these are to
be interpreted by the principles above established. Thus the spectrum of
the bright star [b] Aurigæ shows a continuous spectrum crossed by a few
heavy absorption lines which are known from laboratory experiments to be
produced only by hydrogen. There must therefore be an atmosphere of
relatively cool hydrogen surrounding this star. The spectrum of Pollux
is quite similar to that of the sun and is to be interpreted as showing
a physical condition similar to that of the sun, while the spectrum of
[a] Herculis is quite different from either of the others. In subsequent
chapters we shall have occasion to consider more fully these different
types of spectrum.

89. THE DOPPLER PRINCIPLE.--This important principle of the spectrum
analysis is most readily appreciated through the following experiment:

Listen to the whistle of a locomotive rapidly approaching, and observe
how the pitch changes and the note becomes more grave as the locomotive
passes by and commences to recede. During the approach of the whistle
each successive sound wave has a shorter distance to travel in coming to
the ear of the listener than had its predecessor, and in consequence the
waves appear to come in quicker succession, producing a higher note with
a correspondingly shorter wave length than would be heard if the same
whistle were blown with the locomotive at rest. On the other hand, the
wave length is increased and the pitch of the note lowered by the
receding motion of the whistle. A similar effect is produced upon the
wave length of light by a rapid change of distance between the source
from which it comes and the instrument which receives it, so that a
diminishing distance diminishes very slightly the wave length of every
line in the spectrum produced by the light, and an increasing distance
increases these wave lengths, and this holds true whether the change of
distance is produced by motion of the source of light or by motion of
the instrument which receives it.

This change of wave length is sometimes described by saying that when a
body is rapidly approaching, the lines of its spectrum are all displaced
toward the violet end of the spectrum, and are correspondingly displaced
toward the red end by a receding motion. The amount of this shifting,
when it can be measured, measures the velocity of the body along the
line of sight, but the observations are exceedingly delicate, and it is
only in recent years that it has been found possible to make them with
precision. For this purpose there is made to pass through the
spectroscope light from an artificial source which contains one or more
chemical elements known to be present in the star which is to be
observed, and the corresponding lines in the spectrum of this light and
in the spectrum of the star are examined to determine whether they
exactly match in position, or show, as they sometimes do, a slight
displacement, as if one spectrum had been slipped past the other. The
difficulty of the observations lies in the extremely small amount of
this slipping, which rarely if ever in the case of a moving star amounts
to one sixth part of the interval between the close parallel lines
marked _D_ in Fig. 50. The spectral lines furnished by the headlight of
a locomotive running at the rate of a hundred miles per hour would be
displaced by this motion less than one six-thousandth part of the space
between the _D_ lines, an amount absolutely imperceptible in the most
powerful spectroscope yet constructed. But many of the celestial bodies
have velocities so much greater than a hundred miles per hour that these
may be detected and measured by means of the Doppler principle.

90. OTHER INSTRUMENTS.--Other instruments of importance to the
astronomer, but of which only casual mention can here be made, are the
meridian-circle; the transit, one form of which is shown in Fig. 52, and
the zenith telescope, which furnish refined methods for making
observations similar in kind to those which the student has already
learned to make with plumb line and protractor; the sextant, which is
pre-eminently the sailor's instrument for finding the latitude and
longitude at sea, by measuring the altitudes of sun and stars above the
sea horizon; the heliometer, which serves for the very accurate
measurement of small angles, such as the angular distance between two
stars not more than one or two degrees apart; and the photometer, which
is used for measuring the amount of light received from the celestial
bodies.

[Illustration: FIG. 52.--A combined transit instrument and zenith
telescope.]




CHAPTER IX

THE MOON


91. RESULTS OF OBSERVATION WITH THE UNAIDED EYE.--The student who has
made the observations of the moon which are indicated in Chapter III has
in hand data from which much may be learned about the earth's satellite.
Perhaps the most striking feature brought out by them is the motion of
the moon among the stars, always from west toward east, accompanied by
that endless series of changes in shape and brightness--new moon, first
quarter, full moon, etc.--whose successive stages we represent by the
words, the phase of the moon. From his own observation the student
should be able to verify, at least approximately, the following
statements, although the degree of numerical precision contained in some
of them can be reached only by more elaborate apparatus and longer study
than he has given to the subject:

A. The phase of the moon depends upon the distance apart of sun and moon
in the sky, new moon coming when they are together, and full moon when
they are as far apart as possible.

[Illustration: THE MOON, ONE DAY AFTER FIRST QUARTER. From a photograph
made at the Paris Observatory.]

B. The moon is essentially a round, dark body, giving off no light of
its own, but shining solely by reflected sunlight. The proof of this is
that whenever we see a part of the moon which is turned away from the
sun it looks dark--e. g., at new moon, sun and moon are in nearly the
same direction from us and we see little or nothing of the moon, since
the side upon which the sun shines is turned away from us. At full moon
the earth is in line between sun and moon, and we see, round and
bright, the face upon which the sun shines. At other phases, such as the
quarters, the moon turns toward the earth a part of its night hemisphere
and a part of its day hemisphere, but in general only that part which
belongs to the day side of the moon is visible and the peculiar curved
line which forms the boundary--the "ragged edge," or _terminator_, as it
is called, is the dividing line between day and night upon the moon.

A partial exception to what precedes is found for a few days after new
moon when the moon and sun are not very far apart in the sky, for then
the whole round disk of the moon may often be seen, a small part of it
brightly illuminated by the sun and the larger part feebly illuminated
by sunlight which fell first upon the earth and was by it reflected back
to the moon, giving the pleasing effect which is sometimes called the
old moon in the new moon's arms. The new moon--i. e., the part illumined
by the sun--usually appears to belong to a sphere of larger radius than
the old moon, but this is purely a trick played by the eyes of the
observer, and the effect disappears altogether in a telescope. Is there
any similar effect in the few days before new moon?

C. The moon makes the circuit of the sky from a given star around to the
same star again in a little more than 27 days (27.32166), but the
interval between successive new moons--i. e., from the sun around to the
sun again--is more than 29 days (29.53059). This last interval, which is
called a lunar month or _synodical_ month, indicates what we have
learned before--that the sun has changed its place among the stars
during the month, so that it takes the moon an extra two days to
overtake him after having made the circuit of the sky, just as it takes
the minute hand of a clock an extra 5 minutes to catch up with the hour
hand after having made a complete circuit of the dial.

D. Wherever the moon may be in the sky, it turns always the same face
toward the earth, as is shown by the fact that the dark markings which
appear on its surface stand always upon (nearly) the same part of its
disk. It does not always turn the same face toward the sun, for the
boundary line between the illumined and unillumined parts of the moon
shifts from one side to the other as the phase changes, dividing at each
moment day from night upon the moon and illustrating by its slow
progress that upon the moon the day and the month are of equal length
(29.5 terrestrial days), instead of being time units of different
lengths as with us.

[Illustration: FIG. 53.--Motion of moon and earth relative to the sun.]

92. THE MOON'S MOTION.--The student should compare the results of his
own observations, as well as the preceding section, with Fig. 53, in
which the lines with dates printed on them are all supposed to radiate
from the sun and to represent the direction from the sun of earth and
moon upon the given dates which are arbitrarily assumed for the sake of
illustration, any other set would do equally well. The black dots, small
and large, represent the moon revolving about the earth, but having the
circular path shown in Fig. 34 (ellipse) transformed by the earth's
forward motion into the peculiar sinuous line here shown. With respect
to both earth and sun, the moon's orbit deviates but little from a
circle, since the sinuous curve of Fig. 53 follows very closely the
earth's orbit around the sun and is almost identical with it. For
clearness of representation the distance between earth and moon in the
figure has been made ten times too great, and to get a proper idea of
the moon's orbit with reference to the sun, we must suppose the moon
moved up toward the earth until its distance from the line of the
earth's orbit is only a tenth part of what it is in the figure. When
this is done, the moon's path becomes almost indistinguishable from that
of the earth, as may be seen in the figure, where the attempt has been
made to show both lines, and it is to be especially noted that this
real orbit of the moon is everywhere concave toward the sun.

The phase presented by the moon at different parts of its path is
indicated by the row of circles at the right, and the student should
show why a new moon is associated with June 30th and a full moon with
July 15th, etc. What was the date of first quarter? Third quarter?

We may find in Fig. 53 another effect of the same kind as that noted
above in C. Between noon, June 30th, and noon, July 3d, the earth makes
upon its axis three complete revolutions with respect to the sun, but
the meridian which points toward the moon at noon on June 30th will not
point toward it at noon on July 3d, since the moon has moved into a new
position and is now 37° away from the meridian. Verify this statement by
measuring, in Fig. 53, with the protractor, the moon's angular distance
from the meridian at noon on July 3d. When will the meridian overtake
the moon?

93. HARVEST MOON.--The interval between two successive transits of the
meridian past the moon is called a lunar day, and the student should
show from the figure that on the average a lunar day is 51 minutes
longer than a solar day--i. e., upon the average each day the moon comes
to the meridian 51 minutes of solar time later than on the day before.
It is also true that on the average the moon rises and sets 51 minutes
later each day than on the day before. But there is a good deal of
irregularity in the retardation of the time of moonrise and moonset,
since the time of rising depends largely upon the particular point of
the horizon at which the moon appears, and between two days this point
may change so much on account of the moon's orbital motion as to make
the retardation considerably greater or less than its average value. In
northern latitudes this effect is particularly marked in the month of
September, when the eastern horizon is nearly parallel with the moon's
apparent path in the sky, and near the time of full moon in that month
the moon rises on several successive nights at nearly the same hour, and
in less degree the same is true for October. This highly convenient
arrangement of moonlight has caused the full moons of these two months
to be christened respectively the Harvest Moon and the Hunter's Moon.

94. SIZE AND MASS OF THE MOON.--It has been shown in Chapter I how the
distance of the moon from the earth may be measured and its diameter
determined by means of angles, and without enlarging upon the details of
these observations, we note as their result that the moon is a globe
2,163 miles in diameter, and distant from the earth on the average about
240,000 miles. But, as we have seen in Chapter VII, this distance
changes to the extent of a few thousand miles, sometimes less, sometimes
greater, mainly on account of the elliptic shape of the moon's orbit
about the earth, but also in part from the disturbing influence of other
bodies, such as the sun, which pull the moon to and fro, backward and
forward, to quite an appreciable extent.

From the known diameter of the moon it is a matter of elementary
geometry to derive in miles the area of its surface and its volume or
solid contents. Leaving this as an exercise for the student, we adopt
the earth as the standard of comparison and find that the diameter of
the moon is rather more than a quarter, 4/15, that of the earth, the
area of its surface is a trifle more than 1/14 that of the earth, and
its volume a little more than 1/49 of the earth's. So much is pure
geometry, but we may combine with it some mechanical principles which
enable us to go a step farther and to "weigh" the moon--i. e., determine
its mass and the average density of the material of which it is made.

We have seen that the moon moves around the sun in a path differing but
little from the smooth curve shown in Fig. 53, with arrows indicating
the direction of motion, and it would follow absolutely such a smooth
path were it not for the attraction of the earth, and in less degree of
some of the other planets, which swing it about first to one side then
to the other. But action and reaction are equal; the moon pulls as
strongly upon the earth as does the earth upon the moon, and if earth
and moon were of equal mass, the deviation of the earth from the smooth
curve in the figure would be just as large as that of the moon. It is
shown in the figure that the moon does displace the earth from this
curve, and we have only to measure the amount of this displacement of
the earth and compare it with the displacement suffered by the moon to
find how much the mass of the one exceeds that of the other. It may be
seen from the figure that at first quarter, about July 7th, the earth is
thrust ahead in the direction of its orbital motion, while at the third
quarter, July 22d, it is pulled back by the action of the moon, and at
all times it is more or less displaced by this action, so that, in order
to be strictly correct, we must amend our former statement about the
moon moving around the earth and make it read, Both earth and moon
revolve around a point on line between their centers. This point is
called their _center of gravity_, and the earth and the moon both move
in ellipses having this center of gravity at their common focus. Compare
this with Kepler's First Law. These ellipses are similarly shaped, but
of very different size, corresponding to Newton's third law of motion
(Chapter IV), so that the action of the earth in causing the small moon
to move around a large orbit is just equal to the reaction of the moon
in causing the larger earth to move in the smaller orbit. This is
equivalent to saying that the dimensions of the two orbits are inversely
proportional to the masses of the earth and the moon.

By observing throughout the month the direction from the earth to the
sun or to a near planet, such as Mars or Venus, astronomers have
determined that the diameter of the ellipse in which the earth moves is
about 5,850 miles, so that the distance of the earth from the center of
gravity is 2,925 miles, and the distance of the moon from it is
240,000-2,925 = 237,075. We may now write in the form of a proportion--

    Mass of earth : Mass of moon :: 237,075 : 2,925,

and find from it that the mass of the earth is 81 times as great as the
mass of the moon--i. e., leaving kind and quality out of account, there
is enough material in the earth to make 81 moons. We may note in this
connection that the diameter of the earth, 7,926 miles, is greater than
the diameter of the monthly orbit in which the moon causes it to move,
and therefore the center of gravity of earth and moon always lies inside
the body of the earth, about 1,000 miles below the surface.

95. DENSITY OF THE MOON.--It is believed that in a general way the moon
is made of much the same kind of material which goes to make up the
earth--metals, minerals, rocks, etc.--and a part of the evidence upon
which this belief is based lies in the density of the moon. By density
of a substance we mean the amount of it which is contained in a given
volume--i. e., the weight of a bushel or a cubic centimeter of the
stuff. The density of chalk is twice as great as the density of water,
because a cubic centimeter of chalk weighs twice as much as an equal
volume of water, and similarly in other cases the density is found by
dividing the mass or weight of the body by the mass or weight of an
