avoid the disagreeable drying in open air, the experiment of strewing
sand on the sticky places was tried next. The weight of the paper was
largely increased by the sand, and appeared considerably thicker. For
this reason the method of sanding the paper was at once universally
adopted. To dispense with the process of permitting the surplus tar to
drip off, means were devised by which it was taken off by scrapers, or
by pressing through rollers. The scrapers, two sharp edged rods
fastened across the pan, were then so placed that the paper was drawn
through them. The excess of tar adhering to its surface was thereby
scraped off and ran back into the pan.

This work, however, was performed better and to more satisfaction by a
pair of rollers fastened to the pan. These performed a double duty;
thoroughly removed the tar from the surface and by reason of their
pressure they caused a more perfect incorporation of the tar with the
fibers of the paper. Finally, different factories employed different
methods of manufacture, one of which was to cut the rolls into
definite lengths of about ten yards; these were then rerolled very
loosely and immersed in the hot tar until sufficiently saturated. The
paper was then passed through the roller, much pressure exerted, and
then loosely rolled up again. Being tarred once, it was then laid into
a second pan with hot tar, reeled out after a time, strewn with sand,
and rolled up again. Another method was to cut clothes lines into
lengths of about fifteen yards, and at a distance of two inches have
knots tied in them. The paper was cut in lengths of ten or fifteen
yards, three pieces of the knotted clothes line were then rolled
between the loose coils of paper, which was then submerged in the tar,
which on account of the knots could penetrate the paper. The paper was
next sanded by permitting its lower surface to pass over dry sand in a
box standing on the floor. A workman rolled off the paper, and with
his hand he strews sand on the upper surface. The rolling taking place
on the edge of a table, by means of a crank, the excess of sand
dropped off.

It is said by this method two workmen, one of which tends to the
rolling and sanding, the other turning the crank, could turn out
eighty rolls per day. This method is still in use. It is useless to
describe the many antiquated methods in vogue in smaller factories,
and it can truthfully be said that nearly all of them are out of date.
It appears to be the fact of almost all inventions that when reduced
to practical use, the arrangements, apparatus, and working methods
employed are generally of the most complicated nature, and time and
experience only will simplify them. This has been also the case with
the methods in the roofing paper industry, which are at present
gradually being reduced to a practical basis. The method gradually
adopted has been described in the preceding. The pan is of a certain
length, whereby it becomes possible to saturate the paper by slowly
drawing it through the heated tar. This is the chief feature. The work
is much simplified thereby and the workmen need not dip their hands
into the tar or soil them with it. The work of impregnating has become
much cleaner and easier, while at the same time the tar can be heated
to a much higher temperature. The pan is generally filled with
distilled coal tar, and the heating is regulated in such a manner that
the temperature of the impregnating mass is raised far beyond 212 deg.
Fahrenheit. This accelerates the penetration, which takes place more
quickly as the degree of heat is raised, which may be almost up to the
boiling point of the tar, as at this degree the paper is not destroyed
by the heat. In order to prevent the evaporation of the volatile
ingredients of the tar, the pan is covered with a sheet iron cover,
with a slot at the place where the paper enters into the impregnating
mass and another at the place where it issues. The tar is always kept
at the same level, by occasional additions.

The roll of paper is mounted upon a shaft at the back end of the pan,
and by suitable arrangement of guide rollers it unwinds slowly, passes
into the tar in which it is kept submerged. The guide rollers can be
raised so that when a new roller is set up they can be raised out of
the tar. The end of the paper is then slipped underneath them above
the surface of the tar, when having passed through the squeezing
rollers, it is fastened to the beaming roller, and the guide rollers
are submerged again. A workman slowly turns the crank of the beaming
roller.

This motion draws the paper slowly through the fluid, the roll at the
back end unwinding. The speed with which the squeezing rollers are
turned is regulated in such a manner that the paper remains
sufficiently long underneath the fluid to be thoroughly impregnated
with it. The workmen quickly learn by experience how fast to turn the
crank. The hotter the tar, the more rapid the saturation; the high
degree of heat expels the air and evaporates the hygroscopic fluid in
the pores of the paper. The strong heating of the tar causes another
advantage connected with this method. The surface of the paper as it
issues from the squeezing rollers is still very hot, and a part of the
volatile oils evaporate very quickly at this high temperature. The
surface is thereby at once dried to a certain degree and at the same
time receives a handsome luster, as if it had been coated with a black
lacquer. The paper is sanded in a very simple manner without the use
of mechanical apparatus; as it is being wrapped into a coil, it passes
with its lower surface over a layer of sand, while the workman who
tends to rolling up strews the inside with sand. The lower surface is
coated very equally. Care only being necessary that the sand lies
smooth and even at all times. When the workman has rolled up ten or
fifteen yards, he cuts it across with a knife and straightedge, so
that the paper is cut at right angles with its sides.

There are three different sorts of roofing paper, according to the
impregnating fluid used in its manufacture. The ordinary tar paper is
that saturated with clear cold tar. This contains the greatest amount
of fluid ingredients and is very raggy in a fresh condition. It is
easy to see that the volatile hydrocarbons evaporate in a short time,
and when expelled, the paper becomes stiffer and apparently drier.
This drying, or the volatilization of the hydrocarbons, causes pores
between the fibers of the paper. These pores are highly injurious to
it, as they facilitate a process of decomposition which will ruin it
in a short time.

Roofing paper can be called good only when it is essentially made from
woolen rags, and contains either very few or no earthy additions. It
is beyond doubt that the durability of a roofing paper increases with
the quality of wool fiber it contains--vegetable fibers and earthy
additions cause a direct injury. Reprehensible altogether is any
combination with lime, either in form of a carbonate or sulphate,
because the lime enters into chemical combination with the
decomposition products of the tar.

The general nature of gravel is too well known to require description.
The grains of quartz sand are either sharp cornered or else rounded
pieces of stone of quartz, occasionally mixed with grains of other
amorphous pieces of silica--such as horn stone, silicious slate,
carnelian, etc.; again, with lustrous pieces of mica, or red and white
pieces of feldspar. The gravel used for a tar paper roof must be of a
special nature and be prepared for the purpose. The size of its grains
must not exceed a certain standard--say, the size of a pea. When found
in the gravel bank, it is frequently mixed with clay, etc., and it
cannot be used in this condition for a roof, but must be washed. The
utensils necessary for this purpose are of so simple and suggestive a
nature that they need not be described. Slag is being successfully
used in place of the gravel. It is easily reduced to suitable size, by
letting the red hot mass, as it runs from the furnace, run into a
vessel with water. The sudden chilling of the slag causes it to burst
into fragments of a sharp cornered structure. It is next passed
through a sieve, and the suitably sized gravel makes an excellent
material, as it gives a clean appearance to the roof.

The thinking mind can easily go one step further and imagine that,
since the tar contains a number of volatile hydrocarbons, it might be
made more adaptable for impregnation by paper by distilling it, as by
this process the fluid would lose its tendency to evaporate and the
percentage of resinous substances increase. Singular to say, there was
a prejudice against the employment of distilled tar, entertained by
builders and people who had no knowledge of chemistry. Increasing
intelligence and altered business circumstances, however, brought
about the almost universal employment of distilled tar, and every
large factory uses it at present. The roofing paper prepared with
distilled tar is perhaps most suitably called asphaltum paper, as this
has been used in its manufacture. It possesses properties superior to
the ordinary tar paper, one of which is that immediately after its
manufacture, as soon as cold, it is dry and ready for shipment; nor
does it require to be kept in store for a length of time, and it has
also a good, firm body, being as flexible and tough as leather. It is
very durable upon the roof, and remains flexible for a long time. It
is true that asphaltum papers will always in a fresh state contain a
small percentage of volatile ingredients, which after a while make it
hard and friable upon the roof; but, by reason of its greater
percentage of resinous components, it will always preserve a superior
degree of durability and become far less porous. One hundred parts by
weight absorb 140 or 150 parts by weight of coal tar. A factory which
distilled a good standard tar for roofing paper recovered, besides
benzole and naphtha, also about ten per cent. of creosote oil, used
for one hundred parts raw paper, 176.4 partially distilled tar.
Experiments on a larger as well as a smaller scale reduced this
quantity to an average of 141.5 parts for one hundred parts raw paper.
The weight of sanded paper is very variable, as it depends altogether
upon the size of the sand grains. It may be stated generally that the
weight of the sand is as large as that of the tarred paper.

The kinds of roofing paper saturated with other additions besides coal
tar form a separate class, in order to neutralize the defects inherent
in coal tar. These additions were originally for the purpose of
thickening the paper and making it stiffer and drier. The most
ordinary and cheapest thickener was the coal pitch. Although the
resinous substances are increased thereby, still the light tar oils
remain to evaporate, and the paper prepared with such a substance
readily becomes hard and brittle. A better addition is the natural
asphaltum, because it resists better the destroying influence of the
decomposition process, and also, to a certain degree, protects the
coal tar in which it is dissolved. The addition of natural asphaltum
doubtless caused the name of "asphaltum roofing paper." Resin,
sulphur, wood tar and other substances were also used as additions;
each manufacturer kept his method secret, however, and simply pointed
out by high sounding title in what manner his paper was composed. In
most cases, however, this appellation was applied to the ordinary tar
paper; the impregnating substance was mixed only with coal pitch, or
else a roofing paper saturated with distilled tar. The costly
additions, by the use of which a high grade of roofing paper can
doubtless be produced, largely increased its price, and on account of
the constant fall of prices of the article, its use became rather one
of those things "more honored in the breach than in the observance,"
and was dispensed with whenever practicable. The crude paper is the
foundation of the roofing paper. The qualities of a good,
unadulterated paper have already been stated. At times, the crude
paper contains too many earthy ingredients which impair the cohesion
of the felted fibrous substance, and which especially the carbonate of
lime is very injurious, as it readily effects the decomposition of the
coal tar. The percentage of wool, upon which the durability of the
paper depends very largely, is very small in some of the paper found
in the market. In place of woolen rags, cheap substitutes have been
used, such as waste, which contains vegetable fibers. Since this
cannot resist the decomposition process for any length of time, it is
evident that the roofing paper which contains a noticeable quantity of
vegetable fibers cannot be very durable. To judge from the endeavors
made to improve the coal tar, it may be concluded that this material
does not fully comply with its function of making the roofing paper
perfectly and durably waterproof. The coal tar, be it either crude or
distilled, is not a perfect impregnating material, and the roofing
paper, saturated with it, possesses several defects. Let us in the
following try to ascertain their shortcomings, and then express our
idea in what manner the roofing paper may be improved. It was
previously mentioned that every tar roofing paper will, after a
greater or smaller lapse of time, assume a dry, porous, friable
condition, caused by the volatilization of a part of the constituents
of the tar. This alteration is materially assisted by the oxygen of
the air, which causes the latter to become resinous and exerts a
chemical influence upon them. By the volatilization of the lighter tar
oils, pores are generated between the fibers of the roofing paper,
into which the air and humidity penetrate. In consequence of the
greatly enlarged surface, not only the solid ingredients of the tar,
which still remain unaltered, are exposed to the action of the oxygen,
but also the fibers of the roofing paper are exposed to decomposition.
How destructive the alternating influence of the oxygen and the
atmospheric precipitations are for the roofing paper will be shown by
the following results of tests. It will have been observed that the
rain water running from an old paper roof, especially after dry
weather, has a yellowish, sometimes a brown yellow color. The
supposition that this colored rain water might contain decomposition
products of the roofing paper readily prompted itself, and it has been
collected and analyzed at different seasons of the year. After a
period of several weeks of fair weather during the summer, rain fell,
and the sample of water running from a roof was caught and evaporated;
the residue when dried weighed 1.68 grammes. It was of a brownish
black color, fusible in heat and readily soluble, with a yellow brown
color in water. The dark brown substance readily dissolved in ammonia,
alcohol, dilute acid, hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, and
decomposed in nitric acid, but did not dissolve in benzine or fat oil.
After several days' rain during the summer, a quantity of the water
was caught, evaporated, and the residue dried. Its characteristics
were similar to those above mentioned. By an experiment instituted in
water under conditions similar to the first mentioned, the dry brown
substance weighed 71 grammes. It possessed the same characteristics.
In the solution effected with water containing some aqua ammonia of
the brown substance, a white precipitate of oxalate of lime occurred
when an oxalate of ammonia solution was added, but the brown substance
remained in solution. A further precipitation of oxalate of lime was
produced by a solution of oxalic acid, but the brown organic substance
remained in solution. This organic substance being liberated from the
lime was evaporated, and left a dry, resinous, fusible brownish black
substance, which also dissolved readily in water. It will be seen from
these trials that the substance obtained from the rain water running
from a paper roof is a combination of an organic acid with lime, which
readily dissolves in water, and that also the free organic acid
combined with the lime dissolves easily in water.

The question concerning the origin of this organic substance or its
combination with lime can only be answered in one way, viz., that it
must have been washed by the rain water out of the paper. But since
such a solid substance, easily soluble in water, is contained neither
in the fresh roofing paper nor in the coal tar, the only deduction is
that it must have arisen by the decomposition of the tar, in
consequence of the operation of the oxygen. The lime comes from the
coating substance of the roof, for which tar mixed with coal pitch was
used. The latter was fused with carbonate of lime. These analyses
furthermore show that the formation of the organic acid easily soluble
in water depends upon the season; and that a larger quantity of it is
generated in warm, sunny weather than in cold, without sunshine. This
peculiarity of the solid, resinous constituents of the coal tar, to be
by the operation of the atmospheric oxygen altered into such products
that are readily soluble in water, makes the tar very unsuitable as a
saturative substance for a roofing paper. How rapidly a paper roof can
be ruined by the generation of this injurious organic acid will be
seen from the following calculation: Let us suppose that an average
of 132 gallons of rain water falls upon ten square feet roof surface
per year, and that the arithmetical mean 0.932 of the largest (1.680)
and smallest number (0.184) be the quantity of the soluble brown
substance which on an average is dissolved in one quart of rain water;
hence from ten square feet of roof surface are rinsed away with the
rain water per year 466 grammes of the soluble decomposition products
of the tar. The oxidation process will not always occur as intensely
as by a paper roof, ten years old and painted two years ago, which
instigated above described experiment. As long as the roofing paper is
fresh and less porous, especially if the occurring pores are filled
and closed again by repeated coatings, oxidation will take place far
less rapidly. Besides this, the protective coating applied to the roof
surface is exposed most to this oxidation process. Even by assuming
this constantly progressive destructive action of the oxygen on the
roofing paper to be much less than above stated, we can readily
imagine that it must be quite large. If it is desired to produce a
material free of faults, it is first of all indispensable that
unobjectionable raw material be procured. Coal tar was formerly used
almost exclusively for the coating of a roof. It was heated and
applied hot upon the surface. In order to avoid the running off of the
thinly fluid mass, the freshly coated surface was strewn with sand.
The most volatile portion of the tar evaporated soon, whereby the
coating became thicker and finally dried. The bad properties of the
coal tar, pointed out elsewhere, made it very unsuitable even for this
purpose, and experiments were instituted to compound mixtures, by
adding other ingredients to the tar, that should more fully comply
with its function. It may be said in general that the coating masses
for roofs can be divided into two classes: either as lacquers or as
cements. To the former may be classed those of a fairly thinly fluid
consistency, and which contain volatile oils in such quantities that
they will dry quickly. Cements are those of a thickly fluid
consistency, and are rendered thus fluid by heating. It is not
necessary that the coating applied should harden quickly, as it
assumes soon after its application a firmness sufficient to prevent it
from running off the roof. Coal tar is to be classed among lacquers.
If it has been liberated by distillation from the volatile oils, it is
made better suited for the purpose than the ordinary kind. The mass
contains much more asphaltum, and after drying, which takes place
soon, it leaves a far thicker layer upon the roof surface, while the
pores, which had formed in the roofing paper consequent on drying, are
better filled up. Nevertheless, the distilled tar also has retained
the property of drying with time into a hard, vitreous mass, and
ultimately to be destroyed by decomposition.--_The Roofer_.

       *       *       *       *       *




A PHYSICAL LABORATORY INDICATOR.


The difficulties attending the management of a physical laboratory are
much greater than those of a chemical one. The cause of this lies in the
fact that in the latter the apparatus is less complicated and the pieces
less varied. Any contrivance that will reduce the labor and worry
connected with the running of a laboratory is valuable.

A physical laboratory may be arranged in several ways. The apparatus may
be kept in a store room and such as is needed may be given to the
student each day and removed after the experiments are performed; or the
apparatus for each experiment or system of experiments may be kept in a
fixed place in the laboratory ready for assembling; for certain
experiments the apparatus may be kept in a fixed place in the laboratory
and permanently arranged for service.

Each student may have his own desk and apparatus or he may be required
to pass from desk to desk. The latter method is preferable.

When a store room is used the services of a man are required to
distribute and afterward to collect. If the apparatus is permanently
distributed, a large room is necessary, but the labor of collecting and
distributing is done away with.

There are certain general experiments intended to show the use of
measuring instruments which all students must perform. To illustrate the
use of the indicator I have selected an elementary class, although the
instrument is equally applicable to all classes of experiments.

Having selected a suitable room, tables may be placed against the walls
between the windows and at other convenient places. Shallow closets are
built upon these tables against the wall; they have glass doors and are
fitted with shelves properly spaced. A large number of light wooden
boxes are prepared, numbered from one up to the limit of the storage
capacity of the closets. A number corresponding to that upon the box is
placed upon the shelf, so that each one after removal may be returned to
its proper place without difficulty. On the front of the box is a label
upon which is written the experiment to be performed or the name of the
apparatus whose use is to be learned, references to various books, which
may be found in the laboratory library, and the apparatus necessary for
the experiment, which ought to be found in the box. If any parts of the
apparatus are too large to be placed in the box, the label indicates by
a number where it may be found in the storage case.

It is evident that, instead of the above arrangement, all the boxes can
be stacked in piles in a general store room. The described arrangement
is preferable, as it prevents confusion in collecting and distributing
apparatus when the class is large.

_The Indicator_ (see figure).--Some device is evidently desirable to
direct the work of a laboratory with the least trouble and friction
possible. I have found that the old fashioned "peg board," formerly used
in schools to record the demerits of scholars, modified as in the
following description, leaves nothing to be desired.

The requirements of such an instrument are these: It must show the names
of the members of the class; it must contain a full list of the
experiments to be performed; it must refer the student to the book and
page where information in reference to the experiments or apparatus may
be found; it must show what experiments are to be performed by each
student at a given time; it must give information as to the place in the
laboratory where the apparatus is deposited; it must show to the
instructor what experiments have been performed by each student; it must
prevent the assignment of the same experiment to two students; it must
enable the instructor to assign the same experiment to two or more
students; it must form a complete record of what has been done, what
work is incomplete, and what experiments have not yet been assigned; it
must also be so arranged that new experiments or sets of experiments may
be exhibited.

      +------+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
      |      | A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H |
      +------+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
      |    1 | *   o   o   *   o   o   o   o |
      |    2 | *   o   *   *   o   o   o   o |
      |    3 | +   *   *   *   o   o   o   o |
      |    4 | +   o   *   *   o   o   o   o |
      |    5 | o   +   *   *   *   *   o   o |
      |    6 | o   +   *   *   o   *   o   o |
      |    7 | o   o   +   *   o   o   o   o |
      |    8 | o   o   o   +   *   o   o   o |
      |    9 | o   o   o   *   +   o   o   o |
      |   10 | o   o   o   o   o   +   o   o |
      |   11 | o   o   o   *   o   o   +   * |
      |   12 | o   o   *   *   o   +   +   + |
      |   13 | o   o   *   o   o   o   o   o |
      |   14 | o   o   *   o   o   o   o   o |
      |   15 | o   o   +   o   o   o   o   o |
      |   16 | o   o   +   +   *   o   o   * |
      +--------------------------------------+

     A, B, C, etc., are cards upon which are the names of students. 1,
     2, 3, etc., are cards like the one described in the article. The
     small circles (o) represent unassigned experiments. The black
     circles (*) (slate nails) represent work done. The caudate circles
     (+) (brass nail) represent work assigned.

The indicator consists of a plank of any convenient length and breadth.
The front surface is divided into squares of such size that the pegs may
be introduced and withdrawn with ease. At each corner of the squares
holes are bored into which nails may be placed. There is a blank border
at the top and another on the left side. At the top of each vertical
column of holes is placed a card holder. This is made of light tin
turned up on the long edges--which are vertical--and tacked to the
board. Opposite each horizontal row of holes is a similar tin card
holder, but of greater length, and having its length horizontal. The
holders at the top of the board contain cards upon which the names of
the class are written.

Cards, like the following, are prepared for the horizontal holders.

--------------------------------------------------------------
Stewart & Gee 229
Physical Manip. 85    Intensity of Gravity--Borda's Method  39
Glazebrook & Shaw 132
--------------------------------------------------------------

These cards are numbered from one to any desired number and are arranged
in the holders consecutively.

Two kinds of nails are provided to fit the holes in the board: An
ordinary slate nail and a common picture frame nail with a brass head.
The latter indicates work to be done, the former work done.

To prepare the board for service, brass headed nails are placed opposite
each experiment, and below the names, care being taken not to have more
than one nail in the same horizontal row, unless it is intended that two
persons or more are to work upon the same experiment.

There will be no conflict when the brass nails occupy diagonal lines. If
they do not, a glance will show the fact.

After an experiment has been performed and a report made upon the usual
blank, the brass nail is removed and a slate nail put in its place.

The board will show by the slate nails what work has been done by each
student, by the brass nails what is yet to be done, and by the empty
holes, experiments which have been omitted or are yet to be assigned. A
slate nail opposite an experiment card indicates that that experiment
may now be assigned to another person.

It is evident that the schedule for a whole term may be arranged in a
few minutes and that the daily changes require very little time.

The board is hung in a convenient place. The student as he enters the
laboratory looks for his name on the upper cards and under it for the
first brass nail in the vertical column: to the left he finds the
experiment card. On the left hand end of the slip he sees the book
references, on the right hand end a number--39 in the sample card given
above. Knowing the number, he proceeds to a desk and finds a box
numbered in the same manner. He removes the box from the closet. On the
label of the box is a list of all the apparatus necessary, which he will
find in the box; the label also contains the book references. He
performs the experiment, fills up a blank which he gives to the
instructor, puts all the materials back in the box, replaces the box in
its proper place in the closet and proceeds with the next experiment.
With this indicator there is no difficulty in managing fifty students or
more.

Comparatively little apparatus need be duplicated. Where apparatus is
fixed against a wall a number may be tacked upon the wall and a card
containing the information desired. The procedure is then the same as
with the boxes. The cards on the board being removable, other ones may
be inserted containing information in reference to other boxes having
the same number but containing different materials. There can be no
successful tampering with the board, for the record of experiments
performed is upon the blanks which the students turn in and also in the
individual note books which are written up and given to the instructor
for daily examination.

Lafayette College. J.W. MOORE.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW METHOD OF EXTINGUISHING FIRES


This is by George Dickson, of Toronto, Canada, and David Alanson Jones.

A mixture of water and liquefied carbon dioxide upon being discharged
through pipes at high pressure causes the rapid expansion of the gas and
converts the mixture into spray more or less frozen, and portions of the
liquid carbon dioxide are frozen, owing to its rapid expansion, and are
thus thrown upon the fire in a solid state, where said frozen carbon
dioxide in its further expansion not only acts to put out the fire, but
cools the surface upon which it falls, and thus tends to prevent
reignition.

A represents a receptacle sufficiently strong to stand a pressure of not
less than a thousand pounds to the square inch.

B B water receptacles.

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

In the drawings we have shown two receptacles B and only one receptacle
A; but we do not wish to confine ourselves to any particular number, nor
do we wish to confine ourselves to the horizontal position in which the
