are better mixed on Mars than on the earth--a fact which tends to
equalise the climate. There is a belt of continents round the equator:
'Copernicus,' 'Galileo,' 'Dawes,' and others, having long winding lakes
and inlets. These are separated by narrow seas from other islands on the
north or south, such as: 'Haze Land, 'Storm Land,' and so forth, which
occupy what we should call the temperate zones, beneath the poles; but I
suspect they are frigid enough. If you look closely you will see some
narrow streaks crossing the continents like fractures. These are the
famous 'Canals' of Schiaparelli, who discovered (and I wish I had his
eyes) that many of them were 'doubled,' that is, had another canal
alongside. Some of these are nearly 2,000 miles long, by fifty miles
broad, and 300 miles apart."

"That beats the Suez Canal."

"I am afraid they are not artificial. The doubling is chiefly observed
at the vernal equinox, our month of May, and is perhaps due to spring
floods, or vegetation in valleys of the like trend, as we find in
Siberia. The massing of clouds or mists will account for the peculiar
whiteness at the edge of the limb, and an occasional veiling of the
landscape."

While he spoke, my attention was suddenly arrested by a vivid point of
light which appeared on the dark side of the terminator, and south of
the equator.

"Hallo!" I exclaimed, involuntarily. "There's a light!"

"Really!" responded Gazen, in a tone of surprise, not unmingled with
doubt. "Are you sure?"

"Quite. There is a distinct light on one of the continents."

"Let me see it, will you?" he rejoined, hastily; and I yielded up my
place to him.

"Why, so there is," he declared, after a pause. "I suspect it has been
hidden under a cloud till now."

We turned and looked at each other in silence.

"It can't be the light Javelle saw," ejaculated Gazen at length. "That
was on Hellas Land."

"Should the Martians be signalling they would probably use a system of
lights. I daresay they possess an electric telegraph to work it."

The professor put his eye to the glass again, and I awaited the result
of his observation with eager interest.

"It's as steady as possible," said he.

"The steadiness puzzles me," I replied. "If it would only flash I should
call it a signal."

"Not necessarily to us," said Gazen, with mock gravity. "You see, it
might be a lighthouse flashing on the Kaiser Sea, or a night message in
the autumn manoeuvres of the Martians, who are, no doubt, very warlike;
or even the advertisement of a new soap."

"Seriously, what do you think of it?" I asked.

"I confess it's a mystery to me," he answered, pondering deeply; and
then, as if struck by a sudden thought, he added: "I wonder if it's any
good trying the spectroscope on it?"

So saying, he attached to the telescope a magnificent spectroscope,
which he employed in his researches on the nebulae, and renewed his
observation.

"Well, that's the most remarkable thing in all my professional
experience," he exclaimed, resigning his place at the instrument to me.

"What is?" I demanded, looking into the spectroscope, where I could
distinguish several faint streaks of coloured light on a darker
background.

"You know that we can tell the nature of a substance that is burning by
splitting up the light which comes from it in the prism of a
spectroscope. Well, these bright lines of different colours are the
spectrum of a luminous gas."

"Indeed! Have you any idea as to the origin of the blaze?"

"It may be electrical--for instance, an aurora. It may be a volcanic
eruption, or a lake of fire such as the crater of Kilauea. Really, I
can't say. Let me see if I can identify the bright lines of the
spectrum."

I yielded the spectroscope to him, and scarcely had he looked into it
ere he cried out--

"By all that's wonderful, the spectrum has changed. Eureka! It's
thallium now. I should know that splendid green line amongst a
thousand."

"Thallium!" I exclaimed, astonished in my turn.

"Yes," responded Gazen, hurriedly. "Make a note of the observation, and
also of the time. You will find a book for the purpose lying on the
desk."

I did as directed, and awaited further orders. The silence was so great
that I could plainly hear the ticking of my watch laid on the desk
before me. At the end of several minutes the professor cried--

"It has changed again: make another note."

"What is it now?"

"Sodium. The yellow bands are unmistakable."

A deep stillness reigned as before.

"There she goes again," exclaimed the professor, much excited. "Now I
can see a couple of blue lines. What can that be? I believe it's
indium."

Another long pause ensued.

"Now they are gone," ejaculated Gazen once more. "A red and a yellow
line have taken their place. That should be lithium. Hey, presto!--and
all was dark."

"What's the matter?"

"It's all over." With these words he removed the spectroscope from the
telescope, and gazed anxiously at the planet "The light is gone," he
continued, after a minute. "Perhaps another cloud is passing over it.
Well, we must wait. In the meantime let us consider the situation. It
seems to me that we have every reason to be satisfied with our night's
work. What do you think?"

There was a glow of triumph on his countenance as he came and stood
before me.

"I believe it's a signal," said I, with an air of conviction.

"But how?"

"Why should it change so regularly? I've timed each spectrum, and found
it to last about five minutes before another took its place."

The professor remained thoughtful and silent.

"Is it not by the light which comes from them that we have gained all
our knowledge of the constitution of the heavenly bodies?" I continued.
"A ray from the remotest star brings in its heart a secret message to
him who can read it. Now, the Martians would naturally resort to the
same medium of communication as the most obvious, simple, and
practicable. By producing a powerful light they might hope to attract
our attention, and by imbuing it with characteristic spectra, easily
recognised and changed at intervals, they would distinguish the light
from every other, and show us that it must have had an intelligent
origin."

"What then?"

"We should know that the Martians had a civilisation at least as high as
our own. To my mind, that would be a great discovery--the greatest since
the world began."

"But of little use to either party."

"As for that, a good many of our discoveries, especially in astronomy,
are not of much use. Suppose you find out the chemical composition of
the nebulae you are studying, will that lower the price of bread? No; but
it will interest and enlighten us. If the Martians can tell us what Mars
is made of, and we can return the compliment as regards the earth, that
will be a service."

"But the correspondence must then cease, as the editors say."

"I'm not so sure of that."

"My dear fellow! How on earth are we to understand what the Martians
say, and how on Mars are they to understand what we say? We have no
common code."

"True; but the chemical bodies have certain well-defined properties,
have they not?"

"Yes. Each has a peculiarity marking it from all the rest. For example,
two or more may resemble each other in colour or hardness, but not in
weight."

"Precisely. Now, by comparing their spectra can we not be led to
distinguish a particular quality, and grasp the idea of it? In short,
can the Martians not impress that idea on us by their
spectro-telegraph?"

"I see what you mean," said Professor Gazen; "and, now I think of it,
all the spectra we have seen belong to the group called 'metals of the
alkalies and alkaline earths,' which, of course, have distinctive
properties."

"At first, I should think the Martians would only try to attract our
notice by striking spectra."

"Lithium is the lightest metal known to us."

"Well, we might get the idea of 'lightness' from that."

"Sodium," continued the professor, "sodium is a very soft metal, with so
strong an affinity for oxygen that it burns in water. Manganese, which
belongs to the 'iron group,' is hard enough to scratch glass; and, like
iron, is decidedly magnetic. Copper is red--"

"The signals for colour we might get from the spectra direct."

"Mercury or quicksilver is fluid at ordinary temperatures, and that
might lead us to the idea of movement--animation--life itself."

"Having got certain fundamental ideas," I went on, "by combining these
we might arrive at other distinct conceptions. We might build up an
ideographic or glyphic language of signs--the signs being spectra. The
numerals might be telegraphed by simple occultations of the light. Then
from spectra we might pass by an easy step to equivalent signals of
long and short flashes in various combinations, also made by occulting
the light. With such a code, our correspondence might go on at great
length, and present no difficulty; but, of course, we must be able to
reply."

"If the Martians are as clever as you are pleased to imagine, we ought
to learn a good deal from them."

"I hope we may, and I'm sure the world will be all the better for a
little superior enlightenment on some points."

"Well, we must follow the matter up, at all events," said the professor,
taking another peep through the telescope. "For the present the Martian
philosophers appear to have shut up shop; and, as my nebula has now
risen, I should like to do a little work on it before daybreak. Look
here, if it's a fine night, can you join me to-morrow? We shall then
continue our observations; but, in the meanwhile, you had better say
nothing about them."

On my way home I looked for the ruddy planet as I had done in the
earlier part of the night, but with very different feelings in my heart.
The ice of distance and isolation separating me from it seemed to have
broken down since then, and instead of a cold and alien star, I saw a
friendly and familiar world--a companion to our own in the eternal
solitude of the universe.




CHAPTER II.

HOW CAN WE GET TO THE OTHER PLANETS?


The next evening promised well, and I kept my appointment, but
unfortunately a slight haze gathered in the sky and prevented us from
making further observations. While hoping in vain for it to clear away,
Professor Gazen and I talked over the possibility of journeying to other
worlds. The gist of our argument was afterwards published in a
conversation, entitled "Can we reach the other planets?" which appeared
in _The Day after To-morrow_. It ran as follows:

_I_. (_the writer_). "Do you think we shall ever be able to leave the
earth and travel through space to Mars or Venus, and the other members
of the Solar System?"

_G_. (_Checking an impulse to smile and shaking his head_), "Oh, no!
Never."

_I_. "Yet science is working miracles, or what would have been
accounted miracles in ancient times."

_G_. "No doubt, and hence people are apt to suppose that science can do
everything; but after all Nature has set bounds to her achievements."

_I_. "Still, we don't know what we can and what we cannot do until we
try."

_G_. "Not always; but in this case I think we know. The celestial bodies
are evidently isolated in space, and the tenants of one cannot pass to
another. We are confined to our own planet."

_I_. "A similar objection might have been urged against the plan of
Columbus."

_G_. "That was different. Columbus only sailed through unknown seas to a
distant continent. We are free to explore every nook and cranny of the
earth, but how shall we cross the immense void which parts us from
another world, except on the wings of the imagination?"

_I_. "Great discoveries and inventions are born of dreams. There are
minds which can foresee what lies before us, and the march of science
brings it within our reach. All or nearly all our great scientific
victories have been foretold, and they have generally been achieved by
more than one person when the time came. The telescope was a dream for
ages, so was the telephone, steam and electric locomotion, aerial
navigation. Why should we scout the dream of visiting other worlds,
which is at least as old as Lucian? Ere long, and perhaps before the
century is out, we shall be flying through the air to the various
countries of the globe. In succeeding centuries what is to hinder us
from travelling through space to different planets?"

_G_. "Quite impossible. Consider the tremendous distance--the lifeless
vacuum--that separates us even from the moon. Two hundred and forty
thousand miles of empty space."

_I_. "Some ten times round the world. Well, is that tremendous vacuum
absolutely impassable?"
