NEW MISCELLANEOUS INVENTIONS.

IMPROVED TORTOISE-SHELL HANDLE.


Christian W. Schaefer, New York city.--The object of this invention
is to mount the handles of canes, umbrellas, parasols, whips, opera
glasses, and similar articles with a tortoise-shell covering, in such
a manner that the present inefficient mode of attaching the same by
glue may be dispensed with, the covering attached in tightly fitting
and durable manner, and the joint or weld of the edges be not
noticeable in the least.


IMPROVED HAND STAMP.


Leonard Tilton, Brooklyn, E.D., N. Y.--This invention consists in
novel devices for giving positive rotation to the stamp heads after
the impressions are made, in combination with a reciprocating inking
pad, and in means for adjusting the throw of the inking pad with
respect to the printing faces of the stamp heads.


IMPROVED BUCKLE.


John Fenton, Indianapolis, Ind.--This invention is an improved buckle,
neat in appearance, strong and durable, which may be easily fastened
and unfastened, which will not require the strap to be perforated, and
will hold it securely in any position into which it may be adjusted.
The buckle is formed of a plate having holes in its middle part to
receive the rivets by which it is secured to the strap, and having
cross slots formed in its ends to receive the free end of the said
strap, and the eccentric, having its outer side corrugated radially,
and provided with a handle.


IMPROVED LIQUID DIFFUSER.


George M. Smyth, Brooklyn, N. Y.--This invention consists in the
combination of an air compressor, an air reservoir, and a receptacle
for the liquid, and an arrangement of pipes and nozzles for atomizing
the liquid. An air compressor of any ordinary construction is
connected with the reservoir by a pipe, in which two stopcocks are
placed. There is a receptacle for containing the liquid to be diffused
or atomized. A pipe passes through a stopper placed in the neck of the
said receptacle, and extends nearly to the bottom of the same, and its
upper end is provided with a stopcock and nozzle. A nozzle is arranged
at right angles to the first-mentioned nozzle, and is attached to a
brace that is secured to the pipe.


IMPROVED OIL CAN.


John Graves, New York city, assignor to himself and James L. Miller,
Westfield, N. J.--This is an improved case for packing oil cans for
transportation, the case furnishing the additional facility that the
can may be readily inserted into the same and tilted for use. The
invention consists of a wooden projecting case with side slots, in
which trunnions of the can are guided and supported for swinging the
can on pivot hooks, which serve also for the purpose of locking the
lid to the case.


IMPROVED HARNESS TUGS.


Charles Hauff, Ashland, O.--The body of the carrier is made in the
form of a ring with outwardly projecting flanges around its edges. The
strap is passed around the ring in the groove formed by its flanges,
and its inner end is sewed to its body at the side. Small wedge-shaped
blocks of leather are inserted in the angle between the parts of the
strap where they meet and the ring, which angular blocks are covered
by angular projection of the flanges of the ring.


IMPROVED COMPOSITION FOR CASTING ORNAMENTAL FIGURES.


August Kiesele, New York city.--This consists in a composition
formed by the admixture of dry pulverized sugar, melted paraffin, and
stearine. It is poured into moulds and allowed to cool. The article
is then removed from the mould, and powdered starch or sugar is dusted
over it to destroy the gloss and give it the appearance of alabaster.


IMPROVED PEN RACK.


Harvey W. Forman, Golden City, Col.--This consists of an upper frame
with intercrossing wires, forming wide spaces or meshes, and of a
second frame with closer wires below the same, for holding the pen in
upright position, in connection with a bottom pad or absorbent below
the rack frames.


IMPROVED STOPPER FOR MUCILAGE BOTTLE.


James Tilghman, New York city.--This is a combined brush and stopper,
consisting essentially of a handle having a stem and a flat end
corresponding to the top of the cork. The brush has a flat head,
corresponding to the bottom of the cork. The cork is interposed
between the said head and end of the handle, and held in place by the
central stem.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUSINESS AND PERSONAL.

       *       *       *       *       *


_The Charge for Insertion under this head is One Dollar a line for
each insertion. If the Notice exceeds four lines, One Dollar and a
Half per line will be charged._

       *       *       *       *       *


Metallic Letters and Figures to put on patterns of castings, all
sizes. H. W. Knight, Seneca Falls, N. Y.

How to make Violins--Write J. Ranger, Syracuse, N. Y.

Blake's Belt Studs.--The best and cheapest fastening for Rubber or
Leather Belts. Greene, Tweed & Co., 18 Park place, N. Y.

All kinds of new Lift and Force Pumps for all purposes, at half price,
or trade for firearms or tools. W. P. Hopkins, Lawrence, Mass.

Steam Yacht for sale. 31 feet long, 61/2 beam; new. John Howard, No.
1720 Rittinhouse st., Philadelphia.

Mothers make selections for themselves uptown, but they always go to
Baldwin the Clothier in New York and Brooklyn for boys' outfits.

Wanted--The Agency of small article of merit or novelty for the
Hardware or House furnishing lines. W. M. Ernst & Co., 26 Cliff
street, New York.

Thermometers and Hydrometers for scientific and other purposes.
Goldbacher, 98 Fulton street, N. Y.

For Sale.--One 3 ft. Planer, $195; one 8 ft. do., $350; one 26" Lathe,
$295; one 22" do., $175; one 15" do., $120. At Shearman's, 132 North
3d street, Philadelphia, Pa.

Inventors.--Send 10 cents for the "Journal of Invention," 4 months. 37
Park Row, N. Y. Room 2.

Reliable Oak Leather and Rubber Belting. A specialty of Belting for
high speed and hard work. Charles W. Arny, Manufacturer, Phila., Pa.
Send for price lists.

Shaw's Noise-Quieting Nozzles for Escape Pipes of Locomotives,
Steamboats, etc. Quiets all the noise of high pressure escaping steam
without any detriment whatever. T. Shaw, 915 Ridge Ave., Philadelphia,
Pa.

For 13, 15, 16, and 18 in. Swing Screw-Cutting Engine Lathes, address
Star Tool Company, Providence, R. I.

John T. Noye & Son, Buffalo, N. Y., are Manufacturers of Burr Mill
Stones and Flour Mill Machinery of all kinds, and dealers in Dufour &
Co.'s Bolting Cloth. Send for large illustrated catalogue.

Removal.--Fitch & Meserole, Manufacturers of Electrical Apparatus, and
Bradley's Patent Naked Wire Helices, have removed to 40 Cortlandt St.,
N. Y. Experimental work.

Power & Foot Presses, Ferracute Co., Bridgeton, N. J.

For Best Presses, Dies, and Fruit Can Tools, Bliss & Williams, cor. of
Plymouth and Jay Sts., Brooklyn, N. Y.

Lead Pipe, Sheet Lead. Bar Lead, and Gas Pipe. Send for prices.
Bailey, Farrell & Co., Pittsburgh, Pa.

Hydraulic Presses and Jacks, new and second hand. Lathes and Machinery
for Polishing and Buffing metals. E. Lyon & Co., 470 Grand St., N. Y.

Solid Emery Vulcanite Wheels--The Solid Original Emery Wheel--other
kinds imitations and inferior. Caution.--Our name is stamped in full
on all our best Standard Belting, Packing, and Hose. Buy that only.
The best is the cheapest. New York Belting and Packing Company, 37 and
38 Park Row, N. Y.

Steel Castings from one lb. to five thousand lbs. Invaluable for
strength and durability. Circulars free. Pittsburgh Steel Casting Co.,
Pittsburgh, Pa.

Leather and Rubber Belting, Packing, Hose, and Manufacturers'
Supplies. Send for list. Greene, Tweed & Co., 18 Park place, N. Y.

For Solid Wrought Iron Beams, etc., see advertisement. Address Union
Iron Mills, Pittsburgh, Pa., for lithograph, etc.

Blank Book Back-Shaping Machine. Illustrated circular free. Frank
Thomas & Co., Home St., Cincinnati, O.

Hand Fire Engines, Lift and Force Pumps for fire and all other
purposes. Address Rumsey & Co., Seneca Falls, N. Y., U. S. A.

Help for the weak, nervous, and debilitated. Chronic and painful
diseases cured without medicine. Pulvermacher's Electric Belts are
the desideratum. Book, with full particulars, mailed free. Address
Pulvermacher Galvanic Co., 292 Vine St., Cincinnati, Ohio.

Silver Solder and small Tubing. John Holland, Cincinnati, Manufacturer
of Gold Pens and Pencil Cases.

Patent Scroll and Band Saws. Best and cheapest in use. Cordesman, Egan
& Co., Cincinnati, O.

Mill Stone Dressing Diamonds. Simple, effective, and durable. J.
Dickinson, 64 Nassau St., N. Y.

Best Glass Oilers. Cody & Ruthven, Cincinnati, O.

For Boult's Paneling, Moulding, and Dovetailing Machine, and other
wood-working machinery, address B.C. Machinery Co., Battle Creek,
Mich.

Chester Steel Castings Co. make castings for heavy gearing, and
Hydraulic Cylinders where great strength is required. See their
advertisement, page 30.

Reliable information given on all subjects relating to Mechanics,
Hydraulics, Pneumatics, Steam Engines, and Boilers, by A. F. Nagle,
M.E., Providence. R. I.

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES & QUERIES


It has been our custom for thirty years past to devote a considerable
space to the answering of questions by correspondents; so useful have
these labors proved that the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN office has become the
factotum, or headquarters, to which everybody sends, who wants special
information upon any particular subject. So large is the number of our
correspondents, so wide the range of their inquiries, so desirous are
we to meet their wants and supply correct information, that we are
obliged to employ the constant assistance of a considerable staff of
experienced writers, who have the requisite knowledge or access to
the latest and best sources of information. For example, questions
relating to steam engines, boilers, boats, locomotives, railways,
etc., are considered and answered by a professional engineer of
distinguished ability and extensive practical experience. Inquiries
relating to electricity are answered by one of the most able and
prominent practical electricians in this country. Astronomical queries
by a practical astronomer. Chemical inquiries by one of our most
eminent and experienced professors of chemistry; and so on through
all the various departments. In this way we are enabled to answer the
thousands of questions and furnish the large mass of information which
these correspondence columns present. The large number of questions
sent--they pour in upon us from all parts of the world--renders it
impossible for us to publish all. The editor selects from the mass
those that he thinks most likely to be of general interest to the
readers of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. These, with the replies, are
printed; the remainder go into the waste basket. Many of the rejected
questions are of a primitive or personal nature, which should be
answered by mail; in fact, hundreds of correspondents desire a special
reply by post, but very few of them are thoughtful enough to inclose
so much as a postage stamp. We could in many cases send a brief reply
by mail if the writer were to inclose a small fee, a dollar or more,
according to the nature or importance of the case. When we cannot
furnish the information, the money is promptly returned to the sender.

J. P. D. will find directions for colored whitewash on pp. 235, 236,
vol. 36.--A. M. will find directions for electroplating on p. 59, vol.
36.--H. P. can recover silver from photographers' waste by the process
detailed on p. 250, vol. 27.--A. W. A.'s difficulty as to 64 and 65
squares in the puzzle can be solved by an inspection of the diagrams
on p. 323, No. 21, SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.--I. A. will find a
description of a magneto-electric machine on p. 195, vol. 34. A clock
thus would go for 12 hours, and wind itself at the same time for
12 hours more, if such a machine could exist, would be a perpetual
motion. As to tempering small drills, see p. 186, vol. 26.--R. B. can
prevent rust on iron or steel by the means described on p. 26, vol.
25. For a recipe for a depilatory, see p. 186, vol. 34.--A. T. R. is
informed that the hydrocarbon engine is reversible.--T. W. will find
directions for making sand belts on p. 235, vol. 36.--M. G. should
address a manufacturer of oxygen cylinders.--J. S. C., who inquires
as to a water fountain, sizes of pipes, etc., should send us a sketch
with dimensions.--O. L. is informed that the proper way to ascertain
the relative strengths of corrugated and plain sheet metal is by
experiment.--G. H. B. will find directions for making colored
printing inks on p. 90, vol. 36.--P. M. will find on p. 250, vol. 36,
directions for making a polishing starch.--C. H. B. can braze the ends
of his brass plate to make a cylinder of it. See p. 219, vol. 36.--W.
H. C. is informed that his method of fluting reamers is not
new.--C. C. G. will find his method of raising coal or other weights
impracticable.--E. S. G. had better test so simple an experiment and
satisfy himself.--W. H. C. is informed that the most satisfactory plan
would be to get his tools nickel-plated.

(1) J. H. N., of Christ Church, New Zealand, asks: Is the stearin from
which the olein has been extracted by Dr. Mott's process fit to be
made at once into good stearin candles, without any further treatment?
A. Yes.

(2) B. B. says: I wish to express the strongest coloring matter from
certain herbs, sage leaves, for instance. How can it best be done
