
"Who touched off the pineapple, boy friend?"

"I did. Come out of it and tell me what we do next. Anything busted?"

"Only my head." She patted the mass of stiff wire. "Boy, am I glad I
wore my hair long before they made a robot of me!" And with an effort
she stood up, looked down the pit where the machine had been and said,
"Say, let's get out of here. That don't look so good."

"All right," said Sherman, "which way? Wait till I get my knife."

"No, leave it," she said. "Those babies are nobody's saps. If they find
it on you they'll know you shot the well. Come on, I think that thing is
going to pop again."

The roaring had increased in both volume and intensity, and the
machine-room had become unbearably hot. They turned toward the door, but
just at the entrance into the passage a pile of debris had descended,
making egress impossible. Behind them the roaring increased still more.
"Come on, boy friend," called the dancer, tearing at the rocks. "Get
these out of the road unless you want to be stewed in your own juice."

Together they toiled over the blocks of granite, hurling them backward
toward the wreck of the machine. One minute, two, three--the roaring
behind them grew and spread, the heat became terrific.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ah!" cried Marta Lami at last. A tiny opening at the top of the heap
was before them. Sherman tugged at a rock--one more, and they would be
through. But it was too big, would not budge.

"No, this one," shouted his companion and together they dragged at it.
It gave--a cascade of smaller stones rolled down the heap to the floor.
"You first," said Sherman and stood aside.

The dancer wriggled through and reached back a hand to pull him after.
He dived, grunted, pushed--made it. As they turned to slide down the
other side of the heap, he looked back. A little rivulet of something
white, hot and liquid was creeping through the ruins of the machine and
into the room.

Up the passage, strewn with wreckage, but with no more blockades, into
the upper machine room. The machines here also were deserted and from
one of them issued a minor variation on the roaring sound they had heard
in their own room. The guard was not on duty. They turned, sped up the
next passage to the place where the cars ordinarily met them. The
car-track was dark; by the illumination from the passage they could see
the rail on which it ran, a foot or two down from the level of the
passage, and about a foot broad--a single shining ribbon of metal.
Sherman looked in one direction, then the other. Nothing. The roaring
behind them continued.

"Drive on, kid," said Marta Lami. "The boojums are going to get us if we
wait."

"Stop, look, listen, watch out for the cars," he quoted as they leaped
down and both laughed.

The roadbed was as smooth as glass, the rail set flush with it. Judging
that the best route was the one taking them upward Sherman turned to the
right and they began climbing, hand in metal hand.

The track was on a curve as well as an ascent. After a few steps they
were in complete darkness and could only feel their way along, running
into the wall every few minutes. They climbed for what seemed hours. The
tunnel continued dark, without branches, simply winding on and on.
Finally, so quickly that Sherman missed his step, they reached a level
place, rounded one more curve, and saw ahead of them a band of light
across the track from some side-tunnel.

"Shall we try it?" he asked as they reached the opening.

"Might be another machine room," she said, "but let's go. This track is
terrible. If I wasn't made of iron I'd have bruises all over."

He vaulted over the sill, reached down and hauled her after him. From
behind them came the roar, sunk to a vague purring by the distance. They
were in another granite-lined passage; one that went straight ahead for
a few yards, then branched sharply. The right hand fork seemed to lead
downward; automatically they took the other turn. A diffused radiance
from somewhere high in the walls, as though the granite had been
rendered transparent here and there, filled the whole place with
shadowless light. For a time the passage ran level, then it climbed
again, with another fork to the right, which dipped away from their
level and which they again avoided. Of any other living being there was
thus far no sign.

The passage began climbing again, in a tight spiral, this time.

"Good thing we're in training," remarked Marta Lami. "This is worse than
the stairs in the Statue of Liberty."

"Oh, did you fall for climbing that, too?" asked Sherman.

"Sure. Publicity stunt about a year ago. Dumb bunny of a publicity man.
Photographed on the old lady's spikes. Never will again."

The spiral ended, a side passage branched off. The dancer stopped.

"Sh," she said, "someone's coming. Duck in here." She seized Sherman's
hand and led him into the side passage, down which they ran for a few
feet, then paused to look back. Down the passage they had just vacated
came a group of the ape-men, four or five of them, each carrying on his
left arm a long, cylindrical shield like those one sees in pictures of
Roman soldiers, and in his right hand some instrument that looked like
a fire extinguisher with a long, flexible nozzle.

Each of the group wore one of the helmets and behind them, wearing a
similar headgear to which all the tubes were connected from the
ape-men's helmets came one of the Lassans. The group hurried past
without a sideward glance, the metal feet of the ape-men ringing oddly
loud on the granite of the echoing passage. After a minute Sherman and
the dancer crept cautiously forward; the procession had gone straight on
down. Very likely a wrecking crew.

Sherman and Marta sprinted up the passage in the direction from which
the ape-men and their guide had come. The passage no longer rose with
the same steepness, and as the ascent grew more gentle, the tunnel
widened, with frequent side-passages to the right and branches leading
down to the track at the left. Finally, after a sharp turn, it opened
out into a big room, untenanted like all they had seen so far, filled
with a complex maze of machinery, but machinery of a different character
from that they had labored at. At the farther end of the room a door
stood open. They dashed across it, plunged through--and found themselves
in one of the enormous blue-domed halls, whose ceiling seemed to stretch
miles above them.

       *       *       *       *       *

It must have been all of three hundred feet across, and there was no
visible support for the ceiling. All about the place stood various
objects and pieces of machinery, and figures moved dimly among the
titanic apparatus at the far end. But what most attracted their
attention was the huge object that stood right before them.

It looked like a metal fish on an enormous scale. Fully fifty feet long
and twenty feet high, its immense proportions dwarfed everything about
it, and its sides, of brilliantly polished metal, shone like a mirror.
The tail came to a stubby point, from which projected a circle of four
tubes; down the side was a rib which ended in a similar tube about half
way, and at the nose-end of the mechanical fish was a ten-foot snout,
not unlike an elephant's trunk in shape and apparently made of the same
rubbery material which held the cables of the helmets.

Marta pulled Sherman down behind the thing, and they peered around the
edge seeking for a means of egress from the room. The nearest was twenty
or thirty feet away. Watching their opportunity, they chose a moment
when they seemed least likely to attract attention and made a dive for
it.

They found themselves in another passage, terminating in two doors.

"Which?" asked Sherman.

"Eeny-meeny," said Marta--"this one," and stepping boldly to the right
hand door, pushed it open....

For a moment they could only gaze. The room they had entered was another
and smaller blue-domed hall. Around its sides was a row of curious
twisted benches of green material, each of which was now occupied by one
of the Lassans, hood thrown back from head, and elephant-trunk thrust
into a large pool of some viscous, green stuff with bright yellow flecks
in it, in the center of the circle. Half a dozen helmeted ape-men stood
behind the benches of their masters, apparently serving them at this
singular meal.

[Illustration: Half a dozen ape-men stood behind the benches of their
masters apparently serving at this singular meal.]

As the two humans entered there was one of those silences which are
pregnant with events. Then:

"Good evening, folks. How's the boy?" said Marta, and curtsied
gracefully.

The sound of her words seemed to release the spell. With a bellow of
rage the nearest Lassan leaped from his bench, fumbling at one of the
pouches in his cloak. "The light-gun!" thought Sherman and braced
himself to spring, but another of the masters extended his trunk and
detained the first one. There was a momentary babble of rumbling
conversation, then one of the Lassans reached behind him, picked up a
helmet and placed it on his head, and attaching a tube to one of the
ape-men, rose.

The ape-man moved toward Marta and Sherman like a being in a dream. They
turned to run, but the Lassan produced a light-gun with such evident
intention of using it at the first motion that they paused.

"Looks like we're in for it," said the dancer. "Oh, well, lead on
Napoleon. What do we care for expenses?"

Under the direction of the Lassan the ape-man took them each by an arm
and led them back through the hall of the metal fish, down among the
machines, where two or three others stared at them curiously or lifted
inquisitive trunks in their direction. Then into another passage which
had one of the inevitable car-tracks. Their Lassan conductor reached
around the corner into the passage, applied his trunk briefly to
something and a moment later one of the cars slid silently into
position. The door opened.

"So long, old scout," said Marta Lami. "Even if I never see you again,
we had a great time together."

"So long," replied Sherman, taking his place in the car. He felt a
distinct pang at leaving this dancer--vulgar, no doubt, and flippant,
but gay and debonair, and the best of companions.

The car did not take them far. It discharged Sherman in a little passage
before a narrow door, which opened automatically to admit him to a small
blue-domed room containing nothing but a seat, one of the benches on
which he had seen the Lassans reclining and a mass of wires and tubes.
There seemed nothing in particular to do. He was at liberty, save that
the door closed firmly behind him, cutting off escape, and seeing that
he was left alone, he seated himself and began to examine the machinery,
most of which was attached to his chair.




CHAPTER XV

The Lassan Explains


Before he had time to riddle out any of its secrets the door opened
again and one of the Lassans came in--a distinctly different type than
any he had hitherto seen. This one was smaller than most; his skin,
where exposed, was covered by a tracery of fine wrinkles and his
coloring was whiter than the rest. Little crowfeet stood around the
corners of his eyes, giving him an expression that was singularly
humorous. He approached Sherman on noiseless feet, moved his trunk up
and down as though examining him and then, producing from a pocket in
his cloak one of the thought-helmets, set it on Sherman's head,
tightened a connection or two with his trunk and placing a like device
on his own head, settled himself on the twisted bench.

The ordeal of the helmet! "They make you think whatever they want you
to; it's like being hypnotized," Marta Lami had said. He braced himself
resolutely. This alien intelligence should not plumb his thoughts
without a struggle....

To his surprise, there seemed no attempt to force his mind. The thought
leaped up, unbidden, "Why, this--this Lassan is friendly!" No definite
image or plan or connection of ideas formed itself in his brain; he
merely felt enormously soothed and strengthened. After all, he found
himself arguing, nobody desired to hurt him; merely to discover what
curious process of thought had led him to act as he had.

"You are too intelligent, too high a type to have been put to work at
the machines," came the unspoken thought of the Lassan. "We might better
have put you at the controls of one of the fighting machines." (This
thought caused a mental image of the giant silver fish he had seen in
the hall of the dome to rise in his mind; he pictured himself as seated
amid a mass of levers before a panel set with complex gauges.)

"It was a mistake," the thought he was receiving went on, "that you were
sent there. The Alphen of the mental department, who had your case in
charge should have known better. You earth-men make much better machines
than the ones we brought with us. You do not even need the helmets in
order to control. Some of you are even capable of understanding and
operating the lights." (This, he explained afterward appeared not as a
consecutive sentence in Sherman's mind, but as a succession of ideas,
almost as though he were thinking them himself. With the word "lights" a
complex picture presented itself, involving the light-guns and a large
amount of other complex apparatus, whose exact uses he did not then or
later understand, but which he felt he understood at the moment.)

"Now," the Lassan's thought went on, "I don't blame you for being
frightened and trying to run away, but you know we are different and I
don't quite understand what frightened you. You were working at a
machine, were you not?" And as Sherman unconsciously thought of himself
sticking his fingers in the apertures of the machines, "I thought so.
What happened?"

Unbidden, the memory of the explosion came to him. Again he heard the
Lassan's step in the corridor, saw the guard move aside, the sputter
from the cable, and then the explosion; then his memory jumped to the
moment of tugging at the stones with the roar and heat all round and the
white-hot stream in pursuit.

A vague, but sympathetic thought reached him, followed by a
question--"But what made that happen? You're intelligent, you understand
these things, you are a mechanic--what made it happen?"

With a start of surprise Sherman realized that the Lassan had been
leading him gently along from place to place--to trap him! He struggled
desperately to keep the thought of the short-circuiting of the guard's
helmet from his mind; struggled to think about anything else at
all--thought of a plate of steaming corned beef and cabbage, of the
multiplication table--5 x 5 = 25, all in neat rows of figures, thought
of how to control a plane that had gone into a tail-spin....

The pressure suddenly relaxed, the mind opposite his became friendly
again; once more he received the vague intimation of sympathy and
understanding, even of admiration of his mental strength.

"Why," the thought was telling him, "you have quite as much mentality as
a Lassan! That is a very high compliment. I have never before met one of
the lower animals who could withhold his thoughts from me. It is most
extraordinary. Is it possible for you to withhold your thoughts from
your own kind as well?"

Not at all difficult, thought Sherman, relaxing a bit; indeed the
difficulty in human communication lies not in withholding thoughts but
in expressing them.

His interlocutor went on, "Ah, but the feeling, the thought is generally
understood, though it may not be clear. Tell me, have you never withheld
a thought from someone who wished to know it?"

Yes, thought Sherman, I have--and remembered the poker game at the
Cleveland airport when he had drawn two cards and unexpectedly filled a
straight flush to win the biggest pot of the evening from Barney's full
house; and of the time when he had thought of numerous unpleasant ways
of slaying the mechanic who had left a leak in his oil-line and of the
time when a girl had tried to gold-dig him and he had divined her
intention first, and of the time when he had lifted the knife--!!!

Again that jar! He realized with a start that the Lassan having failed
to pick his brain with friendliness, was trying to do it with flattery,
and the realization so filled him with anger that he had no difficulty
in resisting the pressure that was applied to make him tell, tell, tell
what had happened in the machine-room at the end of the passage.

Once more the pressure relaxed. The Lassan was congratulating him again.
"No, this is sincere this time and not flattery. You win. I shall not
try to make you tell me again. We can probably obtain it from the other
one anyway. Oh, man of a debased and alien race, I salute you. If your
race were all like you we might breed them for intelligence and live in
cooperation with you. It is almost a pity you had to be mechanized. If
there is any information you wish, I will gladly exchange with you. We
have seen your homes, we are curious--imagine living above the
ground!--and from others of your race we know that you have many fine
machines, almost a civilization, in fact. We would willingly know more
of it and in return will tell you of our accomplishments."

       *       *       *       *       *

Could this offer conceal some new trap? Sherman wondered, but the Lassan
divined this thought as soon as formed, and reassured him. "Since we now
live here and since there are so few of your folk left it is important
that we know about each other. We must live side by side--why not in
friendship?"

The offer seemed fair enough. At all events if there were any
injudicious questions he could turn them aside, and there was a good
deal he wished to learn--about his mechanized body, about the purpose of
those curious machines, the blue-domed halls, the silver fish, the
interweavings of this underground city, where the Lassans had come
from--he assented.

"Good," the message reached him. "Suppose you ask a question and then I
will. What do you wish to know?"

"How I was made into a machine."

"I do not know that I can explain it to you. I perceive your knowledge
of the nature of light is elementary.... But the material with which we
surrounded the space-ship in which we came, in order to protect it from
the radiation of suns unknown to you, has a powerful action on all
animal substances. It is a material not unlike your radium, but a
thousand times more powerful. When we reached your planet, your
atmosphere carried it to every part of the earth, and all living things
received it. Those who were most affected by it were turned to metal
which retained that quality called 'life' within its interior reaches;
the others became merely solid metal.

"Our birds are under instructions to bring us all such individuals as
possess life. In our laboratories we make their forms over, so they will
be useful to us as servants. Those who have become solid, of course,
nothing can be done for. We have found in the past that when we take a
new planet and make the individuals over into machines, unless we return
them to familiar surroundings, they lose their brains when they reawake.
Therefore you woke in the same place in which you passed from
consciousness."

"Wonderful," said Sherman, "and where do you come from and how did you
get here?"

He felt the Lassan's amusement. "That is two questions you have asked,
and not one. Nevertheless I will answer. We come from a planet of
another star, very far away--I do not know how to express it to you.
Your methods of measurement for these things are different from ours."
In Sherman's mind appeared a picture of the night heavens with the
tremendous ribbon of the Milky Way swinging across its center; his
attention was directed to one star, a very bright one.

"Rigel!" his mind called, and the thought went on. He was suddenly
transported to the neighborhood of the star, felt that it was ages ago,
long before the earth had cooled, and saw that the star, then a sun like
our own, was threatened by some enormous catastrophe, a titanic
explosion. Abruptly the picture was wiped out and he beheld the comet,
the great comet the earthly astronomers had watched for so long before
it struck on that fateful night, and realized that it was no comet, but
an interplanetary vehicle bound from the planet of Rigel to the earth.

[Illustration: The star, like our own sun, was threatened by some
enormous catastrophe, a titanic explosion.]

"But how--?" he began to frame another question. The Lassan cut across
it firmly. "It is my turn to seek information now. We are interested in
the machine that brought you here--the bird machine. How does it
operate?"

Sherman imagined himself in the airplane's seat, operating the controls
and as well as he could to a strange type of mind, explained how they
