
"I think I know what you mean," said Geo.

"I still--"

"It means that he is a spy," explained Iimmi, "and among other things,
he was probably lying about the radio back at the city. And that cost
Geo his arm."

"Why the--" began Urson, and then looked down the hall where Snake had
disappeared.

They didn't eat much more. When they got up, Urson felt sleepy and was
shown back to his room.

"May I show my friend what you showed me?" Iimmi asked the Priestess
when she returned. "He is also a student of rituals."

"Of course you may," smiled the Priestess.

A door opened and they entered another room similar to the one in which
Geo had awakened. As she was about to leave, Iimmi asked, "Wait. Can you
tell us how to leave the room ourselves?"

"Why would you want to leave?" she asked.

"For exercise," offered Geo, "and to observe the working of the
monastery. Believe us, we are true students of Argo's religion."

"Simply press the wall with your hand, level at your waist, and the door
will open. But you must not wander about the monastery. Rites which are
not for your eyes are being carried out. Not for your eyes," she
repeated. "Strange, this is a phrase that has never left our language.
Suddenly, confronted by people who can see, it makes me feel
somehow ..." she paused. "Well, that is how to leave the room."

She stepped out, and the door closed behind her.

"Here," said Iimmi, "this is what I wanted to show you." On his bed were
a pile of books, old, but legible. Geo flipped through a few pages.
Suddenly he looked up at Iimmi.

"Hey, what are they doing with _printed_ books?"

"Question number one," said Iimmi. "Now, for question number two. Look
here." He reached over Geo's shoulder and hastened him to one page.

"Why it's the ..." began Geo.

"You're darn right it is," said Iimmi.

          HYMN TO THE GODDESS ARGO

    _Forked in the eye of the bright ash
    there the heart of Argo broke
    and the hand of the goddess would dash
    through the head of flame, and the smoke._

    _Burn the grain speck in the hand
    and batter the stars with singing.
    Hail the height of a man,
    and also the height of a woman._

    _The eyes have imprisoned a vision,
    the ash-tree dribbles with blood.
    Thrust from the gates of the prison,
    smear the yew-tree with mud._

"That must be the full version of the poem I found the missing stanza to
back in the library at Leptar."

"As I was saying," said Iimmi, "Question number two: what is the
relation between the rituals of Hama and the old rituals of Argo.
Apparently this particular branch of the religion of the Goddess
underwent no purge. And no one at Olcse Olwnh was supposed to know about
them."

"I wonder why?" Geo asked.

"That is question number three."

"How did you get a hold of them?"

"Well," said Iimmi, "I sort of suspected they might be here. So I just
asked for them. And I think I've got some answers to those questions."

"Fine. Go ahead."

"We'll start from three, go back to one, and then on to two. Nice and
orderly," said Iimmi. "Why wasn't anybody supposed to know about the
rituals? Simply because they were so similar to the rituals of Hama. You
remember some of the others we found in the abandoned temple? If you
don't, you can refresh your memory right here. The two sets of rituals
run almost parallel, except for a name changed here, a color switched
from black to white, a switch in the vegetative symbolism. I guess what
happened was that when Hama's forces invaded Leptar five hundred years
ago, it didn't take Leptar long to find out the similarity. From the
looks of the City of New Hope, I think it's safe to assume that at one
time or another, say five hundred years ago, Aptor's civilization was
far higher than Leptar's, and probably wouldn't have had too hard a time
beating her in an invasion. So when Leptar captured the first jewel,
and somehow did manage to repel Aptor, the priests of Leptar assumed
that the safest way to avoid infiltration by Hama and Aptor again would
be to make the rituals of the two as different as possible from the ones
of their enemy, Hama.

"The ghouls, the bats, they parallel the stories I've heard other
sailors tell too closely to be accidents. How many people do you think
have been shipwrecked on Aptor and gotten far enough into the place to
see what we've seen, and then gotten off again to tell about it?"

"I can think of two," said Geo.

"Huh?" said Iimmi.

"Snake and Jordde," answered Geo. "Remember that Argo said there had
been spies from Aptor before. And Jordde is definitely one, and I guess
so is Snake."

"True enough," said Iimmi. "I guess that fits into Rule Number One." He
got up from the bed. "Come on. Let's take a walk. I want to see some
sunlight." They went to the wall. Geo pressed it and a triangular panel
slipped back.

When they had rounded four or five turns of hallway, Geo said, "I hope
you can remember where we've been."

"I've got a more or less perfect memory for directions," Iimmi said.

Suddenly the passage opened onto steps, and they were looking out upon a
huge, unrelieved white chamber. Down a set of thirty marble steps
priestesses filed below them in rows, their heads fixed blindly forward.

At the far end was a raised dais with a mammoth statue of a kneeling
woman, sculptured of the same effulgent, agate material. "Where do these
women come from?" whispered Geo. "And where do they keep the men?"

Iimmi shrugged.

Suddenly, the figure of the blind Priestess was beside them.

"Excuse me, ma'am," Iimmi said, sensing her disapproval of their
presence, "we didn't mean to be disrespectful, but we are creatures who
are used to natural day and night. We are used to fresh air, green
things. This underground whiteness is oppressive to us and makes us
restless. Is there any way that you could show us a way into the open?"

"There is not," returned the blind Priestess quietly and motioned them
to follow her from the chamber. "Besides, night is coming on and you are
not creatures who relish darkness."

"The night air and the quiet of evening is refreshing to us," countered
Iimmi.

"What do you know of the night," answered the priestess with faint
cynicism in her low voice. Now they reached the chapel where the friends
had first met after their rescue.

"What can you tell us about the Dark God Hama?" Geo asked.

The blind Priestess shrugged, and sat down on one of the benches. "There
is little to say. Today he is a fiction, he does not exist. There is
only Argo, the One White Goddess."

"But we've heard--" Geo began.

"You were at his abandoned temple," said the Priestess. "You saw
yourselves. That is all that is left of Hama. Ghouls prey on the dust of
his dead saints. Perhaps, somewhere behind the burning mountain a few of
his disciples are left. But Hama is dead in Aptor. You have seen the
remains of his city, the City of New Hope. You have also been the first
ones to go in and return in nearly five hundred years."

"Is that how long the city has been in ruin?" asked Geo.

"It is."

"What can you tell us about the city?" Iimmi said.

The Priestess sighed again. "There was a time," she began, "generations
ago, when Hama was a high God in Aptor. He had many temples,
monasteries, and convents devoted to him. We had few. Except for these
religious sanctuaries, the land was barbaric, wild, uninhabitable for
the most part. There had once been cities in Aptor, but these had been
destroyed even earlier by the Great Fire. All that we had was a
fantastic record of an unbelievable time before the rain of flame of
tremendous power, vast science, and a towering, though degenerate,
civilization. These records were extensive, and entirely housed within
the monasteries. Outside the monasteries, there was only chaos, where
half the children were born dead, and the other half deformed. And with
the monstrous races that sprang up over the island now as a reminder to
us, we declared that the magic contained in these chronicles was evil,
and must never be released to the world again. But the priests of Hama,
decided to use the information in these chronicles, spread it to the
people, and declared they would not commit the same mistakes that had
brought the Great Fire. They opened the books, and the City of New Hope
grew on the far shore of the river. They made giant machines that flew
through the air. They constructed immense boats which could sink into
the sea and emerge hundreds of miles away in another harbor in another
land. They even harnessed for beneficial use the fire metal, uranium,
which had brought such terror to the world before and had brought down
the flames."

"But they made the same mistake as the people before the Great Fire
made?" suggested Iimmi.

"Not exactly," said the Priestess. "That is, they were not so stupid as
to misuse the fire metal which ravaged the world so harshly before.
History is cyclic, not repetitive. A new power was discovered that
dwarfed the significance of the fire metal. It could do all that the
fire metal could do, and more efficiently: destroy cities, or warm
chilly huts in winter; but, it could also work on men's minds. They say,
that before the Great Fire, men wandered the streets of the cities
terrified that flames would descend on them any moment and destroy them.
They panicked, bought flimsy useless contraptions to guard themselves
from the fire. Geo, Iimmi, have you any idea how terrifying it would be
to know that while walking the streets, at any moment, your mind might
be snatched from you, raped, violated, and left broken in your own
skull?

"Only three of these instruments were constructed. But the moment their
existence was made known by a few fantastic demonstrations, the City of
New Hope began the swerve down the arc of its own self-destruction. It
lasted for a year, and ended with the broken wreck you escaped from last
night. During that year invasions were launched on the backward nations
across the sea with whom months before there had been friendly trade.
Civil wars broke out and internal struggles caused the invasions to fall
back to the homeland. The instruments were hopelessly lost, but not
before the bird machines had even dropped bombs on the City of New Hope
itself. The house of the fire metal was broken open to release its death
once more. For a hundred years after the end, say our records, the city
flamed with light from the destroyed power house. During the first
hundred years more and more of our number were born blind because of the
sinking fire in the city. At last we moved underground, but it was too
late." She rose from her seat. "And so you see, Hama destroyed himself.
Today, loyal to Argo, are all the beasts of the air, of the land ... and
of the water."

"What about the--the three instruments?" Geo asked. "What happened to
them?"

The blind Priestess turned to him. "Your guess," she said, smiling, "is
as good as mine." She turned again and glided softly from the room.

When she left, Iimmi said, "Something is fishy."

"But what is it?" said Geo.

"Well, for one thing," said Iimmi, "we know there is a Hama. From the
dream I would say that it's just about the size and organization of this
place."

"Just how big is this place anyway?" Geo asked.

"Want to do some more exploring?"

"Sure," he answered. "Do you think she does know about Hama but was just
pretending?"

"Could be," said Iimmi. They started off down another corridor. "That
bit about going into men's minds with the jewels," Iimmi went on. "It
gives me the creeps."

"It's a creepy thing to watch," said Geo. "Argo used it on Snake the
first time we saw her. It just turns you into an automaton."

"Then it really is our jewels she was talking about."

Stairs cut a white tunnel into the wall before them, and they mounted
upward, coming finally to another corridor. They turned down it and for
the first time saw recognizable doors in the wall. "Hey," said Iimmi,
"maybe one of these goes outside."

"Fine," said Geo. "This place is beginning to get me." He pushed open a
door and stepped in. Except for the flowing white walls, it duplicated
in miniature the basement of the New Edison building. Twin dynamos
whirred and the walls were laced with pipes.

"Nothing in here," said Iimmi.

They tried a door across the hall now. In this one sat a white porcelain
table and floor to ceiling cases of glittering instruments. "I bet this
is the room your arm came off in," Iimmi said.

"Probably," replied Geo.

They came out and continued even farther. In the next room the glow was
dimmer, and there was dust on the walls. Iimmi ran his finger over it
and looked at the gray crescent left on the bleached flesh.

Two huge screens leaned out from the face of a metal machine. A few
dials and a glass meter hung beneath each two yard rounded-rectangle of
opaque glass. In front of each was a stand which held something like a
set of binoculars and what looked like a pair of ear muffs.

"I bet this place hasn't been used since before these girls went blind,"
said Geo.

"It looks it," Iimmi said. He stepped up to one of the screens, the one
with the fewer dials on it, and turned a switch.

"What did you do that for?" Geo asked.

"Why not?" said Iimmi. Suddenly a flickering of colored lights ran over
the screen, swellings of blue, green, shiny scarlets. They blinked.
"That's the first color I've seen since I've been here," Iimmi said. The
colors grayed, dimmed, congealed into forms, and in a moment they were
looking at a bare white room in which stood two barefoot young men. One
was a dark Negro with pale hands. The other had an unruly shock of black
hair and only one arm.

"Hey," gestured Iimmi, and the figure on the screen gestured too.
"That's us." He walked forward and the corresponding figure advanced on
the screen. He flicked a dial and the figures exploded into colors and
then focused again. "What's that?" asked Iimmi.

In a room stood three of the blind women. On one wall was a smaller
screen similar to the one in their own room. The women, of course, were
oblivious to the picture on it, but it was the picture on the screen
that had stopped Geo. It was a face. A man's face.

One of the women had on an ear muff apparatus and was talking into a
small metal rod which she carried with her as she paced.

"But the picture! Don't you recognize him?" demanded Geo.

"It's Jordde!" exclaimed Iimmi. "They must have gotten in contact with
our ship and are arranging to send us back."

"I wish I could hear what they're saying," said Geo.

Iimmi looked around and then picked up the metal ear muffs from the
stand in front of the screen. "That's what she seems to be listening
through," said Iimmi, referring to the Priestess in the picture. "Try
them. Go on." He helped Geo fit them over his ears. "Hear anything?"

Geo listened.

"Yes, of course," the Priestess was saying.

"She is set upon staying in the harbor for three more days, to wait out
the week," reported Jordde. "I am sure she will not remain any longer.
She is still bewildered by me, and the men have become uneasy and may
well mutiny if she stays longer."

"We will dispose of the prisoners this evening. There is no chance of
their returning," stated the Priestess.

"Detain them for three days, and I do not care what you do with them,"
said Jordde. "She does not have the jewels, she does not know my--our
power; she will be sure to leave at the end of the week."

"It's a pity we have no jewels for all our trouble," said the Priestess.
"But at least all three are back in Aptor, and potentially within our
