The spear struck something vastly more resistant than any mushroom could
be. It penetrated. Then the stabbed thing moved as Burl landed upon it,
flinging him off his feet, but he clung to the firmly imbedded weapon.
And if his mouth had opened for a yell of victory as he plunged down,
the nature of the surface on which he found himself, and the kind of
movement he felt, turned that yell into a gasp of horror.

It wasn't the furry body of a butterfly he had landed on; his spear
hadn't pierced such a creature's soft flesh. He had leaped upon the
broad, hard back of a huge, meat-eating, nocturnal beetle. His spear had
pierced not the armor, but the leathery joint-tissue between head and
thorax.

The giant creature rocketed upward with Burl clinging to his spear. He
held fast with an agonized strength. His mount rose from the blackness
of the ground into the many times more terrifying blackness of the air.
It rose up and up. If Burl could have screamed, he would have done so,
but he could not cry out. He could only hold fast, glassy-eyed.

Then he dropped. Wind roared past him. The great insect was clumsy at
flying. All beetles are. Burl's weight and the pain it felt made its
flying clumsier still. There was a semi-liquid crashing and an impact.
Burl was torn loose and hurled away. He crashed into the spongy top of a
mushroom and came to rest with his naked shoulder hanging halfway over
some invisible drop. He struggled.

He heard the whining drone of his attempted prey. It rocketed aloft
again. But there was something wrong with it. With his weight applied to
the spear as he was torn free, Burl had twisted the weapon in the wound.
It had driven deeper, multiplying the damage of the first stab.

The beetle crashed to earth again, nearby. As Burl struggled again, the
mushroom-stalk split and let him gently to the ground.

He heard the flounderings of the great beetle in the darkness. It
mounted skyward once more, its wing-beats no longer making a sustained
note. It thrashed the air irregularly and wildly.

Then it crashed again.

There was seeming silence, save for the steady drip-drip of the rain.
And Burl came out of his half-mad fear: he suddenly realized that he
had slain a victim even more magnificent than a spider, because this
creature was meat.

He found himself astonishedly running toward the spot where the beetle
had last fallen.

But he heard it struggle aloft once more. It was wounded to death. Burl
felt certain of it this time. It floundered in mid-air and crashed
again.

He was within yards of it before he checked himself. Now he was
weaponless, and the gigantic insect flung itself about madly on the
ground, striking out with colossal wings and limbs, fighting it knew not
what. It struggled to fly, crashed, and fought its way off the
ground--ever more weakly--then smashed again into mushrooms. There it
floundered horribly in the darkness.

Burl drew near and waited. It was still, but pain again drove it to a
senseless spasm of activity.

Then it struck against something. There was a ripping noise and
instantly the close, peppery, burning smell of the red dust was in the
air. The beetle had floundered into one of the close-packed red
puffballs, tightly filled with the deadly red spores. The red dust would
not normally have been released at night. With the nightly rain, it
would not travel so far or spread so widely.

Burl fled, panting.

Behind him he heard his victim rise one last time, spurred to
impossible, final struggle by the anguish caused by the breathed-in red
dust. It rose clumsily into the darkness in its death-throes and crashed
to the ground again for the last time.

In time to come, Burl and his followers might learn to use the red-dust
puffballs as weapons--but not how to spread them beyond their normal
range. But now, Burl was frightened. He moved hastily sidewise. The dust
would travel down-wind. He got out of its possible path.

There could be no exultation where the red dust was. Burl suddenly
realized what had happened to him. He had been carried aloft an unknown
though not-great distance, in an unknown direction. He was separated
from his tribe, with no faintest idea how to find them in the darkness.
And it was night.

He crouched under the nearest huge toadstool and waited for the dawn,
listening dry-throated for the sound of death coming toward him through
the night.

But only the wind-beats of night-fliers came to his ears, and the
discordant notes of gray-bellied truffle-beetles as they roamed the
mushroom thickets, seeking the places beneath which--so their adapted
instincts told them--fungoid dainties, not too much unlike the truffles
of Earth, awaited the industrious miner. And, of course, there was that
eternal, monotonous dripping of the raindrops, falling at irregular
intervals from the sky.

Red puffballs did not burst at night. They would not burst anyhow,
except at one certain season of their growth. But Burl and his folk had
so far encountered the over-hasty ones, bursting earlier than most. The
time of ripeness was very nearly here, though. When day came again, and
the chill dampness of the night was succeeded by the warmth of the
morning, almost the first thing Burl saw in the gray light was a tall
spouting of brownish-red stuff leaping abruptly into the air from a
burst red parchment-like sphere.

He stood up and looked anxiously all around. Here and there, all over
the landscape, slowly and at intervals, the plumes of fatal red sprang
into the air. There was nothing quite like it anywhere else. An ancient
man, inhabiting Earth, might have likened the appearance to that of a
scattered and leisurely bombardment. But Burl had no analogy for them.

He saw something hardly a hundred yards from where he had hidden during
the night. The dead beetle lay there, crumpled and limp. Burl eyed it
speculatively. Then he saw something that filled him with elation. The
last crash of the beetle to the ground had driven his spear deeply
between the joints of the corselet and neck. Even if the red dust had
not finished the creature, the spear-point would have ended its life.

He was thrilled once more by his superlative greatness. He made due note
that he was a mighty slayer. He took the antennae as proof of his valor
and hacked off a great barb-edged leg for meat. And then he remembered
that he did not know how to find his fellow-tribesmen. He had no idea
which way to go.

Even a civilized man would have been at a loss, though he would have
hunted for an elevation from which to look for the cliff hiding-place of
the tribe. But Burl had not yet progressed so far. His wild ride of the
night before had been at random, and the chase after the wounded beetle
no less dictated by chance. There was no answer.

He set off anxiously, searching everywhere. But he had to be alert for
all the dangers of an inimical world while keeping, at the same time, an
extremely sharp eye out for bursting red puffballs.

At the end of an hour he thought he saw familiar things. Then he
recognized the spot. He had come back to the dead beetle. It was already
the center of a mass of small black bodies which pulled and hacked at
the tough armor, gnawing out great lumps of flesh to be carried to the
nearest ant-city.

Burl set off again, very carefully avoiding any place that he recognized
as having been seen that morning. Sometimes he walked through
mushroom-thickets--dangerous places to be in--and sometimes over
relatively clear ground colored exotically with varicolored fungi. More
than once he saw the clouds of red stuff spurting in the distance. Deep
anxiety filled him. He had no idea that there were such things as points
of the compass. He knew only that he needed desperately to find his
tribesfolk again.

They, of course, had given him up for dead. He had vanished in the
night. Old Tama complained of him shrilly. The night, to them, meant
death. Jon quaked watchfully all through it. When Burl did not come to
the feast of mushroom that Jon and Dor had brought back, they sought
him. They even called timidly into the darkness. They heard the
throbbing of huge wings as a great creature rose desperately into the
sky, but they did not associate that sound with Burl. If they had, they
would have been instantly certain of his fate.

As it was, the tribe's uneasiness grew into terror which rapidly turned
to despair. They began to tremble, wondering what they would do with no
bold chieftain to guide them. He was the first man to command allegiance
from others in much too long a period, on the forgotten planet, but the
submission of his followers had been the more complete for its novelty.
His loss was the more appalling. Burl had mistaken the triumphant shout
of the foragers. He'd thought it independence of him--rivalry. Actually,
the men dared to shout only because they felt secure under his
leadership. When they accepted the fact that he had vanished--and to
disappear in the night had always meant death--their old fears and
timidity returned. To them it was added despair.

They huddled together and whispered to one another of their fright. They
waited in trembling silence through all the long night. Had a
hunting-spider appeared, they would have fled in as many directions as
there were people, and undoubtedly all would have perished. But day came
again, and they looked into each other's eyes and saw the self-same
fear. Saya was probably the most pitiful of the group. Her face was
white and drawn beyond that of any one else.

They did not move when day brightened. They remained about the
bee-tunnels, speaking in hushed tones, huddled together, searching all
the horizon for enemies. Saya would not eat, but sat still, staring
before her in numbed grief. Burl was dead.

Atop the low cliff a red puffball glistened in the morning light. Its
tough skin was taut and bulging, resisting the pressure of the spores
within. Slowly, as the morning wore on, some of the moisture that kept
the skin stretchable dried. The parchment-like stuff contracted. The
tautness of the spore-packed envelope grew greater. It became
insupportable.

With a ripping sound, the tough skin split across and a rush of the
compressed spores shot skyward.

The tribesmen saw and cried out and fled. The red stuff drifted down
past the cliff-edge. It drifted toward the humans. They ran from it. Jon
and Tama ran fastest. Jak and Cori and the other were not far behind.
Saya trailed, in her despair.

Had Burl been there, matters would have been different. He had already
such an ascendancy over the minds of the others that even in panic they
would have looked to see what he did. And he would have dodged the
slowly drifting death-cloud by day, as he had during the night. But his
followers ran blindly.

As Saya fled after the others she heard shrieks of fright to the left
and ran faster. She passed by a thick mass of distorted fungi in which
there was a sudden stirring and panic lent wings to her feet. She
fled blindly, panting. Ahead was a great mass of stuff--red
puffballs--showing here and there among great fanlike growths, some
twelve feet high, that looked like sponges.

She fled past them and swerved to hide herself from anything that might
be pursuing by sight. Her foot slipped on the slimy body of a shell-less
snail and she fell heavily, her head striking a stone. She lay still.

Almost as if at a signal a red puffball burst among the fanlike growths.
A thick, dirty-red cloud of dust shot upward, spread and billowed and
began to settle slowly toward the ground again. It moved as it settled
flowing over the inequalities of die ground as a monstrous snail or
leach might have done, sucking from all breathing creatures the life
they had within them. It was a hundred yards away, then fifty, then
thirty....

Had any member of the tribe watched it, the red dust might have seemed
malevolently intelligent. But when the edges of the dust-cloud were no
more than twenty yards from Saya's limp body, an opposing breeze sprang
up. It was a vagrant, fitful little breeze that halted the red cloud and
threw it into some confusion, sending it in a new direction. It passed
Saya without hurting her, though one of its misty tendrils reached out
as if to snatch at her in slow-motion. But it passed her by.

Saya lay motionless on the ground. Only her breast rose and fell
shallowly. A tiny pool of red gathered near her head.

Some thirty feet from where she lay, there were three miniature
toadstools in a clump, bases so close together that they seemed but one.
From between two of them, however, two tufts of reddish thread appeared.
They twinkled back and forth and in and out. As if reassured, two
slender antennae followed, then bulging eyes and a small, black body
with bright-red scalloped markings upon it.

It was a tiny beetle no more than eight inches long--a sexton or
burying-beetle. Drawing near Saya's body it scurried onto her flesh. It
went from end to end of her figure in a sort of feverish haste. Then it
dived into the ground beneath her shoulder, casting back a little shower
of hastily-dug dirt as it disappeared.

Ten minutes later, another small creature appeared, precisely like the
first. Upon the heels of the second came a third. Each made the same
hasty examination and dived under her unmoving form.

Presently the ground seemed to billow at a spot along Saya's side and
then at another. Ten minutes after the arrival of the third beetle, a
little rampart had reared itself all about Saya's body, following her
outlines precisely. Then her body moved slightly, in little jerks,
seeming to settle perhaps half an inch into the ground.

The burying-beetles were of that class of creatures which exploited the
bodies of the fallen. Working from below, they excavated the earth. When
there was a hollow space below they turned on their backs and thrust up
with their legs, jerking at the body until it sank into the space they
had made ready. The process would be repeated until at last all their
dead treasures had settled down below the level of the surrounding
ground. The loosened dirt then fell in at the sides, completing the
inhumation. Then, in the underground darkness, it was the custom for the
beetles to feast magnificently, gorging themselves upon the food they
had hidden from other scavengers--and of course rearing their young also
upon its substance.

Ants and flies were rivals of these beetles and not infrequently the
sexton-beetles came upon carrion after ants had taken their toll, and
when it already swarmed with maggots. But in this case Saya was not
dead. The fact that she still lived, though unconscious, was the factor
that had given the sexton-beetles this splendid opportunity.

She breathed gently and irregularly, her face drawn with the sorrow of
the night before, while the desperately hurrying beetles swarmed about
beneath her body, channelling away the soil so she would sink lower and
lower into it. She descended slowly, a half-inch by a half-inch. The
bright-red tufts of thread appeared again and a beetle made its way to
the open air. It moved hastily about, inspecting the progress of the
work.

It dived below again. Another inch and, after a long time, another, were
excavated.

Matters still progressed when Burl stepped out from a group of
overshadowing toadstools and halted. He cast his eyes over the landscape
and was struck by its familiarity. He was, in fact, very near the spot
he had left the night before in that maniacal ride on the back of a
flying beetle. He moved back and forth, trying to account for the
feeling of recognition.

He saw the low cliff, then, and moved eagerly toward it, passing within
fifty feet of Saya's body, now more than half-buried in the ground. The
loose dirt around the outline of her figure was beginning to topple in
little rivulets upon her. One of her shoulders was already half-screened
from view. Burl passed on, unseeing.

He hurried a little. In a moment he recognized his location exactly.
There were the mining-bee burrows. There was a thrown-away lump of
edible mushroom, cast aside as the tribesfolk fled.

His feet stirred up a fine dust, and he stopped short. A red puffball
had burst here. It fully accounted for the absence of the tribe, and
Burl sweated in sudden fear. He thought instantly of Saya. He went
carefully to make sure. This was, absolutely, the hiding place of the
tribe. There was another mushroom-fragment. There was a spear, thrown
down by one of the men in his flight. Red dust had settled upon the
spear and the mushroom-fragments.

Burl turned back, hurrying again, but taking care to disturb the dust no
more than he could possibly help.

The little excavation into which Saya was sinking inch by inch was not
in his path. Her body no longer lay above the ground, but in it. Burl
went by, frantic with anxiety about the tribe, but about Saya most of
all.

Her body quivered and sank a fraction into the ground. Half a dozen
small streams of earth were tumbling upon her. In minutes she would be
