



ANIMAL ORIGIN OF PETROLEUM AND PARAFFIN.


R. Zaloziecki, in _Dingl. Polyt. Jour._, gives a lengthy physical and
chemical argument in favor of the modern view that petroleum and
paraffin owe their origin to animal sources; that they are formed from
animal remains in a manner strictly analogous to that of the formation
of ordinary coal from wood and other vegetable debris. For geological
as well as chemical reasons, the author holds that Mendeleeff's theory
of their igneous origin is untenable, pointing out that the
hydrocarbons could not have been formed by the action of water
percolating through clefts in the gradually solidifying crust until it
reached the molten metallic carbides, as these clefts could only occur
where complete solidification had taken place, and between this point
and the metallic stratum a considerable space would be taken up by
semi-solid, slag-like material which would be quite impervious to
water. Under the conditions, too, existing beneath the surface of the
earth, such polymerization as is necessary to account for the presence
of the different classes of hydrocarbons found in petroleum is
scarcely credible.

On the other hand it is to be specially noticed that, with a few
unimportant exceptions, all bituminous deposits are found in the
sedimentary rocks, and that just as these are constantly changing in
composition, so the organic matter present changes, there being a
definite relationship between the chemical constitution of the
petroleum and the age of the strata in which it is found. It is almost
certain that in the most recent alluvial formations no oil is ever
found, its latest appearance being in the rocks of the tertiary
period, the place where the solid paraffin is almost exclusively met
with; thus helping to show that the latter has been formed from the
decomposition of the oil, and is not a residue remaining after the oil
has been distilled off. To this conclusion the fact also strongly
points, that the paraffin is much simpler in constitution, purer, and
often of far lighter color than the crude oil, which could not be the
case if it were the original substance.

On examining by the aid of a map the position of the chief oil-bearing
localities it will be noticed that the most prolific spots follow
fairly accurately the contour lines of the country, so that at one
time they formed in all probability a coast line whereon would be
concentrated for climatic reasons most of the animal life both of the
land and sea. During succeeding generations their dead bodies would
accumulate in enormous quantities and be buried in the slowly
depositing sand and mud, till, owing to the gradual alterations of
level, the sea no longer reached the same point. This theory is borne
out by the fact that oil deposits are usually found in marine
sediments, sea fossils being frequently met with. The first process of
the decomposition of the animal remains would consist in the formation
of ammonia and nitrogenous bases, the action being aided by the
presence of air, moisture, and micro-organisms, at the same time,
owing to the well known antiseptic properties of salt, the
decomposition would go on slowly, allowing time for more sand and
inorganic matter to be deposited. In this way the decomposing matter
would be gradually protected from the action of the air, and finally
the various fatty substances would be found mixed with large amounts
of salt, under considerable pressure, and at a somewhat high
temperature. From this adipocere, fatty acids would be gradually
formed, the glycerol being washed away, and finally the acids would be
decomposed by the pressure into hydrocarbons and free carbonic acid
gas. That many of these hydrocarbons would be solid at ordinary
temperatures, forming the so-called mineral wax, which exists in many
places in large quantities, is much easier to imagine, in the light of
modern chemical knowledge, than that the fatty acids were at once
split up into the simpler liquid hydrocarbons, to be afterward
condensed into the more complex molecular forms of the solid
substance.

In this way from animal matter are in all probability formed the vast
petroleum deposits, the three substances, adipocere, ozokerite, and
petroleum oil being produced in chronological order, just as lignite,
brown coal and coal are formed by the gradual decomposition of
vegetable remains.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ORIGIN OF PETROLEUM.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Abstract of a paper read before the British
  Association, Cardiff meeting, 1891, Section G.]

By O.C.D. Ross, M.Inst.C.E.


Petroleum is one of the most widely distributed substances in nature,
but the question how it was originally produced has never yet been
satisfactorily determined, and continues a problem for philosophers.
In 1889 the total production exceeded 2,600,000,000 gallons, or about
10,000,000 tons, and, at fourpence per gallon, was worth about
L44,000,000, while the recognition of its superior utility as an
economical source of light, heat, and power steadily increases; but,
notwithstanding its importance in industry, the increasing abundance
of the foreign supply, and the ever-widening area of production,
practical men in England continue to distrust its permanence, and
owing to the mystery surrounding its origin, and the paucity of
indications where and how to undertake the boring of wells, they
hesitate to seek for it in this country, or even to extend the use of
it whenever that would involve alterations of existing machinery. The
object of this paper is to suggest an explanation of the mystery which
seems calculated to dissipate that distrust, since it points to very
abundant stores, both native and foreign, yet undiscovered, and even
in some localities to daily renovated provisions of this remarkable
oil.

The theories of its origin suggested by Reichenbach, Berthelot,
Mendeleeff, Peckham, and others, made no attempt to account for the
exceeding variety in its chemical composition, in its specific
gravity, its boiling points, etc., and are all founded on some
hypothetical process which differs from any with which we are
acquainted; but modern geologists are agreed that, as a rule, the
records of the earth's history should be read in accordance with those
laws of nature which continue in force at the present day, e.g., the
decomposition of fish and cetaceous animals could not now produce oil
containing paraffin. Hence we can hardly believe it was possible
thousands or millions of years ago, if it can be proved that any of
the processes of nature with which we are familiar is calculated to
produce it.

The chief characteristics of petroleum strata are enumerated as:

    I. The existence of adjoining beds of limestone, gypsum, etc.

    II. The evidence of volcanic action in close proximity to
    them.

    III. The presence of salt water in the wells.

I. All writers have noticed the presence of limestone close to
petroleum fields in the United States and Canada, in the Caucasus, in
Burma, etc., but they have been most impressed by its being
"fossiliferous," or shell limestone, and have drawn the erroneous
inference that the animal matter once contained in those shells
originated petroleum; but no fish oil ever contained paraffin. On the
other hand, the fossil shells are carbonate of lime, and, as such,
capable of producing petroleum under conditions such as many limestone
beds have been subjected to in all ages of the earth's history. All
limestone rocks were formed under water, and are mainly composed of
calcareous shells, corals, encrinites, and foraminfera--the latter
similar to the foraminfera of "Atlantic ooze" and of English chalk
beds. Everywhere, under the microscope, the original connection of
limestone with organic matter--its organic parentage, so to speak, and
cousinship with the animal and vegetable kingdoms--is conspicuous.
When pure it contains 12 per cent. of carbon.

Now petroleum consists largely of carbon, its average composition
being 85 per cent. of carbon and 15 per cent. of hydrogen, and in the
limestone rocks of the United Kingdom alone there is a far larger
accumulation of carbon than in all the coal measures the world
contains. A range of limestone rock 100 miles in length by 10 miles in
width, and 1,000 yards in depth, would contain 743,000 million tons of
carbon, or sufficient to provide carbon for 875,000 million tons of
petroleum. Deposits of oil-bearing shale have also limestone close at
hand; e.g., coral rag underlies Kimmeridge clay, as it also underlies
the famous black shale in Kentucky, which is extraordinarily rich in
oil.

II. As evidence of volcanic action in close proximity to petroleum
strata, the mud volcanoes at Baku and in Burma are described, and a
sulphur mine in Spain is mentioned (with which the writer is well
acquainted), situated near an extinct volcano, where a perpetual gas
flame in a neighboring chapel and other symptoms indicate that
petroleum is not far off. While engaged in studying the geological
conditions of this mine, the author observed that Dr. Christoff
Bischoff records in his writings that he had produced sulphur in his
own laboratory by passing hot volcanic gases through chalk, which,
when expressed in a chemical formula, leads at once to the postulate
that, in addition to sulphur, _ethylene_, and all its homologues
(C_{n}H_{2n}), which are the oils predominating at Baku, would be
produced by treating:

  2, 3, 4,  5 equivs. of carbonate of lime (limestone) with
  2, 3, 4,  5   "        sulphurous acid (SO_{2}) and
  4, 6, 8, 10  "         sulphureted hydrogen (H_{2}S);

and that marsh gas and its homologues, which are the oils
predominating in Pennsylvania, would be produced by treating:

  1, 2, 3, 4, 5 equivs. of carbonate of lime with
  1, 2, 3, 4, 5   "        sulphurous acid and
  3, 5, 7, 9, 11  "        sulphureted hydrogen.

Thus we find that:

  Carbonate of lime, 2CaCO_{3},  }         { 2(CaSO.H_{2}O) (gypsum),
  Sulphurous acid, 2SO_{2}, and  }  yield  { 4S (sulphur), and
  Sulphureted hydrogen, 4H_{2}S, }         { C_{2}H_{4}, which is
                                           { _ethylene_.

And that:

  Carbonate of lime, CaCO_{3}    }         { (CaSO_{4}.H_{2}O) (gypsum),
  Sulphurous acid, SO_{2}, and   }  yield  { 3S (sulphur) and
  Sulphureted hydrogen, 3H_{2}S, }         { CH4, which is marsh gas.

So that these and all their homologues, in fact petroleum in all its
varieties, would be produced in nature by the action of volcanic gases
on limestone.

But much the most abundant of the volcanic gases appear at the surface
as steam, and petroleum seems to have been more usually produced
without sulphurous acid, and with part of the sulphureted hydrogen
(H_{2}S) replaced by H_{2}O (steam) or H_{2}O_{2} (peroxide of
hydrogen), which is the product that results from the combination of
sulphureted hydrogen and sulphurous acid:

    (H_{2}S + SO_{2} == H_{2}O_{2} + 2S).

It is a powerful oxidizing agent, and it converts sulphurous into
sulphuric acid. Thus:

  CaCO_{3}  }         { CaSO_{4}.H_{2}O (gypsum)
  H_{2}S,   }  yield  { and
  2H_{2}O,  }         { CH_{4}, which is marsh gas.

And

  2CaCO_{3},    }         { 2CaSO_{4}.H_{2}O
  2H_{2}S,      }  yield  { and
  2H_{2}O_{2},  }         { C_{2}H_{4}, which is _ethylene._

Tables are given showing the formulae for the homologues of ethylene
and marsh gas resulting from the increase in regular gradation of the
same constituents.

   _Formulae Showing how Ethylene and its Homologues
   (C_{n}H_{2}{n}) are Produced by the Action of the Volcanic
   Gases H_{2}S and H_{2}O_{2} on Limestone._

Carbonate  Sulphureted Peroxide of                 Ethylene and
 of lime.   hydrogen.   hydrogen.      Gypsum.    its homologues.

 2CaCO3  +   2H2S  +   2H2O2 yield 2(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C2H4  ethylene
                                                         (gaseous).
 3CaCO3  +   3H2S  +   3H2O2   "   3(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C3H6
 4CaCO3  +   4H2S  +   4H2O2   "   4(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C4H8
 5CaCO3  +   5H2S  +   5H2O2   "   5(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C5H10
 6CaCO3  +   6H2S  +   6H2O2   "   6(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C6H12
                                                             Boiling
                                                             point.
 7CaCO3  +   7H2S  +   7H2O2   "   7(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C7H14     --
 8CaCO3  +   8H2S  +   8H2O2   "   8(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C8H16    189 deg.C.
 9CaCO3  +   9H2S  +   9H2O2   "   9(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C9H18    136 deg.C.
10CaCO3  +  10H2S  +  10H2O2   "  10(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C10H20   160 deg.C.
11CaCO3  +  11H2S  +  11H2O2   "  11(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C11H22   180 deg.C.
12CaCO3  +  12H2S  +  12H2O2   "  12(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C12H24   196 deg.C.
13CaCO3  +  13H2S  +  13H2O2   "  13(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C13H26   240 deg.C.
14CaCO3  +  14H2S  +  14H2O2   "  14(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C14H28   247 deg.C.
15CaCO3  +  15H2S  +  15H2O2   "  15(CaSO4.H2O)  +  C15H30    --

It is explained that these effects must have occurred, not at periods
of acute volcanic eruptions, but in conditions which maybe, and have
been, observed at the present time, wherever there are active
solfataras or mud volcanoes at work. Descriptions of the action of
solfataras by the late Sir Richard Burton and by a British consul in
Iceland are quoted, and also a paragraph from Lyall's "Principles of
Geology," in which he remarks of the mud volcanoes at Girgenti
(Sicily) that _carbureted hydrogen_ is discharged from them, sometimes
with great violence, and that they are known to have been casting out
water, mixed with mud and _bitumen_, with the same activity as now for
the last fifteen centuries. Probably at all these solfataras, if the
gases traverse limestone, fresh deposits of oil-bearing strata are
accumulating, and the same volcanic action has been occurring during
many successive geological periods and millions of years; so that it
is difficult to conceive limits to the magnitude of the stores of
petroleum which may be awaiting discovery in the subterranean
depths.[2]

  [Footnote 2: Professor J. Le Conte, when presiding recently at the
  International Geological Congress at Washington, mentioned that in
  the United States extensive lava floods have been observed,
  covering areas from 10,000 to 100,000 square miles in extent and
  from 2,000 to 4,000 feet deep. We have similar lava flows and
  ashes in the North of England, in Scotland, and in Ireland,
  varying from 3,000 to 6,000 feet in depth. In the Lake District
  they are nearly 12,000 feet deep. Solfataras are active during the
  intermediate, or so-called "dormant," periods which occur between
  acute volcanic eruptions.]

Gypsum may also be an indication of oil-bearing strata, for the
substitution in limestone of sulphuric for carbonic acid can only be
accounted for by the action of these hot sulphurous gases. Gypsum is
found extensively in the petroleum districts of the United States, and
it underlies the rock salt beds at Middlesboro, where, on being
pierced, it has given passage to oil gas, which issues abundantly,
mixed with brine, from a great depth.

III. Besides the space occupied by "natural gas," which is very
extensive, 17,000 million gallons of petroleum have been raised in
America since 1860, and that quantity must have occupied more than
100,000,000 cubic yards, a space equal to a subterranean cavern 100
yards wide by 20 feet deep, and 82 miles in length, and it is
suggested that beds of "porous sandstone" could hardly have contained
so much; while vast receptacles may exist, carved by volcanic water
out of former beds of rock salt adjoining the limestone, which would
account for the brine that usually accompanies petroleum. It is
further suggested that when no such vacant spaces were available, the
hydrocarbon vapors would be absorbed into, and condensed in,
contiguous clays and shales, and perhaps also in beds of coal, only
partially consolidated at the time.

There is an extensive bituminous limestone formation in Persia,
containing 20 per cent. of bitumen, and the theory elaborated in the
paper would account for bitumen and oil having been found in Canada
and Tennessee embedded in limestone, which fact is cited by Mr.
Peckham as favoring his belief that some petroleums are a "product of
the decomposition of animal remains."

Above all, this theory accounts for the many varieties in the chemical
composition of paraffin oils in accordance with ordinary operations of
nature during successive geological periods.--_Chem. News._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE COLORADO DESERT LAKE.


Mr. J.J. Mcgillivray, who has been for many years in the United States
mineral survey service, has some interesting things to say about the
overflow of the Colorado desert, which has excited so much comment,
and about which so many different stories have been told:

"None of the papers, so far as I know," said Mr. McGillivray, "have
described with much accuracy or detail the interesting thing which has
happened in the Colorado desert or have stated how it happened. The
Colorado desert lies a short distance northwest of the upper end of
the Gulf of California, and contains not far from 2,500 square miles.
The Colorado River, which has now flooded it, has been flowing along
to the east of it, emptying into the Gulf of California. The surface
of the desert is almost all level and low, some of it below the sea
level. Some few hundreds of years ago it was a bay making in from the
Gulf of California, and then served as the outlet of the Colorado
River. But the river carried a good deal of sediment, and in time made
a bar, which slowly and surely shut off the sea on the south, leaving
only a narrow channel for the escape of the river, which cut its way
out, probably at some time when it was not carrying much sediment.
Then the current became more rapid and cut its way back into the land,
and, in doing this, did not necessarily choose the lowest place, but
rather the place where the formation of the land was soft and easily
cut away by the action of the water.

"While the river was cutting its way back it was, of course, carrying
more or less sediment, and this was left along the banks, building
them all the time higher, and confining the river more securely in its
bounds. That is the Colorado River as we have known it ever since its
discovery. Meantime, the water left in the shallow lake, cut off from
the flow of the river, gradually evaporated--a thing that would take
but a few years in that country, where the heat is intense and the
humidity very low. That left somewhere about 2,000 miles of desert
land, covered with a deposit of salt from the sea water which had
evaporated, and most of it below the level of the sea. That is the
Colorado desert as it has been known since its discovery.

"Then, last spring, came the overflow which has brought about the
present state of affairs. The river was high and carrying an enormous
amount of sediment in proportion to the quantity of water. This
gradually filled up the bed of the stream and caused it to overflow
its banks, breaking through into the dry lake where it had formerly
flowed. The fact that the water is salt, which excited much comment at
the time the overflow was first discovered, is, of course, due to the
fact that the salt in the sea water which evaporated hundreds of years
ago has remained there all the time, and is now once more in solution.

"The desert will, no doubt, continue to be a lake and the outlet of
the river unless the breaks in the banks of the river are dammed by
artificial means, which seems hardly possible, as the river has been
flowing through the break in the stream 200 feet wide, four feet deep,
and flowing at a velocity of five feet a second.

"It is an interesting fact to note that the military survey made in
1853 went over this ground and predicted the very thing which has now
happened. The flooding of the desert will be a good thing for the
surrounding country, for it does away with a large tract of absolutely
useless land, so barren that it is impossible to raise there what the
man in Texas said they mostly raised in his town, and it will increase
the humidity of the surrounding territory. Nature has done with this
piece of waste land what it has often been proposed to do by private
enterprise or by public appropriation. Congress has often been asked
to make an appropriation for that purpose."

Mr. McGillivray had also some interesting things to say about Death
Valley, which he surveyed.

"It has been called a _terra incognita_ and a place where no human
being could live. Well, it is bad enough, but perhaps not quite so bad
as that. The great trouble is the scarcity of water and the intense
heat. But many prospecting parties go there looking for veins of ore
and to take out borax. The richest borax mines in the world are found
there. The valley is about 75 miles long by 10 miles wide. The lowest
point is near the center, where it is about 150 ft. below the level of
the sea. Just 15 miles west of this central point is Telescope peak,
11,000 ft. above the sea, and 15 miles east is Mt. Le Count, in the
Funeral mountains, 8,000 ft. high. The valley runs almost due north
and south, which is one reason for the extreme heat. The only stream
of water in or near the valley flows into its upper end and forms a
marsh in the bed of the valley. This marsh gives out a horrible odor
of sulphureted hydrogen, the gas which makes a rotten egg so
offensive. Where the water of this stream comes from is not very
definitely known, but in my opinion it comes from Owen's lake, beyond
the Telescope mountains to the west, flowing down into the valley by
some subterranean passage. The same impurities found in the stream are
also found in the lake, where the water is so saturated with salt,
boracic acid, etc., that one can no more sink in it than in the water
of the Great Salt lake; and I found it so saturated that after
swimming in it a little while the skin all over my body was gnawed and
made very sore by the acids. Another reason why I think the water of
the stream enters the valley by some fixed subterranean source is the
fact that, no matter what the season, the flow from the springs that
feed the marsh is always exactly the same.

"The heat there is intense. A man cannot go an hour without water
without becoming insane. While we were surveying there, we had the
same wooden cased thermometer that is used by the signal service. It
was hung in the shade on the side of our shed, with the only stream in
the country flowing directly under it, and it repeatedly registered
130 deg.; and for 48 hours in 1883, when I was surveying there, the
thermometer never once went below 104 deg.."--_Boston Herald._

       *       *       *       *       *




HEMLOCK AND PARSLEY.

By W.W. BAILEY.


The study of the order Umbelliferae presents peculiar difficulties to
the beginner, for the flowers are uniformly small and strikingly
similar throughout the large and very natural group. The family
distinctions or features are quite pronounced and unmistakable, and it
is the determination of the genera which presents obstacles--serious,
indeed, but not insurmountable. "By their fruits shall ye know them."

The Umbelliferae, as we see them here, are herbaceous, with hollow,
often striated stems, usually more or less divided leaves, and no
stipules. Occasionally we meet a genus, like Eryngium or Hydrocotyle,
with leaves merely toothed or lobed. The petioles are expanded into
sheaths; hence the leaves wither on the stem. The flowers are usually
arranged in simple or compound umbels, and the main and subordinate
clusters may or may not be provided with involucres and involucels. To
this mode of arrangement there are exceptions. In marsh-penny-wort
(Hydrocotyle) the umbels are in the axils of the leaves, and scarcely
noticeable; in Eryngium and Sanicula they are in heads. The calyx is
coherent with the two-celled ovary, and the border is either obsolete
or much reduced. There are five petals inserted on the ovary, and
external to a fleshy disk. Each petal has its tip inflexed, giving it
an obcordate appearance. The common colors of the corolla are white,
yellow, or some shade of blue. Alternating with the petals, and
inserted with them, are the five stamens.

The fruit, upon which so much stress is laid in the study of the
family, is compound, of two similar parts or carpels, each of which
contains a seed. In ripening the parts separate, and hang divergent
from a hair-like prolongation of the receptacle known as the
gynophore. Each half fruit (mericarp) is tipped by a persistent style,
and marked by vertical ribs, between or under which lie, in many
genera, the oil tubes or vittae. These are channels containing aromatic
and volatile oil. In examination the botanist makes delicate cross
sections of these fruits under a dissecting microscope, and by the
shape of the fruit and seed within, and by the number and position of
the ribs and oil tubes, is able to locate the genus. It, of course,
requires skill and experience to do this, but any commonly intelligent
class can learn the process. It goes without saying, and as a
corollary to what has already been stated, that these plants should
always be collected in full fruit; the flowers are comparatively
unimportant. Any botanist would be justified in declining to name one
