heavy lever, which revolves into a cut made in the rear breech of the
gun. The gas check consists of a pad made of two steel plates or cups,
between which is a pad of asbestos and mutton suet formed under heavy
pressure. The rifling consists of narrow grooves and bands, 45 of
each. The depth of the groove is six one-hundredths of an inch.

Although the gun is designed for a charge of 100 pounds, it is
believed that it can be increased to 105 pounds without giving
dangerous pressure, and the intention is to increase the charge to
that amount when the new powder is received from Du Pont.

The following is a very full synopsis of the official report of the
preliminary firings--13 rounds--with this gun:

The first seven rounds were fired with German cocoa powder, which was
received from Watervliet Arsenal. There were two kinds of cartridges,
one kind weighing 85 pounds, and having 30 grains in each layer, the
other weighing 100 lb., and having 27 grains in each layer. In two of
the first seven rounds the weight of the charge was 65 pounds, the
projectiles weighing 182 and 286 pounds; in the next two rounds
charges of 85 pounds were fired, the projectiles, as before, weighing
182 and 286 pounds, while in the last three of the rounds fired with
cocoa powder the charge was 100 lb., while the weight of the
projectile was 182, 235, and 286 pounds. At the seventh round was
fired the normal charge, 100 lb. of powder and a projectile weighing
286 pounds, for which the gun was designed. The mean pressure for this
round, determined by two crusher gauges, was 32,800 pounds, and the
velocity at 150 feet was 1,787 feet.

Two kinds of Du Pont's brown prismatic powder, marked P.A. and P.I.,
were then fired. With the normal charge of P.A. powder (round 12 of
the record), the mean pressure was 35,450 pounds, the velocity at 150
feet was 1,812 feet. For P.I. powder (round 13 of the record), the
pressure was 26,925 pounds, the velocity was 1,702 feet, and a
considerable amount of unconsumed powder was ejected, showing that the
P.I. powder is not a suitable one for this piece. The highest pressure
indicated with the normal charge of P.A. powder was 36,200 pounds,
exceeding by 1,200 pounds the provisional limit of pressure.

At the fifth round the breech block opened with some difficulty, and
an examination showed that the resistance resulted from the diametral
enlargement of the rear plate. Directions have been given to correct
this defect. The star gauge records show that no material change took
place in the diameter of the chamber or the bore. From 30 inches to 54
inches (measured from base of the breech), there was a diminution in
diameter of from 0.001 in. to 0.002 in.; in rear of 30 inches there
was no change. No enlargement in the shot chamber exceeded 0.001 in.
From the bottom of the bore (the beginning of the rifling) to the
muzzle the average enlargements were as follows: in. to 6 in., 0.005
in.; 7 in. to 14 in., 0.003 in.; 15 in. to 29 in., 0.002 in.; 30 in.
to muzzle, 0.002 to 0.001 in.

After the third round the joint between the D. and D. rings opened
slightly on the top, and measured after the 13th round showed that the
opening was about 0.004 in. wide. It cannot at present be stated
whether or not this opening increased during firing, but the defect
has been noted and will be carefully observed. Enough cocoa powder
remains to allow a comparison to be made with such brown prismatic
powder as may be adopted finally. No firing has been done as yet to
test the best position for the bands, but it will take place as soon
as enough of some standard powder is obtained to fire ten consecutive
rounds.--_Army and Navy Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *




COMBUSTION, FIRE-BOXES, AND STEAM BOILERS.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Address before the June Convention of the Master
  Mechanics' Association.]

By JOHN A. COLEMAN.


Mr. Chairman and gentlemen: I was rash enough some time ago to promise
to prepare a paper for this occasion, the fulfillment of which prior
engagements have absolutely prevented.

I would greatly prefer to be let off altogether, but I do not like to
break down when expected to do anything; and if you have the patience
to listen for a few minutes to the reflections of an "outsider," I
will endeavor to put what I have to say in as concise form as I can,
in such manner as will do no harm, even if it does no good.

For many years I was connected with steam engineering. I was once with
the Corliss Steam Engine Company, and afterward was the agent of Mr.
Joseph Harrison, of Russian fame, for the introduction of his safety
boilers.

That brought me into contact with the heavy manufacturers throughout
the Eastern States, and during that long experience I was particularly
impressed with a peculiarity common to the mill owners, which, I
believe it may be said with truth, is equally common to those
interested in locomotive engineering, namely, how much we overlook
common, every-day facts. For instance, we burn coal; that is, we think
we do, and boilers are put into mills and upon railroads, and we
suppose we are burning coal under them, when in reality we are only
partially doing so. We think that because coal is consumed it
necessarily is burned, but such is frequently very far from the fact.

I wish upon the present occasion to make merely a sort of general
statement of what I conceive to be combustion, and what I conceive to
be a boiler, and then to try to make a useful application of these
ideas to the locomotive.

Treating first the subject of combustion, let us take the top of the
grate-bars as our starting point. When we shovel coal upon the grate
bars and ignite it, what happens first? We separate the two
constituents of coal, the carbon from the hydrogen. We make a gas
works. Carbon by itself will burn no more than a stone; neither will
hydrogen. It requires a given number of equivalents of oxygen to mix
with so many equivalents of carbon, and a given number of equivalents
of oxygen to mix with so many of hydrogen to form that union which is
necessary to produce heat. This requires time, space, and air, and one
thing more, viz., heat.

I presume that most of you have read Charles Williams' treatise upon
"Combustion," which was published many years ago, and which until
recently was often quoted as an absolute authority upon the art of
burning fuel under boilers. Mr. Williams in his treatise accurately
describes the chemistry of combustion, but he has misled the world for
fifty years by an error in reasoning and the failure to discuss a
certain mechanical fact connected with the combination of gases in the
process of combustion. He said: "What is the use of heating the air
put into a furnace? If you take a cubic foot of air, it contains just
so many atoms of oxygen, neither more nor less. If the air be heated,
you cause it to assume double its volume, but you have not added a
single atom of oxygen, and you will require twice the space for its
passage between the grate bars, and twice the space in the furnace,
which is a nuisance; but if the air could be frozen, it would be
condensed, and more atoms of oxygen could be crowded into the cubic
foot, and the fire would receive a corresponding advantage." Mr.
Williams proceeded upon this theory, and died without solving the
perplexing mystery of as frequent failure as success which attended
his experiments with steamship boilers. The only successes which he
obtained were misleading, because they were made with boilers so badly
proportioned for their work that almost any change would produce
benefit.

Successful combustion requires something more than the necessary
chemical elements of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, for it requires
something to cook the elements, so to speak, and that is heat, and for
this reason: When the coal is volatilized in the furnace, what would
be a cubic foot of gas, if cold, is itself heated and its volume
increased to double its normal proportion. It is thin and attenuated.
The cold air which is introduced to the furnace is denser than the
gas. With dampers wide open in the chimney, and the gases and air
passing into the flues with a velocity of 40 feet per second, they
strike the colder surface of the tubes, and are cooled below the point
of combustion before they have had time to become assimilated; and
although an opponent in a debate upon steam boiler tests once stated
that his thermometer in the chimney showed only 250 degrees, and
indicated that all the value that was practical had been obtained from
the coal, I took the liberty to maintain that a chemist might have
analyzed the gases and shown there were dollars in them; and that if
the thermometer had been removed from the chimney and placed in the
pile of coal outside the boiler, it would have gone still lower; but
it would not have proved the value to have been extracted from the
coal, for it was not the complete test to apply.

The condition of things in the furnace may be illustrated thus: If we
should mingle a quart of molasses and a gallon of water, it would
require considerable manipulation and some time to cause them to
unite. Why? Because one element is so much denser than the other; but
if we should mix a quart of the gallon of water with the quart of
molasses, and render their densities somewhere near the density of the
remaining water, and then pour the masses together, there would be a
more speedy commingling of the two. And so with the furnace. I have
always maintained that every furnace should be lined with fire-brick,
in order that it shall be so intensely hot when the air enters that
the air shall instantly be heated to the same degree of tenuity as the
hot gases themselves, and the two will then unite like a flash--and
that is heat. And here is the solution of the Wye Williams mystery of
failure when cold air was introduced upon the top of a fire to aid
combustion. The proof of the necessity for heat to aid the chemical
assimilation of the volatilized coal elements is seen in starting a
fire in a common stove. At first there is only a blue flame, in which
the hand may be held; but wait until the lining becomes white hot, and
then throw on a little coal, and you will find a totally different
result. It is also seen in the Siemens gas furnace, with which you are
doubtless familiar. There is the introduction of gas with its
necessary complement of air. Until the furnace and retorts become
heated, the air and gas flutter through only partially united, and do
little good; but as soon as the retorts and furnace become thoroughly
hot, the same gas and air will melt a fire-brick.

These are common phenomena, which are familiar, but apt to be
unnoticed; but they logically point to the truth that no furnaces
should present a cooling medium in contact with fuel which is
undergoing this process of digestion, so to speak. It will be very
evident, I think, from these facts that water-legs in direct contact
with a fire are a mistake. They tend to check a fire as far as their
influence extends, as a thin sheet of ice upon the stomach after
dinner would check digestion, and for the same reason, namely, the
abstraction of heat from a chemical process. If fire-brick could be
laid around a locomotive furnace, and the grate, of course, kept of
the same area as before, it is my belief that a very important
advantage would be at once apparent. An old-fashioned cast iron heater
always produced a treacherous fire. It would grow dead around the
outside next to the cold iron; but put a fire-clay lining into it, and
it was as good as any other stove.

If I have now made clear what I mean by making heat, we will next
consider the steam boiler. What is a steam boiler? It is a thing to
absorb heat. The bottom line of this science is the bottom of a pot
over a fire, which is the best boiler surface in the world; there is
water upon one side of a piece of iron and heat against the other. One
square foot of the iron will transmit through it a given number of
units of heat into the water at a given temperature in a given time;
two square feet twice as many, and three, three times as many, and so
on. Put a cover upon the pot, and seal it tight, leave an orifice for
the steam, and that is a steam boiler with all its mysteries.

The old-fashioned, plain cylinder boiler is a plain cylindrical pot
over the fire. If enough plain cylinder boilers presenting the
requisite number of square feet of absorbing surface are put into a
cotton mill, experience has shown that they will make a yard of cotton
cloth about as cheaply as tubular boilers. If this is so, why do not
all put them in? Because it is the crudest and most expensive form of
boiler when its enormous area of ground, brickwork, and its fittings
are considered. Not all have the money or the room for them. To
produce space, the area is drawn in sidewise and lengthwise, but we
must have the necessary amount of square feet of absorbing surface,
consequently the boiler is doubled up, so to speak, and we have a
"flue boiler." We draw in sidewise and lengthwise once more and double
up the surface again, and that is a "tubular boiler." That includes
all the "mystery" on that subject.

Now, we find among the mills, just as I imagine we should upon the
railroads, that the almost universal tendency is to put in too small
boilers and furnaces. To skimp at boilers is to spend at the coal
yard. Small boilers mean heavy and over-deep fires, and rapid
destruction of apparatus. In sugar houses you will see this frequently
illustrated, and will find 16 inch fires upon their grates.

We have found that, as we could persuade mill owners to put in more
boilers and extend their furnaces, so that coal could be burned
moderately and time for combustion afforded, we often saved as high as
1,000 tons in a yearly consumption of 4,000.

Now, when the ordinary locomotive sends particles of coal into the
cars in which I am riding, I do not think it would be unfair criticism
to say that the process of combustion was not properly carried out.
When we see dense volumes of gas emitted from the stack, it is evident
that a portion of the hard dollars which were paid for the coal are
being uselessly thrown into the air; and it will be well to remember
that only a little of the unburnt gas is visible to the eye.

One point I wish to make is this: We find, as I have said, that as we
spread out with boilers and furnaces in the mills, so that we can take
matters deliberately, we save money.

Now, coming again to locomotives. I think, if we examine the subject
carefully, the fact will strike us a little curiously. The first
locomotive built in Philadelphia weighed about 14 tons. Judging from
the cut I have seen, I should think her furnace might have been 30
inches square. We have gone from that little 14 ton engine to machines
of 50 and 60 tons--perhaps more. The engines have been increased over
four times, but I will ask you if the furnace areas have been
increased (applause) in proportion? Some of the furnaces of the
engines are six feet by three, but that is an increase of less than 3
to 1 of furnace, as against 4 to 1 of weight of engine.

When my attention was first called to this matter, I had supposed, as
most people do who are outside of the railway profession, that there
was something subtile and mysterious about railway engineering that
none but those brought up to the business could understand. Possibly
it is so, and I am merely making suggestions for what they are worth,
but I think the position I have taken in this matter was established
by some experiments of three weeks' duration, which I conducted
between Milan and Como, in Italy, for the Italian government, in
pulling freight trains up grades of 100 feet to the mile. The
experiments were made with an engine built by the Reading Railroad.

We competed with English, French, Belgian, and Austrian engines. These
machines required the best of fuel to perform the mountain service,
and could use coal dust only when it was pressed into brick. We used
in the Reading Railroad machine different fuels upon different days,
making the road trip of 120 miles each day with one kind of fuel. We
used coal dust scraped up in the yards, also the best Cardiff coal,
anthracite, and five kinds of Italian lignite, the best of which
possesses about half the combustible value of coal.

The results in drawing heavy freight trains were equally good with
each fuel, the engine having at all times an abundance of steam on
heavy grades, no smoke nor cinders, and no collection of cinders in
the forward part of the engine.

The fireman arranged his fires at a station, and did little or nothing
except to smoke his pipe and enjoy the scenery until he reached the
next station. An incident occurred to prove that we were not playing
with the machine. They told me one morning that we should be given a
load of 25 per cent less than the maximum load of an engine of her
class (30 tons). We started up the 100 foot grade, and found we could
barely crawl, and our engineer got furious over it. He thought they
were repeating a trick already attempted by screwing down a brake in
ascending a grade. We detected it, however, and found a pair of wheels
nearly red hot. Upon this occasion we found nothing amiss, except full
cars where they had reported only a light load. We pulled to the top
of the hill, the steam blowing off furiously all the time.

This was a new experience to the Italians, and might surprise some
Americans. When we arrived at the station, the inspector-general and
his corps of engineers were evidently amazed, and it was evident we
had captured them. He said to me, "I can congratulate you, signor, on
possession of a superb machine."

Afterward one of the engineers said to me: "Do not let it be known
that I told you what you have hauled or I shall lose my place, but you
have drawn 50 per cent more than the maximum load of one of our 40 ton
engines." I said: "You attempted to 'stall' us, and when you try it
again, be fair enough to give me a flat of pig iron, and as you pack
cars on one end I will pack pig iron upon the engine until she will
stick to the track, but rest assured that you will not be able to get
that steam down." The experience with that engine proves conclusively
to my mind that the general principles of steam making are the same
for both stationary and locomotive practice. The grand secret of the
success of that Wootten engine was the enormous area of the grate
surface, being, if I remember correctly, 7 by 9 feet, permitting thin
fires to be carried and complete combustion to be obtained before the
gases reached the boiler tubes. An enormous crown sheet was presented,
and that is where the bulk of the work of any boiler is done.

Thin fires accomplish this. As already stated, a given amount of coal
generates a given amount of gas, and this gas requires a given amount
of air or oxygen. This air must be supplied through the grate bars and
then pass through the interstices of the mass of heated coal. It
requires about 10 cubic feet of air to consume one cubic foot of gas.
In stationary boilers we find that if we use "pea" and "dust" coal, an
extremely thin layer must be used, or the 10 feet of air per foot of
gas cannot pass through it; if "chestnut" coal be used, the thickness
may be increased somewhat; "stove size" allows a thickness of six
inches, and "lump" much thicker, if any wise man could be found who
would use that coarse, uneconomical size. Of course, I am speaking of
anthracite coal. Opinions differ about "soft coal," but the same
general principle applies as regards an unobstructed passage of air
through the hot bed of coal.

Now, it will be agreed that the locomotive of the future must be
improved to keep up with the times. Fierce competition requires
increased efficiency and reduced expenses. I am told by you railroad
gentlemen that the freight business of the country doubles every ten
years. Trains follow close upon each other. What are you going to do?
Are you to double, treble, or quadruple your tracks?

It seems to me much remains yet to be done with the locomotive. We
must burn a great deal less coal for the steam we make, and after we
have made steam we must use that steam up more thoroughly. In the
short cylinder required by locomotive service, the steam, entering at
the initial pressure pushes the piston to the opposite end, and it
then rushes out of the exhaust strong enough to drive another piston.
Of every four dollars' worth of coal consumed, at least two dollars
worth is absolutely thrown away. Or, of every ten thousand dollars
spent for fuel, five thousand dollars are absolutely wasted. How can
we save this? It would seem obvious that if steam rushes from the
exhaust of an engine strong enough to drive another engine, the common
sense of the thing would be to put another engine alongside and let
the steam drive it, and we should get just so much more out of our
four dollars' worth of coal. It seems evident that we must follow the
lead of the steamship men, and compound the locomotive engine, as
they have done with the marine engine.

Next we must attack the extravagant furnace, and increase its area and
reduce the depth of the bed of coal. The difficulty of making this
change seemed to me to be removed, on examining an engine on the
Providence & Bristol Railroad, the other day. The machine was made at
the Mason Works, of Taunton. It was an engine and tender combined, the
truck being at the rear end of the tender, and the driver placed well
in advance of the fire-box, so that the maximum weight of both engine
and tender rested upon the drivers. In thus removing the drivers from
the proximity of the fire-box, abundant facility is afforded for
widening the fire-box, so as to obtain a grate area as large as that
of the Wootten engine or of a stationary boiler. It seems to me the
increase of grate area can be obtained only by widening; for a length
of more than six or seven feet is very hard upon the fireman. You
certainly cannot get more power by deepening present fire-boxes,
except by an enormously increased waste of fuel, which all will
concede is already sufficiently extravagant.

In arriving at the conclusion of these hasty and I fear somewhat
incoherent remarks, I would say that the object aimed at for the
improvement of the locomotive would be reached, first, by making steam
economically, by employing such increased grate area as will permit
running thin fires and moderate or comparatively slow draught; and,
secondly, in economically using the steam which has been economically
made by compounding the engine.

I have given you merely the views of an "outsider," who has had a
somewhat extensive experience in stationary engineering, and who has
observed locomotive practice in many parts of the world. These views
are offered for what they are worth, as suggestions for future thought
in designing engines, and as a sort of refresher upon rudimentary
points which long familiarity with every-day phenomena causes us at
times to overlook. I trust that your deliberations may aid in the
speedy reduction of the expenses of transporting freight and
passengers, for the benefit of the railroad companies and, in their
turn, the advantage of the people at large.

       *       *       *       *       *




ATLANTIC STEAMERS.[1]

  [Footnote 1: A paper recently read before the Institution of Naval
  Architects.]

By W. JOHN.


[Illustration: Fig. 1--CITY OF ROME.]

The author said that he hoped to bring before the meeting impartially
certain facts which might be of interest, and which, when recorded in
the pages of the "Transactions," might be found of some use as data
for future reference. In dealing with passenger steamers, he would do
so principally from a shipbuilder's point of view; but the moment he
commenced to think over Atlantic passenger ships as a shipbuilder, he
was met by the question whether the present tendency toward divorcing
the passenger and cargo trade from each other is likely to continue or
not. If the answer is yes, then it seems to become an important
question, for the present at least, how to build, on moderately small
dimensions, the fastest, safest, and most economical passenger
steamer, using all the most modern improvements to make her commodious
and luxurious, and an easy sea boat into the bargain. If cargo is
still to be carried in the passenger ships of the future, a moderate
speed only will be aimed at in the immediate future, and every effort
will be devoted to economy of fuel, comfort, and safety, with a fair
carrying capacity. This latter policy is one which may possibly
prevail at least for a time, as it has powerful supporters in
Liverpool; but he could not help thinking that very high
speeds--higher than we have yet attained--must eventually gain the
day. He also thought that they were on the eve of important movements,
which will indicate what the next step in the passenger trade is to
be; for it must be remembered, among other things, that none of our
present English transatlantic liners, even the latest, have yet been
fitted with the latest modern improvements for economy of fuel or
quick combustion, such as triple expansion engines or forced draught.
They must, therefore, be at some disadvantage, other things being
equal, compared with the ships of the future possessing them. The
Great Eastern steaming up Milford Haven about twenty-five years ago
between two lines of the channel fleet of old--two and three decked
wooden line-of-battle ships--the whole fleet saluting with yards
manned, was a sight to be remembered. More than this, that ship, with
all her mournful career, has been a useful lesson and a useful warning
to all naval architects who seriously study their profession--a lesson
of what can be done in the safe construction of huge floating
structures, and a warning that the highest flights of constructive
genius may prove abortive if not strictly subordinated to the
practical conditions and commercial requirements of the times. The
Sirius and Great Western crossed the Atlantic in 1838, and in 1840 the
first ship of the since celebrated Cunard Company made her first
voyage. This was the Britannia, which, with her sister ships, the
Arcadia, Caledonia, and Columbia, kept up the mail service regularly
at a speed of about 81/2 knots an hour. The Britannia was 207 ft. in
length between perpendiculars, and 34 ft. 4 in. extreme breadth, 22
ft. 6 in. depth of hold, 423 horse power--nominal--and 1,153 tons
burden, built of wood, and propelled by paddles. In 1860 the Collins
Line started in opposition to the Cunard, and, after a series of
disasters, collapsed in 1858. This was three years after the Persia,
the first Cunarder built of iron, had been completed. In 1850, also,
the Inman Line was started with the City of Glasgow, of 1,600 tons
builders' measurement, and 350 horse power. She was built of iron, and
was the first screw steamer sent across the Atlantic from Liverpool
with passengers, and was the pioneer of the great emigrant trade which
Mr. Inman, above all others, did so much to develop and make cheap and
comfortable for the emigrants themselves, as well as profitable to his
company. That the builders of the celebrated old Great Britain, in
1843, and Mr. Inman, in 1850, should have pronounced so decisively in
favor of the screw propeller in preference to the paddle for ocean
steaming is a proof of their true practical judgment, which time and
practical experience have made abundantly clear. While the Cunard
Company went on developing its fleet from the early wood paddle
steamer Britannia of 1,130 tons in 1840 to the iron paddle steamers
Persia, etc., in 1858, the iron screw steamer China of 1862, to the
still more important screw steamers Bothnia and Scythia, vessels of
4,335 tons, in 1874, the Inman and other lines were as rapidly
developing in speed and size, if not in numbers. The year 1874 is
memorable, for it saw the White Star steamers Britannic and Germanic
put into the water, as well as the Inman steamer City of Berlin and
the two before mentioned Cunard steamers, Bothnia and Scythia. By the
addition of these two ships to their fleet the White Star Line,
although started only in 1870, reached a front rank position in the
New York passenger trade. The author gave in separate tables the logs
of several of these ships, some from published documents and some
kindly furnished by the owners. The Great Western had crossed the
Atlantic from Bristol to New York in 15 days as early as 1838. The
first Cunard steamer, the Britannic, was about the same speed, from 81/4
to 81/2 knots an hour. The average duration of the Cunard voyages in the
year 1856 was 12.67 days from Liverpool to New York, and 11.03 days
from New York to Liverpool. The Bothnia, in 1874, reduced the passage
to about nine days. The White Star Britannic, in 1876, averaged 7 days
18 hours 26 minutes outward from Queenstown to New York, and 9 days 6
hours 44 minutes homeward, and has averaged for the last ten years 8
days 9 hours 36 minutes outward, and 8 days 1 hour 48 minutes
homeward. The City of Berlin, of the Inman Line, also built in 1874, 8
days 10 hours 56 minutes, and homeward 8 days 2 hours 37 minutes; and
for the nine years from 1875 to 1883 inclusive, averaged outward 8
days 19 hours 56 seconds, and inward 8 days 8 hours 34 seconds; or,
putting it into rounder figures, the Britannic had reduced the average
passage between the two points to 81/4 days, and the City of Berlin to
81/2 days. From the year 1874 on to 1879 no further advance was made in
Atlantic steaming, but in that year the Arizona was added to the Guion
Line, and it soon became evident that another important stride had
been made in the Atlantic passenger trade, which would lead to most
important results. The results, as we all know, have been sufficiently
startling. The Guion Line, which had started in 1866 with the
Manhattan, had now the fastest passenger ship on the Atlantic. In
spite of burning some fifty per cent. more coal than the Britannic,
the ship was an obvious commercial success. The spirited policy which
brought her into existence was appreciated by the public, and the
other lines had to move forward. Then followed a period of rivalry,
the Cunard Company building the Gallia and Servia, the Inman Company
the City of Rome, and the Guion Line the Alaska, all of which were
completed in 1881, and afterward the Oregon for the Guion
Line--1883--the Aurania the same year for the Cunard Company, and,
later still, the America for the National Line, and the Umbria and
Etruria for the Cunard Company in 1885.

[Illustration:

_Frames from outer edge of Tank to Upper Deck, 7 x 31/2 x 8/16 for 250
ft. Amidships, for 60 ft. before and abaft these Points 61/2 x 31/2 x 6/16
at end of Vessel 5 x 31/2 x 7/16, all spaced 24 in. apart and all
carried to Upper Deck, double from Bilge to Bilge in way of
