elevator and side flaps and there were radical bearings to take both
side and end thrusts.

"Tell you, Dashaway," said Mr. Randolph in conclusion, "I'll trust
you with the Monarch II because you are something more than a
grass-cutting pilot by mail trying to coast a flying machine off the
ground."

"I hope to deserve your compliment," laughed the young aviator.

"You've got a horse power engine and planes hard to beat.  There are
self-priming oil pumps, an auxiliary exhaust, and the machine
follows the lines of the lowest gasoline consumption.  Remember the
triple axis conditions, Dashaway.  One controls the fore and aft
axis, producing tipping.  The second is the vertical axis, producing
turning.  The third is the lateral axis, producing rising and
falling."

"Some one at the office wishes to see Mr. Dashaway," just here
interrupted a lad from the plant.

"To see me?" spoke Dave in some surprise.

"Yes, sir.  He asked me to give you his card, and said he had come
quite a distance to see you."

Dave took the card the lad handed him.  He was a little startled,
and then curious, as he read the name--

"JAMES PRICE, Revenue Officer."





CHAPTER XVI

THE "MONARCH II"


The manager of the Interstate factory and Dave and Hiram followed
the messenger from the plant back to the office.

"The gentleman who wishes to see me," the young aviator explained to
Mr. Randolph, "is the revenue officer I told you about."

"Ah, I think I understand the purpose of his visit, then," said the
manager.

Mr. Price was the same keen-faced, ferret-like person he always
appeared, as Dave introduced him to the manager.

"I have heard of you from our young friend, Dashaway," said Mr.
Randolph.

"Lucky I ran across him," responded the officer, in his usual short,
jerky way.  "Lucky to catch you here, too, before you got off,
Dashaway."

"Then you came specially to see me?" asked Dave.

"And your friends," replied Mr. Price with a comprehensive wave of
his hand.  "Mutual interests all around, it seems.  You see, I met
Mr. King at Columbus after you left," explained the official.  "He
told me of your remarkable discoveries, Dashaway.  You are keener
than I, young man.  I have been chasing all over the district, and
here you get a clew to Ridgely, while I and my men were blundering
around."

"If it is really a dew to him, Mr. Price," submitted the young
aviator.  "You know, it is all a theory so far."

"As the facts stand, I have no doubt from your story that Ridgely is
one of the men who ran away with the Drifter," declared the officer.

"Have you fathomed his purpose in taking the air route, Mr. Price?"
asked the factory manager.

"Most certainly."

"I am puzzled to guess what it may be."

"Why, it's plain as the nose on your face," said the officer
bluntly.

"How is that?"

"You know that this man, Ridgely, is a professional smuggler?"

"So Dashaway has told me."

"We drove him from one point on the border.  He has selected
another, that's all.  He has worn out the old methods of evading the
revenue service, so he is adopting new ones.  In fact, I rather
admire his brilliant originality.  Why, I can conceive no situation
so ideal as that capture of an airship, and professional operators
in his employ."

"Then--"

"I am positive that the Dawsons and Ridgely have made for some
obscure point, probably near Lake Superior, and will open up
business in the old way, do their work only at night, and I have
come on here to ask Dashaway to work in harmony with me."

"Most certainly he will," pledged the factory manager.

"I am after Ridgely, you are after your aircraft.  We can work
together," pronounced the officer.  "I intend to start at once for
the Lake Superior district.  I shall set my men at work clear along
the line and over the border, to try and find a trace of my man.  I
haven't an airship, though, you must remember, and wouldn't know how
to run one if I had.  That's where you come in, Dashaway.  You
search the air, I'll watch the land.  What I want to do is to give
you a list of points where I or my men can be reached at a moment's
notice any time.  If we keep in touch with each other, I believe we
can land those rascals."

For over an hour after that the officer and Dave had an earnest,
confidential chat together.  Mr. Price brought out maps, and gave
Dave great deal of information as to the smuggling system on the
border.  In the meantime, Randolph and Hiram again visited the
aerodrome.  After the revenue officer had departed, Dave came across
Hiram looking for him.

"Say, Dave," exclaimed the excited youth, "it's like a new world to
me, all this.  I declare, I never had such a time in my life.  This
Mr. Randolph is a prince."

"Fixed things up for us, has he, Hiram?"

"Right royally.  He's stocked up that monoplane like a banquet hall.
Why, say, if we can keep the Monarch II aloft, we can live like
millionaires in an up-to-date hotel for a week to come."

Hiram in his enthusiasm was exaggerating things considerably.
However, when Dave revisited the aerodrome, he found that the clever
Interstate manager had stocked up the aircraft, with every necessity
for safety and comfort he could think of.

The Monarch II was certainly a marvel in its construction and scope.
It had been made to accommodate an operator and one, or even two,
passengers.  The seating space was quite roomy, and there was a
handy basket-like compartment, arranged to hold wraps, provisions
and duplicate machine parts.

It was late in the afternoon when the Monarch II was rolled out into
the broad roomy yard of the factory.  Everything was in order for
the finest start in the world.  Dave had thought out and mapped out
every detail of the proposed air voyage.  Mr. Randolph personally
superintended all the initial arrangements.  The starter worked
liked a charm.  There was no wavering.  A turn of the handle, and
the magnificent machine spread its wings like some great bird poised
for a steady flight.

Hiram gave a great shout of delight.  Dave smiled down at the
manager proudly.

"Good luck!" cried Mr. Randolph.

Just then the factory whistle sounded out shrilly for quitting time.
Workmen appeared at the open windows of the factor.  Some came
running out into the yard.

The word had gone around that the young aviators were bound on an
extraordinary cruise--a search for the stolen airship.  A great
chorus of ringing hurrahs went up from the crowd.

"It's great, isn't it, Dave?" chuckled the delighted Hiram.

"The Monarch II acts prettily, that's sure," replied the young
aviator.

Dave delighted his companion by giving him charge of the barograph
readings and attention to some of the minor duties of aviation.  The
rapid progress of the machine in mid air was exhilarating.  The
weather conditions were ideal, and Dave had a definite goal in view.

There was not a break in the pleasant twilight journey.  The Monarch
II fulfilled all expectations and promises.  About nine o'clock in
the evening the record showed over two hundred miles accomplished,
when they descended on a level stretch of prairie near a small
bustling city.  Here the gasoline supply in the tanks was
replenished.  The basket had been stored with over a hundred gallons
of this in separate packages, without embarrassing the buoyancy of
the machine, as the young aviators were far below average operating
weight.

"This high living of ours makes and hungry," intimated Hiram, as
they finished getting the machine in shape to renew the flight.

"Time for lunch, you think?" proposed Dave with a jolly laugh.
"Here we are."

They selected from the packages in the accommodation basket enough
things for a feed.  Mr. Randolph had certainly provided for them in
a liberal way.  The packages produced two kinds of sandwiches, some
doughnuts, a cream cakes, cheese, celery and a prime apple pie.

Dave was pleased and proud with their progress thus far on their
strange journey.  There was a steady but mild head wind, and if he
held till daylight the young aviator counted on reaching the first
important destination on the route he had mapped out.

His idea was to reach a certain point in the dark.  They would then
seek a hiding place, or at least seclusion, until evening again,
resting through the day.  Dave's plan was to travel so that their
progress might not be noted and get to the Dawson group through the
public prints or by some other avenue, and thus warn them that they
were being traced.

There was not a landmark on the route, such as a city, lake or
river, that Dave had not memorized, from standard "fly" directories
during the past two days.  The Drifter, being in the hands of the
Dawsons, who knew considerable about aviation, would probably follow
the same course.  At night it was more difficult to tally off
progress than in daylight, but so far Dave felt that he had not
deviated from the due northwest course that was to bring him to a
certain destination.

For over five hours after lunch and rest the Monarch II kept
steadily on its way.  Dawn was just breaking when Dave passed a few
miles to the west of a town he knew to be Millville. He glanced at
Hiram, about to address him.  Hiram was fast asleep.

"We will have to get down somewhere near here," decided Dave.

As he changed the course of the aircraft there was a slight jar, and
Hiram woke up.

"Hello!" he cried, "have I been--"

"Asleep at the switch?" smiled Dave.  "Yes, but it hasn't needed any
attention.  We are going to land, Hiram."

Dave knew his bearings, as has been said.  His anxiety, however, was
to get to cover, so to speak, before the airship was seen by anyone
in the vicinity.  He soon knew that he had failed in this.  Circling
about and drifting in trying to select a suitable landing spot, Dave
made out rising farmer staring up at the machine from his chicken
yard.

A little farther on the driver of a truck wagon, bound town-wards
evidently, espied the Monarch II, even in the dim morning light, for
he stopped his horses, his face turned in the direction of the
machine.

Finally Dave located a spot that suited him.  It was where there had
been mining going on some period in the past.  Some hills shut in
the deserted diggings.  Several great heaps of ore surrounded a sort
of pit, broad and roomy.

"I don't think we can find a better resting place," said Dave, as
they reached the ground and he shut off the power.

"Going to stay here all day?" inquired Hiram.

"That is the programme, yes."

"Well, I suppose breakfast is the first move?" asked the young
aviator's assistant.

"I'm hungry as a bear," announced Dave.

"So am I," agreed Hiram, and he set at work to explore the
accommodation, basket.

Hiram soon had a tempting spread.  There was cold ham, a roasted
chicken, an abundance of bread and butter, and a two gallon jug of
cold coffee.

The boys did full justice to the layout.  Then Dave went over the
machine, seeing to it that every part was in order.

"I'll have to take a little nap, Hiram," he advised his companion.

"No, a good long one," corrected Hiram.

"If we're going to lay off until night, there isn't much to do.
I'll stay awake and keep a look out for anything happening.  You
see, I had quite a snooze up there in the air."

Dave made a comfortable couch by spreading out some of the wraps
found in the accommodation basket.  It was after ten o'clock when he
woke up.  He insisted on Hiram taking a turn on the couch.

"Can't do it.  Not a bit sleepy," declared Hiram.

"Well, you can try it while I'm gone," suggested Dave.

"Oh, going somewhere?"

"Yes, to the town.  I want to make a few inquiries as to the country
around here and ahead of us, and I may wire Mr. Randolph."

"All right, go ahead," replied Hiram. "I'll see that everything is
kept trim and safe about the machine."

Dave visited Millville, and posted himself as to certain
geographical points in which he was interested.  He also sent a
brief dispatch to the Interstate people.  Provided with some
railroad maps, and some fresh rolls from a bakery, he started out to
rejoin his chum.

He found Hiram busy burnishing up every bit of metal about the
Monarch II.  They had their noon lunch.  On his way back from town
Dave' had noticed a little brook.  He was telling Hiram about it,
and they were discussing a plan of a plunge and a swim, when Hiram,
facing the point where the pit began, sprang suddenly to his feet.

"Hello!" he cried excitedly.  "Someone is coming."

"Sure enough," echoed Dave, also arising.  "Why, I noticed that man
in Millville.  Can it be possible that he has followed me?  I didn't
know it, if he has."

The boys stood motionless, awaiting the coming up of the intruder.
He was a brisk, smart looking man.  There was something in his sharp
way of glancing at things that made Dave think of a lawyer.  The
stranger came up within a dozen feet of them.  Then he halted, took
in the flying machine with a grim smile, and then looked the young
aviators over from head to foot.

"Reckon I've landed on both feet," he observed, a confident,
satisfied drawl in his voice.

"What do you mean by that?" inquired Dave.
