oil into three classes. First, those that form chemical combinations,
called soap. This kind is the most durable, is used for priming
purposes, and consists of lead, zinc, and iron bases, of which red
lead takes up the most oil; next, white lead, the pure carbonate Dutch
process made, following with zinc white and iron carbonates, as iron
ore paint, Turkey umber, yellow ocher; also faintly the chromates of
lead--chrome-green and chrome-yellow, finishing with the poorest of
all, modern white lead, made by the wet or vinegar process. The second
class being neutrals have no chemical affinity to linseed oil; they
need a large quantity of drier to harden the paint, and include all
blacks, vermilion, Prussian, Paris, and Chinese blue, also terra di
Sienna, Vandyke brown, Paris green, verdigris, ultramarine, genuine
carmine, and madderlake. The last seven are, on account of their
transparency, better adapted for varnish mixtures--glazing. The third
class of pigments act destructively to linseed oil; they having an
acid base (mostly tin salt, hydrochloride of tin, and redwood dye),
form with the gelatinous matter of the oil a jelly that will neither
work well under the brush nor harden sufficiently, and can be used in
varnish for glazing only; they are not permanent in color, and among
the most troublesome are the lower grades of so-called carmines,
madderlakes, rose pinks, etc., which contain more or less acidous
dyes, forming a soft paint with linseed oil that once dry on a job can
be twisted or peeled off like the skin of a ripe peach. All these
combinations of paint have to be closely observed by the painter to
insure his success.

Twenty-five years ago a house needed to be painted outside but once in
from five to seven years; it looked well all the time, as no dust
settled in the paint to make it unsightly. Painters then used the
Dutch-process-made white-lead, a base and raw linseed oil, a fat acid,
which formed the insoluble soap. They also put turpentine in the
following coats, to keep up the proportions of oil and pigment. All
held out well against wind and weather. Now they use the
wet-process-made white lead, neutralized by vinegar, with oil
neutralized by boiling, from the first to the last coat, and--fail in
making their work permanent.

W.S., in the _Building News_, relates an unaccountable mysterious
blistering in a leaky house, where the rainwater came from above on a
painted wood wall, blistering the paint in streaks and filled at the
lower ends with water, which no doubt was caused by the water soaking
the wood at the upper ends where there was no paint, and following it
down through the fibers, pushed and peeled off the soft, inadhesive
paint. Green, sappy, and resinous wood is unfit for durable painting,
and to avoid blistering and peeling wood should be well seasoned and
primed with all raw linseed oil, some drier, to insure a moderately
slow drying, and as much of a base pigment as the painter can possibly
spread (much drier takes up too much oil acid, needed for the pigment
base to combine with), which insures a tough paint that never fails to
stand against blistering or peeling, as well as wind, weather, and
ammonia.

The coach, car, and house painter can materially improve his painting
where his needs lie by first oiling the wood with raw oil, then
smoothing the surface down with lump pumicestone, washing it with a
mixture of japan drier or, better yet, gold sizing and turpentine,
wiping dry, and following it up with a coat of white lead, oil, and
turpentine. The explanation is: the raw oil penetrates the wood and
raises the wood fibers on the surface to be rubbed down with
pumicestone, insuring the best surface for the following painting: to
harden the oil in the wood it receives a coat of japan drier, which
follows into the pores and there forms a tough, resinous matter,
resisting any air pressure that might arise from within, and at the
same time reacts on the first coat of lead as a drier. This mode
insures the smoothest and toughest foundation for the following
painting, and may be exposed to the hottest July sun without fear of
either blistering or peeling.

LOUIS MATERN.

Bloomington, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *




OLIVE OIL.


The following particulars with regard to the production of olive oil
in Tuscany have been furnished to Mr. Consul Inglis by one of the
principal exporters in Leghorn:

The olive oil produced in Tuscany from the first pressing of the fruit
is intended for consumption as an article of food. Hence, great
attention is paid both to the culture of the olive tree and the
process of making oil.

The olive crop is subject to many vicissitudes, and is an uncertain
one. It may be taken as a rule that a good crop does not occur more
frequently than once in three years. A prolonged drought in summer may
cause the greater part of the small fruit to fall off the trees. A
warm and wet autumn will subject the fruit to the ravages of a maggot
or worm, which eats its way into it. Fruit thus injured falls to the
ground prematurely, and the oil made from it is of very bad quality,
being nauseous in taste and somewhat thick and viscous. Frost
following immediately on a fall of snow or sleet, when the trees are
still wet, will irretrievably damage the fruit, causing it to shrivel
up and greatly diminishing the yield of oil, while the oil itself has
a dark color, and loses its delicate flavor.

The olive tree in Tuscany generally blossoms in April. By November the
fruit has attained its full size, though not full maturity, and the
olive harvest generally commences then. The fruit, generally speaking,
is gathered as it falls to the ground, either from ripeness or in
windy weather. In some districts, however, and when the crop is short,
the practice is to strip the fruit from the trees early in the season.
When there is a full crop the harvest lasts many months, and may not
be finished till the end of May, as the fruit does not all ripen
simultaneously.

Oil made early in the season has a deeper color, and is distinguished
by a fruity flavor, with a certain degree of pungency; while as the
season advances it becomes lighter in color, thinner in body, and
milder and sweeter in taste. Oil made toward the close of the harvest
in April or May from extremely ripe fruit is of a very pale straw
color, mild and sweet to the taste, though sometimes, if the fruit has
remained too long on the trees, it may be slightly rancid. Oil very
light in color is much prized in certain countries, notably France,
and hence, if it also possesses good quality, commands a higher price
in the Tuscan markets.

The fruit of the olive tree varies just as much in quality as does the
grape, according to the species of the tree itself, the nature of the
soil, exposure, and climate of the locality where it grows. Some
varieties of the olive tree largely grown, because thought to be
better suited to the special conditions of some districts, yield a
fruit which imparts a bitter taste to the oil made from it; such oil,
even when otherwise perfect, ranks as a second rate quality.

The highest quality of oil can only be obtained when the fruit is
perfectly and uniformly sound, well ripened, gathered as soon as it
has dropped from the trees, and crushed immediately with great
attention. Should the fruit remain any time on the ground,
particularly during wet weather, it deteriorates fast and gets an
earthy taste; while if allowed to remain an undue length of time in
the garners it heats, begins to decompose, and will yield only bad
oil.

The process of making oil is as follows: The fruit is crushed in a
stone mill, generally moved by water power; the pulp is then put into
bags made of fiber, and a certain number of these bags, piled one upon
another, are placed in a press, most frequently worked by hand; when
pressure is applied, the oil flows down into a channel by which it is
conveyed to a receptacle or tank.

When oil ceases to flow, tepid water is poured upon the bags to carry
off oil retained by the bags. The pulp is then removed from the bags,
ground again in the mill, then replaced in the bags, and pressed a
second time. The water used in the process of making oil must be quite
pure; the mill, press, bags, and vessels sweet and clean, as the least
taint would ruin the quality of the oil produced.

The oil which has collected in the tank or receptacle just mentioned
is removed day by day, and the water also drained off, as oil would
suffer in quality if left in contact with water; the water also, which
necessarily contains some oil mingled with it, is sent to a deposit
outside, and at some distance from the crushing house, which is called
the "Inferno," where it is allowed to accumulate, and the oil which
comes to the surface is skimmed off from time to time. It is fit only
for manufacturing purposes.

After the second pressing the olive-pulp is not yet done with; it is
beaten up with water by mechanical agitators moved by water-power, and
then the whole discharged into open-air tanks adjoining the crushing
house. There the crushed olive kernels sink to the bottom, are
gathered up and sold for fuel, fetching about 12 francs per 1,000
kilos, while the _debris_ of the pulp is skimmed off the surface of
the tank and again pressed in bags, yielding a considerable quantity
of inferior oil, called "olio lavato," or washed oil, which, if
freshly made, is even used for food by the poorer classes. The pulp
then remaining has still further use. It is sold for treatment in
factories by the sulphide of carbon process, and by this method yields
from seven to nine per cent. of oil, of course suitable only for
manufacturing purposes. Only the first two pressings yield oil which
ranks as first quality, subject of course to the condition of the
fruit being unexceptionable. New oil is allowed to rest a while in
order to get rid of sediment; it is then clarified by passing through
clean cotton wool, when it is fit for use.

The highest quality of olive oil for eating purposes should not only
be free from the least taint in taste or smell, but possessed of a
delicate, appetizing flavor. When so many favorable conditions are
needed as to growth, maturity, and soundness of the fruit, coupled
with great attention during the process of oil-making, it is not to be
wondered at that by no means all or even the greater part of the oil
produced in the most favored districts of Tuscany is of the highest
quality. On the contrary, the bulk is inferior and defective.

These defective oils are largely dealt in both for home consumption
and export, when price and not quality is the object.

In foreign countries there is always a market for inferior, defective
olive oil for cooking purposes, etc., provided the price be low. Price
and not quality is the object, so much so that when olive oil is dear,
cotton-seed, ground-nut, and other oils are substituted, which bear
the same relation to good olive oil that butterine and similar
preparations do to real butter.

The very choicest qualities of pure olive oil are largely shipped from
Leghorn to England, along with the very lowest qualities, often also
adulterated.

The oil put into Florence flasks is of the latter kind. Many years
back this was not the case, but now it is a recognized fact that
nothing but the lowest quality of oil is put into these flasks; oil
utterly unfit for food, and so bad that it is a mystery to what use it
is applied in England. Importers in England of oil in these flasks
care nothing, however, about quality; cheapness is the only
desideratum.

The best quality of Tuscan olive oil is imported in London in casks,
bottled there, and bears the name of the importers alone on the label.
There is no difficulty in procuring in England the best Tuscan oil,
which nothing produced elsewhere can surpass; but consumers who wish
to get, and are willing to pay for, the best article must look to the
name and reputation of the importers and the general excellence of all
the articles they sell, which is the best guarantee they can have of
quality.

       *       *       *       *       *




BEESWAX AND ITS ADULTERATIONS.


Beeswax is a peculiar waxy substance secreted only by bees, and
consisting of 80.2 per cent. carbon, 13.4 per cent. hydrogen, and 6.4
per cent. oxygen. It is a mixture of myricine, cerotic acid, and
cerolein, the first of which is insoluble in boiling alcohol, the
second is soluble in hot alcohol and crystallizes out on cooling,
while the third remains dissolved in cold alcohol.

Although we are unable to produce real beeswax artificially, there are
many imitations which are made use of to adulterate the genuine
article, and their detection is a matter of considerable difficulty.
Huebl says (_Dingl. Jour._, p. 338) that the most reliable method of
estimating the adulteration of beeswax is that proposed by Becker, and
known as the saponification method.

The quantity of potassic hydrate required to saponify one gramme or 15
grains of pure beeswax varies from 97 to 107 milligrammes. Other kinds
of wax and its substitutes require in some cases more and in others
less of the alkali. This method would, however, lead to very erroneous
conclusions if applied to a mixture of which some of the constituents
have higher saponification numbers than beeswax and others higher, as
one error would balance the other.

To avoid this, the quantity of alkali required to saponify the
myricine is first ascertained, and then that required to saturate the
free cerotic acid. In this way two numbers are obtained; and in an
investigation of twenty samples of Austrian yellow beeswax, the author
found these numbers stood to each other almost in the constant ratio
of 1 to 3.70. Although this ratio cannot be considered as definitely
established by so few experiments, it may serve as a guide in judging
of the purity of beeswax.

The experiment is carried out as follows: 3 or 4 grammes of the wax
that has been melted in water are put in 20 c.c. of neutral 95 per
cent, alcohol, and warmed until the wax melts, when phenolphthaleine
is added, and enough of an alcoholic solution of potash run in from a
burette until on shaking it retains a faint but permanent red color.
The burette used by the author is divided in 0.05 c.c. After adding 20
c.c. more of a half normal potash solution, it is heated on a water
bath for 3/4 hour. Then the uncombined excess of alkali is titrated with
half normal hydrochloric acid. The alcohol must be tested as to its
reaction before using it, and carefully neutralized with the acid of
phenolphthalein.

To saturate the free acid in 1 gramme of wax requires 19 to 21
milligrammes of potassic hydrate, while 73 to 76 milligrammes more are
necessary to saponify the myricine ether. The lower numbers in the one
usually occur with low numbers for the other, so that the proportions
remain 1 to 3.6 or 1 to 3.8.

For comparison he gives the following numbers obtained with one gramme
of the more common adulterants:


  ----------------+----------+----------+---------+--------+
                  |    To    |    To    |  Total  |        |
                  |neutralize|  convert |saponifi-|        |
                  | the acid.|the ether.| cation. | Ratio. |
  ----------------+----------+----------+---------+--------+
  Japanese wax    |     20   |   200    |   220   |  10    |
  Carnauba wax    |      4   |    75    |    79   |  19    |
  Tallow          |      4   |   176    |   180   |  44    |
  Stearic acid    |    195   |     0    |   195   |  0/195 |
  Rosin           |    110   |     1.6  |   112   |  0.015 |
  Paraffine       |      0   |     0    |     0   |  0     |
  Ceresine        |      0   |     0    |     0   |  0     |
  Yellow beeswax  |     20   |    75    |    95   |  3.75  |
  ----------------+----------+----------+---------+--------+


The author deduces the following conclusions as the results of these
investigations:

1. If the numbers obtained lie between these limits, 19 to 21, 73 to
76, 92 to 97, and 3.6 to 3.8 respectively, it may be assumed that the
beeswax is pure, provided it also corresponds to beeswax in its
physical properties.

2. If the saponification figures fall below 92 and yet the ratio is
correct, it is adulterated with some neutral substance like paraffine.

3. If the ratio is above 3.8, it is very probable that Japanese or
carnauba wax or grease has been added.

4. If the ratio falls below 3.6, stearic acid or resin has been used
as the adulterant.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHENOL IN THE STEM, LEAVES, AND CONES OF PINUS SYLVESTRIS.

A DISCOVERY BEARING ON THE FLORA OF THE CARBONIFEROUS EPOCH AND THE
FORMATION OF PETROLEUM.

By A.B. GRIFFITHS, Ph.D., F.C.S. Membre de la Societe Chimique de
Paris, Medallist in Chemistry and Botany, etc.


Having found, in small quantities, alcohols of the C_{n}H_{2n-7}
series, last summer, in the stem, acicular leaves, and cones of _Pinus
sylvestris_, I wish in this paper to say a few words on the subject.

First of all, I took a number of cones, cut them up into small pieces,
and placed them in a large glass beaker, then nearly filled it with
distilled water, and heated to about 80 deg. C., keeping the decoction at
this temperature for about half an hour, I occasionally stirred with a
glass rod, and then allowed it to cool, and filtered. This filtrate
was then evaporated nearly to dryness, when a small quantity of
six-sided prisms crystallized out, which subsequently were found to be
the hydrate of phenol (C_{6}H_{5}HO)_{2}H_{2}O. Its melting point was
found to be 17.2 deg. C. Further, the crystals already referred to were
dissolved in ether, and then allowed to evaporate, when long colorless
needles were obtained, which, on being placed in a dry test tube and
the tube placed in a water bath kept at 42 deg. C., were found to melt;
and on making a careful combustion analysis of these crystals, the
following composition was obtained:

                   Carbon     76.6
                   Hydrogen    6.4
                   Oxygen     17.0
                             -----
                             100.0

This gives C_{6}H_{6}O, which is the formula for phenol.

On dissolving some of these crystals in water (excess) and adding
ferric chloride, a beautiful violet color was imparted to the
solution. To another aqueous solution of the crystals was added
