
In silence they watched the panorama grow black except for the
street-lamps, remain thus for a time, and then suddenly spring into
brilliantly illuminated activity.

Again this lasted for a little while, and the west once more began
to glow. The sun rose somewhat more hastily from the Jersey hills
and began to soar overhead, but very soon darkness fell again. With
hardly an interval the city became illuminated, and then the west
grew red once more.

"Apparently," said Arthur, steadying his voice with a conscious
effort, "there's been a cataclysm somewhere, the direction of
the earth's rotation has been reversed, and its speed immensely
increased. It seems to take only about five minutes for a rotation
now."

As he spoke darkness fell for the third time. Estelle turned from
the window with a white face.

"What's going to happen?" she cried.

"I don't know," answered Arthur. "The scientist fellows tell us
if the earth were to spin fast enough the centrifugal force would
throw us all off into space. Perhaps that's what's going to happen."

Estelle sank into a chair and stared at him, appalled. There was a
sudden explosion behind them. With a start, Estelle jumped to her
feet and turned. A little gilt clock over her typewriter-desk lay
in fragments. Arthur hastily glanced at his own watch.

"Great bombs and little cannon-balls!" he shouted. "Look at this!"

His watch trembled and quivered in his hand. The hands were going
around so swiftly it was impossible to watch the minute-hand,
and the hour-hand traveled like the wind.

While they looked, it made two complete revolutions. In one of
them the glory of daylight had waxed, waned, and vanished. In the
other, darkness reigned except for the glow from the electric
light overhead.

There was a sudden tension and catch in the watch. Arthur dropped
it instantly. It flew to pieces before it reached the floor.

"If you've got a watch," Arthur ordered swiftly, "stop it this
instant!"

Estelle fumbled at her wrist. Arthur tore the watch from her hand
and threw open the case. The machinery inside was going so swiftly
it was hardly visible; Relentlessly, Arthur jabbed a penholder in
the works. There was a sharp click, and the watch was still.

Arthur ran to the window. As he reached it the sun rushed up, day
lasted a moment, there was darkness, and then the sun appeared again.

"Miss Woodward!" Arthur ordered suddenly, "look at the ground!"

Estelle glanced down. The next time the sun flashed into view
she gasped.

The ground was white with snow!

"What _has_ happened?" she demanded, terrified. "Oh, what _has_
happened?"

Arthur fumbled at his chin awkwardly, watching the astonishing
panorama outside. There was hardly any distinguishing between
the times the sun was up and the times it was below now, as the
darkness and light followed each other so swiftly the effect was
the same as one of the old flickering motion-pictures.

As Arthur watched, this effect became more pronounced. The tall
Fifth Avenue Building across the way began to disintegrate. In a
moment, it seemed, there was only a skeleton there. Then that
vanished, story by story. A great cavity in the earth appeared,
and then another building became visible, a smaller, brown-stone,
unimpressive structure.

With bulging eyes Arthur stared across the city. Except for the
flickering, he could see almost clearly now.

He no longer saw the sun rise and set. There was merely a streak of
unpleasantly brilliant light across the sky. Bit by bit, building
by building, the city began to disintegrate and become replaced
by smaller, dingier buildings. In a little while those began to
disappear and leave gaps where they vanished.

Arthur strained his eyes and looked far down-town. He saw a forest
of masts and spars along the waterfront for a moment and when
he turned his eyes again to the scenery near him it was almost
barren of houses, and what few showed were mean, small residences,
apparently set in the midst of farms and plantations.

Estelle was sobbing.

"Oh, Mr. Chamberlain," she cried. "What is the matter? What has
happened?"

Arthur had lost his fear of what their fate would be in his
absorbing interest in what he saw. He was staring out of the window,
wide-eyed, lost in the sight before him. At Estelle's cry, however,
he reluctantly left the window and patted her shoulder awkwardly.

"I don't know how to explain it," he said uncomfortably, "but it's
obvious that my first surmise was all wrong. The speed of the earth's
rotation can't have been increased, because if it had to the extent
we see, we'd have been thrown off into space long ago. But--have
you read anything about the Fourth Dimension?"

Estelle shook her head hopelessly.

"Well, then, have you ever read anything by Wells? The 'Time
Machine,' for instance?"

Again she shook her head.

"I don't know how I'm going to say it so you'll understand, but
time is just as much a dimension as length and breadth. From what I
can judge, I'd say there has been an earthquake, and the ground has
settled a little with our building on it, only instead of settling
down toward the center of the earth, or side-wise, it's settled in
this fourth dimension."

"But what does that mean?" asked Estelle uncomprehendingly.

"If the earth had settled down, we'd have been lower. If it had
settled to one side, we'd have been moved one way or another, but as
it's settled back in the Fourth Dimension, we're going back in time."

"Then--"

"We're in a runaway skyscraper, bound for some time back before
the discovery of America!"




III.


It was very still in the office. Except for the flickering outside
everything seemed very much as usual. The electric light burned
steadily, but Estelle was sobbing with fright and Arthur was trying
vainly to console her.

"Have I gone crazy?" she demanded between her sobs.

"Not unless I've gone mad, too," said Arthur soothingly. The
excitement had quite a soothing effect upon him. He had ceased to
feel afraid, but was simply waiting to see what had happened. "We're
way back before the founding of New York now, and still going
strong."

"Are you sure that's what has happened?"

"If you'll look outside," he suggested, "you'll see the seasons
following each other in reverse order. One moment the snow covers
all the ground, then you catch a glimpse of autumn foliage, then
summer follows, and next spring."

Estelle glanced out of the window and covered her eyes.

"Not a house," she said despairingly. "Not a building. Nothing,
nothing, nothing!"

Arthur slipped, his arm about her and patted hers comfortingly.

"It's all right," he reassured her. "We'll bring up presently,
and there we'll be. There's nothing to be afraid of."

She rested her head on his shoulder and sobbed hopelessly for
a little while longer, but presently quieted. Then, suddenly,
realizing that Arthur's arm was about her and that she was crying
on his shoulder, she sprang away, blushing crimson.

Arthur walked to the window.

"Look there!" he exclaimed, but it was too late. "I'll swear to
it I saw the Half Moon, Hudson's ship," he declared excitedly.
"We're way back now, and don't seem to be slacking up, either."

Estelle came to the window by his side. The rapidly changing scene
before her made her gasp. It was no longer possible to distinguish
night from day.

A wavering streak, moving first to the right and then to the left,
showed where the sun flashed across the sky.

"What makes the sun wabble so?" she asked.

"Moving north and south of the equator," Arthur explained
casually. "When it's farthest south--to the left--there's always
snow on the ground. When it's farthest right it's summer. See how
green it is?"

A few moments' observation corroborated his statement.

"I'd say," Arthur remarked reflectively, "that it takes about fifteen
seconds for the sun to make the round trip from farthest north to
farthest south." He felt his pulse. "Do you know the normal rate
of the heart-beat? We can judge time that way. A clock will go
all to pieces, of course."

"Why did your watch explode--and the clock?"

"Running forward in time unwinds a clock, doesn't it?" asked
Arthur. "It follows, of course, that when you move it backward in
time it winds up. When you move it too far back, you wind it so
tightly that the spring just breaks to pieces."

He paused a moment, his fingers on his pulse.

"Yes, it takes about fifteen seconds for all the four seasons to
pass. That means we're going backward in time about four years a
minute. If we go on at this rate another hour we'll be back in the
time of the Northmen, and will be able to tell if they did discover
America, after all."

"Funny we don't hear any noises," Estelle observed. She had caught
some of Arthur's calmness.

"It passes so quickly that though our ears hear it, we don't separate
the sounds. If you'll notice, you do hear a sort of humming.
It's very high-pitched, though."

Estelle listened, but could hear nothing.

"No matter," said Arthur. "It's probably a little higher than your
ears will catch. Lots of people can't hear a bat squeak."

"I never could," said Estelle. "Out in the country, where I come
from, other people could hear them, but I couldn't."

They stood a while in silence, watching.

"When are we going to stop?" asked Estelle uneasily. "It seems as
if we're going to keep on indefinitely."

"I guess we'll stop all right," Arthur reassured her. "It's obvious
that whatever it was, only affected our own building, or we'd see
some other one with us. It looks like a fault or a flaw in the rock
the building rests on. And that can only give so far."

Estelle was silent for a moment.

"Oh, I can't be sane!" she burst out semihysterically. "This can't
be happening!"

"You aren't crazy," said Arthur sharply. "You're sane as I am. Just
something queer is happening. Buck up. Say your multiplication
tables. Say anything you know. Say something sensible and you'll
know you're all right. But don't get frightened now. There'll be
plenty to get frightened about later."

The grimness in his tone alarmed Estelle.

"What are you afraid of?" she asked quickly.
