has occurred. In such "kemps," as Dr. Bowman has shown, scales have
disappeared, and the fibre has become, in part or whole, a dense,
non-cellular structure, resisting dye-penetration and felting (see Fig.
14).

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

One of the physical properties of wool is its hygroscopicity or power of
absorbing moisture. As the very structure of wool and fur fibre would
lead us to suppose, these substances are able to absorb a very
considerable amount of water without appearing damp. If exposed freely
to the air in warm and dry weather, wool retains from 8 to 10 per cent.,
and if in a damp place for some time, it may absorb as much as from 30
to 50 per cent. of water: Wool, fur, or hair that has been washed,
absorbs the most moisture; indeed, the amount of water taken up varies
inversely with the fatty or oily matter present. Hence the less fat the
more moisture. In the washed wool, those fibres in which the cells are
more loosely arranged have the greatest absorbing power for water. No
doubt the moisture finds its way in between the cells of the wool fibre
from which the oil or fat has been removed. But I need hardly remind you
that if wool and fur are capable, according to the circumstances under
which they are placed, of absorbing so much moisture as that indicated,
it becomes (especially in times of pressure and competition) very
important to inquire if it be not worth while to cease paying wool and
fur prices for mere water. This question was answered long ago in the
negative by our Continental neighbours, and in Germany, France, and
Switzerland official conditioning establishments have been founded by
the Governments of those countries for the purpose of testing lots of
purchased wool and silk, etc., for moisture, in order that this moisture
may be deducted from the invoices, and cash paid for real dry wool, etc.
I would point out that if you, as hat manufacturers, desire to enter the
lists with Germany, you must not let her have any advantage you have
not, and it is an advantage to pay for what you know exactly the
composition of, rather than for an article that may contain 7 per cent.
or, for aught you know, 17 per cent. or 30 per cent. of water. There is,
so far as I know, no testing for water in wools and furs in this
country, and certainly no "conditioning establishments" (1887), and, I
suppose, if a German or French wool merchant or furrier could be
imagined as selling wool, etc., in part to a German or French firm, and
in part to an English one, the latter would take the material without a
murmur, though it might contain 10 per cent., or, peradventure, 30 per
cent. of water, and no doubt the foreign, just as the English merchant
or dealer, would get the best price he could, and regard the possible 10
per cent. or 30 per cent. of water present with certainly the more
equanimity the more of that very cheap element there were present. But
look at the other side. The German or French firm samples its lot as
delivered, takes the sample to be tested, and that 10 or 30 per cent. of
water is deducted, and only the dry wool is paid for. A few little
mistakes of this kind, I need hardly say, will altogether form a kind of
_vade mecum_ for the foreign competitor.

We will now see what the effect of water is in the felting operation.
Especially hot water assists that operation, and the effect is a
curious one. When acid is added as well, the felting is still further
increased, and shrinking also takes place. As already shown you, the
free ends of the scales, themselves softened by the warm dilute acid,
are extended and project more, and stand out from the shafts of the
hairs. On the whole, were I a hat manufacturer, I should prefer to buy
my fur untreated by that nitric acid and mercury process previously
referred to, and promote its felting properties myself by the less
severe and more rational course of proceeding, such, for example, as
treatment with warm dilute acid. We have referred to two enemies
standing in the way to the obtainment of a final lustre and finish on
felted wool or fur, now let us expose a third. In the black dyeing of
the hat-forms a boiling process is used. Let us hear what Dr. Bowman, in
his work on the wool fibre, says with regard to boiling with water.
"Wool which looked quite bright when well washed with tepid water, was
decidedly duller when kept for some time in water at a temperature of
160 deg. F., and the same wool, when subjected to boiling water at 212 deg. F.,
became quite dull and lustreless. When tested for strength, the same
fibres which carried on the average 500 grains without breaking before
boiling, after boiling would not bear more than 480 grains." Hence this
third enemy is a boiling process, especially a long-continued one if
only with water itself. If we could use coal-tar colours and dye in only
a warm weak acid bath, not boil, we could get better lustre and finish.

We will now turn our attention to the chemical composition of wool and
fur fibres. On chemical analysis still another element is found over and
above those mentioned as the constituents of silk fibre. In silk, you
will recollect, we observed the presence of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
and nitrogen. In wool, fur, etc., we must add a fifth constituent,
namely, sulphur. Here is an analysis of pure German wool--Carbon, 49.25
per cent.; hydrogen, 7.57; oxygen, 23.66; nitrogen, 15.86; sulphur,
3.66--total, 100.00. If you heat either wool, fur, or hair to 130 deg. C.,
it begins to decompose, and to give off ammonia; if still further heated
to from 140 deg. to 150 deg. C., vapours containing sulphur are evolved. If some
wool be placed in a dry glass tube, and heated strongly so as to cause
destructive distillation, products containing much carbonate of ammonium
are given off. The ammonia is easily detected by its smell of hartshorn
and the blue colour produced on a piece of reddened litmus paper, the
latter being a general test to distinguish alkalis, like ammonia, soda,
and potash, from acids. No vegetable fibres will, under any
circumstances, give off ammonia. It may be asked, "But what does the
production of ammonia prove?" I reply, the "backbone," chemically
speaking, of ammonia is nitrogen. Ammonia is a compound of nitrogen and
hydrogen, and is formulated NH_{3}, and hence to discover ammonia in the
products as mentioned is to prove the prior existence of its nitrogen in
the wool, fur, and hair fibres.

_Action of Acids on Wool, etc._--Dilute solutions of vitriol (sulphuric
acid) or hydrochloric acid (muriatic acid, spirits of salt) have little
effect on wool, whether warm or cold, except to open out the scales and
confer roughness on the fibre. Used in the concentrated state, however,
the wool or fur would soon be disintegrated and ruined. But under all
circumstances the action is far less than on cotton, which is destroyed
at once and completely. Nitric acid acts like sulphuric and hydrochloric
acids, but it gives a yellow colour to the fibre. You see this clearly
enough in the fur that comes from your furriers after the treatment they
subject it to with nitric acid and nitrate of mercury. There is a
process known called the stripping of wool, and it consists in
destroying the colour of wool and woollen goods already dyed, in order
that they may be re-dyed. Listen, however, to the important precautions
followed: A nitric acid not stronger than from 3 deg. to 4 deg. Twaddell is
used, and care is taken not to prolong the action more than three or
four minutes.

_Action of Alkalis._--Alkalis have a very considerable action on fur and
wool, but the effects vary a good deal according to the kind of alkali
used, the strength and the temperature of the solution, as also, of
course, the length of period of contact. The caustic alkalis, potash and
soda, under all conditions affect wool and fur injuriously. In fact, we
have a method of recovering indigo from indigo-dyed woollen rags, based
on the solubility of the wool in hot caustic soda. The wool dissolves,
and the indigo, being insoluble, remains, and can be recovered. Alkaline
carbonates and soap in solution have little or no injurious action if
not too strong, and if the temperature be not over 50 deg. C. (106 deg. F.).
Soap and carbonate of ammonium have the least injurious action. Every
washer or scourer of wool, when he uses soaps, should first ascertain if
they are free from excess of alkali, _i.e._ that they contain no free
alkali; and when he uses soda ash (sodium carbonate), that it contains
no caustic alkali. Lime, in water or otherwise, acts injuriously,
rendering the fibre brittle.

_Reactions and tests proving chemical differences and illustrating modes
of discriminating and separating vegetable fibres, silk and wool, fur,
etc._--You will remember I stated that the vegetable fibre differs
chemically from those of silk, and silk from wool, fur, and hair, in
that with the first we have as constituents only carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen; in silk we have carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen; whilst
in wool, fur, and hair we have carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and
sulphur. I have already shown you that if we can liberate by any means
ammonia from a substance, we have practically proved the presence of
nitrogen in that substance, for ammonia is a nitrogen compound. As
regards sulphur and its compounds, that ill-smelling gas, sulphuretted
hydrogen, which occurs in rotten eggs, in organic effluvia from
cesspools and the like, and which in the case of bad eggs, and to some
extent with good eggs, turns the silver spoons black, and in the case of
white lead paints turns these brown or black, I can show you some still
more convincing proofs that sulphur is contained in wool, fur, and hair,
and not in silk nor in vegetable fibres. First, I will heat strongly
some cotton with a little soda-lime in a tube, and hold a piece of
moistened red litmus paper over the mouth of the tube. If nitrogen is
present it will take up hydrogen in the decomposition ensuing, and
escape as ammonia, which will turn the red litmus paper blue. With the
cotton, however, no ammonia escapes, no turning of the piece of red
litmus paper blue is observed, and so no nitrogen can be present in the
cotton fibre. Secondly, I will similarly treat some silk. Ammonia
escapes, turns the red litmus paper blue, possesses the smell like
hartshorn, and produces, with hydrochloric acid on the stopper of a
bottle, dense white fumes of sal-ammoniac (ammonium chloride). Hence
silk contains nitrogen. Thirdly, I will heat some fur with soda-lime.
Ammonia escapes, giving all the reactions described under silk. Hence
fur, wool, etc., contain nitrogen. As regards proofs of all three of
these classes of fibres containing carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, the
char they all leave behind on heating in a closed vessel is the carbon
itself present. For the hydrogen and oxygen, a perfectly dry sample of
any of these fabrics is taken, of course in quantity, and heated
strongly in a closed vessel furnished with a condensing worm like a
still. You will find all give you water as a condensate--the vegetable
fibre, acid water; the animal fibres, alkaline water from the ammonia.
The presence of water proves both hydrogen and oxygen, since water is a
compound of these elements. If you put a piece of potassium in contact
with the water, the latter will at once decompose, the potassium
absorbing the oxygen, and setting free the hydrogen as gas, which you
could collect and ignite with a match, when you would find it would
burn. That hydrogen was the hydrogen forming part of your cotton, silk,
or wool, as the case might be. We must now attack the question of
sulphur. First, we prepare a little alkaline lead solution (sodium
plumbate) by adding caustic soda to a solution of lead acetate or sugar
of lead, until the white precipitate first formed is just dissolved.
That is one of our reagents; the other is a solution of a red-coloured
salt called nitroprusside of sodium, made by the action of nitric acid
on sodium ferrocyanide (yellow prussiate). The first-named is very
sensitive to sulphur, and turns black directly. To show this, we take a
quantity of flowers of sulphur, dissolve in caustic soda, and add to the
lead solution. It turns black at once, because the sulphur unites with
the lead to form black sulphide of lead. The nitroprusside, however,
gives a beautiful crimson-purple coloration. Now on taking a little
cotton and heating with the caustic alkaline lead solution, if sulphur
were present in that cotton, the fibre would turn black or brown, for
the lead would at once absorb such sulphur, and form in the fibre soaked
with it, black sulphide of lead. No such coloration is formed, so cotton
does not contain sulphur. Secondly, we must test silk. Silk contains
nitrogen, like wool, but does it contain sulphur? The answer furnished
by our tests is--no! since the fibre is not coloured brown or black on
heating with the alkaline lead solution. Thirdly, we try some white
Berlin wool, so that we can easily see the change of colour if it takes
place. In the hot lead solution the wool turns black, lead sulphide
being formed. On adding the nitroprusside solution to a fresh portion of
wool boiled with caustic soda, to dissolve out the sulphur, a splendid
purple coloration is produced. Fur and hair would, of course, do the
same thing. Lead solutions have been used for dyeing the hair black; not
caustic alkaline solutions like this, however. They would do something
more than turn the hair black--probably give rise to some vigorous
exercise of muscular power! Still it has been found that even the lead
solutions employed have, through gradual absorption into the system,
whilst dyeing the hair black, also caused colics and contractions of the
limbs.

Having now found means for proving the presence of the various elements
composing cotton, silk, and wool, fur or hair, we come to methods that
have been proposed for distinguishing these fibres more generally, and
for quantitatively determining them in mixtures. One of the best of the
reagents for this purpose is the basic zinc chloride already referred
to. This is made as follows: 100 parts of fused zinc chloride, 85 parts
of water, and 4 parts of zinc oxide are boiled together until a clear
solution is obtained. This solution dissolves silk slowly in the cold,
quickly if hot, and forms a thick gummy liquid. Wool, fur, and vegetable
fibres are not affected by it. Hence if we had a mixture, and treated
with this solution, we could strain off the liquid containing the
dissolved silk, and would get cotton and wool left. On weighing before
and after such treatment, the difference in weights would give us the
silk present. The residue boiled with caustic soda would lose all its
wool, which is soluble in hot strong caustic alkali. Again straining
off, we should get only the cotton or other vegetable fibre left, and
thus our problem would be solved. Of course there are certain additional
niceties and modifications still needed, and I must refer you for the
method in full to the _Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry_,
1882, page 64; also 1884, page 517. I will now conclude with some tests
with alkaline and acid reagents, taken in order, and first the acids.
These will also impress upon our minds the effects of acids and alkalis
on the different kinds of fibres.

I. In three flasks three similar portions of cotton lamp-wick, woollen
yarn, and silk are placed, after previously moistening them in water and
wringing them out. To each is now added similar quantities of
concentrated sulphuric acid. The cotton is quickly broken up and
dissolved, especially if assisted by gentle warming, and at last a
brown, probably a black-brown, solution is obtained. The woollen is a
little broken up, but not much to the naked eye, and the vitriol is not
coloured. The silk is at once dissolved, even in the cold acid. We now
add excess of water to the contents of each flask. A brownish, though
clear, solution is produced in the case of cotton; the woollen floats
not much injured in the acid, whilst a clear limpid solution is obtained
with the silk. On adding tannic acid solution to all three, only the
silk yields a precipitate, a rather curdy one consisting of fibroin.

II. Three specimens of cotton, wool, and silk, respectively, are touched
with nitric acid. Cotton is not coloured, but wool and silk are stained
yellow; they are practically dyed.

III. Three specimens, of cotton, wool, and silk, respectively, are
placed in three flasks, and caustic soda solution of specific gravity
1.05 (10 deg. Twaddell) is added. On boiling, the wool and silk dissolve,
whilst the cellulose fibre, cotton, remains undestroyed.

IV. If, instead of caustic soda as in III., a solution of oxide of
copper in ammonia be used, cotton and silk are dissolved, but wool
remains unchanged, _i.e._ undissolved. If sugar or gum solutions be
added to the solutions of cotton and silk, the cotton cellulose is
precipitated, whilst the silk is not, but remains in solution.

V. Another alkaline solvent for silk, which, however, leaves undissolved
cotton and wool, is prepared as follows: 16 grains of copper sulphate
("blue vitriol," "bluestone") are dissolved in 150 c.c. of water, and
then 16 grains of glycerin are added. To this mixture a solution of
caustic soda is added until the precipitate first formed is just
re-dissolved, so as not to leave an excess of caustic soda present.




LECTURE III

WATER: ITS CHEMISTRY AND PROPERTIES; IMPURITIES AND THEIR ACTION; TESTS
OF PURITY


I have already had occasion to refer, in my last Lecture, to water as a
chemical substance, as a compound containing and consisting of hydrogen
and oxygen. What are these water constituents, hydrogen and oxygen? Each
of them is a gas, but each a gas having totally different properties. On
decomposing water and collecting the one of these two gases, the
hydrogen gas, in one vessel, and the other, the oxygen gas, in another
vessel, twice as large a volume of hydrogen gas is given off by the
decomposing water as of oxygen. You may now notice a certain meaning in
the formula assigned to water, H_{2}O: two volumes of hydrogen combined
with one of oxygen; and it may be added that when such combination takes
place, not three volumes of resulting water vapour (steam), but two
volumes are produced. This combination of the two gases, when mixed
together, is determined by heating to a high temperature, or by passing
an electric spark; it then takes place with the consequent sudden
condensation of three volumes of mixture to two of compound, so as to
cause an explosion. I may also mention that as regards the weights of
these bodies, oxygen and hydrogen, the first is sixteen times as heavy
as the second; and since we adopt hydrogen as the unit, we may consider
H to stand for hydrogen, and also to signify 1--the unit; whilst O
means oxygen, and also 16. Hence the compound atom or molecule of
water, H_{2}O, weighs 18. I must now show you that these two gases are
possessed of totally different properties. Some gases will extinguish a
flame; some will cause the flame to burn brilliantly, but will not burn
themselves; and some will take fire and burn themselves, though
extinguishing the flame which has ignited them. We say the first are
non-combustible, and will not support combustion; the second are
supporters of combustion, the third are combustible gases. Of course
these are, as the lawyers say, only _ex parte_ statements of the truth;
still they are usually accepted. Oxygen gas will ignite a red-hot match,
but hydrogen will extinguish an inflamed one, though it will itself
burn. You generally think of water as the great antithesis of, the
universal antidote for, fire. The truth is here again only of an _ex
parte_ character, as I will show you. If I can, by means of a substance
having a more intense affinity for oxygen than hydrogen has, rob water
of its oxygen, I necessarily set the hydrogen that was combined with
that oxygen free. If the heat caused by the chemical struggle, so to
say, is great, that hydrogen will be inflamed and burn. Thus we are
destroying that antithesis, we are causing the water to yield us fire. I
will do this by putting potassium on water, and even in the cold this
potassium will seize upon the oxygen of the water, and the hydrogen will
take fire.

_Specific Gravity._--We must now hasten to other considerations of
importance. Water is generally taken as the unit in specific gravities
assigned to liquids and solids. This simply means that when we desire to
express how heavy a thing is, we are compelled to say it is so many
times heavier or lighter than something. That something is generally
water, which is regarded, consequently, as unit or figure 1. A body of
specific gravity 1.5, or 1-1/2, means that that body is 1-1/2 or 1.5
times as heavy as water. As hat manufacturers, you will have mostly to
do with the specific gravities of liquids, aqueous solutions, and you
will hear more of Twaddell degrees. The Twaddell hydrometer, or
instrument for measuring the specific gravities of liquids, is so
constructed that when it stands in water, the water is just level with
its zero or 0 deg. mark. Well, since in your reading of methods and new
processes, you will often meet with specific gravity numbers and desire
to convert these into Twaddell degrees, I will give you a simple means
of doing this. Add cyphers so as to make into a number of four figures,
then strike out the unit and decimal point farthest to the left, and
divide the residue by 5, and you get the corresponding Twaddell degrees.
If you have Twaddell degrees, simply multiply by 5, and add 1000 to the
result, and you get the specific gravity as usually taken, with water as
the unit, or in this case as 1000. An instrument much used on the
Continent is the Beaume hydrometer. The degrees (_n_) indicated by this
instrument can be converted into specific gravity (_d_) by the

    formula: _d_ = 144.3/(144.3 - n)

_Ebullition or Boiling of Water, Steam._--The atmosphere around us is
composed of a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen gases; not a compound of
these gases, as water is of hydrogen and oxygen, but a mixture more like
sand and water or smoke and air. This mass of gases has weight, and
presses upon objects at the surface of the earth to the extent of 15 lb.
on the square inch. Now some liquids, such as water, were it not for
this atmospheric pressure, would not remain liquids at all, but would
become gases. The pressure thus tends to squeeze gases together and
convert them into liquids. Any force that causes gases to contract will
do the same thing, of course--for example, cold; and _ceteris paribus_
removal of pressure and expansion by heat will act so as to gasify
liquids. When in the expansion of liquids a certain stage or degree is
reached, different for different liquids, gas begins to escape so
quickly from the liquid that bubbles of vapour are continually formed
and escape. This is called ebullition or boiling. A certain removal of
pressure, or expansion by heat, is necessary to produce this, _i.e._ to
reach the boiling-point of the liquid. As regards the heat necessary for
the boiling of water at the surface of the earth, _i.e._ under the
atmospheric pressure of 15 lb. on the square inch, this is shown on the
thermometer of Fahrenheit as 212 deg., and on the simpler centigrade one, as
100 deg., water freezing at 0 deg. C. But if what I have said is true, when we
remove some of the atmospheric pressure, the water should boil with a
less heat than will cause the mercury in the thermometer to rise to 100 deg.
C., and if we take off all the pressure, the water ought to boil and
freeze at the same time. This actually happens in the Carre ice-making
machine. The question now arises, "Why does the water freeze in the
Carre machine?" All substances require certain amounts of heat to enable
them to take and to maintain the liquid state if they are ordinarily
solid, and the gaseous state if ordinarily liquid or solid, and the
greater the change of state the greater the heat needed. Moreover, this
heat does not make them warm, it is simply absorbed or swallowed up, and
becomes latent, and is merely necessary to maintain the new condition
assumed. In the case of the Carre machine, liquid water is, by removal
of the atmospheric pressure, coerced, as it were, to take the gaseous
form. But to do so it needs to absorb the requisite amount of heat to
aid it in taking that form, and this heat it must take up from all
surrounding warm objects. It absorbs quickly all it can get out of
itself as liquid water, out of the glass vessel containing it, and from
the surrounding air. But the process of gasification with ebullition
goes on so quickly that the temperature of the water thus robbed of heat
quickly falls to 0 deg. C., and the remaining water freezes. Thus, then, by
pumping out the air from a vessel, _i.e._ working in a vacuum, we can
boil a liquid in such exhausted vessel far below its ordinary boiling
temperature in the open air. This fact is of the utmost industrial
importance. But touching this question of latent heat, you may ask me
for my proof that there is latent heat, and a large amount of it, in a
substance that feels perfectly cold. I have told you that a gasified
liquid, or a liquefied solid, or most of all a gasified solid, contains
such heat, and if reconverted into liquid and solid forms respectively,
that heat is evolved, or becomes sensible heat, and then it can be
decidedly felt and indicated by the thermometer. Take the case of a
liquid suddenly solidifying. The heat latent in that liquid, and
necessary to keep it a liquid, is no longer necessary and comes out, and
the substance appears to become hot. Quicklime is a cold, white, solid
substance, but there is a compound of water and lime--slaked lime--which
is also a solid powdery substance, called by the chemist, hydrate of
lime. The water used to slake the quicklime is a liquid, and it may be
ice-cold water, but to form hydrate of lime it must assume a solid form,
and hence can and does dispense with its heat of liquefaction in the
change of state. You all know how hot lime becomes on slaking with
water. Of course we have heat of chemical combination here as well as
evolution of latent heat. As another example, we may take a solution of
acetate of soda, so strong that it is just on the point of
crystallising. If it crystallises it solidifies, and the liquid
consequently gives up its latent heat of liquefaction. We will make it
crystallise, first connecting the tube containing it to another one
containing a coloured liquid and closed by a cork carrying a narrow tube
dipping into the coloured liquid. On crystallising, the solution gives
off heat, as is shown by the expansion of the air in the corked tube,
and the consequent forcing of the coloured liquid up the narrow tube.
Consequently in your works you never dissolve a salt or crystal in water
or other liquid without rendering heat latent, or consuming heat; you
never allow steam to condense in the steam pipes about the premises
without losing vastly more heat than possibly many are aware of. Let us
inquire as to the latent heat of water and of steam.

_Latent Heats of Water and Steam._--If we mix 1 kilogram (about 2 lb.)
of ice (of course at zero or 0 deg. C.) with 1 kilogram of water at 79 deg. C.,
and stir well till the ice is melted, _i.e._ has changed its state from
solid to liquid, we find, on putting a thermometer in, the temperature
is only 0 deg. C. This simply means that 79 deg. of heat (centigrade degrees)
have become latent, and represent the heat of liquefaction of 1 kilogram
of ice. Had we mixed 1 kilogram of water at 0 deg. C. with 1 kilogram of
water at 79 deg. C. there would have been no change of state, and the
temperature of the mixture might be represented as a distribution of the
79 deg. C. through the whole mass of the 2 kilograms, and so would be
39-1/2 deg. C. We say, therefore, the latent heat of water is the heat which
is absorbed or rendered latent when a unit of weight, say 1 kilogram of
water as ice, melts and liquefies to a unit of water at zero, or it is
79 heat units. These 79 units of heat would raise 79 units of weight of
liquid water through 1 deg. C., or one unit of liquid water through 79 deg..

Let us now inquire what the latent heat of steam is. If we take 1
kilogram of water at 0 deg. C. and blow steam from boiling water at 100 deg. C.
into it until the water just boils, and then stop and weigh the
resulting water, we shall find it amounts to 1.187 kilograms, so that
0.187 kilogram of water which was in the gaseous steam form, and had
besides a sensible heat of 100 deg. C., has changed its state to that of
liquid water. This liquid water, being at the boiling-point, has still
the 100 deg. C. of sensible heat, and hence the water in the gaseous steam
form can have given up to the water at 0 deg. C. into which it was blown,
only the latent heat of gasification which was not sensible, but by
virtue of which it was enabled to assume the gaseous form. But if 0.187
kilogram of steam at 100 deg. C. can heat 1 kilogram of water through 100
degrees, then 1 kilogram of steam can raise 5.36 kilograms of ice-cold
water through 100 degrees, or 536 kilograms through 1 degree, and thus
the latent heat of steam is 536 heat units.

_Effect of Increase of Pressure on the Boiling of Water._--Now we have
referred to diminution of pressure and its effect on the boiling-point
of water, and I may point out that by increasing the pressure, such,
_e.g._, as boiling water under a high pressure of steam, you raise the
boiling-point. There are some industrial operations in which the action
of certain boiling solutions is unavailing to effect certain
decompositions or other ends when the boiling is carried on under the
ordinary atmospheric pressure, and boiling in closed and strong vessels
under pressure must be resorted to. Take as an example the wood-pulp
process for making paper from wood shavings. Boiling in open pans with
caustic soda lye is insufficient to reduce the wood to pulp, and so
boiling in strong vessels under pressure is adopted. The temperature of
the solution rises far above 212 deg. F. (100 deg. C.). Let us see what may
result chemically from the attainment of such high temperatures of water
in our steam boilers working under high pressures. If you blow ordinary
steam at 212 deg. F. or 100 deg. C., into fats or oils, the fats and oils remain
undecomposed; but suppose you let fatty and oily matters of animal or
vegetable origin, such as lubricants, get into your boiler feed-water
and so into your boiler, what will happen? I have only to tell you that
a process is patented for decomposing fats with superheated steam, to
drive or distil over the admixed fatty acids and glycerin, in order to
show you that in your boilers such greasy matters will be more or less
decomposed. Fats are neutral as fats, and will not injure the iron of
the boilers; but once decompose them and they are split up into an acid
called a fat acid, and glycerin. That fat acid at the high temperature
soon attacks your boilers and pipes, and eats away the iron. That is one
of the curious results that may follow at such high temperatures.
Mineral or hydrocarbon oils do not contain these fat acids, and so
cannot possibly, even with high-pressure steam, corrode the boiler
metal.

_Effect of Dissolved Salts on the Boiling of Water._--Let us inquire
what this effect is? Suppose we dissolve a quantity of a salt in water,
and then blow steam at 100 deg. C. (212 deg. F.) into that water, the latter
will boil not at 212 deg. F., but at a higher temperature. There is a
certain industrial process I know of, in course of which it is necessary
first to maintain a vessel containing water, by means of a heated closed
steam coil, at 212 deg. F. (100 deg. C.), and at a certain stage to raise the
temperature to about 327 deg. F. (164 deg. C.). The pressure on the boiler
connected with the steam coil is raised to nearly seven atmospheres, and
thus the heat of the high-pressure steam rises to 327 deg. F. (164 deg. C.), and
then a considerable quantity of nitrate of ammonium, a crystallised
salt, is thrown into the water, in which it dissolves. Strange to say,
although the water alone would boil at 212 deg. F., a strong solution in
water of the ammonium nitrate only boils at 327 deg. F., so that the effect
of dissolving that salt in the water is the same as if the pressure were
raised to seven atmospheres. Now let us, as hat manufacturers, learn a
practical lesson from this fact. We have observed that wool and fur
fibres are injured by boiling in pure water, and the heat has much to do
with this damage; but if the boiling take place in bichrome liquors or
similar solutions, that boiling will, according to the strength of the
solution in dissolved matters, take place at a temperature more or less
elevated above the boiling-point of water, and so the damage done will
be the more serious the more concentrated the liquors are, quite
independently of the nature of the substances dissolved in those
liquors.

_Solution._--We have already seen that when a salt of any kind dissolves
in water, heat is absorbed, and becomes latent; in other words, cold is
produced. I will describe a remarkable example or experiment, well
illustrating this fact. If you take some Glauber's salt, crystallised
sulphate of soda, and mix it with some hydrochloric acid (or spirits of
salt), then so rapidly will the solution proceed, and consequently so
great will be the demand for heat, that if a vessel containing water be
put in amongst the dissolving salt, the heat residing in that vessel and
its water will be rapidly extracted, and the water will freeze. As
regards solubility, some salts and substances are much more quickly and
easily dissolved than others. We are generally accustomed to think that
to dissolve a substance quickly we cannot do better than build a fire
under the containing vessel, and heat the liquid. This is often the
correct method of proceeding, but not always. Thus it would mean simply
loss of fuel, and so waste of heat, to do this in dissolving ordinary
table salt or rock salt in water, for salt is as soluble in cold water
as in hot. Some salts are, incredible though it may appear, less soluble
in boiling water than in cold. Water just above the freezing-point
dissolves nearly twice as much lime as it does when boiling. You see,
then, that a knowledge of certain important facts like these may be so
used as to considerably mitigate your coal bills, under given
circumstances and conditions.




LECTURE IV

WATER: ITS CHEMISTRY AND PROPERTIES; IMPURITIES AND THEIR ACTION; TESTS
OF PURITY--_Continued_


In the last lecture, under the head of "Solution," I mentioned that some
salts, some chemical substances, are more soluble in water than others,
and that their solubilities under different circumstances of temperature
vary in different ways. However, some salts and compounds are
practically insoluble in water under any circumstances. We now arrive at
the important result known to chemists as the precipitation of insoluble
compounds from solutions. In order to define this result, however, we
must, of course, first consider the circumstances of causation of the
result. Let us take a simple case of chemical decomposition resulting in
the deposition or precipitation of a substance from solution in the
insoluble state. We will take a salt you are probably acquainted
with--sulphate of copper, or bluestone, and dissolve it in water, and we
have then the sulphate of copper in solution in water. Now suppose it is
our desire to obtain from that solution all the copper by depositing it
in some insoluble form. We may accomplish this in several different
ways, relying on certain methods of decomposing that sulphate of copper.
One of the simplest and most economical is that adopted in a certain
so-called wet method of extracting copper. It is based on the fact that
metallic iron has a greater tendency to combine in water solutions, with
the acids of copper salts, than the copper has in those salts. We
simply need to place some scraps of iron in the copper sulphate solution
to induce a change which may be represented as follows: Copper sulphate,
consisting of a combination of copper oxide with sulphuric acid, yields
with iron, iron sulphate, a combination of iron oxide with sulphuric
acid, and metallic copper. The metallic copper produced separates in the
form of a red coating on the iron scraps. But we may also, relying on
the fact that oxide of copper is insoluble in water, arrange for the
