for amusement and hunting, and also the beginnings of the development
of agriculture. A type of such a nation of barbarism would be the
Indians who used to live here--the Algonkian--the Delaware Indians.
When the first Europeans came to the shores of the Delaware River they
did not find absolutely rude savages. The Delaware Indians had
moderately stationary villages surrounded by pickets, the houses being
built of strong timber; they had large fields of maize, pumpkins,
squashes and beans, which they cultivated diligently during the summer
and stored the food for their winter's supply. They depended largely,
to be sure, upon hunting and fishing also; but along with that they
had these simple arts: From the rushes which grew below Philadelphia,
in a place called the "Neck," they used to weave mats for protecting
the floors and also for building the sides of their summer houses and
for sleeping upon. They had a method of tanning and dressing buckskin
and using it for the purposes of clothing. They were by no means naked
savages; they were clothed, and tolerably well clothed; they could
make pottery, and the pottery was decorated sometimes with interesting
designs, of which we have specimens in our cabinets. Therefore, we
find among the old Delaware Indians who formerly lived on the site of
Philadelphia a fair specimen of a nation in a barbarous stage,
decidedly superior to the Australian natives of to-day or the Indians
of the Terra del Fuego or the northern part of British America, who
are in the state of complete savagery.

Above that is the period of semi-civilization, a stage marked by the
discovery of the method of building stone walls. No Algonkian or
Iroquois Indian ever built a stone wall in his life; there is no
record of any and no signs of any throughout the United States east of
the Mississippi; there was never a stone wall built by a native tribe
that really amounted to anything more than a stone pile; but we do
find that in the southwest, among the cliff dwellers, and in various
parts of Central America and South America, the stone wall was not
only known, but it was constructed with a great deal of durability and
skill. Also, some knowledge of metals was found among most of the
semi-civilized people. The Mexicans and the Peruvians were in a state
of semi-civilization when they were discovered by the whites the first
time. They, built many extensive temples and houses, erected
frequently upon pyramids, the pyramids themselves being supported by
stone walls. They knew the dressing of stone; they were distinctly
agricultural and depended more on that than anything else for their
food supply. They had developed a system of mnemonic records which, in
the Yucatan culture, might be called picture writing, but was not
phonetic writing in our true sense of the term. The also knew
something about weighing and measuring. They had definite laws, laws
which were carried out by properly appointed individuals. Their towns
and cities would often number thousands of inhabitants; they had roads
connecting them, which roads were kept in good condition; they had a
regular army made up of men selected and trained for that purpose. In
all these respects we see nations who were semi-civilized, but they
were not yet civilized. We could call a nation civilized that had a
distinct system of phonetic writing and used it; but not all nations
having this are civilized. It is only when it is used freely and for
purposes of business that we can call them civilized.

The wild Tuaregs of the Sahara have a system of phonetic writing used
by a few of them--the women being the literati of those tribes (the
men not knowing how to read or write); but civilization means more
than this; it means the use of iron weapons and tools; it means also
the adoption of a definite currency which is established on a fixed
basis and recognized throughout the community; it means the
establishment of commercial lines--a progress distinct above that
which is the mere barter of the lower conditions of savagery and
barbarism. In all these respects we see that civilization means a type
about such as we enjoy at present. It is such as has existed in Europe
since the Renaissance; because during the middle ages we could only
say that Europe was in a semi-civilized condition. They knew something
about writing; but at a time when Dean, the writer of the early
history of England, said that throughout the whole of England there
were not half a dozen men who could read what he had written, you can
see that writing was a very unimportant part of the culture of that
nation; so it can only be when writing becomes a common possession of
the majority that we can call it an element of civilization.

It is not to be supposed that we ourselves have reached the type of
the highest culture. We leave something for our descendants to do. We
do not wish to relieve them of the privilege of being better than
ourselves; and we shall leave them, probably, plenty of room; because
it is supposed that the stage of enlightenment which is the highest
stage of culture--which we foresee, but do not see--that that rather
applies to the future than to ourselves. That period will come when
mankind has freed itself very much more than now from the bonds of
nature and the environment of society. It will come when the ideas of
our equality are much more perfect than they are now; when that
equality extends to the equality of women with men before the law and
in all rights; when it comes to the equality of all men of all castes
before the law and the equal opportunity of all men to obtain that
which is best in the life of all. We are very far from that yet. It
will come also when the idea of international legislation is such that
it will not be necessary, in order to cure great evils, that we should
have recourse to weapons of any material whatsoever; that time is not
yet come; and so we have much that is left for our descendants to work
out in this direction.

It would, however, appear that all these various criteria which I have
named are somewhat unsatisfactory. They do not, it appears to me,
quite touch the question at issue. They are in a measure external
measures altogether--even that somewhat psychological one which I
quoted from the German authorities. Were I to propose a criterion, or
a series of criteria, of culture which could be applied to all
nations, it would be that which might as well and easily be applied to
each individual; and when we come to apply it in that manner it is
much more easy to understand its bearing. Herbert Spencer, in defining
what he means by culture, says: "It means the knowledge of one thing
thoroughly and a knowledge of the groundwork of all other branches of
human knowledge." He claimed that we can only understand one thing
thoroughly; but that we could and ought to understand the general
outline of all other things which are studied by mankind. This is
somewhat defective, it appears, because it bases culture entirely from
an intellectual point of view; and if man were merely a walking
intellectual machine, it would be well enough; but he is not; for the
intellectual man is but a small portion of his life. We are engaged,
most of our time, in something which is very far from purely
intellectual action. We are governed distinctly by our emotions and
our feelings--our sentiments; and culture must touch them, or it is
vague and empty. Therefore it is that I would say that we should think
with Goethe--to whom we must often recur for an insight into the
profoundest trends of human nature--must recur to him; and we find
that he lays down the principle of culture in the individual to be "A
general sympathy with all the highest ideas which have governed and
are governing the human mind." He said: "We should keep ourselves
first (each man and woman should keep himself and herself) in touch
with the highest elements of his and her own nature." He said, "It is
not so difficult, if we give but a little time to it--provided we give
that time regularly. We must remember," he says, "to cultivate our
intellect by some study, every day and our sense of the beautiful by
looking at something which is beautiful; and there is much around us
which costs us nothing to look at were we to observe it--the cloud,
the sunlight, the tree, the flower, a butterfly--anything of that kind
studied for a few minutes each day would continue to develop in man's
mind the sense of the beautiful. We should also appreciate carefully
our actions and govern them and measure them, as to whether they are
just to others--a matter which a very few minutes a day will probably
enable us to do;" and so also he would go further and seek to find, in
the idea of truth itself, as to what we ought and ought not to
believe--trying to discover some one test of truth which we can apply.

Indeed, we may therefore formulate and apply to nations at large what
Goethe has there suggested; and we shall find it can be arranged in
what I may call a pentatonic scale of culture. You may be aware that
all musical scales of all savage and barbarous and primitive tribes
are not in the octave, as ours, but in five notes only; they all have
one musical scale only, and that is a pentatonic scale; and it is
perhaps because they feel that their own minds are based upon some
such arrangement as that (although that is an idea which I do not
subscribe to, but only suggest); but when we come to look over the
whole cycle of culture, as we find it described in the histories of
culture--in the histories of civilization--we find that they are all
efforts to develop one or the other, or several, of five primary ideas
which are in the mind of every human being; and when they are
developed, then culture is perfect, either in the individual or in the
nation or the race. These five primitive ideas, innate in every human
soul, are the ideas of the useful, of the beautiful, of the just, of
the good and of the true, and you will not find any savage (provided
he is not deficient in the ordinary mental ability of his tribe) who
does not indicate an appreciation of every one of these in his own
way. It is the idea of the useful which teaches him his utilitarian
arts; which teaches him to build his house; to chip the flint for his
weapon; to sharpen the stick to dig the place to drop the seed; and
all those we call the arts of utility, the useful arts; and yet you
will not find a savage tribe to-day but what goes somewhat above this;
because among them all they make also an effort that these tools and
weapons of theirs shall have some sign about them of the beautiful;
and you will find decoration--indeed, "the painted savage" is a name
we give to the lowest order of humanity; yet this same paint is to
make himself beautiful; and so it is throughout all his games and
amusements in life--you will find he is constantly striving at the
idea of decoration--at the idea of beauty; little by little he
develops this, until it becomes, in some nations, the joy of their
existence and the lesson of the race, as in the ancient Greeks; as in
the Italians of the time of the Renaissance. These are what we call
the aesthetic emotions, based upon an innate sense and love of the
beautiful: and we may also turn to the lowest savage--we shall not
find him deficient in justice; on the contrary, among the rudest
Australians, without shelter or clothing, you will find that the law
of the tribe is well defined and also implacable; and a man who has
sinned knows that he must meet it or flee; he knows that there is no
avail or recourse beyond the tribal council, and he knows what they
will decide in his particular case, because he knows the law and the
penalty of its infringement. And this rude notion of justice develops,
little by little, into the great edifice of jurisprudence, the law of
nation and the law of nations. Thus we find that the idea of the just,
and of what is right from man to man, is something which is found
everywhere; and as that develops culture develops; but the mere just
alone does not satisfy the human heart; the man who merely metes out
to his fellow that which the tribal law, or the law of the land,
requires of him, certainly is not up to the ideal of any man or woman
in this assembly or in this city.

There is something beyond that, and what is that? We find that it
rests in the idea of the good--that which is often brought forward in
the beautiful forms of religion, which tells man that above justice
there is something greater and nobler than mere ethics or
morality--the mere right and wrong--the mere giving what is due. It is
not enough to do that; there must be a giving of more than is due;
because the idea of the good transcends the present life--it passes
into the future life of the species; and it is only through going
above what is needed to-day that we may endow our posterity with
something greater than we ourselves possess. It is the idea of the
good, therefore, which lifts that which is merely just into a
higher--into, I might say, an immortal sphere of activity. It has
always had an intense attraction for noble souls, which history shows
us; and it is not to be supposed that that attraction will ever
diminish; it will ever increase, although its forms may change; and
finally, along with this betterment of the emotions, and of the sense
of justice--of right and of ethics and of aesthetics--we find the
constant effort and desire of all mankind, in all stages of culture,
to find out what is true, as distinct from that which is not true. You
will not be mistaken if you seek for this in the soul of the rudest
savage; he, too, likes to know the truth. The methods by which he
arrives at it, or seeks to arrive at it, are widely different from
those which you have been taught. Nevertheless, the logical force of
his mind; the methods of thought that he has; the laws that govern his
intelligence, are exactly the same as yours: and it is only with your
enlightenment you have gained more and more acquaintance with the
methods. You know something about the great discovery which has
advanced all modern science from its mediaeval condition to that of the
present--of the application of the inductive system of science and
thought; and you know that it is by constant and close mathematical
study of analogy--of probability--that we exclude error little by
little from our observations--we improve more and more our instruments
of precision--we count out the errors of our observation; and we are
constantly seeking those laws which are not transient and ephemeral
only, but which are eternal and immortal. Upon those laws, finally,
must rest all our real, certain knowledge; and it is the endeavor of
the anthropologist to apply those laws to man and his development; and
such, indeed, is the recognized and highest mission of that science.
We thus find that the idea of truth is at the summit of this scale
which I have placed before you--not separated from it. It interprets
every one of the ideas and justifies them and qualifies them and lifts
them up into their highest usefulness. Chevalier Bunsen, in describing
what he thought would be the highest condition of human enlightenment,
said, "It will be when the good will be the true and the true will be
the good;" and he might have extended that further and said, when both
those ideas were the inspiring motives of all these five great ideas
which I have stated are at the basis of the culture of every
individual and are also at the basis of the culture of the race and of
the nation.

This, therefore, will serve as a sketch of the milestones of human
progress. The way has been long and painful; the results have been far
from satisfactory; and yet they have been enormous and wonderful, when
we compare them now with what our ancestors were when history began.
We can conclude, however, from looking back on this thorny and upward
path, that it is still going to ascend; we do not know it for certain;
progress may cease, through some unknown law, now and here; but if
there is anything that we can derive from the lesson of the past--if
we can project into the future any of the facts which history shows us
are our own now--it guides us forward to a firm belief that the
hereafter will have in its breast greater treasures for humanity,
greater glories for posterity, than any that we know or can
understand.

       *       *       *       *       *




TOMBS OF THE FIRST EGYPTIAN DYNASTY.[1]

    [Footnote 1: The Independent.]

By LUDWIG BORCHARDT, Ph.D., Director of the German School in
Cairo.


For many years various European collections of Egyptian antiquities
have contained a certain series of objects which gave archaeologists
great difficulty. There were vases of a peculiar form and color,
greenish plates of slate, many of them in curious animal forms, and
other similar things. It was known, positively, that these objects had
been found in Egypt, but it was impossible to assign them a place in
the known periods of Egyptian art. The puzzle was increased in
difficulty by certain plates of slate with hunting and battle scenes
and other representations in relief in a style so strange that many
investigators considered them products of the art of Western Asia.

The first light was thrown on the question in the winter of 1894-95 by
the excavations of Flinders Petrie in Ballas and Neggadeh, two places
on the west bank of the Nile, a little below ancient Thebes. This
persevering English investigator discovered here a very large
necropolis in which he examined about three thousand graves. They all
contained the same kinds of pottery and the same slate tablets
mentioned above, and many other objects which did not seem to be
Egyptian. It was plain that the newly found necropolis and the
puzzling objects already in the museums belonged to the same period.
Petrie assumed that they represented the art of a foreign
people--perhaps the Libyans--who had temporarily resided in Egypt in
the time between the old and the middle kingdoms. He gave this unknown
people the name "New Race." But his theory met with little approval,
least of all from German Egyptologists; and even at that time, an
opinion was expressed that this unusual art belonged before the known
beginning of Egyptian culture. However, in spite of much discussion,
the question could not then be decided.

About the same time another riddle was presented to Egyptologists by
the results of the excavations made in Abydos by the French scholar
Amelineau; and another hot discussion was raised. Amelineau had
excavated several large tombs and had also found objects which could
not be arranged in the known development of Egyptian art. The
fortunate discoverer ascribed these to the dynasties of the demigods,
who, according to Egyptian tradition, reigned before the kings; but of
course this idea met with determined opposition, and indeed especially
among his French colleagues. The tomb of Abydos offered, however, on
quiet consideration, more material for establishing its date than
those of Ballas and Neggadeh. In Abydos a number of inscriptions had
been found which, rude as they were, showed that the people buried in
the tombs had known the hieroglyphic system of writing. The occurrence
of so-called "Horus names" in these inscriptions was especially
important. For every old Egyptian king had a long list of names and
titles, and among them a name surmounted by the picture of a hawk
(i.e., Horus), and called on that account the "Horus name." As the
name is, at the same time, written on a sort of standard, it is also
called the "Banner name." Such "Horus" or "Banner names" occur, then,
on the objects found by Amelineau. Accidentally, one of these names
occurs, also, on a statue in the Grizeh Museum which, according to its
style, is one of the oldest statues which the museum possesses. Thus
it became evident that the Abydos objects were, in any case, to be
placed in the earliest period of Egyptian history.

The discussion stood thus when, in the spring of 1897, the fortunate
hand of De Morgan, the former Directeur-general des Services des
antiquites egyptiennes, succeeded by renewed excavations in Neggadeh
in furnishing the connections between the objects found by Petrie in
Ballas and Neggadeh and those found by Amelineau in Abydos. He
discovered, not far from the necropolis, excavated by Petrie, the tomb
of a king which, on the one hand, contained pottery and tablets like
those found by Petrie, and on the other, objects entirely like those
found by Amelineau. Thus it was proved that both Petrie's tombs and
those of Amelineau belonged to the same period, and, indeed, the
oldest period, of Egyptian history, before the third dynasty. They
were older than the most ancient objects which we had thought that we
possessed. But it was still impossible to date them exactly.

At this point, an epoch-making discovery of Dr. Sethe, privat-docent
at the University of Berlin, placed the whole matter at a single
stroke on a comparatively sure foundation. He pointed out that the
inscriptions on a few unassuming potsherds from Abydos contained not
only Banner names of old kings, but also their ordinary names. These
names were not inclosed, as later, in cartouches, and even contained
many unusual spellings; but they were still too clear to be
misunderstood. Sethe succeeded in identifying the names of the fifth,
the sixth and the seventh kings of the first Manethonian dynasty,
called by the Greek authors Usaphais, Miebais and Semempses. Thus it
became extremely probable that all these newly discovered objects were
from the first dynasty, but still not absolutely certain; for the
three names occurred only on fragments of vases, and absolutely
nothing was known of how these fragments were found. The proof that
they belonged to the other objects was wanting. A very skeptical
investigator might still have said that the other objects were older,
that the potsherds had only fallen accidentally into ruined tombs of
an older period; or he might have said quite the contrary, that the
potsherds were older than the tombs.

At this point occurred the possibility of finding a solution of the
question in the objects found in the royal tomb of Neggadeh. For the
report of the excavations at Neggadeh was more exact than that of the
excavations at Abydos; and the whole contents of the tomb of Neggadeh
had been kept together and preserved in a separate room in the Grizeh
Museum. The possibility became a reality. One of the principal objects
of this royal tomb was found to bear the ordinary as well as the Horus
name of the king--a fact which had escaped the fortunate discoverer.
The object is a small ivory plate with incised representations of
funerary offerings before the king. Animals are being sacrificed to
him; jars full of beer and other things are being offered. The figure
of the king, in front of a hanging mat, is not preserved; but the
upper corner still remains with the two names, which were written
above the figure. First, there is the same Horus name which occurs on
all the inscribed objects of this tomb and which may be translated
"The Warrior." Beside the Horus name in a sort of cartouche is the
title "Lord of Vulture and Serpent Crown" (Lord of Upper and Lower
Egypt), and beneath the title the sign which represents a
checkerboard, and has the syllabic value Mn. There can therefore be no
doubt that the king buried in the royal tomb of Neggadeh, of whom we
had only known the Horus name "The Warrior," had also the name Mn.
Now, there is no other known Egyptian king who could be identified
with this name Mn than the first king of the first Manethonian
dynasty, called Menes by the Greeks. It is impossible here to go into
the philological basis of the identification of Mn and Menes. The
final conclusion is this: In Neggadeh, we have before us the tomb of
the oldest king of whom the Egyptians had preserved any memory, and
whom they considered the founder of the Egyptian monarchy.

In consideration of the importance of the questions involved, a short
description of the tomb of Menes and of the objects found in it will
certainly be of interest. The second part of De Morgan's book,
"Recherche sur les origines de l'Egypte," which has just appeared,
furnishes us with the facts concerning the tomb, and the objects found
in the tomb I will describe from the originals in the Gizeh Museum.

The tomb consists of a large building, standing alone, measuring 54 X
27 m. (about 100 X 50 Egyptian ells), and built of burned brick. The
outside walls were ornamented, as was usual in later Egyptian
buildings, with pilasters composed of groups of smaller rectangular
pilasters. It is the same motive so often to be observed in the sham
doors in tombs of the old kingdom, and is really the most natural
facade ornamentation for brick buildings, as it may be made by simply
setting every alternate column of bricks forward or backward. The
walls were, in addition, plastered. Back of the thick outside wall on
each side lay a row of narrow rectangular rooms, formed by dividing a
