inconvenient and more or less inefficient mechanical arrangements for
commutating the currents and sorting them, so as to collect and
combine those in one direction, separating them from those which are
in the opposite; and he also points our the reversibility of the
apparatus, showing that as an electro-magnetic engine it is capable of
converting a current of electricity into mechanical motion capable of
performing work, while as a magneto-electric machine it is made to
transform mechanical energy into an electric current, which in other
apparatus, forming part of its external circuit, is capable of
performing electric, chemical, or mechanical work.

All these statements are matters of everyday familiarity at the
present day, but it must be remembered that they are records of
experiments made twenty years ago, and as such they entitle their
author to a very distinguished place among the pioneers of electric
science, and it is somewhat remarkable that they did not lead him
straight to the discovery of the "action and reaction" principle of
dynamo-electric magnetic induction to which he approached so closely,
and it is also a curious fact that so suggestive and remarkable a
paper should have been written and published as far back as 1864, and
that it should not have produced sooner than it did a revolution in
electric science.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ELIAS ELECTROMOTOR.


We lately published a short description of a very interesting
apparatus which may be considered in some sense as a prototype of the
Gramme machine, although it has very considerable, indeed radical
differences, and which, moreover, was constructed for a different
purpose, the Elias machine being, in fact, an electromotor, while the
Gramme machine is, it is almost unnecessary to say, an electric
generator. This apparent resemblance makes it, however, necessary to
describe the Elias machine, and to explain the difference between it
and the Gramme. Its very early date (1842), moreover, gives it an
exceptional interest. The figures on the previous page convey an exact
idea of the model that was exhibited at the Paris Electrical
Exhibition, and which was contributed by the Ecole Polytechnique of
Delft in the Dutch Section. This model is almost identical with that
illustrated and described in a pamphlet accompanying the exhibit. The
perspective illustrations show the machine very clearly, and the
section explains the construction still further. The apparatus
consists of an exterior ring made of iron, about 14 in. in diameter
and 1.5 in wide. It is divided into six equal sections by six small
blocks which project from the inner face of the ring, and which act as
so many magnetic poles. On each of the sections between the blocks is
rolled a coil, of one thickness only, of copper wire about 0.04 in. in
diameter, inclosed in an insulating casing of gutta percha, giving to
the conductor thus protected a total thickness of 0.20 in.; this wire
is coiled, as shown in the illustration. It forms twenty-nine turns in
each section, and the direction of winding changes at each passage in
front of a pole piece. The ends of the wire coinciding with the
horizontal diameter of the ring are stripped of the gutta percha, and
are connected to copper wires which are twisted together and around
two copper rods, which are placed vertically, their lower ends
entering two small cavities made in the base of the apparatus. The
circuit is thus continuous with two ends at opposite points of the
same diameter. The ring is about 1.1 in. thick, and is fixed, as
shown, to two wooden columns, B B, by two blocks of copper, a.

[Illustration: THE ELIAS ELECTROMOTOR.--MADE IN 1842.]

It will be seen from the mode of coiling the wire on this ring, that
if a battery be connected by means of the copper rods, the current
will create six consecutive poles on the various projecting blocks.
The inner ring, E, is about 11 in. in outside diameter, and is also
provided with a series of six projecting pieces which pass before
those on the exterior ring with very little clearance. Between these
projections the space between the inner face of the outer, and the
outer face of the inner ring, is 0.40 in. The latter is movable, and
is supported by three wooden arms, F, fixed to a boss, G, which is
traversed by a spindle supported in bearings by the columns, A and C.
A coil is rolled around the ring in exactly the same way as that on
the outer ring, the wire being of the same size, and the insulation of
the same thickness. The ends of the wire are also bared at points of
the diameter opposite each other, and the coil connected in pairs so
as to form a continuous circuit. At the two points of junction they
are connected with a hexagonal commutator placed on the central
spindle, one end corresponding to the sides 1, 3, and 5, and the other
to the sides 2, 4, and 6. Two copper rods, J, fixed on the base to two
plates of copper furnished with binding screws, are widened and
flattened at their upper ends to rest against opposite parallel sides
of the hexagon. It will be seen that if the battery is put in circuit
by means of the binding screws, the current in the interior ring will
determine six consecutive poles, the names of which will change as the
commutator plates come into contact successively with the sides of the
hexagon. Consequently, if at first the pole-pieces opposite each other
are magnetized with the same polarity, a repulsion between them will
be set up which will set the inner ring in motion, and the effect will
be increased on account of the attraction of the next pole of the
outer ring. At the moment when the pole piece thus attracted comes
into the field of the pole of opposite polarity, the action of the
commutator will change its magnetization, while that of the pole-piece
on the fixed ring always remains the same; the same phenomenon of
repulsion will be produced, and the inner ring will continue its
movement in the same direction, and so on. To the attractive and
repulsive action of the magnetic poles has to be added the reciprocal
action of the coils around the two rings, the action of which is
similar. From this brief explanation the differences between the Elias
machine and the Gramme will be understood. The Dutch physicist did not
contemplate the production of a current; he utilized two distinct
sources of electricity to set the inner ring in motion, and did not
imagine that it was possible, by suppressing one of the inducing
currents and putting the ring in rapid rotation, to obtain a
continuous current. Moreover, if ever this apparent resemblance had
been real, the merit of the Gramme invention would not have been
affected by it. It has happened very many times that inventors living
in different countries, and strangers to one another, have been
inspired with the same idea, and have followed it by similar methods,
either simultaneously or at different periods, without the application
having led to the same results. It does not suffice even for the seed
to be the same; it must have fallen in good ground, and be cultivated
with care; here it scarcely germinates, there it produces a vigorous
plant and abundant fruit.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




BJERKNES'S EXPERIMENTS.


As a general thing, too much trust should not be placed in words. In
the first place, it frequently happens that their sense is not well
defined, or that they are not understood exactly in the same way by
everybody, and this leads to sad misunderstandings. But even in case
they are precise, and are received everywhere under a single
acceptation, there still remains one danger, and that is that of
passing from the word to the idea, and of being led to believe that,
because there is a word, there is a real thing designated by this
word.

Let us take, for example, the word _electricity_. If we understand by
this term the common law which embraces a certain category of
phenomena, it expresses a clear and useful idea; but as for its
existence, it is not permitted to believe _a priori_ that there is a
distinct agent called electricity which is the efficient cause of the
phenomena. We ought never, says the old rule of philosophy, to admit
entities without an absolute necessity. The march of science has
always consisted in gradually eliminating these provisory conceptions
and in reducing the number of causes. This fact is visible without
going back to the ages of ignorance, when every new phenomenon brought
with it the conception of a special being which caused it and directed
it. In later ages they had _spirits_ in which there was everything:
volatile liquids, gases, and theoretical conceptions, such as
phlogiston. At the end of the last century, and at the beginning of
our own, ideas being more rational, the notion of the "fluid" had been
admitted, a mysterious and still vague enough category (but yet an
already somewhat definite one) in which were ranged the unknown and
ungraspable causes of caloric, luminous, electric, etc., phenomena.
Gradually, the "fluid" has vanished, and we are left (or rather, we
were a short time ago) at the notion of forces--a precise and
mathematically graspable notion, but yet an essentially mysterious
one. We see this conception gradually disappearing to leave finally
only the elementary ideas of matter and motion--ideas, perhaps, which
are not much clearer philosophically than the others, particularly
that of matter taken _per se_, but which, at least, are necessary,
since all the others supposed them.

Among those notions that study and time are reducing to other and
simpler ones, that of electricity should be admitted; for it presents
itself more and more as one of the peculiar cases of the general
motion of matter. It will be to the eternal honor of Fresnel for
having introduced into science and mathematically constituted the
theory of undulations (already proposed before him, however), thus
giving the first example of the notion of motion substituted for that
of force. Since the principle of the conservation of energy has taken
the eminent place in science that it now occupies, and we have seen a
continual transformation of one series of phenomena into another, the
mind is at once directed to the aspect of a new fact toward an
explanation of this kind. Still, it is certain that these hypotheses
are difficult of justification; for those motions that are at present
named molecular, and that we cannot help presuming to be at the base
of all actions, are _per se_ ungraspable and can only be demonstrated
by the coincidence of a large number of results. There is, however,
another means of rendering them probable, and that is by employing
analogy. If, by vibrations which are directly ascertainable, we can
reproduce the effects of electricity, there will be good reason for
admitting that the latter is nothing else than a system of vibration
differing only, perhaps, in special qualities, such as dimensions,
direction, rapidity, etc.

Such is the result that is attained by the very curious experiments
that are due to Mr. Bjerknes. These constitute an _ensemble_ of very
striking results, which are perfectly concordant and exhibit very
close analogies with electrical effects, as we shall presently see.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

They are based on the presence of bodies set in vibration in a liquid.
The vibrations produced by Mr. Bjerknes are of two kinds--pulsations
and oscillations. The former of these are obtained by the aid of small
drums with flexible ends, as shown to the left in Fig. 1. A small pump
chamber or cylinder is, by means of a tube, put in communication with
one of these closed drums in which the rapid motion of a piston
alternately sucks in and expels the air. The two flexible ends are
successively thrust outward and attracted toward the center. In an
apparatus of this kind the two ends repulse and attract the liquid at
the same time. Their motions are of the same phase; if it were desired
that one should repulse while the other was attracting, it would be
necessary to place two drums back to back, separated by a stiff
partition, and put them in connection with two distinct pump chambers
whose movements were so arranged that one should be forcing in while
the other was exhausting. A system of this nature is shown to the
right in Fig. 1.

The vibrations are obtained by the aid of small metal spheres fixed in
tubular supports by movable levers to which are communicated the
motions of compression and dilatation of the air in the pump chamber.
They oscillate in a plane whose direction may be varied according to
the arrangement of the sphere, as seen in the two apparatus of this
kind shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 2 will give an idea of the general
arrangement. The two pistons of the air-pumps are connected to cranks
that may be fixed in such a way as to regulate the phases as may be
desired, either in coincidence or opposition. The entire affair is put
in motion by a wheel and cord permitting of rapid vibrations being
obtained. The air is let into the apparatus by rubber tubing without
interfering with their motions.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

We may now enter into the details of the experiments:

The first is represented in Fig. 2. In a basin of water there is
placed a small frame carrying a drum fixed on an axle and capable of
revolving. It also communicates with one of the air cylinders. The
operator holds in his hand a second drum which communicates with the
other cylinder. The pistons are adjusted in such a way that they shall
move parallel with each other; then the ends of the drums inflate and
collapse at the same time; the _motions are of the same phase_; but if
the drums are brought near each other a very marked attraction occurs,
the revolving drum follows the other. If the cranks are so adjusted
that the pistons move in an opposite direction, the _phases are
discordant_--there is a repulsion, and the movable drum moves away
from the other. The effect, then, is analogous to that of two magnets,
with about this difference, that here it is the like phases that
attract and the different phases that repel each other, while in
magnets like poles repel and unlike poles attract each other.

It is necessary to remark that it is indifferent which face of the
drum is presented, since both possess the same phase. The drum
behaves, then, like an insulated pole of a magnet, or, better, like a
magnet having in its middle a succeeding point. In order to have two
poles a double drum must be employed. The experiment then becomes more
complicated; for it is necessary to have two pump chambers with
opposite phases for this drum alone, and one or two others for the
revolving drum. The effects, as we shall see, are more easily shown
with the vibrating spheres.

This form has the advantage that the vibrating body exhibits the two
phases at the same time; relatively to the liquid, one of its ends
advances while the other recedes. Thus with a vibrating sphere
presented to the movable drum, there may be obtained repulsion or
attraction, according as the side which is approached is concordant or
discordant with the end of the drum that it faces.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

With the arrangement shown in Fig. 3 there may be performed an
interesting series of experiments. The two spheres supported by the
frame are set in simultaneous vibration, and the frame, moreover, is
free to revolve about its axis. The effect is analogous to that which
would be produced by two short magnets carried by the same revolving
support; on presenting the vibrating sphere to the extremities the
whole affair is attracted or repulsed, according to its phase and
according to the point at which it is presented; on replacing the
transverse support by a single sphere (as indicated in the figure by a
dotted line) we obtain the analogue of a short magnet carried on a
pivot like a small compass needle. This sphere follows the pole of a
vibrating sphere which is presented to it, as the pole of a magnet
would do, with this difference always, that in the magnet, like poles
repel, while in oscillating bodies like phases attract.

In all the preceding experiments the bodies brought in presence were
both in motion and the phenomena were analogous to those of permanent
magnetism. We may also reproduce those which result from magnetism by
induction. For this purpose we employ small balls of different
materials suspended from floats, as shown in Fig. 4 (a, b, c).
Let us, for example, take the body, b, which is a small metal
sphere, and present to it either a drum which is caused to pulsate, on
an oscillating sphere, and it will be attracted, thus representing the
action of a magnet upon a bit of soft iron. A curious experiment may
serve to indicate the transition between this new series and the
preceding. If we present to each other two drums of opposite phases,
but so arranged that one of them vibrates faster than the other, we
shall find, on carefully bringing them together, that the repulsion
which manifested itself at first is changing to attraction. On
approaching each other the drum having the quicker motion finally has
upon the other, the same action as if the latter were immovable; and
the effect is analogous to that which takes place between a strong and
weak magnet presented by their like poles.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

By continuing these experiments we arrive at a very important point.
Instead of the body, b (Fig. 4), let us take c. As the figure
shows, this is a sphere lighter than water, kept in the liquid by a
weight. If we present to it the vibrating body, it will be repelled,
and we shall obtain the results known by the name of diamagnetism.
This curious experiment renders evident the influence of media. As
well known, Faraday attributed such effects to the action of the air;
and he thought that magnetic motions always resulted from a difference
between the attraction exerted by the magnet upon the body under
experiment, and the attraction exerted by the air. If the body is more
sensitive than the air, there is direct magnetism, but if it is less
so, there is diamagnetism. Water between the bodies, in the Bjerknes
experiments, plays the same role; it is this which, by its vibration,
transmits the motions and determines the phases in the suspended body.
If the body is heavier than water its motion is less than that of the
liquid, and, consequently, relatively to the vibrating body, it is of
like phase; and if it is lighter, the contrary takes place, and the
phases are in discordance. These effects may be very well verified by
the aid of the little apparatus shown in Fig. 5, and which carries two
bars, one of them lighter and the other heavier than water. On
presenting to them the vibrating body, one presents its extremity and
takes an axial direction, while the other arranges itself crosswise
and takes the equatorial direction. These experiments may be varied in
different ways that it is scarcely necessary to dwell upon in this
place, as they may be seen at the Electrical Exhibition.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Very curious effects are also obtained with the arrangement shown in
Fig. 6. Between the two drums there is introduced a body sustained by
a float such as represented at a, Fig. 4. Various results may, then,
be obtained according to the combinations adopted. Let us suppose that
the phases are alike, and that the interposed body is heavier than
water; in this case it is repelled as far as the circumference of the
drums, at which point it stops. If the phases are different, the
influenced body behaves in the opposite manner and stops at the
center. If the body is lighter than water the effects are naturally
changed. Placed between two like phases, it is attracted within a
certain radius and repelled when it is placed further off; if the
phases are unlike, it is always repelled. We may easily assure
ourselves that these effects are analogous to those which are produced
on bodies placed between the poles of wide and powerful magnets. It
is useless to repeat that the analogies are always inverse.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

Mr. Bjerknes has carried the examination of these phenomena still
further in studying experimentally the actions that occur in the
depths of the liquid; and for this purpose he has made use of the
arrangement shown in Fig. 7. By the side of the vibrating body there
is placed a light body mounted on a very flexible spring. This assumes
the motion of that portion of the fluid in which it is immersed, and,
by the aid of a small pencil, its direction is inscribed upon a plate
located above it. By placing this registering apparatus in different
directions the entire liquid may be explored. We find by this means
figures that are perfectly identical with magnetic phantoms. All the
circumstances connected with these can be reproduced, the vibrating
sphere giving the phantom of a magnet with its two poles. We may even
exhibit the mutual action of two magnets. The figures show with
remarkable distinctness--much more distinct, perhaps, than those that
are obtained by true magnets.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

However, it must not be thought that these so interesting facts are
the result of groping in the dark and the outcome of some fortunate
experiment; for they have, on the contrary, been foreseen and
predetermined. Mr. Bjerknes is especially a mathematician, and it was
a study, through calculation, of the vibratory motion of a body or
system of bodies in a medium that led him to the results that he
afterwards materialized.

After the production, by Mr. Lejeune, of his solutions, Mr. Bjerknes
in 1865 entered upon a complete study of the subject, and recognized
the fact that the result of such motions was the production of regular
mechanical actions. He calculated the directions of these, and, along
about 1875, perceived the possibility of reproducing the effects of
permanent magnetism. More recently, in 1879, he saw that magnetism by
derivation might likewise be explained by those hypotheses, and
figured by actions of this kind. It was not till then that he
performed the experiments, and submitted a body to the results of
calculation.

The same process has led him to the conclusion that the action of
currents might be represented in the same manner; only, instead of
bodies in vibration, it would require bodies in alternating rotation.
The effects are much more difficult to ascertain, since it is
necessary to employ viscid liquids.

Meanwhile, the experiments have been performed. Up to the present time
attractions and repulsions have not been shown, and I do not know
whether Mr. Bjerknes has obtained them. But, by the process pointed
out, the lines of action (electric phantoms, if I may so express
myself) have been traced, and they are very curious. By supposing the
current perpendicular to the plate, and in the presence of the pole of
a magnet, the influences produced around it are very well seen, and
the figures are very striking, especially in the case of two currents.
Mr. Bjerknes does not appear as yet to have obtained from these
experiments all that he expects from them. And yet, such as they are,
they have already led him to important conclusions. Thus, calculation,
confirmed by application, has led him to renounce the formula proposed
by Ampere and to adopt that of Regnard as modified by Clausius. Is he
right? This is what more prolonged experimentation will allow to be
seen.

These researches, however, are beset with difficulties of a special
nature, and the use of viscid liquids is a subject for discussion. Mr.
Bjerknes desired to employ them for reproducing the effects that he
had obtained from water, but he found that the lines of force were no
longer the same, and that the phenomena were modified. It is
necessary, then, to hold as much as possible to liquids that are
perfect. The experimenter is at present endeavoring to use these
liquids by employing cylinders having a fluted surface; but it is
clear that this, too, is not without its difficulties.

This series of experiments offers a rare example of the verification
of algebraic calculation by direct demonstration. In general, we may
employ geometry, which gives a graphic representation of calculation
and furnishes a valuable control. Sometimes we have practical
application, which is a very important verification in some respects,
but only approximate in others. But it is rare that we employ, as Mr.
Bjerknes has done, a material, direct, and immediate translation,
which, while it brings the results into singular prominence, permits
of comparing them with known facts and of generalizing the views upon
which they are based.

Hypotheses as to the nature of electricity being as yet only tolerably
well established, we should neglect nothing that may contribute to
give them a solid basis. Assuming that electricity _is_ a vibratory
motion (and probably there is no doubt about it), yet the fact is not
so well established with regard to it as it is to that of light. Every
proof that comes to support this idea is welcome, and especially so
when it is not derived from a kind of accident, but is furnished by a
calculated and mathematical combination. Viewed from this double
standpoint, the experiments of Mr. Bjerknes are very remarkable, and,
I may add, they are very curious to behold, and I recommend all
visitors to the Exhibition to examine them.--_Frank Geraldy, in La
Lumiere Electrique._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ARC ELECTRIC LIGHT.[1]

    [Footnote 1: A recent address before the New York Electric Light
     Association.]

BY LEO DAFT.


I shall experience one difficulty in addressing you this evening,
which is, that although I do not wish to take up your time with purely
elementary matter, I wish to make the subject clear to those who may
not be familiar with its earlier struggles.

If we begin at the beginning we have to go back to the time when
Faraday made the discovery that light could be produced by the
separation of two carbon rods conducting a current of considerable
tension. That is the historical point when electric lighting first
loomed up as a giant possibility of the near future. This occurred
about the year 1846. In some experiments he found that although the
circuit could not be interrupted by any considerable interval when
metallic terminals were used without breaking the current, when carbon
was substituted the interval could be largely increased, and a light
of dazzling brilliancy appeared between the points.

