apparatus does not extend more than 20 cm. above the water bath. This
arrangement prevents the fusel oil from passing over. If the alcohol is
stronger than 70 per cent., and the height of the distillation apparatus
is not more than 17 cm., the residue in the flask may be weighed as
fusel oil. With a weaker alcohol, or an apparatus which projects further
out of the water bath, the residual fusel oil is mixed with water. It
can, however, be separated by adding strong alcohol and redistilling, or
by treating with ether, which dissolves the amyl alcohol, and
distilling, the temperature being raised finally to 60 deg..

    [Footnote 7: Pharm. Centralhalle, xxii., 236.]

Marquardt,[8] like Betelli, extracts the fusel oil from alcohol by means
of chloroform, and by oxidation converts it into valeric acid. From the
quantity of barium valerate found he calculates the amount of amyl
alcohol present in the original solution; 150 c.c. of the spirit, which
has been diluted so as to contain 12 to 15 per cent. of alcohol, are
shaken up thoroughly with 50 c.c. of chloroform, the aqueous layer drawn
off, and shaken with a fresh portion of chloroform. This treatment is
repeated several times. The extracts are then united, and washed
repeatedly with water. The chloroform, which is now free from alcohol
and contains all the fusel oil, is treated with a solution of 5 grammes
of potassium bichromate in 30 grammes of water and 2 grammes of
sulphuric acid, and then heated in a closed flask for six hours on a
water bath at 85 deg.. The contents of the flask are then distilled, the
distillate saturated with barium carbonate, and the chloroform
distilled; the residue is evaporated to a small volume, the excess of
barium carbonate filtered off, and the filtrate evaporated to dryness
and weighed. The residue is dissolved in water, a few drops of nitric
acid added, and the solution divided into two portions. In the first
portion the barium is determined; in the second the barium chloride. The
total per cent. of barium minus that of barium chloride gives the amount
present as barium valerate, from which is calculated the per cent. of
amyl alcohol. By this process the author has determined one part of
fusel oil in ten thousand of alcohol. To detect very minute quantities
of fusel oil, the chloroform extracts are treated with several drops of
sulphuric acid and enough potassium permanganate to keep the solution
red for twenty-four hours. If allowed to stand in a test tube, the odor
of valeric aldehyde will first be noticed, then that of amyl valerate,
and lastly that of valeric acid.--_Amer. Chem. Journal._

    [Footnote 8: Berichte d. Deutsch. Chem. Gesellsch., xv., 1,370
    and 1,663.]

       *       *       *       *       *




ON SILICON.


It is known that platinum heated in a forge fire, in contact with
carbon, becomes fusible. Boussingault has shown that this is due to the
formation of a silicide of platinum by means of the reduction of the
silica of the carbon by the metal. MM. P. Schuetzenberger and A. Colson
have produced the same phenomenon by heating to white heat a slip of
platinum in the center of a thick layer of lampblack free from silica.

The increase in weight of the metal and the augmentation of its
fusibility were found to be due, in this case also, to a combination
with silicon. As the silicon could not come directly from the carbon
which surrounded the platinum, MM. Schuetzenberger and Colson have
endeavored to discover under what form it could pass from the walls of
the crucible through a layer of lampblack several centimeters in
thickness, in spite of a volatility amounting to almost nothing under
the conditions of the experiment. They describe the following
experiments as serving to throw some light upon the question:

1. A thin slip of platinum rolled in a spiral is placed in a small
crucible of retort carbon closed by a turned cover of the same material.
This is placed in a second larger crucible of refractory clay, and the
intervening space filled with lampblack tightly packed. The whole is
then heated to white heat for an hour and a half in a good wind furnace.
After cooling, the platinum is generally found to have been fused into a
button, with a marked increase in weight due to taking up silicon, which
has penetrated in the form of vapor through the walls of the interior
crucible.

2. If, in the preceding experiment, the lampblack be replaced by a
mixture of lampblack and rutile in fine powder, the slip of platinum
remains absolutely intact, and does not change in weight. Thus the
titaniferous packing recommended by Sainte-Claire Deville for preventing
the access of nitrogen in experiments at high temperatures also prevents
the passage of silicon. A mixture of carbon and finely divided iron is,
on the contrary, ineffectual. These facts seem to indicate that nitrogen
plays a part in the transportation of the silicon, as this is only
prevented by the same means made use of in order to prevent the passage
of nitrogen.

3. The volatility of free silicon at a high temperature is too slight to
account for the alteration of the platinum at a distance. This can be
shown by placing several decigrammes of crystallized silicon on the
bottom of a small crucible of retort carbon, covering the silicon with a
small flat disk of retort carbon upon which is placed the slip of
platinum. The crucible, closed by its turned cover, is then enveloped in
a titaniferous packing and kept at a brilliant white heat for an hour
and a half. The metal is found to have only very slightly increased in
weight, and its properties remain unaltered. This experiment was
repeated several times with the same result. If, however, the
crystallized silicon be replaced by powdered calcined silica, the
platinum, placed upon the carbon disk, fuses and increases in weight,
while the silica loses weight. The theory of these curious phenomena is
very difficult to establish on account of the high temperatures which
are necessary for their manifestation, but it may be concluded, at
present, that nitrogen and probably oxygen also play some part in the
transportation of the silicon across the intervening space, and that the
carbosilicious compounds recently described by MM. Schuetzenberger and
Colson also take part in the phenomenon.--_Comptes Rendus_, xciv.,
1,710.--_Amer. Chem. Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *




STANNOUS NITRATES.


At the Royal Powder Works at Spandau, Prussia, frequent ignition of the
powder at a certain stage of the process led to an examination of the
machinery, when it was found that where, at certain parts, bronze pieces
which were soldered were in constant contact with the moist powder, the
solder was much corroded and in part entirely destroyed, and that in the
joints had collected a substance which, on being scraped out with a
chisel, exploded with emission of sparks. It was suspected that the
formation of this explosive material was in some way connected with the
corrosion of the solder, and the subject was referred for investigation
to Rudolph Weber, of the School of Technology, at Berlin. The main
results of his investigation are here given.

The explosive properties of the substance indicated a probable
nitro-compound of one of the solder metals (tin and lead), and as the
lead salts are more stable and better understood than those of tin, it
was resolved to investigate the latter, in hope of obtaining a similar
explosive compound. Experiments on the action of moist potassium nitrate
on pure tin led to no result, as no explosive body was formed. Stannous
nitrate, Sn(NO_{3})_{2}, formed by the action of dilute nitric acid on
tin, has long been known, but only in solution, as it is decomposed on
evaporating. By adding freshly precipitated moist brown stannous oxide
to cool nitric acid of sp. gr. 1.20, as long as solution occurred, and
then cooling the solution to -20 deg., Weber obtained an abundance of
crystals of the composition Sn(NO_{3})_{2} + 20H_{2}O. They resemble
crystals of potassium chlorate. They cannot be kept, as they liquefy at
ordinary temperatures. An insoluble _basic_ salt was obtained by
digesting an excess of moist stannous oxide in solution of stannous
nitrate, or by adding to a solution of stannous nitrate by degrees, with
constant stirring, a quantity of sodium carbonate solution insufficient
for complete precipitation. Thus obtained, the basic salt, which has the
composition Sn_{2}N_{2}O_{7}, is a snow-white crystalline powder, which
is partially decomposed by water, and slowly oxidized by long exposure
to the air, or by heating to 100 deg.. By rapid heating to a higher
temperature, as well as by percussion and friction, it explodes
violently, giving off a shower of sparks. This compound is also formed
when a fine spray of nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.20) is thrown upon a surface
of tin or solder. It is also formed when tin or solder is exposed to the
action of a solution of copper nitrate, and thus formed presents the
properties already described.

In this, then, we have a probable cause of the explosions occurring in
the powder works; but the explanation of the formation of the substance
is wanting, as potassium nitrate was shown not to give an explosive
substance with tin. A thin layer of a mixture of sulphur and potassium
nitrate was placed between sheets of tin and copper foil, and allowed to
stand, being kept constantly moist. After a time the copper was found to
have become coated with sulphide, while the tin was largely converted
into the explosive basic nitrate. The conditions are obviously the same
as those found in the powder machinery, where bronze and tin solder are
constantly in contact with moist gunpowder. The chemical action is
probably this: the sulphur of the powder forms, with the copper of the
bronze, copper sulphide; this is oxidized to sulphate, which reacts with
the niter of the powder, forming potassium sulphate and copper nitrate;
the latter, as shown above, then forms with the tin of the solder the
explosive basic nitrate, which, being insoluble, gradually collects in
the joints, and finally leads to an explosion.--_Journal fuer Praktische
Chemie._

       *       *       *       *       *




METALLIC THORIUM.

By L.F. NILSON.


The density of thorium as obtained by reducing the anhydrous chloride by
means of sodium was found by Chydenius, 7.657 to 7.795. The author has
obtained metallic thorium by heating sodium with the double anhydrous
thorium potassium chloride, in presence of sodium chloride in an iron
crucible. After treating the residue with water there remains a grayish,
heavy, sparkling powder, which under the microscope appears to consist
of very small crystals. Metallic thorium is brittle and almost
infusible; the powder takes a metallic luster under pressure, is
permanent in the air at temperatures up to 120 deg., takes fire below a red
heat either in air or oxygen, and burns with a dazzling luster, leaving
a residue of perfectly white thoria. If heated with chlorine, bromine,
iodine, and sulphur, it combines with them with ignition. It is not
attacked by water, cold or hot. Dilute sulphuric acid occasions the
disengagement of hydrogen, especially if heated, but the metal is acted
on very slowly. Concentrated sulphuric acid with the aid of heat attacks
the metal very slightly, evolving sulphurous anhydride. Nitric acid,
strong or weak, has no sensible action. Fuming hydrochloric acid and
_aqua regia_ attack thorium readily, but the alkalies are without
action. The metal examined by the author behaves with the reagents in
question the same as did the specimens obtained by Berzelius. The mean
specific gravity of pure thorium is about 11. Hence it would seem that
the metal obtained by Chydenius must have contained much foreign matter.
The specific gravity of pure thoria is 10.2207 to 10.2198. The
equivalent and the density being known, we may calculate the atomic
volume. If we admit that the metal is equivalent to 4 atoms of hydrogen,
we obtain the value 21.1. This number coincides with the atomic volumes
of zirconium (21.7), cerium (21.1), lanthanum (22.6), and didymium
(21.5). This analogy is certainly not due to chance; it rather confirms
the opinion which I have put forward in connection with my researches on
the selenites, on certain chloro-platinates and chloro-platinites, etc.,
that the elements of the rare earths form a series of quadrivalent
metals.

       *       *       *       *       *

[AMERICAN CHEMICAL JOURNAL.]




FRIEDRICH WOeHLER.


No one but a chemist can appreciate the full significance of the brief
message which came to us a month ago without warning--"Woehler is dead!"
What need be added to it? No chemist was better known or more honored
than Woehler, and none ever deserved distinction and honor more than he.
His life was made up of a series of brilliant successes, which not only
compelled the admiration of the world at large, but directed the
thoughts of his fellow workers, and led to results of the highest
importance to science.

It is impossible in a few words to give a correct account of the work of
Woehler, and to show in what way his life and work have been of such
great value to chemistry. Could he himself direct the preparation of
this notice, the writer knows that his advice would be, "Keep to the
facts." So far as any one phrase can characterize the teachings of
Woehler, that one does it; and though enthusiasm prompts to eulogy, let
us rather recall the plain facts of his life, and let them, in the main,
speak for themselves.[1]

    [Footnote 1: See Kopp's "Geschichte der Chemie," iv., 440.]

He was born in the year 1800 at Eschersheim, a village near
Frankfort-on-the-Main. From his earliest years the study of nature
appears to have been attractive to him. He took great delight in
collecting minerals and in performing chemical and physical experiments.
While still a boy, he associated with a Dr. Buch, of Frankfort, and was
aided by this gentleman, who did what he could to encourage in the young
student his inclination toward the natural sciences. The first paper
which bears the name of Woehler dates from this period, and is upon the
presence of selenium in the iron pyrites from Kraslitz. In 1820 he went
to the University of Marburg to study medicine. While there he did not,
however, neglect the study of chemistry. He was at that time
particularly interested in an investigation on certain cyanogen
compounds. In 1821 he went to Heidelberg, and in 1823 he received the
degree of Doctor of Medicine. L. Gmelin became interested in him, and it
was largely due to Gmelin's influence that Woehler gave up his intention
of practicing medicine, and concluded to devote himself entirely to
chemistry. For further instruction in his chosen science, Woehler went to
Stockholm to receive instruction from Berzelius, in whose laboratory he
continued to work from the fall of 1823 until the middle of the
following year. Only a few years since, in a communication entitled
"Jugenderinnerungen eines Chemikers," he gave a fascinating account of
his journey to Stockholm and his experiences while working with
Berzelius. On his return to Germany, he was called to teach chemistry in
the recently founded municipal trade school (Gewerbschule) at Berlin. He
accepted the call, and remained in Berlin until 1832, when he went to
Cassel to live. In a short time he was called upon to take part in the
direction of the higher trade school at Cassel. He continued to teach
and work in Cassel until 1836, when he was appointed Professor of
Chemistry in Goettingen. This office he held at the time of his death,
September 23, 1882.

In 1825 Woehler became acquainted with Liebig, and an intimate friendship
resulted, which continued until the death of Liebig, a few years ago.
Though they lived far apart, they met during the vacations at their
homes, or traveled together. Many important investigations were
conceived by them as they talked over the problems of chemistry, and
many papers appeared under both their names, containing the results of
their joint work. Among such papers may be mentioned: "On Cyanic Acid"
(1830); "On Mellithic Acid" (1830); "On Sulphotartaric Acid" (1831); "On
Oil of Bitter Almonds, Benzoic Acid, and Related Compounds" (1832); "On
the Formation of Oil of Bitter Almonds from Amygdalin" (1837); and "On
Uric Acid" (1837).

Of the papers included in the above list, the two which most attract
attention are those "On the Oil of Bitter Almonds" and "On Uric Acid."
In the former it was shown for the first time that in analogous carbon
compounds there are groups which remain unchanged, though the compounds
containing them may, in other respects, undergo a variety of changes.
This is the conception of radicals or residues as we use it at the
present day. It cannot be denied that this conception has done very much
to simplify the study of organic compounds. The full value of the
discovery was recognized at once by Berzelius, who, in a letter to the
authors of the paper, proposed that they should call their radical proin
or orthrin (the dawn of day), for the reason that the assumption of its
existence might be likened to the dawn of a new day in chemistry. The
study of this paper should form a part of the work of every advanced
student of chemistry. It is a model of all that is desirable in a
scientific memoir. The paper on uric acid is remarkable for the number
of interesting transformation products described in it, and the skill
displayed in devising methods for the isolation and purification of the
new compounds. Comparatively little has been added to our knowledge of
uric acid since the appearance of the paper of Liebig and Woehler.

It would lead too far to attempt to give a complete list of the papers
which have appeared under the name of Woehler alone. In 1828 he made the
remarkable discovery that when an aqueous solution of ammonium cyanate,
CNONH_{4}, is evaporated, the salt is completely transformed into urea,
which has the same percentage composition. It would be difficult to
exaggerate the importance of this discovery. That a substance like urea,
which up to that time had only been met with as a product of processes
which take place in the animal body, should be formed in the laboratory
out of inorganic compounds, appeared to chemists then to be little less
than a miracle. To-day such facts are among the commonest of chemistry.
The many brilliant syntheses of well-known and valuable organic
compounds which have been made during the past twenty years are results
of this discovery of Woehler.

In 1823 he published a paper on secretion, in the urine, of substances
which are foreign to the animal organism, but which are brought into the
body. He discovered the transformation of neutral organic salts into
carbonates by the process of assimilation.

In 1832 he investigated the dimorphism of arsenious acid and antimony
oxide. In 1841 he made the discovery that dimorphous bodies have
different fusing points, according as they are in the crystallized or
amorphous condition.

Among the more remarkable of his investigations in inorganic chemistry
are those on methods for the preparation of potassium (1823); on
tungsten compounds (1824); the preparation of aluminum (1827); of
glucinum and yttrium (1828). In 1856, working with Ste. Claire Deville,
he discovered crystallized boron.

Analytical methods were improved in many ways, and excellent new methods
were introduced by him. Further, he did a great deal for the improvement
of the processes of applied chemistry.

With Liebig he was associated in editing the "Annalen der Chemie and
Pharmacie" and the "Handwoerterbuch der Chemie." He wrote a remarkably
useful and popular "Grundriss der Chemie." The part relating to
inorganic chemistry appeared first in 1831, and was in use until a few
years ago, when Fittig wrote his "Grundriss" on the same plan, a work
which supplanted its prototype.

The above will serve to give some idea of the great activity of Woehler's
life, and the fruitfulness of his labors. While thus contributing
largely by his own work directly to the growth of chemistry, he did
perhaps as much in the capacity of teacher. Many of the active chemists
of the present day have enjoyed the advantages of Woehler's instruction,
and many can trace their success to the impulse gathered in the
laboratory at Goettingen. The hand of the old master appears in
investigations carried on to-day by his pupils.

Woehler's was not a speculative mind. He took very little part in the
many important discussions on chemical theories which engaged the
attention of such men as Dumas, Gerhardt, Berzelius, and Liebig, during
the active period of his life. He preferred to deal with the facts as
such; and no one ever dealt with the facts of chemistry more
successfully. He had a genius for methods which has never been equaled.
The obstacles which had baffled his predecessors were surmounted by him
with ease. He was in this respect a truly great man.

Personally, Woehler was modest and retiring. His life was simple and
unostentatious. He had a kindly disposition, which endeared him to his
students, to which fact many American chemists who were students at
Goettingen during the time of Woehler's activity can cordially testify. In
short, it may be said deliberately that Woehler, as a chemist and as a
man, was a fit model for all of us and for those who will come after us.
Though he has gone, his methods live in every laboratory. His spirit
reigns in many; could it reign in all, the chemical world would be the
better for it.

I.R.
