he had sat up in bed and thrown off the covers, partially removing his
pajamas and inspecting as much of his body as was visible.

It was the smooth body of a little boy.

That was ridiculous. He was a man of forty-three; an army officer, a
chemist, once a best-selling novelist. He had been married, and divorced
ten years ago. He looked again at his body. It was only twelve years
old. Fourteen, at the very oldest. His eyes swept the room, wide with
wonder. Every detail was familiar: the flower-splashed chair covers; the
table that served as desk and catch-all for his possessions; the
dresser, with its mirror stuck full of pictures of aircraft. It was the
bedroom of his childhood home. He swung his legs over the edge of the
bed. They were six inches too short to reach the floor.

For an instant, the room spun dizzily; and he was in the grip of utter
panic, all confidence in the evidence of his senses lost. Was he insane?
Or delirious? Or had the bomb really killed him; was this what death was
like? What was that thing, about "ye become as little children"? He
started to laugh, and his juvenile larynx made giggling sounds. They
seemed funny, too, and aggravated his mirth. For a little while, he was
on the edge of hysteria and then, when he managed to control his
laughter, he felt calmer. If he were dead, then he must be a discarnate
entity, and would be able to penetrate matter. To his relief, he was
unable to push his hand through the bed. So he was alive; he was also
fully awake, and, he hoped, rational. He rose to his feet and prowled
about the room, taking stock of its contents.

There was no calendar in sight, and he could find no newspapers or dated
periodicals, but he knew that it was prior to July 18, 1946. On that
day, his fourteenth birthday, his father had given him a light .22
rifle, and it had been hung on a pair of rustic forks on the wall. It
was not there now, nor ever had been. On the table, he saw a boys' book
of military aircraft, with a clean, new dustjacket; the flyleaf was
inscribed: _To Allan Hartley, from his father, on his thirteenth
birthday, 7/18 '45._ Glancing out the window at the foliage on the
trees, he estimated the date at late July or early August, 1945; that
would make him just thirteen.

His clothes were draped on a chair beside the bed. Stripping off his
pajamas, he donned shorts, then sat down and picked up a pair of
lemon-colored socks, which he regarded with disfavor. As he pulled one
on, a church bell began to clang. St. Boniface, up on the hill, ringing
for early Mass; so this was Sunday. He paused, the second sock in his
hand.

There was no question that his present environment was actual. Yet, on
the other hand, he possessed a set of memories completely at variance
with it. Now, suppose, since his environment were not an illusion,
everything else were? Suppose all these troublesome memories were no
more than a dream? Why, he was just little Allan Hartley, safe in his
room on a Sunday morning, badly scared by a nightmare! Too much science
fiction, Allan; too many comic books!

That was a wonderfully comforting thought, and he hugged it to him
contentedly. It lasted all the while he was buttoning up his shirt and
pulling on his pants, but when he reached for his shoes, it evaporated.
Ever since he had wakened, he realized, he had been occupied with
thoughts utterly incomprehensible to any thirteen-year-old; even
thinking in words that would have been so much Sanscrit to himself at
thirteen. He shook his head regretfully. The just-a-dream hypothesis
went by the deep six.

He picked up the second shoe and glared at it as though it were
responsible for his predicament. He was going to have to be careful. An
unexpected display of adult characteristics might give rise to some
questions he would find hard to answer credibly. Fortunately, he was an
only child; there would be no brothers or sisters to trip him up. Old
Mrs. Stauber, the housekeeper, wouldn't be much of a problem; even in
his normal childhood, he had bulked like an intellectual giant in
comparison to her. But his father--

Now, there the going would be tough. He knew that shrewd attorney's
mind, whetted keen on a generation of lying and reluctant witnesses.
Sooner or later, he would forget for an instant and betray himself. Then
he smiled, remembering the books he had discovered, in his late 'teens,
on his father's shelves and recalling the character of the openminded
agnostic lawyer. If he could only avoid the inevitable unmasking until
he had a plausible explanatory theory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake Hartley was leaving the bathroom as Allan Hartley opened his door
and stepped into the hall. The lawyer was bare-armed and in slippers; at
forty-eight, there was only a faint powdering of gray in his dark hair,
and not a gray thread in his clipped mustache. The old Merry Widower,
himself, Allan thought, grinning as he remembered the white-haired but
still vigorous man from whom he'd parted at the outbreak of the War.

"'Morning, Dad," he greeted.

"'Morning, son. You're up early. Going to Sunday school?"

Now there was the advantage of a father who'd cut his first intellectual
tooth on Tom Paine and Bob Ingersoll; attendance at divine services was
on a strictly voluntary basis.

"Why, I don't think so; I want to do some reading, this morning."

"That's always a good thing to do," Blake Hartley approved. "After
breakfast, suppose you take a walk down to the station and get me a
_Times_." He dug in his trouser pocket and came out with a half dollar.
"Get anything you want for yourself, while you're at it."

Allan thanked his father and pocketed the coin.

"Mrs. Stauber'll still be at Mass," he suggested. "Say I get the paper
now; breakfast won't be ready till she gets here."

"Good idea." Blake Hartley nodded, pleased. "You'll have three-quarters
of an hour, at least."

       *       *       *       *       *

So far, he congratulated himself, everything had gone smoothly.
Finishing his toilet, he went downstairs and onto the street, turning
left at Brandon to Campbell, and left again in the direction of the
station. Before he reached the underpass, a dozen half-forgotten
memories had revived. Here was a house that would, in a few years, be
gutted by fire. Here were four dwellings standing where he had last seen
a five-story apartment building. A gasoline station and a weed-grown lot
