"There's a bear. Just ducked into that church or movie theater or
whatever. I wonder what he thinks we are."

Altamont puffed slowly at his pipe, "I wonder if we're going to find
anything at all in Pittsburgh."

"You mean people, as distinct from those biped beasts we've found so
far? I doubt it," Loudons replied, finishing his caffchoc and wiping
his mustache on the back of his hand. "I think the whole eastern half
of the country is nothing but forest like this, and the highest type
of life is just about three cuts below _Homo Neanderthalensis_, almost
impossible to contact, and even more impossible to educate."

"I wasn't thinking about that; I've just about given up hope of
finding anybody or even a reasonably high level of barbarism,"
Altamont said. "I was thinking about that cache of microfilmed books
that was buried at the Carnegie Library."

"If it was buried," Loudons qualified. "All we have is that article in
that two-century-old copy of _Time_ about how the people at the
library had constructed the crypt and were beginning the microfilming.
We don't know if they ever had a chance to get it finished, before the
rockets started landing."

They passed over a dam of flotsam that had banked up at a wrecked
bridge and accumulated enough mass to resist the periodic floods that
had kept the river usually clear. Three human figures fled across a
sand-flat at one end of it and disappeared into the woods; two of them
carried spears tipped with something that sparkled in the sunlight,
probably shards of glass.

"You know, Monty, I get nightmares, sometimes, about what things must
be like in Europe," Loudons said.

Five or six wild cows went crashing through the brush below. Altamont
nodded when he saw them.

"Maybe tomorrow, we'll let down and shoot a cow," he said. "I was
looking in the freezer-locker; the fresh meat's getting a little low.
Or a wild pig, if we find a good stand of oak trees. I could enjoy
what you'd do with some acorn-fed pork. Finished?" he asked Loudons.
"Take over, then; I'll go back and wash the dishes."

They rose, and Loudons, favoring his left leg, moved over to the seat
at the controls. Altamont gathered up the two cups, the
stainless-steel dishes, and the knives and forks and spoons, going up
the steps over the shielded converter and ducking his head to avoid
the seat in the forward top machine-gun turret. He washed and dried
the dishes, noting with satisfaction that the gauge of the water tank
was still reasonably high, and glanced out one of the windows. Loudons
was taking the big helicopter upstairs, for a better view.

Now and then, among the trees, there would be a glint of glassy slag,
usually in a fairly small circle. That was to be expected; beside the
three or four H-bombs that had fallen on the Pittsburgh area,
mentioned in the transcripts of the last news to reach the Fort from
outside, the whole district had been pelted, more or less at random,
with fission bombs. West of the confluence of the Allegheny and
Monongahela, it would probably be worse than this.

"Can you see Pittsburgh yet, Jim?" he called out.

"Yes; it's a mess! Worse than Gary; worse than Akron, even. _Monty_!
Come here! I think I have something!"

Picking up the pipe he had laid down, Altamont hurried forward,
dodging his six-foot length under the gun turret and swinging down
from the walkway over the converter.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Smoke. A lot of smoke, twenty or thirty fires, at the very least."
Loudons had shifted from _Forward_ to _Hover_, and was peering through
a pair of binoculars. "See that island, the long one? Across the river
from it, on the north side, toward this end. Yes, by Einstein! And I
can see cleared ground, and what I think are houses, inside a
stockade--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Murray Hughes walked around the corner of the cabin, into the morning
sunlight, lacing his trousers, with his hunting shirt thrown over his
bare shoulders, and found, without much surprise, that his father had
also slept late. Verner Hughes was just beginning to shave. Inside the
kitchen, his mother and the girls were clattering pots and skillets;
his younger brother, Hector, was noisily chopping wood. Going through
the door, he filled another of the light-metal basins with hot water,
found his razor, and went outside again, setting the basin on the
bench.

Most of the ware in the Hughes cabin was of light-metal; Murray and
his father had mined it in the dead city up the river, from a place
where it had floated to the top of a puddle of slag, back when the
city had been blasted, at the end of the Old Times. It had been hard
work, but the stuff had been easy to carry down to where they had
hidden their boat, and, for once, they'd had no trouble with the
Scowrers. Too bad they couldn't say as much for yesterday's hunting
trip!

As he rubbed lather into the stubble on his face, he cursed with
irritation. That had been a bad-luck hunt, all around. They'd gone out
before dawn, hunting into the hills to the north, they'd spent all day
at it, and shot one small wild pig. Lucky it was small, at that.
They'd have had to abandon a full-grown one, after the Scowrers began
hunting them. Six of them, as big a band as he'd ever seen together at
one time, and they'd gotten between them and the stockade and forced
them to circle miles out of their way. His father had shot one, and
he'd had to leave his hatchet sticking in the skull of another, when
his rifle had misfired.

That meant a trip to the gunsmith's, for a new hatchet and to have the
mainspring of the rifle replaced. Nobody could afford to have a rifle
that couldn't be trusted, least of all a hunter and prospector. And
he'd had words with Alex Barrett, the gunsmith, just the other day.
Not that Barrett wouldn't be more than glad to do business with him,
once he saw that hard tool-steel he'd dug out of that place down the
river. Hardest steel he'd ever found, and hadn't been atom-spoiled,
either.

He cleaned, wiped and stropped his razor and put it back in the case;
he threw out the wash-water on the compost-pile, and went into the
cabin, putting on his shirt and his belt, and passed on through to the
front porch, where his father was already eating at the table. The
people of the Toon liked to eat in the open; it was something they'd
always done, just as they'd always liked to eat together in the
evenings.

He sweetened his mug of chicory with a lump of maple sugar and began
to sip it before he sat down, standing with one foot on the bench and
looking down across the parade ground, past the Aitch-Cue House,
toward the river and the wall.

"If you're coming around to Alex's way of thinking--and mine--it won't
hurt you to admit it, son," his father said.

He turned, looking at his father with the beginning of anger, and then
grinned. The elders were constantly keeping the young men alert with
these tests. He checked back over his actions since he had come out
onto the porch.

To the table, sugar in his chicory, one foot on the bench, which had
reminded him again of the absence of the hatchet from his belt and
brought an automatic frown. Then the glance toward the gunsmith's
shop, and across the parade ground, at the houses into which so much
labor had gone; the wall that had been built from rubble and topped
with pointed stakes; the white slabs of marble from the ruined
building that marked the graves of the First Tenant and the men of the
Old Toon. He _had_ thought, in that moment, that maybe his father and
Alex Barrett and Reader Rawson and Tenant Mycroft Jones and the others
were right--there were too many things here that could not be moved
along with them, if they decided to move.

It would be false modesty, refusal to see things as they were, not to
admit that he was the leader of the younger men, and the boys of the
Irregulars. And last winter, the usual theological arguments about the
proper chronological order of the Sacred Books and the true nature of
the Risen One had been replaced by a violent controversy when Sholto
Jiminez and Birdy Edwards had reopened the old question of the
advisability of moving the Toon and settling elsewhere. He'd been in
favor of the idea himself, but, for the last month or so, he had begun
to doubt the wisdom of it. It was probably reluctance to admit this to
himself that had brought on the strained feelings between himself and
his old friend the gunsmith.

"I'll have to drill the Irregulars, today," he said. "Birdy Edwards
has been drilling them, while we've been hunting. But I'll go up and
see Alex about a new hatchet and fixing my rifle. I'll have a talk
with him."

He stepped forward to the edge of the porch, still munching on a
