
Meadows bright with clover-heads among the grasses, daisies, and
buttercups in June resound with the murmur of unwearying industry and
rapturous enjoyment. Bumblebees by the tens of thousands buzzing above
acres of the farmer's clover blossoms should be happy in a knowledge of
their benefactions, which doubtless concern them not at all. They have
never heard the story of the Australians who imported quantities of
clover for fodder, and had glorious fields of it that season, but not a
seed to plant next year's crops, simply because the farmers had failed
to import the bumblebee. After her immigration the clovers multiplied
prodigiously.

No; the bee's happiness rests on her knowledge that only the
butterflies' long tongues can honestly share with her the brimming wells
of nectar in each tiny floret. Children who have sucked them too
appreciate her rapture. If we examine a little flower under the
magnifying glass, we shall see why its structure places it in the pea
family. Bumblebees so depress the keel either when they sip, or feed on
pollen, that their heads and tongues get well dusted with the yellow
powder, which they transfer to the stigmas of other flowers; whereas the
butterflies are of doubtful value, if not injurious, since their long,
slender tongues easily drain the nectar without depressing the keel.
Even if a few grains of pollen should cling to their tongues, it would
probably be wiped off as they withdrew them through the narrow slit,
where the petals nearly meet, at the mouth of the flower. _Bombus
terrestris_ delights in nipping holes at the base of the tube, which
other pilferers also profit by. Our country is so much richer in
butterflies than Europe, it is scarcely surprising that Professor
Robertson found thirteen Lepidoptera out of twenty insect visitors to
this clover in Illinois, whereas Muller caught only eight butterflies on
it out of a list of thirty-nine visitors in Germany. The fritillaries
and the sulphurs are always seen about the clover fields among many
others, and the "dusky wings" and the caterpillar of several species
feed almost exclusively on this plant.

"To live in clover," from the insect's point of view at least, may well
mean a life of luxury and affluence. Most peasants in Europe will tell
you that a dream about the flower foretells not only a happy marriage,
but long life and prosperity. For ages the clover has been counted a
mystic plant, and all sorts of good and bad luck were said to attend
the finding of variations of its leaves which had more than the common
number of leaflets. At evening these leaflets fold downward, the side
ones like two hands clasped in prayer, the end one bowed over them. In
this fashion the leaves of the white and other clovers also go to
sleep, to protect their sensitive surfaces from cold by radiation, it
is thought.


White Sweet Clover; Bokhara or Tree Clover; White Melilot; Honey
Lotus

_Melilotus alba_

_Flowers_--Small, white, fragrant, papilionaceous, the standard petal a
trifle longer than the wings; borne in slender racemes. _Stem:_ 3 to 10
ft. tall, branching. _Leaves:_ Rather distant, petioled, compounded of 3
oblong, saw-edged leaflets; fragrant, especially when dry.

_Preferred Habitat_--Waste lands, roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--June-November.

_Distribution_--United States, Europe, Asia.

Both the White and the Yellow Sweet Clover put their leaves to sleep at
night in a remarkable manner: the three leaflets of each leaf twist
through an angle of 90 degrees, until one edge of each vertical blade
is uppermost. The two side leaflets, Darwin found, always tend to face
the north with their upper surface, one facing north-northwest and the
other north-northeast, while the terminal leaflet escapes the chilling
of its sensitive upper surface through radiation by twisting to a
vertical also, but bending to either east or west, until it comes in
contact with the vertical upper surface of either of the side leaflets.
Thus the upper surface of the terminal and of at least one of the side
leaflets is sure to be well protected through the night; one is "left
out in the cold."

The dried branches of sweet clover will fill a room with delightful
fragrance; but they will not drive away flies, nor protect woollens from
the ravages of moths, as old women once taught us to believe.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ubiquitous White or Dutch Clover (_Trifolium repens_), whose
creeping branches send up solitary round heads of white or pinkish
flowers on erect, leafless stems, from May to December, in fields, open
waste land, and cultivated places throughout our area, Europe, and Asia,
devotes itself to wooing bees, since these are the only insects that
effect cross-fertilization regularly, other visitors aiding it only
occasionally. Its foliage is the favorite food of very many species of
caterpillars and of all grazing cattle the world around. This is still
another plant frequently miscalled shamrock. Good luck or bad attends
the finding of the leaves, when compounded of an even or an odd number
of leaflets more than the normal count, according to the saying of many
simple-minded folk.


Blue, Tufted, or Cow Vetch or Tare; Cat Peas; Tinegrass

_Vicia Cracca_

_Flowers_--Blue, later purple; 1/2 in. long, growing downward in 1-sided
spike, 15 to 40 flowered; calyx oblique, small, with unequal teeth;
corolla butterfly-shaped, consisting of standard, wings, and keel, all
oblong; the first clawed, the second oblique, and adhering to the
shorter keel; 10 stamens, 1 detached from other 9. _Stem:_ Slender,
weak, climbing or trailing, downy, 2 to 4 ft. long. _Leaves:_ Tendril
bearing, divided into 18 to 24 thin, narrow, oblong leaflets. _Fruit:_ A
smooth pod 1 in. long or less, 5 to 8 seeded.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry soil, fields, waste land.

_Flowering Season_--June-August.

_Distribution_--United States from New Jersey, Kentucky, and Iowa
northward and northwestward. Europe and Asia.

Dry fields blued with the bright blossoms of the Tufted Vetch, and
roadsides and thickets where the angular vine sends forth vivid patches
of color, resound with the music of happy bees. Although the parts of
the flower fit closely together, they are elastic, and opening with the
energetic visitor's weight and movement give ready access to the
nectary. On his departure they resume their original position, to
protect both nectar and pollen from rain and pilferers whose bodies are
not perfectly adapted to further the flower's cross-fertilization. The
common bumblebee (_Bombus terrestris_) plays a mean trick, all too
frequently, when he bites a hole at the base of the blossom, not only
gaining easy access to the sweets for himself, but opening the way for
others less intelligent than he, but quite ready to profit by his
mischief, and so defeat nature's plan. Doctor Ogle observed that the
same bee always acts in the same manner, one sucking the nectar
legitimately, another always biting a hole to obtain it surreptitiously,
the natural inference, of course, being that some bees, like small boys,
are naturally depraved.


Ground-nut

_Apios tuberosa (A. Apios)_

_Flowers_--Fragrant, chocolate brown and reddish purple, numerous, about
1/2 in. long, clustered in racemes from the leaf axils. Calyx 2-lipped,
corolla papilionaceous, the broad standard petal turned backward, the
keel sickle-shaped; stamens within it 9 and 1. _Stem:_ From tuberous,
edible rootstock; climbing, slender, several feet long, the juice milky.
_Leaves:_ Compounded of 5 to 7 ovate leaflets. _Fruit:_ A leathery,
slightly curved pod, 2 to 4 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Twining about undergrowth and thickets in moist or
wet ground.

_Flowering Season_--July-September.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick to Ontario, south to the Gulf states
and Kansas.

No one knows better than the omnivorous "barefoot boy" that

  "Where the ground-nut trails its vine"

there is hidden something really good to eat under the soft, moist soil
where legions of royal fern, usually standing guard above it, must be
crushed before he digs up the coveted tubers. He would be the last to
confuse it with the Wild Kidney Bean or Bean Vine (_Phaseolus
polystachyus_). The latter has loose racemes of smaller purple flowers
and leaflets in threes; nevertheless it is often confounded with the
ground-nut vine by older naturalists whose knowledge was "learned of
schools."


Wild or Hog Peanut

_Amphicarpa monoica (Falcata comosa)_

_Flowers_--Numerous small, showy ones, borne in drooping clusters from
axils of upper leaves; lilac, pale purplish, or rarely white,
butterfly-shaped, consisting of standard petal partly enfolding wings
and keel. Calyx tubular, 4 or 5 toothed; 10 stamens (9 and 1); 1 pistil.
(Also solitary fertile flowers, lacking petals, on thread-like, creeping
branches from lower axils or underground.) _Stem:_ Twining wiry
brownish-hairy, 1 to 8 ft. long. _Leaves:_ Compounded of 3 thin
leaflets, egg-shaped at base, acutely pointed at tip. _Fruit:_ Hairy pod
1 in. long. Also 1-seeded, pale, rounded, underground peanut.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist thickets, shady roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--August-September.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick westward to Nebraska, south to Gulf
of Mexico.

_Amphicarpa_ ("seed at both ends"), the Greek name by which this
graceful vine is sometimes known, emphasizes its most interesting
feature, that, nevertheless, seems to many a foolish duplication of
energy on Nature's part. Why should the same plant bear two kinds of
blossoms and seeds? Among the foliage of low shrubbery and plants in
shady lanes and woodside thickets, we see the delicate, drooping
clusters of lilac blossoms hanging where bees can readily discover them
and, in pilfering their sweets, transfer their pollen from flower to
flower. But in case of failure to intercross these blossoms that are
dependent upon insect help to set fertile seed, what then? Must the
plant run the risk of extinction? Self-fertilization may be an evil,
but failure to produce seed at all is surely the greatest one. To guard
against such a calamity, insignificant looking flowers that have no
petals to open for the enticing of insects, but which fertilize
themselves with their own pollen, produce abundant seed close to the
ground or under it. Then what need of the showy blossoms hanging in the
thicket above? Close inbreeding in the vegetable world, as in the
animal, ultimately produces degenerate offspring; and although the showy
lilac blossoms of the wild peanut yield comparatively few
cross-fertilized seeds, these are quite sufficient to enable the vine to
maintain those desired features which are the inheritance from ancestors
that struggled in their day and generation after perfection. No plant
dares depend upon its cleistogamous or blind flowers alone for
offspring; and in the sixty or more genera containing these curious
growths, that usually look like buds arrested in development, every
plant that bears them bears also showy flowers dependent upon
cross-pollination by insect aid.

The boy who:

      "Drives home the cows from the pasture
  Up through the long shady lane"

knows how reluctantly they leave the feast afforded by the wild peanut.
Hogs, rooting about in the moist soil where it grows, unearth the hairy
pods that should produce next year's vines; hence the poor excuse for
branding a charming plant with a repellent folk-name.

This plant should not be confused with pig-nut (_carya porcina_), which
is a species of hickory.




WOOD-SORREL FAMILY _(Oxalidaceae)_


White or True Wood-sorrel; Alleluia

_Oxalis acetosella_

_Flowers_--White or delicate pink, veined with deep pink, about 1/2 in.
long. Five sepals; 5 spreading petals rounded at tips; 10 stamens, 5
longer, 5 shorter, all anther-bearing; 1 pistil with 5 stigmatic styles.
_Scape:_ Slender, leafless, 1-flowered, 2 to 5 in. high. _Leaf:_
Clover-like, of 3 leaflets, on long petioles from scaly, creeping
rootstock.

_Preferred Habitat_--Cold, damp woods.

_Flowering Season_--May-July.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia and Manitoba, southward to North Carolina.
Also a native of Europe.

Clumps of these delicate little pinkish blossoms and abundant leaves,
cuddled close to the cold earth of northern forests, usually conceal
near the dry leaves or moss from which they spring blind flowers that
never open--cleistogamous the botanists call them--flowers that lack
petals, as if they were immature buds; that lack odor, nectar, and
entrance; yet they are perfectly mature, self-fertilized, and abundantly
fruitful. Fifty-five genera of plants contain one or more species on
which these peculiar products are found, the pea family having more than
any other, although violets offer perhaps the most familiar instance to
most of us. Many of these species bury their offspring below ground; but
the wood-sorrel bears its blind flowers nodding from the top of a
curved scape at the base of the plant, where we can readily find them.
By having no petals, and other features assumed by an ordinary flower to
attract insects, and chiefly in saving pollen, they produce seed with
literally the closest economy. It is estimated that the average blind
flower of the wood-sorrel does its work with four hundred pollen grains,
while the prodigal peony scatters with the help of wind and insect
visitors more than three and a half millions!

As self-fertilization is impossible, the showy blossoms of the
wood-sorrel are a necessity not a luxury; for the insects must not be
allowed to overlook them.

Every child knows how the wood-sorrel "goes to sleep" by drooping its
three leaflets until they touch back to back at evening, regaining the
horizontal at sunrise--a performance most scientists now agree protects
the peculiarly sensitive leaf from cold by radiation. During the day as
well, seedling, scape, and leaves go through some interesting movements,
closely followed by Darwin in his "Power of Movement in Plants," which
should be read by all interested.

_Oxalis_, the Greek for sour, applies to all sorrels because of their
acid juice; but _acetosella_ = vinegar salt, the specific name of this
plant, indicates that from it druggists obtain salt of lemons. Twenty
pounds of leaves yield between two and three ounces of oxalic acid by
crystallization. Names locally given the plant in the Old World are wood
sour or sower, cuckoo's meat, sour trefoil, and shamrock--for this is
St. Patrick's own flower, the true shamrock of the ancient Irish, some
claim. Alleluia, another folk-name, refers to the joyousness of the
Easter season, when the plant comes into bloom in England.


Violet Wood-sorrel

_Oxalis violacea_

_Flowers_--Pinkish purple, lavender, or pale magenta; less than 1 in.
long; borne on slender stems in umbels or forking clusters, each
containing from 3 to 12 flowers. Calyx of 5 obtuse sepals; 5 petals; 10
(5 longer, 5 shorter) stamens; 5 styles persistent above 5-celled ovary.
_Stem:_ From brownish, scaly bulb 4 to 9 in. high. _Leaves:_ About 1 in.
wide, compounded of 3 rounded, clover-like leaflets with prominent
midrib borne at end of slender petioles, springing from root.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rocky and sandy woods.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--Northern United States to Rocky Mountains, south to
Florida and New Mexico; more abundant southward.

Beauty of leaf and blossom is not the only attraction possessed by this
charming little plant. As a family the wood-sorrels have great interest
for botanists since Darwin devoted such exhaustive study to their power
of movement, and many other scientists have described the several forms
assumed by perfect flowers of the same species to secure
cross-fertilization. Some members of the clan also bear blind flowers,
which have been described in the account of the white wood-sorrel. Even
the rudimentary leaves of the seedlings "go to sleep" at evening, and
during the day are in constant movement up and down. The stems, too, are
restless; and as for the mature leaves, every child knows how they droop
their three leaflets back to back against the stem at evening,
elevating them to the perfect horizontal again by day. Extreme
sensitiveness to light has been thought to be the true explanation of so
much activity, and yet this is not a satisfactory theory in many cases.
It is certain that drooping leaves suffer far less from frost than those
whose upper surfaces are flatly exposed to the zenith. This view that
the sleep of leaves saves them from being chilled at night by radiation
is Darwin's own, supported by innumerable experiments; and probably it
would have been advanced by Linnaeus, too, since so many of his
