and Elias M. Gluck, same place.

I claim, 1st, The method of elevating or adjusting the plough of an
excavator by the rotary motion of the forward axle, derived from the
forward wheels by means of the clutches, a' a', substantially as and for
the purposes set forth.

2d, In combination with the above, the plough, P, racks, r r, and
pinion, a, when the latter is fixed to the axle, and operates to raise
the plough by power derived from the axle, substantially as and for the
purpose specified.

3d, The combination of the rocking cart, C, gear, e e'e", apron, B, and
plough, P, when the parts are so constructed and arranged that by the
raising or depressing of the plough, the wheels, e e', shall be
thrown into or out of gear, and the apron put in motion or stopped,
substantially as and for the purpose specified.

4th. The combination of the looped rods, w w w, with the arms, v v v,
doors, m m' m", and lever, 1", substantially as and for the purpose
specified.

5th, The lips or projections, o o, of the doors, m m' m", substantially
as and for the purposes set forth.

6th. The combination of the rod, u, lever, l', spring, s, trigger,
n, doors, m m' m", having the lips, o o o, rod, y', and hook, y,
substantially as and for the purposes specified.


72,099.--AUGER HANDLE.--Daniel Y. Smith, Joliet, Ill.

I claim the combination of the ferrule, a, with the annular nut, e, and
flat spring, c, when constructed and arranged as and for the purposes
set forth.


72,100.--MACHINE FOR SHARPENING SAWS.--J.B.Smith, Milwaukee, Wis.

I claim cutter, B, gauge, E, and adjustable cone-mandrel, D, in
combination, substantially as and for the purpose described.


72,101.--RAISING OILS AND BURNING-FLUIDS BY PNEUMATIC PRESSURE.--John
Henry Smith, Allegheny city, Pa.

I claim raising, by pneumatic pressure, oils or burning-fluids from an
oil or fluid compartment of a ship or other vessel, and mixing with said
oil and fluid the gas generated therefrom, as herein described and set
forth.

Also, the combination and arrangement of the pipes, A B C f and f', when
used in connection with the oil or fluid compartment, R, of a ship or
other vessel, the whole being constructed, arranged, and operating
substantially in the manner hereon described and set forth.

Also, in connection with the above, ejecting fine jets of water into the
flame, caused by the burning of the oil or fluid and other matter mixed
therewith, as herein described and set forth.


72,102.--SHIP FOR TRANSPORTING PETROLEUM.--John H. Smith, Allegheny
city, Pa.

I claim, providing the hulls of ships and other vessels with a
compartment for oils and burning fluids, said compartment being
protected with water, and furnished with supply and discharge pipes,
substantially as herein described and for the purpose set forth.


72,103.--DEVICE FOR SHEARING AND CLIPPING WOOL.--R.T.Smith and
J.K.Priest, Nashua, N.H.

I claim, 1st, The revolving spring cutter or cutters, O, in connection
with a cutter-plate.

2d, The open cutter-plate, P.

3d, The shield, N, in connection with the cylinder, C, covering shaft,
M, and extending into groove, g, substantially in the manner and for the
purpose herein described.


72,104.--CORN PLOUGH.--John Snyder, Williamsfield, Ohio.

I claim the combination of the tongue, H, strap, L, and upright, K, with
the forward end of the central beam, A, substantially as herein shown
and described, and for the purpose set forth.


72,105.--BOOT-HEEL POLISHER.--V.K.Spear, Lynn, Mass.

I claim, 1st, The reciprocating polisher, moving in the line of an arc
of a circle, by means of mechanism substantially as herein described,
and having an elastic bearing, as and for the purpose set forth.

2d, In combination with a reciprocating polisher, substantially as
described, I claim the pivoted sliding frame to support the boot or shoe
constructed, arranged, and operating substantially as set forth.


72,106.--MEANS FOR PROPELLING VESSELS.--Robt.R. Spedden and Daniel F.
Stafford, Astoria, Oregon.

We claim, 1st, The combination of the rack-frame, K, racks, I and J, and
ratchet wheel, H, with each other and with a shaft, D, for the purpose
of applying power to said shaft, substantially as herein shown and
described.

2d, The combination of the stationary post, O, pitman, N, rocking-post,
M, and adjusting slide, L, with each other, with the rack frame, K, and
with the hinged parts of a vessel or other structure, one or both of
said hinged parts floating in the water, so as to be acted upon by the
motion of the waves, substantially as herein shown and described.


72,107.--CULTIVATOR.--C.E.Steller, Chicago, Ill.

I claim, 1st, The hinged runners, J W, substantially as and for the
purpose set forth.

2d, The slotted sides, A A and B B, in combination with the shanks, C D
E, arranged to be set at different angles, and fastened by set-screws, Z
Z, as described.

3d, The combination of the guide-bar, E, arranged to be raised and
lowered, with rear standards, H H, and sides, A A B B, as described.

4th, The combination of standards, G G, hinged runners, J W, and sides,
A A B B, as set forth.

5th, The shanks, U, of shovel, T, arranged to fit in a socket, V, and
bar, S, in combination with standards, G G, and cross-bar, I, as and for
the purpose set forth.

6th, The double evener, L, arranged substantially as set forth.

7th, The double evener, L, in combination with braces, O O and P P, with
or without braces, Y, substantially as set forth.


72,108.--EYE CUP.--Benj. F. Stephens, Brooklyn, N.Y.

I claim a pair of bowls, united by tubes or necks to an exhaustion-bag
or ball, as and for the purposes set forth.


72,109.--HARVESTER RAKE.--Edward Stewart, Fort Madison, Iowa.

I claim the arrangement of the shafts, D E and G, with their respective
wheels, crank, I, and pitman, J, with its dividing end, J', connecting
the arms, e e, upon the box, K', at the end of shaft, K, the whole
constructed and operating substantially as and for the purposes
specified.


72,110.--STREET PAVEMENT.--H. M. Stow, San Francisco, Cal.

I claim, 1st, A wooden pavement, composed of alternate tiers of
square-ended and wedge-shaped blocks, the wedge-shaped ends of the
latter being driven down into a foundation-bed of sand or earth,
substantially as and for the purpose described.

2d, A wooden pavement, composed of blocks with lower ends wedge-formed,
and all driven down into a foundation-bed of sand or earth,
substantially as shown and described.


72,111.--STREET PAVEMENT.--H. M. Stow, San Francisco, Cal.

I claim, 1st, The cast iron plates, with projecting wedge-shaped flanges
to be driven into the sand or earth, substantially as and for the
purpose set forth.

2d, Also, a pavement composed of alternate tiers of cast iron plates,
with projecting wedge-shaped flanges and wedge-shaped wooden blocks,
driven into the sand and earth, substantially as described.


72,112.--WASHING MACHINE.--John D Swartz, Milton, Pa

I claim, 1st, The slotted aims, g, bearing the shaft, D, and rubber, C,
when such arms are connected at their lower ends by the slotted bar, E,
through which the spring, G, passes as herein described for the purpose
specified.

2d, The combination of the semi-circular rubber, C, slotted arms, g,
shaft, D, slotted cross-bar, E, spirally grooved rollers, d, in the
curved frames, B, the spring, G, and rack, H, as herein described for
the purpose specified.


72,113.--PORTABLE FENCE.--G. D. Sweigert, Martic township, Pa., assignor
to himself, John Sweigert and Felix W. Sweigert.

I claim a portable fence, combined of round wrought-iron posts, C,
bed-plate, A, rails, B, scarfed, and applied with intervening ferrules,
D, head and bottom washers, F, all arranged in the manner and for the
purpose specified.


72,114.--VARIABLE CRANK FOR BORING MACHINE.--G. C. Taft, Worcester,
Mass., assignor to Theodore Mace, Sing Sing, N.Y.

I claim the two variable cranks, constructed as specified, and applied
in the manner shown, to the shaft or axis of the boring machine, as and
for the purposes set forth.


72,115.--ROTARY TAKE-UP FOR KNITTING MACHINE.--James Teachout,
Waterford, N.Y.

I claim, 1st, The stationary scroll plate, C, placed over the center of
motion of take-up of knitting machines, for the purpose described.

2d, Also, in combination with the scroll plate, C, the toothed gear, D,
for the purpose herein set forth.

3d, Also, the toothed wheel, D, or its equivalent, either separately, or
combined with the described appendages e i g i K, arranged as shown and
described as operating substantially in the manner and for the purpose
specified.

4th, Also, in combination with the above, the adjustable gear, s, and
concentric gears, s', for the purpose described.


72,116.--KNITTING MACHINE.--James Teachout, Waterford, N.Y.

I claim 1st, Forming the "jacks" or loop-lifters, B, with a projecting
are, f, and depressed arc, g, for the purposes set forth.

2d, n combination with the arc, f, and arch, g, the rounded end, as
shown and described.

3d, In combination with the described knitting jacks, a retaining hub or
device, constructed and arranged as shown and described.

72117,--KNITTING MACHINE--James Teachout, Waterford, N.Y.

I claim, 1st, The vertically adjustable collars or rings, G and H, for
the purposes described.

2d, In combination with the collars, G and H, the partitions or wings,
k, and groove, l, as set forth.

3d, In combination with the adjustable collars, G and H, wings, k, and
groove, l, the "jacks" or lifters, M, formed as shown and described, for
the purpose specified.


72,118.--MANUFACTURING ILLUMINATING GAS.--J. B. Terry, Hartford, Conn.

I claim, 1st, The method herein described of heating air charged with
hydrocarbon vapor, so as to render it non-condensable previous to its
delivery as an illuminating gas, for the purposes set forth.

2d, The employment of a retort or other heating medium interposed
between the carbureter and gas holder or other gas-delivering or
gas-burning device, substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

3d, The employment of one or more burners under the retort or vessel,
for the purpose of heating the same under the arrangement herein shown
and described.

4th, The combination, with the carbureting vessel and intermediate
heater, of a jacket under or around the sand carbureter, and a flue
connecting the jacket with said heater, substantially in the manner and
for the purposes set forth.


72,119.--LOOMS.--S. T. Thomas and J. H. Dolley, Guildford, N.H.

We claim, in combination with the lever, g, arranged to operate as set
forth, the incline, n, or its equivalent, for relieving the picker from
the action of the spring, i, to permit free movement of the shuttle
boxes, substantially as set forth.


72,120.--GATE.--John W. Thompson, Greenfield, Mass.

I claim a gate, made of metallic tubing and connections, substantially
as herein set forth and described.


72,121.--TAIL-PIECE FOR VIOLINS.--James Thoms, South Boston, Mass.

I claim applying a winch to the tail-piece of a violin, substantially as
and for the purpose herein shown and described.


72,122.--FOLDING BEDSTEAD AND CRIB.--R. S. Titcomb, Gloversville, N.Y.

I claim, 1st, A folding bedstead or crib, substantially as shown and
described, and for the purpose set forth.

2d, a rotating bedding-box, A, in combination with the head and
foot-boards of a bedstead or crib, substantially as shown and described,
and for the purpose set forth.

3d, Folding head and foot-boards, composed of the parts, F and C,
substantially as shown and described, and for the purposes set forth.

4th, The swinging sides, A', in combination with the box, A, and the
head and foot-boards, F C, substantially as shown and described, and for
the purposes set forth.


72,123.--STEAM ENGINE.--J. F. Troxel, Bloomsville, Ohio.

I claim, 1st, The construction of the oscillating valve, T, and
arrangement of the openings, S P P', and R, substantially as shown and
described.

2d, Also the arrangement of the piston rods, K and L, operating in one
and the same end of the cylinder, substantially as shown and described.


72,124.--WARDROBE.--Nathan Turner, West Lynn, Mass.

I claim a convertible wardrobe, closet, or bookcase, with swinging
