chronometer over his head and then turned to speak into the audio log
recorder. "Rocket cruiser _Polaris_ completed space flight one-seven-six
at 1301."

Captain Strong stepped up to Tom and clapped him on the shoulder.
"Secure the _Polaris_, Tom, and tell Astro to get the reactant pile from
the firing chamber ready for dumping when the hot-soup wagon gets here."
The Solar Guard officer referred to the lead-lined jet sled that removed
the reactant piles from all ships that were to be laid up for longer
than three days. "And you'd better get over to your dorm right away,"
Strong continued. "You have to get ready for parade and full Corps
dismissal."

Tom grinned. "Yes, sir!"

"We're blasting off, sir," said Tony Richards, stepping forward with his
unit mates. "Congratulations again, Corbett. I still can't figure out
how you did it so quickly!"

"Thanks, Tony," replied Tom graciously. "It was luck and the pressure of
good competition."

Richards shook hands and then turned to Strong. "Do I have your
permission to leave the ship, sir?" he asked.

"Permission granted," replied Strong. "And have a good leave."

"Thank you, sir."

The three _Arcturus_ cadets saluted and left the ship. A moment later
Roger and Astro joined Strong and Tom on the control deck.

"Well," said Strong, "what nonsense have you three planned for your
leave? Try and see Liddy Tamal. I hear she's making a new stereo about
the Solar Guard. You might be hired as technical assistants." He smiled.
The famous actress was a favorite of the cadets. Strong waited. "Well,
is it a secret?"

"It was your idea, Astro," said Roger. "Go ahead."

"Yeah," said Tom. "You got us into this."

"Well, sir," mumbled Astro, turning red with embarrassment, "we're going
to Venus."

"What's so unusual about going to Venus?" asked Strong.

"We're going hunting," replied Astro.

"Hunting?"

"Yes, sir," gulped the big Venusian. "For tyrannosaurus."

Strong's jaw dropped and he sat down suddenly on the nearest
acceleration cushion. "I expected something a little strange from you
three whiz kids." He laughed. "It would be impossible for you to go home
and relax for a month. But this blasts me! Hunting for a tyrannosaurus!
What are you going to do with it after you catch it?" He paused and then
added, "If you do."

"Eat it," said Astro simply. "Tyrannosaurus steak is delicious!"

Strong doubled with laughter at the seriousness of Astro's expression.
The giant Venusian continued doggedly, "And besides, there's a bounty on
them. A thousand credits for every tyranno head brought in. They're
dangerous and destroy a lot of crops."

Strong straightened up. "All right, all right! Go ahead! Have yourselves
a good time, but don't take any unnecessary chances. I like my cadets to
have all the arms and legs and heads they're supposed to have." He
paused and glanced at his watch. "You'd better get hopping. Astro, did
you get the pile ready for the soup wagon?"

"Yes, sir!"

"Very well, Tom, secure the ship." He came to attention. "Unit,
_stand--to_!"

The three cadets stiffened and saluted sharply.

"Unit dismissed!"

Captain Strong turned and left the ship.

Hurriedly, Tom, Roger, and Astro checked the great spaceship and fifteen
minutes later were racing out of the main air lock. Hitching a ride on a
jet sled to the nearest slidewalk, they were soon being whisked along
toward their quarters. Already, cadet units were standing around in
fresh blues waiting for the call for final dress parade.

At exactly fifteen hundred, the entire Cadet Corps stepped off with
electronic precision for the final drill of the term. By threes, each
unit marching together, with the _Polaris_ unit walking behind the
standard bearers as honor unit, they passed the reviewing stand. Senior
officers of the Solar Guard, delegates from the Solar Alliance, and
staff officers of the Academy accepted their salute. Commander Walters
stood stiffly in front of the stand, his heart filled with pride as he
recognized the honor unit. He had almost washed out the _Polaris_ unit
in the beginning of their Academy training.

Major Lou Connel, Senior Line Officer of the Solar Guard, stepped
forward when the cadets came to a stop and presented Tom, Roger, and
Astro with the emblem of their achievement, a small gold pin in the
shape of a rocket ship. He, too, had had his difficulties with the
_Polaris_ unit, and while he had never been heard to compliment anyone
on anything, expecting nothing but the best all the time, he
nevertheless congratulated them heartily as he gave them their hard-won
trophy.

After several other awards had been presented, Commander Walters
addressed the Cadet Corps, concluding with "... each of you has had a
tough year. But when you come back in four weeks, you'll think this past
term has been a picnic. And remember, wherever you go, whatever you do,
you're Space Cadets! Act like one! But above all, have a good time!
Spaceman's luck!"

A cadet stepped forward quickly, turned to face the line of cadets, and
held up his hands. He brought them down quickly and words of the Academy
song thundered from a thousand voices.

    "_From the rocket fields of the Academy
    To the far-flung stars of outer space,
    We're Space Cadets training to be
    Ready for dangers we may face.

    Up in the sky, rocketing past,
    Higher than high, faster than fast,
    Out into space, into the sun,
    Look at her go when we give her the gun.

    We are Space Cadets, and we are proud to say
    Our fight for right will never cease.
    Like a cosmic ray, we light the way
    To interplanet peace!_"

"_Dis_-missed!" roared Walters. Immediately the precise lines of cadets
turned into a howling mob of eager boys, everyone seemingly running in a
different direction.

"Come on," said Roger. "I've got everything set! Let's get to the
station ahead of the mob."

"But what about our gear?" said Tom. "We've got to get back to the
dorm."

"I had it sent down to the station last night. I got the monorail
tickets to Atom City last week, and reserved seats on the _Venus Lark_
two weeks ago! Come on!"

"Only Roger could handle it so sweetly," sighed Astro. "You know,
hotshot, sometimes I think you're useful!"

The three cadets turned and raced across the quadrangle for the nearest
slidewalk that would take them to the Academy monorail station and the
beginning of their adventure in the jungles of Venus.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 2


"The situation may be serious and it may not, but I don't want to take
any chances."

Commander Walters sat in his office, high up in the Tower of Galileo,
with department heads from the Academy and Solar Guard. Behind him, an
entire wall made of clear crystal offered a breath-taking view of the
Academy grounds. Before him, their faces showing their concern over a
report Walters had just read, Captain Strong, Major Connel, Dr. Joan
Dale, and Professor Sykes waited for the commanding officer of the
Academy to continue.

"As you know," said Walters, "the resolution passed by the Council in
establishing the Solar Guard specifically states that it shall be the
duty of the Solar Guard to investigate and secure evidence for the Solar
Alliance Council of any acts by any person, or group of persons,
suspected of overt action against the Solar Constitution or the
Universal Bill of Rights. Now, based on the report I've just read to
you, I would like an opinion from each of you."

"For what purpose, Commander?" asked Joan Dale, the young and pretty
astrophysicist.

"To decide whether it would be advisable to have a full and open
investigation of this information from the Solar Guard attache on
Venus."

"Why waste time talking?" snapped Professor Sykes, the chief of the
nucleonics laboratory. "Let's investigate. That report sounds serious."

Major Connel leveled a beady eye on the little gray-haired man.

"Professor Sykes, an investigation is serious. When it is based on a
report like this one, it is doubly serious, and needs straight and
careful thinking. We don't want to hurt innocent people."

Sykes shifted around in his chair and glared at the burly Solar Guard
officer. "Don't try to tell me anything about straight thinking, Connel.
I know more about the Solar Constitution and the rights of our citizens
than you'll know in ten thousand light years!"

"Yeah?" roared Connel. "And with all your brains you'd probably find out
these people are nothing more than a harmless bunch of colonists out on
a picnic!"

The professor shot out of his chair and waved an angry finger under
Connel's nose. "And that would be a lot more than I'm finding out right
now with that contraption of yours!" he shouted.

Connel's face turned red. "So that's how you feel about my invention!"
he snapped.

"Yes, that's the way I feel about your invention!" replied Sykes hotly.
"I know three cadets that could build that gadget in half the time it's
taken you just to figure out the theory!"

Commander Walters, Captain Strong, and Joan Dale were fighting to keep
from laughing at the hot exchange between the two veteran spacemen.

"They sound like the _Polaris_ unit," Joan whispered to Strong.

Walters stood up. "Gentlemen! Please! We're here to discuss a report on
the activities of a secret organization on Venus. I will have to ask you
to keep to the subject at hand. Dr. Dale, do you have any comments on
the report?" He turned to the young physicist who was choking off a
laugh.

"Well, Commander," she began, still smiling, "the report is rather
sketchy. I would like to see more information before any real decision
is made."

Walters turned to Strong. "Steve?"

"I think Joan has the right idea, sir," he replied. "While the report
indicates that a group of people on Venus are meeting regularly and
secretly, and wearing some silly uniform, I think we need more
information before ordering a full-scale investigation."

"He's right, Commander," Connel broke in. "You just can't walk into an
outfit and demand a look at their records, books, and membership index,
unless you're pretty sure you'll find something."

"Send a man from here," Strong suggested. "If you use anyone out of the
Venus office, he might be recognized."

"Good idea," commented Sykes.

Joan nodded. "Sounds reasonable."

"How do you feel about it, Connel?" asked Walters.

Connel, still furious over Sykes's comment on his spectrum recorder,
shot an angry glance at the professor. "I think it's fine," he said
bluntly. "Who're you going to send?"

Walters paused before answering. He glanced at Strong and then back at
Connel. "What about yourself?"

"Me?"

"Why not?" continued Walters. "You know as much about Venus as anyone,
and you have a lot of friends there you can trust. Nose around a while,
see what you can learn, unofficially."

"But what about my work on the spectrum recorder?" asked Connel.

"That!" snorted Sykes derisively. "Huh, that can be completed any time
you want to listen to some plain facts about--"

"I'll never listen to anything you have to say, you dried-up old neutron
chaser!" blasted Connel.

"Of course not," cackled Sykes. "And it's the same bullheaded
stubbornness that'll keep you from finishing that recorder."

"I'm sorry, gentlemen," said Walters firmly. "I cannot allow personal
discussions to interfere with the problem at hand. How about it, Connel?
Will you go to Venus?"

Lou Connel was the oldest line officer in the Solar Guard, having
recommended the slightly younger Walters for the post of commandant of
Space Academy and the Solar Guard so that he himself could escape a desk
job and continue blasting through space where he had devoted his entire
life. While Walters had the authority to order him to accept the
assignment, Connel knew that if he begged off because of his work on the
recorder, Walters would understand and offer the assignment to Strong.
He paused and then growled, "When do I blast off?"

Walters smiled and answered, "As soon as we contact Venus headquarters
and tell them to expect you."

"Wouldn't it be better to let me go without any fanfare?" mused the
burly spaceman. "I could just take a ship and act as though I'm on some
kind of special detail. As a matter of fact, Higgleston at the Venusport
lab has some information I could use."

"Anything Higgleston could tell you," interjected Sykes, "I can tell
you! You're just too stubborn to listen to me."

Connel opened his mouth to blast the professor in return, but he caught
a sharp look from Walters and he clamped his lips together tightly.

"I guess that's it, then," said Walters. "Anyone have any other ideas?"
He glanced around the room. "Joan? Steve?"

Dr. Dale and Captain Strong shook their heads silently. Strong was
disappointed that he had not been given the assignment on Venus. Four
weeks at the deserted Academy would seem like living in a graveyard.
Walters sensed his feelings, and smiling, he said, "You've been going
like a hot rocket this past year, Steve. I have a specific assignment
for you."

"Yes, sir!" Strong looked up eagerly.

"I want you to go to the Sweet Water Lakes around New Chicago--"

"Yes, sir?"

"--go to my cabin--"

"Sir?"

"--_and go fishing_!"

Strong grinned. "Thanks, skipper," he said quietly. "I guess I could use
a little relaxation. I was almost tempted to join Corbett, Manning, and
Astro. They're going hunting in the jungle belt of Venus for a
tyrannosaurus!"

"Blast my jets!" roared Connel. "Those boys haven't killed themselves in
line of duty, so they go out and tangle with the biggest and most
dangerous monster in the entire solar system!"

"Well," said Joan with a smile, "I'll put my money on Astro against a
tyranno any time, pound for pound!"

"Hear, hear!" chimed in Sykes, and forgetting his argument with Connel,
he turned to the spaceman. "Say, Lou," he said, "when you get to Venus
tell Higgy I said to show you that magnetic ionoscope he's rigging up.
It might give you some ideas."

"Thanks," replied Connel, also forgetting the hot exchange of a few
minutes before. He stood up. "I'll take the _Polaris_, Commander. She's
the fastest ship available with automatic controls for a solo hop."

"She's been stripped of her reactant pile, Major," said Strong. "It'll
take a good eighteen hours to soup her up again."

"I'll take care of it," said Connel. "Are there any specific orders,
Commander?"

"Use your own judgment, Lou," said Walters. "You know what we want and
how far to go to get it. If you learn anything, we'll start a full-scale
investigation. If not, we'll forget the whole matter and no one will get
hurt."

"And the Solar Guard won't get a reputation of being nosy," added
Strong.

Connel nodded. "I'll take care of it." He shook hands all around, coming
to Sykes last. "Sorry I lost my temper, Professor," he said gruffly.

"Forget it, Major." Sykes smiled. He really admired the gruff spaceman.

The thick-set senior officer came to smart attention, saluted crisply,
turned, and left the office. For the time being, the mysterious trouble
on Venus was his responsibility.

       *       *       *       *       *
