and to demonstrate the need for devising a means of communication.
At least that was what the book said. It demonstrated nothing of
the sort to this crowd. It scared them. The dignitary with the staff
twittered excitedly. One of his companions agreed with him at length.
Another started to reach for his knife, then remembered his manners.
The bellowsman pumped a few blasts on the horn.

"What do you think of the language?" he asked Lillian.

"They all sound that bad, when you first hear them. Give them a few
seconds, and then we'll have Phase Two."

When the gibbering and skreeking began to fall off, she stepped
forward. Lillian was, herself, a good test of how human aliens were;
this gang weren't human enough to whistle at her. She touched
herself on the breast. "Me," she said.

The natives seemed shocked. She repeated the gesture and the word,
then turned and addressed Paul Meillard. "You."

"Me," Meillard said, pointing to himself. Then he said, "You," to
Luis Gofredo. It went around the contact team; when it came to him,
he returned it to point of origin.

"I don't think they get it at all," he added in a whisper.

"They ought to," Lillian said. "Every language has a word for self
and a word for person-addressed."

"Well, look at them," Karl Dorver invited. "Six different opinions
about what we mean, and now the band's starting an argument of their
own."

"Phase Two-A," Lillian said firmly, stepping forward. She pointed
to herself. "Me--Lillian Ransby. Lillian Ransby--me _name_.
You--_name_?

"_Bwoooo!_" the spokesman screamed in horror, clutching his staff
as though to shield it from profanation. The others howled like
a hound-pack at a full moon, except one of the short-tunic boys,
who was slapping himself on the head with both hands and yodeling.
The horn-crew hastily swung their piece around at the Terrans,
pumping frantically.

"What do you suppose I said?" Lillian asked.

"Oh, something like, 'Curse your gods, death to your king, and
spit in your mother's face,' I suppose."

"Let me try it," Gofredo said.

The little Marine major went through the same routine. At his first
word, the uproar stopped; before he was through, the natives' faces
were sagging and crumbling into expressions of utter and
heartbroken grief.

"It's not as bad as all that, is it?" he said. "You try it, Mark."

"Me ... Mark ... Howell...." They looked bewildered.

"Let's try objects, and play-acting," Lillian suggested. "They're
farmers; they ought to have a word for water."

       *       *       *       *       *

They spent almost an hour at it. They poured out two gallons of
water, pretended to be thirsty, gave each other drinks. The natives
simply couldn't agree on the word, in their own language, for water.
That or else they missed the point of the whole act. They tried
fire, next. The efficiency of a steel hatchet was impressive, and
so was the sudden flame of a pocket-lighter, but no word for fire
emerged, either.

"Ah, to Niflheim with it!" Luis Gofredo cried in exasperation.
"We're getting nowhere at five times light speed. Give them their
presents and send them home, Paul."

"Sheath-knives; they'll have to be shown how sharp they are,"
he suggested. "Red bandannas. And costume jewelry."

"How about something to eat, Bennet?" Meillard asked Fayon.

"Extee Three, and C-H trade candy," Fayon said. Field Ration,
Extraterrestrial Service, Type Three, could be eaten by anything
with a carbon-hydrogen metabolism, and so could the trade candy.
"Nothing else, though, till we have some idea what goes on inside
them."

Dorver thought the six members of the delegation would be persons
of special consequence, and should have something extra. That was
probably so. Dorver was as quick to pick up clues to an alien social
order as he was, himself, to deduce a culture pattern from a few
artifacts. He and Lillian went back to the landing craft to collect
the presents.

Everybody, horn-detail, armed guard and all, got one ten-inch bowie
knife and sheath, a red bandanna neckcloth, and a piece of flashy
junk jewelry. The (town council? prominent citizens? or what?) also
received a colored table-spread apiece; these were draped over their
shoulders and fastened with two-inch plastic pins advertising the
candidacy of somebody for President of the Federation Member Republic
of Venus a couple of elections ago. They all looked woebegone about
it; that would be their expression of joy. Different type nerves and
different facial musculature, Fayon thought. As soon as they sampled
the Extee Three and candy, they looked crushed under all the sorrows
of the galaxy.

By pantomime and pointing to the sun, Meillard managed to inform
them that the next day, when the sun was in the same position, the
Terrans would visit their village, bringing more gifts. The natives
were quite agreeable, but Meillard was disgruntled that he had to
use sign-talk. The natives started off toward the village on the
mound, munching Extee Three and trying out their new knives. This
time tomorrow, half of them would have bandaged thumbs.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Marine riflemen and submachine-gunners were coming in, slinging
their weapons and lighting cigarettes. A couple of Navy technicians
were getting a snooper--a thing shaped like a short-tailed tadpole,
six feet long by three at the widest, fitted with visible-light
and infra-red screen pickups and crammed with detection
instruments--ready to relieve the combat car over the village.
The contact team crowded into the Number One landing craft, which
had been fitted out as a temporary headquarters. Prefab-hut elements
were already being unloaded from the other craft.

Everybody felt that a drink was in order, even if it was two hours
short of cocktail time. They carried bottles and glasses and ice to
the front of the landing craft and sat down in front of the battery
of view and communication screens. The central screen was a two-way,
tuned to one in the officers' lounge aboard the _Hubert Penrose_,
two hundred miles above. In it, also provided with drinks, were
Captain Guy Vindinho and two other Navy officers, and a Marine
captain in shipboard blues. Like Gofredo, Vindinho must have gotten
into the Service on tiptoe; he had a bald dome and a red beard, and
he always looked as though he were gloating because nobody knew
that his name was really Rumplestiltskin. He had been watching
the contact by screen. He lifted his glass toward Meillard.

"Over the hump, Paul?"

Meillard raised his drink to Vindinho. "Over the first one.
There's a whole string of them ahead. At least, we sent them away
happy. I hope."

"You're going to make permanent camp where you are now?" one of
the other officers asked. Lieutenant-Commander Dave Questell;
ground engineering and construction officer. "What do you need?"

There were two viewscreens from pickups aboard the 2500-foot battle
cruiser. One, at ten-power magnification, gave a maplike view of the
broad valley and the uplands and mountain foothills to the south. It
was only by tracing the course of the main river and its tributaries
that they could find the tiny spot of the native village, and they
couldn't see the landing craft at all. The other, at a hundred
power, showed the oblong mound, with the village on its flat top,
little dots around a circular central plaza. They could see the two
turtle-shaped landing-craft, and the combat car, that had been
circling over the mound, landing beside them, and, sometimes,
a glint of sunlight from the snooper that had taken its place.

The snooper was also transmitting in, to another screen, from
two hundred feet above the village. From the sound outlet came an
incessant gibber of native voices. There were over a hundred houses,
all small and square, with pyramidal roofs. On the end of the mound
toward the Terran camp, animals of at least four different species
were crowded, cattle that had been herded up from the meadows at
the first alarm. The open circle in the middle of the village was
crowded, and more natives lined the low palisade along the edge
of the mound.

"Well, we're going to stay here till we learn the language,"
Meillard was saying. "This is the best place for it. It's completely
isolated, forests on both sides, and seventy miles to the nearest
other village. If we're careful, we can stay here as long as we want
to and nobody'll find out about us. Then, after we can talk with
these people, we'll go to the big town."

       *       *       *       *       *

The big town was two hundred and fifty miles down the valley,
at the forks of the main river, a veritable metropolis of almost
three thousand people. That was where the treaty would have to
be negotiated.

[Illustration: "... But no two of them speak the same language!"]

"You'll want more huts. You'll want a water tank, and a pipeline
to that stream below you, and a pump," Questell said. "You think
a month?"

Meillard looked at Lillian Ransby. "What do you think?"

"_Poodly-doodly-oodly-foodle_," she said. "You saw how far we didn't
get this afternoon. All we found out was that none of the standard
procedures work at all." She made a tossing gesture over her shoulder.
"There goes the book; we have to do it off the cuff from here."

"Suppose we make another landing, back in the mountains, say two or
three hundred miles south of you," Vindinho said. "It's not right
to keep the rest aboard two hundred miles off planet, and you won't
be wanting liberty parties coming down where you are."

"The country over there looks uninhabited," Meillard said.
"No villages, anyhow. That wouldn't hurt, at all."

"Well, it'll suit me," Charley Loughran, the xeno-naturalist, said.
"I want a chance to study the life-forms in a state of nature."

Vindinho nodded. "Luis, do you anticipate any trouble with this
crowd here?" he asked.

"How about it, Mark? What do they look like to you? Warlike?"

"No." He stated the opinion he had formed. "I had a close look at
their weapons when they came in for their presents. Hunting arms.
Most of the spears have cross-guards, usually wooden, lashed on,
to prevent a wounded animal from running up the spear-shaft at the
hunter. They made boar-spears like that on Terra a thousand years
ago. Maybe they have to fight raiding parties from the hills once
in a while, but not often enough for them to develop special
fighting weapons or techniques."

"Their village is fortified," Meillard mentioned.

"I question that," Gofredo differed. "There won't be more than
a total of five hundred there; call that a fighting strength of
two hundred, to defend a twenty-five-hundred-meter perimeter, with
woodchoppers' axes and bows and spears. If you notice, there's no
wall around the village itself. That palisade is just a fence."

"Why would they mound the village up?" Questell, in the screen
wondered. "You don't think the river gets up that high, do you?
Because if it does--"

Schallenmacher shook his head. "There just isn't enough watershed,
and there's too much valley. I'll be very much surprised if that
stream, there"--he nodded at the hundred-power screen--"ever gets
more than six inches over the bank."

"I don't know what those houses are built of. This is all alluvial
country; building stone would be almost unobtainable. I don't see
anything like a brick kiln. I don't see any evidence of irrigation,
either, so there must be plenty of rainfall. If they use adobe, or
sun-dried brick, houses would start to crumble in a few years, and
