 60  Her fading forms, repeoples all her realms;
     Soft Joys disport on purple plumes unfurl'd,
     And Love and Beauty rule the willing world.


[_Fair Psyche_. l. 48. Described from an antient gem on a fine onyx in
possession of the Duke of Marlborough, of which there is a beautiful
print in Bryant's Mythol. Vol II. p. 392. And from another antient gem
of Cupid and Psyche embracing, of which there is a print in Spence's
Polymetis. p. 82.]

[_Repeoples all her realms_. l. 60.

    Quae mare navigerum et terras frugiferentes
    Concelebras; per te quoniam genus omne animantum
    Concipitur, visitque exortum lumina folis.            Lucret.]


       III. 1. "SYLPHS! Your bold myriads on the withering heath
     Stay the fell SYROC'S suffocative breath;
 65  Arrest SIMOOM in his realms of sand,
     The poisoned javelin balanced in his hand;--
     Fierce on blue streams he rides the tainted air,
     Points his keen eye, and waves his whistling hair;
     While, as he turns, the undulating soil
 70  Rolls in red waves, and billowy deserts boil.


[_Arrest Simoom_. l. 65. "At eleven o'clock while we were with great
pleasure contemplating the rugged tops of Chiggre, where we expected to
solace ourselves with plenty of good water, Idris cried out with a loud
voice, "fall upon your faces, for here is the simoom!" I saw from the
S.E. a haze come in colour like the purple part of a rainbow, but not so
compressed or thick; it did not occupy twenty yards in breadth, and was
about twelve feet high from the ground. It was a kind of a blush upon
the air, and it moved very rapidly, for I scarce could turn to fall upon
the ground with my head to the northward, when I felt the heat of its
current plainly upon my face. We all lay flat upon the ground, as if
dead, till Idris told us it was blown over. The meteor, or purple haze,
which I saw was indeed passed; but the light air that still blew was of
heat to threaten suffocation. For my part I found distinctly in my
breast, that I had imbibed a part of it; nor was I free of an asthmatic
sensation till I had been some months in Italy." Bruce's Travels. Vol.
IV. p. 557.

It is difficult to account for the narrow track of this pestilential
wind, which is said not to exceed twenty yards, and for its small
elevation of twelve feet. A whirlwind will pass forwards, and throw down
an avenue of trees by its quick revolution as it passes, but nothing
like a whirling is described as happening in these narrow streams of
air, and whirlwinds ascend to greater heights. There seems but one known
manner in which this channel of air could be effected, and that is by
electricity.

The volcanic origin of these winds is mentioned in the note on Chunda in
Vol. II. of this work; it must here be added, that Professor Vairo at
Naples found, that during the eruption of Vesuvius perpendicular iron
bars were electric; and others have observed suffocating damps to attend
these eruptions. Ferber's Travels in Italy, p. 133. And lastly, that a
current of air attends the passage of electric matter, as is seen in
presenting an electrized point to the flame of a candle. In Mr. Bruce's
account of this simoom, it was in its course over a quite dry desert of
sand, (and which was in consequence unable to conduct an electric stream
into the earth beneath it,) to some moist rocks at but a few miles
distance; and thence would appear to be a stream of electricity from a
volcano attended with noxious air; and as the bodies of Mr. Bruce and
his attendants were insulated on the sand, they would not be sensible of
their increased electricity, as it passed over them; to which it may be
added, that a sulphurous or suffocating sensation is said to accompany
flames of lightning, and even strong sparks of artificial electricity.
In the above account of the simoom, a great redness in the air is said
to be a certain sign of its approach, which may be occasioned by the
eruption of flame from a distant volcano in these extensive and
impenetrable deserts of sand. See Note on l. 294 of this Canto.]


       You seize TORNADO by his locks of mist,
     Burst his dense clouds, his wheeling spires untwist;
     Wide o'er the West when borne on headlong gales,
     Dark as meridian night, the Monster sails,
 75  Howls high in air, and shakes his curled brow,
     Lashing with serpent-train the waves below,
     Whirls his black arm, the forked lightning flings,
     And showers a deluge from his demon-wings.


[_Tornado's_. l. 71. See additional notes, No. XXXIII.]


       2. "SYLPHS! with light shafts YOU pierce the drowsy FOG,
 80  That lingering slumbers on the sedge-wove bog,
     With webbed feet o'er midnight meadows creeps,
     Or flings his hairy limbs on stagnant deeps.
     YOU meet CONTAGION issuing from afar,
     And dash the baleful conqueror from his car;
 85  When, Guest of DEATH! from charnel vaults he steals,
     And bathes in human gore his armed wheels.


[_On stagnant deeps_. l. 82. All contagious miasmata originate either
from animal bodies, as those of the small pox, or from putrid morasses;
these latter produce agues in the colder climates, and malignant fevers
in the warmer ones. The volcanic vapours which cause epidemic coughs,
are to be ranked amongst poisons, rather than amongst the miasmata,
which produce contagious diseases.]


       "Thus when the PLAGUE, upborne on Belgian air,
     Look'd through the mist and shook his clotted hair,
     O'er shrinking nations steer'd malignant clouds,
 90  And rain'd destruction on the gasping crouds.
     The beauteous AEGLE felt the venom'd dart,
     Slow roll'd her eye, and feebly throbb'd her heart;
     Each fervid sigh seem'd shorter than the last,
     And starting Friendship shunn'd her, as she pass'd.
 95  --With weak unsteady step the fainting Maid
     Seeks the cold garden's solitary shade,
     Sinks on the pillowy moss her drooping head,
     And prints with lifeless limbs her leafy bed.
     --On wings of Love her plighted Swain pursues,
100  Shades her from winds, and shelters her from dews,
     Extends on tapering poles the canvas roof,
     Spreads o'er the straw-wove matt the flaxen woof,
     Sweet buds and blossoms on her bolster strows,
     And binds his kerchief round her aching brows;
105  Sooths with soft kiss, with tender accents charms,
     And clasps the bright Infection in his arms.--
     With pale and languid smiles the grateful Fair
     Applauds his virtues, and rewards his care;
     Mourns with wet cheek her fair companions fled
110  On timorous step, or number'd with the dead;
     Calls to its bosom all its scatter'd rays,
     And pours on THYRSIS the collected blaze;
     Braves the chill night, caressing and caress'd,
     And folds her Hero-lover to her breast.--
115  Less bold, LEANDER at the dusky hour
     Eyed, as he swam, the far love-lighted tower;
     Breasted with struggling arms the tossing wave,
     And sunk benighted in the watery grave.
     Less bold, TOBIAS claim'd the nuptial bed,
120  Where seven fond Lovers by a Fiend had bled;
     And drove, instructed by his Angel-Guide,
     The enamour'd Demon from the fatal bride.--
     --SYLPHS! while your winnowing pinions fan'd the air,
     And shed gay visions o'er the sleeping pair;
125  LOVE round their couch effused his rosy breath,
     And with his keener arrows conquer'd DEATH.


[_The beauteous Aegle_. l. 91. When the plague raged in Holland in 1636,
a young girl was seized with it, had three carbuncles, and was removed
to a garden, where her lover, who was betrothed to her, attended her as
a nurse, and slept with her as his wife. He remained uninfected, and she
recovered, and was married to him. The story is related by Vinc.
Fabricius in the Misc. Cur. Ann. II. Obs. 188.]


       IV. 1. "You charm'd, indulgent SYLPHS! their learned toil,
     And crown'd with fame your TORRICELL, and BOYLE;
     Taught with sweet smiles, responsive to their prayer,
130  The spring and pressure of the viewless air.
     --How up exhausted tubes bright currents flow
     Of liquid silver from the lake below,
     Weigh the long column of the incumbent skies,
     And with the changeful moment fall and rise.
135  --How, as in brazen pumps the pistons move,
     The membrane-valve sustains the weight above;
     Stroke follows stroke, the gelid vapour falls,
     And misty dew-drops dim the crystal walls;
     Rare and more rare expands the fluid thin,
140  And Silence dwells with Vacancy within.--
     So in the mighty Void with grim delight
     Primeval Silence reign'd with ancient Night.


[_Torricell and Boyle_. l. 128. The pressure of the atmosphere was
discovered by Torricelli, a disciple of Galileo, who had previously
found that the air had weight. Dr. Hook and M. Du Hamel ascribe the
invention of the air-pump to Mr. Boyle, who however confesses he had
some hints concerning its construction from De Guerick. The vacancy at
the summit of the barometer is termed the Torricellian vacuum, and the
exhausted receiver of an air pump the Boylean vacuum, in honour of these
two philosophers.

The mist and descending dew which appear at first exhausting the
receiver of an air-pump, are explained in the Phil. Trans. Vol. LXXVIII.
from the cold produced by the expansion of air. For a thermometer placed
in the receiver sinks some degrees, and in a very little time, as soon
as a sufficient quantity of heat can be acquired from the surrounding
bodies, the dew becomes again taken up. See additional notes, No. VII.
Mr. Saussure observed on placing his hygrometer in a receiver of an air-
pump, that though on beginning to exhaust it the air became misty, and
parted with its moisture, yet the hair of his hygrometer contracted, and
the instrument pointed to greater dryness. This unexpected occurrence is
explained by M. Monge (Annales de Chymie, Tom. V.) to depend on the want
of the usual pressure of the atmosphere to force the aqueous particles
into the pores of the hair; and M. Saussure supposes, that his vesicular
vapour requires more time to be redissolved, than is necessary to dry
the hair of his thermometer. Essais sur l'Hygrom. p. 226. but I suspect
there is a less hypothetical way of understanding it; when a colder body
is brought into warm and moist air, (as a bottle of spring-water for
instance,) a steam is quickly collected on its surface; the contrary
occurs when a warmer body is brought into cold and damp air, it
continues free from dew so long as it continues warm; for it warms the
atmosphere around it, and renders it capable of receiving instead of
parting with moisture. The moment the air becomes rarefied in the
receiver of the air-pump it becomes colder, as appears by the
thermometer, and deposits its vapour; but the hair of Mr. Saussure's
hygrometer is now warmer than the air in which it is immersed, and in
consequence becomes dryer than before, by warming the air which
immediately surrounds it, a part of its moisture evaporating along with
its heat.]


       2. "SYLPHS! your soft voices, whispering from the skies,
     Bade from low earth the bold MONGULFIER rise;
145  Outstretch'd his buoyant ball with airy spring,
     And bore the Sage on levity of wing;--
     Where were ye, SYLPHS! when on the ethereal main
     Young ROSIERE launch'd, and call'd your aid in vain?
     Fair mounts the light balloon, by Zephyr driven,
150  Parts the thin clouds, and sails along the heaven;
     Higher and yet higher the expanding bubble flies,
     Lights with quick flash, and bursts amid the skies.--
     Headlong He rushes through the affrighted air
     With limbs distorted, and dishevel'd hair,
155  Whirls round and round, the flying croud alarms,
     And DEATH receives him in his sable arms!--
     So erst with melting wax and loosen'd strings
     Sunk hapless ICARUS on unfaithful wings;
     His scatter'd plumage danced upon the wave,
160  And sorrowing Mermaids deck'd his watery grave;
     O'er his pale corse their pearly sea-flowers shed,
     And strew'd with crimson moss his marble bed;
     Struck in their coral towers the pausing bell,
     And wide in ocean toll'd his echoing knell.


[_Young Rosiere launch'd_. l. 148. M. Pilatre du Rosiere with a M.
Romain rose in a balloon from Boulogne in June 1785, and after having
been about a mile high for about half an hour the balloon took fire, and
the two adventurers were dashed to pieces on their fall to the ground.
Mr. Rosiere was a philosopher of great talents and activity, joined with
such urbanity and elegance of manners, as conciliated the affections of
his acquaintance and rendered his misfortune universally lamented.
Annual Register for 1784 and 1785, p. 329.]

[_And wide in ocean_. l. 164. Denser bodies propagate vibration or sound
better than rarer ones; if two stones be struck together under the
water, they may be heard a mile or two by any one whose head is immersed
at that distance, according to an experiment of Dr. Franklin. If the ear
be applied to one end of a long beam of timber, the stroke of a pin at
the other end becomes sensible; if a poker be suspended in the middle of
a garter, each end of which is pressed against the ear, the least
percussions on the poker give great sounds. And I am informed by laying
the ear on the ground the tread of a horse may be discerned at a great
distance in the night. The organs of hearing belonging to fish are for
this reason much less complicated than of quadrupeds, as the fluid they
are immersed in so much better conveys its vibrations. And it is
probable that some shell-fish which have twisted shells like the cochlea
and semicircular canals of the ears of men and quadrupeds may have no
appropriated organ for perceiving the vibrations of the element they
live in, but may by their spiral form be in a manner all ear.]


165    V. "SYLPHS! YOU, retiring to sequester'd bowers,
     Where oft your PRIESTLEY woos your airy powers,
     On noiseless step or quivering pinion glide,
     As sits the Sage with Science by his side;
     To his charm'd eye in gay undress appear,
170  Or pour your secrets on his raptured ear.
     How nitrous Gas from iron ingots driven
     Drinks with red lips the purest breath of heaven;
     How, while Conferva from its tender hair
     Gives in bright bubbles empyrean air;
175  The crystal floods phlogistic ores calcine,
     And the pure ETHER marries with the MINE.


[_Where oft your Priestley_. l. 166. The fame of Dr. Priestley is known
in every part of the earth where science has penetrated. His various
discoveries respecting the analysis of the atmosphere, and the
production of variety of new airs or gasses, can only be clearly
understood by reading his Experiments on Airs, (3 vols. octavo, Johnson,
London.) the following are amongst his many discoveries. 1. The
discovery of nitrous and dephlogisticated airs. 2. The exhibition of the
acids and alkalies in the form of air. 3. Ascertaining the purity of
respirable air by nitrous air. 4. The restoration of vitiated air by
vegetation. 5. The influence of light to enable vegetables to yield pure
air. 6. The conversion by means of light of animal and vegetable
substances, that would otherwise become putrid and offensive, into
nourishment of vegetables. 7. The use of respiration by the blood
parting with phlogiston, and imbibing dephlogisticated air.

The experiments here alluded to are, 1. Concerning the production of
nitrous gas from dissolving iron and many other metals in nitrous acid,
which though first discovered by Dr. Hales (Static. Ess. Vol. I. p. 224)
was fully investigated, and applied to the important purpose of
distinguishing the purity of atmospheric air by Dr. Priestley. When
about two measures of common air and one of nitrous gas are mixed
together a red effervescence takes place, and the two airs occupy about
one fourth less space than was previously occupied by the common air
alone.

2. Concerning the green substance which grows at the bottom of
reservoirs of water, which Dr. Priestley discovered to yield much pure
air when the sun shone on it. His method of collecting this air is by
placing over the green substance, which he believes to be a vegetable of
the genus conferva, an inverted bell-glass previously filled with water,
which subsides as the air arises; it has since been found that all
vegetables give up pure air from their leaves, when the sun shines upon
them, but not in the night, which may be owing to the sleep of the
plant.

3. The third refers to the great quantity of pure air contained in the
calces of metals. The calces were long known to weigh much more than the
metallic bodies before calcination, insomuch that 100 pounds of lead
will produce 112 pounds of minium; the ore of manganese, which is always
found near the surface of the earth, is replete with pure air, which is
now used for the purpose of bleaching. Other metals when exposed to the
atmosphere attract the pure air from it, and become calces by its
combination, as zinc, lead, iron; and increase in weight in proportion
to the air, which they imbibe.]


       "So in Sicilia's ever-blooming shade
     When playful PROSERPINE from CERES stray'd,
     Led with unwary step her virgin trains
180  O'er Etna's steeps, and Enna's golden plains;
     Pluck'd with fair hand the silver-blossom'd bower,
     And purpled mead,--herself a fairer flower;
     Sudden, unseen amid the twilight glade,
     Rush'd gloomy DIS, and seized the trembling maid.--
185  Her starting damsels sprung from mossy seats,
     Dropp'd from their gauzy laps the gather'd sweets,
     Clung round the struggling Nymph, with piercing cries,
     Pursued the chariot, and invoked the skies;--
     Pleased as he grasps her in his iron arms,
190  Frights with soft sighs, with tender words alarms,
     The wheels descending roll'd in smoky rings,
     Infernal Cupids flapp'd their demon wings;
     Earth with deep yawn received the Fair, amaz'd,
     And far in Night celestial Beauty blaz'd.


[_When playful Proserpine_. l. 178. The fable of Proserpine's being
seized by Pluto as she was gathering flowers, is explained by Lord Bacon
to signify the combination or marriage of etherial spirit with earthly
materials. Bacon's Works, Vol. V. p. 470. edit. 4to. Lond. 1778. This
allusion is still more curiously exact, from the late discovery of pure
air being given up from vegetables, and that then in its unmixed state
it more readily combines with metallic or inflammable bodies. From these
fables which were probably taken from antient hieroglyphics there is
frequently reason to believe that the Egyptians possessed much chemical
knowledge, which for want of alphabetical writing perished with their
philosophers.]


195    VI. "Led by the Sage, Lo! Britain's sons shall guide
     Huge SEA-BALLOONS beneath the tossing tide;
     The diving castles, roof'd with spheric glass,
     Ribb'd with strong oak, and barr'd with bolts of brass,
     Buoy'd with pure air shall endless tracks pursue,
200  And PRIESTLEY'S hand the vital flood renew.--
     Then shall BRITANNIA rule the wealthy realms,
     Which Ocean's wide insatiate wave o'erwhelms;
     Confine in netted bowers his scaly flocks,
     Part his blue plains, and people all his rocks.
205  Deep, in warm waves beneath the Line that roll,
     Beneath the shadowy ice-isles of the Pole,
     Onward, through bright meandering vales, afar,
     Obedient Sharks shall trail her sceptred car,
     With harness'd necks the pearly flood disturb,
210  Stretch the silk rein, and champ the silver curb;
     Pleased round her triumph wondering Tritons play,
     And Seamaids hail her on the watery way.
     --Oft shall she weep beneath the crystal waves
     O'er shipwreck'd lovers weltering in their graves;
215  Mingling in death the Brave and Good behold
     With slaves to glory, and with slaves to gold;
     Shrin'd in the deep shall DAY and SPALDING mourn,
     Each in his treacherous bell, sepulchral urn!--
     Oft o'er thy lovely daughters, hapless PIERCE!
220  Her sighs shall breathe, her sorrows dew their hearse.--
     With brow upturn'd to Heaven, "WE WILL NOT PART!"
     He cried, and clasp'd them to his aching heart,--
     --Dash'd in dread conflict on the rocky grounds,
     Crash the mock'd masts, the staggering wreck rebounds;
225  Through gaping seams the rushing deluge swims,
     Chills their pale bosoms, bathes their shuddering limbs,
     Climbs their white shoulders, buoys their streaming hair,
     And the last sea-shriek bellows in the air.--
     Each with loud sobs her tender sire caress'd,
230  And gasping strain'd him closer to her breast!--
     --Stretch'd on one bier they sleep beneath the brine,
     And their white bones with ivory arms intwine!


[_Led by the Sage_. l. 195. Dr. Priestley's discovery of the production
of pure air from such variety of substances will probably soon be
applied to the improvement of the diving bell, as the substances which
contain vital air in immense quantities are of little value as manganese
and minium. See additional notes, No. XXXIII. In every hundred weight of
minium there is combined about twelve pounds of pure air, now as sixty
pounds of water are about a cubic foot, and as air is eight hundred
times lighter than water, five hundred weight of minium will produce
eight hundred cubic feet of air or about six thousand gallons. Now, as
this is at least thrice as pure as atmospheric air, a gallon of it may
be supposed to serve for three minutes respiration for one man. At
present the air can not be set at liberty from minium by vitriolic acid
without the application of some heat, this is however very likely soon
to be discovered, and will then enable adventurers to journey beneath
the ocean in large inverted ships or diving balloons.

Mr. Boyle relates, that Cornelius Drebelle contrived not only a vessel
to be rowed under water, but also a liquor to be caried in that vessel,
which would supply the want of fresh air. The vessel was made by order
of James I. and carried twelve rowers besides passengers. It was tried
in the river Thames, and one of the persons who was in that submarine
voyage told the particulars of the experiments to a person who related
them to Mr. Boyle. Annual Register for 1774, p. 248.]

[_Day and Spalding mourn_. l. 217. Mr. Day perished in a diving bell, or
diving boat, of his own construction at Plymouth in June 1774, in which
he was to have continued for a wager twelve hours one hundred feet deep
in water, and probably perished from his not possessing all the
hydrostatic knowledge that was necessary. See note on Ulva, Vol. II. of
this work. See Annual Register for 1774. p. 245.

Mr. Spalding was professionally ingenious in the art of constructing and
managing the diving bell, and had practised the business many years with
success. He went down accompanied by one of his young men twice to view
the wreck of the Imperial East-Indiaman at the Kish bank in Ireland. On
descending the third time in June, 1783, they remained about an hour
under water, and had two barrels of air sent down to them, but on the
signals from below not being again repeated, after a certain time, they
were drawn up by their assistants and both found dead in the bell.
Annual Register for 1783, p. 206. These two unhappy events may for a
time check the ardor of adventurers in traversing the bottom of the
ocean, but it is probable in another half century it may be safer to
travel under the ocean than over it, since Dr. Priestley's discovery of
procuring pure air in such great abundance from the calces of metals.]

[_Hapless Pierce!_ l, 219. The Haslewell East-Indiaman, outward bound,
was wrecked off Seacomb in the isle of Purbec on the 6th of January,
1786; when Capt. Pierce, the commander, with two young ladies, his
daughters, and the greatest part of the crew and passengers perished in
the sea. Some of the officers and about seventy seamen escaped with
great difficulty on the rocks, but Capt. Pierce finding it was
impossible to save the lives of the young ladies refused to quit the
ship, and perished with them.]


       "VII. SYLPHS OF NICE EAR! with beating wings you guide
