The lieutenant was still mopping his face and looking across the
gathering-place toward Alpha, glaring above the huts.

"How much worse do you think this is going to get?" he asked.

"The heat, or the native troubles?"

"I was thinking about the heat, but both."

"Well, it'll get hotter. Not much hotter, but some. We can expect
storms, too, within twelve to fifteen hundred hours. Nobody has any idea
how bad they'll be. The last periastron was ninety years ago, and we've
only been here for sixty-odd; all we have is verbal accounts from memory
from the natives, probably garbled and exaggerated. We had pretty bad
storms right after transit a year ago; they'll be much worse this time.
Thermal convections; air starts to cool when it gets dark, and then
heats up again in double-sun daylight."

It was beginning, even now; starting to blow a little after Alpha-rise.

"How about the natives?" the lieutenant asked. "If they can get any
crazier than they are now--"

"They can, and they probably will. They think this is the end of the
world. The Last Hot Time." He used the native expression, and then
translated it into Lingua Terra. "The Sky Fire--that's Alpha--will burn
up the whole world."

"But this happens every ninety years. Mean they always acted this way at
periastron?"

He shook his head. "Race would have exterminated itself long ago if they
had. No, this is something special. The coming of the Terrans was a
sign. The Terrans came and brought oomphel to the world; this a sign
that the Last Hot Time is at hand."

"What the devil _is_ oomphel?" The lieutenant was mopping the back of
his neck with one hand, now, and trying to pull his sticky tunic loose
from his body with the other. "I hear that word all the time."

"Well, most Terrans, including the old Kwannon hands, use it to mean
trade-goods. To the natives, it means any product of Terran technology,
from paper-clips to spaceships. They think it's ... well, not exactly
supernatural; extranatural would be closer to expressing their idea.
Terrans are natural; they're just a different kind of people. But
oomphel isn't; it isn't subject to any of the laws of nature at all.
They're all positive that we don't make it. Some of them even think it
makes us."


When he got back in the car, the native pilot, Heshto, was lolling in
his seat and staring at the crowd of natives along the side of the
gathering-place with undisguised disdain. Heshto had been educated at
one of the Native Welfare Commission schools, and post-graded with
Kwannon Planetwide News. He could speak, read and write Lingua Terra. He
was a mathematician as far as long division and decimal fractions. He
knew that Kwannon was the second planet of the Gettler Beta system,
23,000 miles in circumference, rotating on its axis once in 22.8
Galactic Standard hours and making an orbital circuit around Gettler
Beta once in 372.06 axial days, and that Alpha was an M-class pulsating
variable with an average period of four hundred days, and that Beta
orbited around it in a long elipse every ninety years. He didn't believe
there was going to be a Last Hot Time. He was an intellectual, he was.

He started the contragravity-field generator as soon as Miles was in his
seat. "Where now, boss?" he asked.

"Qualpha's Village. We won't let down; just circle low over it. I want
some views of the ruins. Then to Sanders' plantation."

"O.K., boss; hold tight."

He had the car up to ten thousand feet. Aiming it in the map direction
of Qualpha's Village, he let go with everything he had--hot jets,
rocket-booster and all. The forest landscape came hurtling out of the
horizon toward them.

Qualpha's was where the trouble had first broken out, after the bug-out
from Sanders; the troops hadn't been able to get there in time, and it
had been burned. Another village, about the same distance south of the
plantation, had also gone up in flames, and at a dozen more they had
found the natives working themselves into frenzies and had had to
sleep-gas them or stun them with concussion-bombs. Those had been the
villages to which the deserters from Sanders' had themselves gone; from
every one, runners had gone out to neighboring villages--"The Gone Ones
are returning; all the People go to greet them at the Deesha-Phoo. Burn
your villages; send on the word. Hasten; the Gone Ones return!"

Saving some of those villages had been touch-and-go, too; the runners,
with hours lead-time, had gotten there ahead of the troops, and there
had been shooting at a couple of them. Then the Army contragravity began
landing at villages that couldn't have been reached in hours by foot
messengers. It had been stopped--at least for the time, and in this
area. When and where another would break out was anybody's guess.

The car was slowing and losing altitude, and ahead he could see thin
smoke rising above the trees. He moved forward beside the pilot and
pulled down his glasses; with them he could distinguish the ruins of the
village. He called Bluelake, and then put his face to the view-finder
and began transmitting in the view.


It had been a village like the one he had just visited, mud-and-wattle
huts around an oval gathering-place, stockade, and fields beyond. Heshto
brought the car down to a few hundred feet and came coasting in on
momentum helped by an occasional spurt of the cold-jets. A few sections
of the stockade still stood, and one side of the khamdoo hadn't fallen,
but the rest of the structures were flat. There wasn't a soul, human or
parahuman, in sight; the only living thing was a small black-and-gray
quadruped investigating some bundles that had been dropped in the
fields, in hope of finding something tasty. He got a view of
that--everybody liked animal pictures on a newscast--and then he was
swinging the pickup over the still-burning ruins. In the ashes of every
hut he could see the remains of something like a viewscreen or a
nuclear-electric stove or a refrigerator or a sewing machine. He knew
how dearly the Kwanns cherished such possessions. That they had
destroyed them grieved him. But the Last Hot Time was at hand; the whole
world would be destroyed by fire, and then the Gone Ones would return.

So there were uprisings on the plantations. Paul Sanders had been
lucky; his Kwanns had just picked up and left. But he had always gotten
along well with the natives, and his plantation house was literally a
castle and he had plenty of armament. There had been other planters who
had made the double mistake of incurring the enmity of their native
labor and of living in unfortified houses. A lot of them weren't around,
any more, and their plantations were gutted ruins.

And there were plantations on which the natives had destroyed the klooba
plants and smashed the crystal which lived symbiotically upon them. They
thought the Terrans were using the living crystals to make magic. Not
too far off, at that; the properties of Kwannon biocrystals had opened a
major breakthrough in subnucleonic physics and initiated half a dozen
technologies. New kinds of oomphel. And down in the south, where the
spongy and resinous trees were drying in the heat, they were starting
forest fires and perishing in them in hecatombs. And to the north, they
were swarming into the mountains; building great fires there, too, and
attacking the Terran radar and radio beacons.

Fire was a factor common to all these frenzies. Nothing could happen
without magical assistance; the way to bring on the Last Hot Time was
People.

Maybe the ones who died in the frenzies and the swarmings were the lucky
ones at that. They wouldn't live to be crushed by disappointment when
the Sky Fire receded as Beta went into the long swing toward apastron.
The surviving shoonoon wouldn't be the lucky ones, that was for sure.
The magician-in-public-practice needs only to make one really bad
mistake before he is done to some unpleasantly ingenious death by his
clientry, and this was going to turn out to be the biggest
magico-prophetic blooper in all the long unrecorded history of Kwannon.

A few minutes after the car turned south from the ruined village, he
could see contragravity-vehicles in the air ahead, and then the fields
and buildings of the Sanders plantation. A lot more contragravity was
grounded in the fallow fields, and there were rows of pneumatic
balloon-tents, and field-kitchens, and a whole park of engineering
equipment. Work was going on in the klooba-fields, too; about three
hundred natives were cutting open the six-foot leafy balls and getting
out the biocrystals. Three of the plantation airjeeps, each with a pair
of machine guns, were guarding them, but they didn't seem to be having
any trouble. He saw Sanders in another jeep, and had Heshto put the car
alongside.

"How's it going, Paul?" he asked over his radio. "I see you have some
help, now."

"Everybody's from Qualpha's, and from Darshat's," Sanders replied. "The
Army had no place to put them, after they burned themselves out." He
laughed happily. "Miles, I'm going to save my whole crop! I thought I
was wiped out, this morning."

He would have been, if Gonzales hadn't brought those Kwanns in. The
klooba was beginning to wither; if left unharvested, the biocrystals
would die along with their hosts and crack into worthlessness. Like all
the other planters, Sanders had started no new crystals since the hot
weather, and would start none until the worst of the heat was over. He'd
need every crystal he could sell to tide him over.

[Illustration]

"The Welfarers'll make a big forced-labor scandal out of this," he
predicted.

"Why, such an idea." Sanders was scandalized. "I'm not forcing them to
eat."

"The Welfarers don't think anybody ought to have to work to eat. They
think everybody ought to be fed whether they do anything to earn it or
not, and if you try to make people earn their food, you're guilty of
economic coercion. And if you're in business for yourself and want them
to work for you, you're an exploiter and you ought to be eliminated as a
class. Haven't you been trying to run a plantation on this planet, under
this Colonial Government, long enough to have found that out, Paul?"


Brigadier General Ramon Gonzales had taken over the first--counting
down from the landing-stage--floor of the plantation house for his
headquarters. His headquarters company had pulled out removable
partitions and turned four rooms into one, and moved in enough screens
and teleprinters and photoprint machines and computers to have outfitted
the main newsroom of _Planetwide News_. The place had the feel of a
newsroom--a newsroom after a big story has broken and the 'cast has gone
on the air and everybody--in this case about twenty Terran officers and
non-coms, half women--standing about watching screens and smoking and
thinking about getting a follow-up ready.

Gonzales himself was relaxing in Sanders' business-room, with his belt
off and his tunic open. He had black eyes and black hair and mustache,
and a slightly equine face that went well with his Old Terran Spanish
name. There was another officer with him, considerably younger--Captain
Foxx Travis, Major General Maith's aide.

"Well, is there anything we can do for you, Miles?" Gonzales asked,
after they had exchanged greetings and sat down.

"Why, could I have your final situation-progress map? And would you be
willing to make a statement on audio-visual." He looked at his watch.
"We have about twenty minutes before the 'cast."

"You have a map," Gonzales said, as though he were walking tiptoe from
one word to another. "It accurately represents the situation as of the
moment, but I'm afraid some minor unavoidable inaccuracies may have
crept in while marking the positions and times for the earlier phases of
the operation. I teleprinted a copy to _Planetwide_ along with the one I
sent to Division Headquarters."

He understood about that and nodded. Gonzales was zipping up his tunic
and putting on his belt and sidearm. That told him, before the brigadier
general spoke again, that he was agreeable to the audio-visual
appearance and statement. He called the recording studio at _Planetwide_
while Gonzales was inspecting himself in the mirror and told them to get
set for a recording. It only ran a few minutes; Gonzales, speaking
without notes, gave a brief description of the operation.

"At present," he concluded, "we have every native village and every
plantation and trading-post within two hundred miles of the Sanders
plantation occupied. We feel that this swarming has been definitely
stopped, but we will continue the occupation for at least the next
hundred to two hundred hours. In the meantime, the natives in the
occupied villages are being put to work building shelters for themselves
against the anticipated storms."

"I hadn't heard about that," Miles said, as the general returned to his
