wiped out Posts Thirteen and Fifteen. The third made no sound before it
landed, except to an observer at a distance. Sergeant Walpole heard
neither the scream of fall nor the sound of its explosion.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was running madly, and suddenly the earth bucked violently beneath
his feet, and he had a momentary sensation of things flying madly by
over his head, and then he knew nothing at all for a very long time.
Then his head ached horribly and someone was popping at something
valorously with a rifle, and he heard the nasty sharp explosions of the
hexynitrate bullets which have remodeled older ideas of warfare, and
Sergeant Walpole was aware of an urgent necessity to do something, but
he could not at all imagine what it was. Then a shell went off, the
earth-concussion banged his nose against the sand, and the rifle-fire
stopped.

"For Gawd's sake!" said Sergeant Walpole dizzily.

He staggered to his feet and looked behind him. Where the cottage had
been there was a hole. Quite a large hole. It was probably a hundred
yards across and all of twenty deep, but sea-water was seeping in to
fill it through the sand. Its edge was forty or fifty feet from where he
stood. He had been knocked down by the heaving earth, and the sand and
mud blown out of the crater had gone clean over him. Twenty feet back,
the top part of his body would have been cut neatly off by the blast. As
it was....

       *       *       *       *       *

He found his nose bleeding and plugged it with his handkerchief. He was
still rather dazed, and he still had the feeling that there was
something extremely important that he must do. He stood rocking on his
feet, trying to clear his head, when two men came along the sand-dunes
behind the beach. One of them carried two automatic rifles. The other
was trying to bandage a limp and flapping arm as he ran. They saw the
Sergeant and ran to him.

"Hell, Sarge, I thought y'were blown to little egg-shells."

"I ain't," said Sergeant Walpole. He looked again at the hole in the
ground and swore painedly.

"Look at that," said the man with the flapping arm. "Hell's goin' to pop
around here, Sarge."

The sergeant swung around. Then his mouth dropped open. Just half a mile
away and hardly more than two hundred yards from the shore-line, the
Diesel tramp was ramming the beach. A wake still foamed behind it. A
monstrous bow-wave spread out on either hand, over-topping even the
combers that came rolling in. It was being deliberately run ashore. It
struck, and its fore-mast crumpled up and fell forward, carrying its
derrick-booms with it. There was the squeal of crumpled metal plates.

"Flyin' a yeller flag just now," panted one of the two privates. "We
started poppin' hexynitrate bullets at her an' she flung a shell at us.
She's a enemy ship. But what the hell?"

Smoke spurted up from the beached ship. Her stern broke off and settled
in the deeper water out from the shore. More smoke spurted out. Her bow
split wide. There were the deep rumbles of black-powder explosions.
Sergeant Walpole and his two followers stared blankly. More explosions,
and the ship was hidden in smoke, and when it blew away her funnel was
down and half or more of her upper works was sliding into the sea, and
she had listed suddenly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant Walpole gazed upward. Futilely, of course; there was nothing in
sight overhead. But these explosions did look like the hexynitrate stuff
they put in small-arm bullets nowadays. A thirty-caliber bullet had the
explosive effect of an old-style six-pound T.N.T. shell. Only,
hexynitrate goes off with a crack instead of a boom. It wasn't an
American plane opening up with a machine-gun.

Then the beached ship seemed to blow up. A mass of thick smoke covered
her from stem to stern, and bits of plating flew heavily through the
air, and there were a few lurid bursts of flame. Sergeant Walpole
suddenly remembered that there ought to be survivors, only he hadn't
seen anybody diving overboard to try to get ashore. He half-started
forward....

Then the sea-breeze blew this smoke, too, away from the wreckage. And
the tramp was gone, but there was something else left in its place--so
that Sergeant Walpole took one look, and swallowed a non-existent
something that came up instantly into his throat again, and remembered
the urgent thing he had to do.

"Pete," he said calmly, "you hunt up the Area Officer an' tell him what
you seen. Here! I'll give you a report that'll keep 'em from slammin'
you in clink for bein' drunk. Grab a monocycle somewheres. It's faster
than a car, the way you'll be travelin'. First telephone you come to
that's workin', make Central put you in the tight beam to head-quarters.
Then go on an' report, y'self. See?"

Pete started, and automatically fumbled with his limp and useless arm.
Then he carefully tucked the unmanageable hand in the pocket of his
uniform blouse.

"That don't matter now," he said absurdly.

He was looking at the thing left in place of the tramp, as Sergeant
Walpole scribbled on one of the regulation report-forms of the Eastern
Coast Observation Force. And the thing he saw was enough to upset
anybody.

       *       *       *       *       *

Where the tramp had been there was a single bit of bow-plating sticking
up out of the surf, and a bunch of miscellaneous floating wreckage
drifting sluggishly toward the beach. And there was a solid, rounded,
metallic shape apparently quite as long as the original tramp had been.
There was a huge armored tube across its upper part, with vision-slits
in two bulbous sections at its end. There were gun-ports visible here
and there, and already a monstrous protuberance was coming into view
midway along its back, as if forced into position from within. Where the
bow of the tramp had been there were colossal treads now visible. There
was a sort of conning-tower, armored and grim. There was a ghastly
steel beak. The thing was a war-machine of monstrous size. It emitted a
sudden roaring sound, as of internal-combustion engines operating at
full power, and lurched heavily. The steel plates of the tramp still
visible above water, crumpled up like paper and were trodden under. The
thing came toward the shore. It slithered through the shallow sea, with
waves breaking against its bulging sides. It came out upon the beach,
its wet sides glittering. It was two hundred feet long, and it looked
somehow like a gigantic centipede.

It was a tank, of sorts, but like no tank ever seen on earth before. It
was the great-grandfather of all tanks. It was so monstrous that for its
conveyance a ship's hull and superstructure had been built about it, and
its own engines had been the engines of that ship. It was so huge that
it could only be landed by blasting away a beached ship from about
itself, so it could run under its own power over the fragments to the
shore.

Now it stopped smoothly on the sandy beach, in which its eight-foot-wide
steel treads sank almost a yard. Men dropped down from ports in its
swelling sides. They made swift, careful inspections of predetermined
points. They darted back up the ladders again. The thing roared once
more. Then it swung about, headed for the sand-dunes, and with an
extraordinary smoothness and celerity disappeared inland.




PART II

    "... The Wabbly was meant for one purpose, the
    undermining of civilian morale. To accomplish that
    purpose it set systematically about the establishment
    of a reign of terror; and so complete was its success
    that half the population of a state was in headlong
    flight within two hours. It was, first, mysterious;
    secondly, deadly, and within a very few hours it had
    built up a reputation for invincibility. Judged on the
    basis of its first twelve hours' work alone, it was the
    most successful experiment of the war. Its effect on
    civilian morale was incalculable." (_Strategic Lessons
    of the War of 1941-43._--U. S. War College. Pp. 80-81.)


Two of the members of Observation-Post Fourteen gaped after the
retreating monster. Sergeant Walpole scribbled on the official form.
Just as the monstrous thing dipped down out of sight there was a
vicious, crashing report from its hinder part. Something shrieked....

Sergeant Walpole got up, spitting sand. There was blood on the
report-form in his hand. He folded it painstakingly. Of the two men who
had been with him, one was struggling out of the sand as Sergeant
Walpole had had to do. The other was scattered over a good many square
yards of sandy beach.

