much vacuum! That's what we're up against! However, I'm going to try out
that model, Mart, right now. Come on, guy, snap into it! Let's get
busy!"

"You are getting idiotic again, Dick," Crane rejoined calmly, without
moving. "You know, even better than I do, that you are playing with the
most concentrated essence of energy that the world has ever seen. That
zone of force probably can be generated----"

"Probably, nothing!" barked Seaton. "It's just as evident a fact as that
stool," kicking the unoffending bit of furniture half-way across the
room as he spoke. "If you'd've let me, I'd've shown it to you
yesterday!"

"Undoubtedly, then. Grant that it is impenetrable to all matter and to
all known waves. Suppose that it should prove impenetrable also to
gravitation and to magnetism? Those phenomena probably depend upon the
ether, but we know nothing fundamental of their nature, nor of that of
the ether. Therefore your calculations, comprehensive though they are,
cannot predict the effect upon them of your zone of force. Suppose that
that zone actually does set up a barrier in the ether, so that it
nullifies gravitation, magnetism, and all allied phenomena; so that the
power-bars, the attractors and repellers, cannot work through it? Then
what? As well as showing me the zone of force, you might well have shown
me yourself flying off into space, unable to use your power and helpless
if you released the zone. No, we must know more of the fundamentals
before you try even a small-scale experiment."

"Oh, bugs! You're carrying caution to extremes, Mart. What can happen?
Even if gravitation should be nullified, I would rise only slowly,
heading south the angle of our latitude--that's thirty-nine
degrees--away from the perpendicular. I couldn't shoot off on a tangent,
as some of these hot-heads have been claiming. Inertia would make me
keep pace, approximately, with the earth in its rotation. I would rise
slowly--only as fast as the tangent departs from the curvature of the
earth's surface. I haven't figured out how fast that is, but it must be
pretty slow."

"Pretty slow?" Crane smiled. "Figure it out."

"All right--but I'll bet it's slower than the rise of a toy balloon."
Seaton threw down the papers and picked up his slide-rule, a twenty-inch
trigonometrical duplex. "You'll concede that it is allowable to neglect
the radial component of the orbital velocity of the earth for a first
approximation, won't you--or shall I figure that in too?"

"You may ignore that factor."

"All right--let's see. Radius of rotation here in Washington would be
cosine latitude times equatorial radius, approximately--call it
thirty-two hundred miles. Angular velocity, fifteen degrees an hour. I
want secant fifteen less one times thirty-two hundred. Right? Secant
equals one over cosine--um-m-m-m--one point oh three five. Then point oh
three five times thirty-two hundred. Hundred and twelve miles first
hour. Velocity constant with respect to sun, accelerated respecting
point of departure. Ouch! You win, Mart--I'd kinda step out! Well, how
about this, then? I'll put on a vacuum suit and carry rations. Harness
outside, with the same equipment I used in the test flights before we
built _Skylark I--plus_ the new stuff and a coil. Then throw on the
zone, and see what happens. There can't be any jar in taking off, and
with that outfit I can get back O. K. if I go clear to Jupiter!"

Crane sat in silence, his keen mind considering every aspect of the
motions possible, of velocity, of acceleration, of inertia. He already
knew well Seaton's resourcefulness in crises and his physical and mental
strength.

"As far as I can see, that might be safe," he admitted finally, "and we
really should know something about it besides the theory."

"Fine, Mart--let's get busy! I'll be ready in five minutes. Yell for the
girls, will you? They'd break us off at the ankles if we pull anything
new without letting them in on it."

A few minutes later the "girls" strolled out into Crane Field, arms
around each other--Dorothy Seaton, her gorgeous auburn hair framing
violet eyes and vivid coloring; black-haired, dark-eyed Margaret Crane.

"Br-r-r, it's cold!" Dorothy shivered, wrapping her coat more closely
about her. "This must be the coldest day Washington has seen for years!"

"It is cold," Margaret agreed. "I wonder what they are going to do out
here, this kind of weather?"

       *       *       *       *       *

As she spoke, the two men stepped out of the "testing shed"--the huge
structure that housed their Osnomian-built space-cruiser, "Skylark II."
Seaton waddled clumsily, wearing as he did a Crane vacuum-suit which,
built of fur, canvas, metal and transparent silica, braced by steel
netting and equipped with air-tanks and heaters, rendered its wearer
independent of outside conditions of temperature and pressure. Outside
this suit he wore a heavy harness of leather, buckled about his body,
shoulders, and legs, attached to which were numerous knobs, switches,
dials, bakelite cases, and other pieces of apparatus. Carried by a
strong aluminum framework in turn supported by the harness, the
universal bearing of a small power-bar rose directly above his
grotesque-looking helmet.

"What do you think you're going to do in that thing, Dickie?" Dorothy
called. Then, knowing that he could not hear her voice, she turned to
Crane. "What are you letting that precious husband of mine do now,
Martin? He looks as though he were up to something."

While she was speaking, Seaton had snapped the release of his face
plate.

"Nothing much, Dottie. Just going to show you-all the zone of force.
Mart wouldn't let me turn it on, unless I got all cocked and primed for
a year's journey into space."

"Dot, what is that zone of force, anyway?" asked Margaret.

"Oh, it's something Dick got into his head during that awful fight they
had on Osnome. He hasn't thought of anything else since we got back. You
know how the attractors and repellers work? Well, he found out something
funny about the way everything acted while the Mardonalians were
bombarding them with a certain kind of a wave-length. He finally figured
out the exact ray that did it, and found out that if it is made strongly
enough, it acts as if a repeller and attractor were working
together--only so much stronger that nothing can get through the
boundary, either way--in fact, it's so strong that it cuts anything in
two that's in the way. And the funny thing is that there's nothing there
at all, really; but Dick says that the forces meeting there, or
something, make it act as though something really important were there.
See?"

"Uh-huh," assented Margaret, doubtfully, just as Crane finished the
final adjustments and moved toward them. A safe distance away from
Seaton, he turned and waved his hand.

Instantly Seaton disappeared from view, and around the place where he
had stood there appeared a shimmering globe some twenty feet in
diameter--a globe apparently a perfect spherical mirror, which darted
upward and toward the south. After a moment the globe disappeared and
Seaton was again seen. He was now standing upon a hemispherical mass of
earth. He darted back toward the group upon the ground, while the mass
of earth fell with a crash a quarter of a mile away. High above their
heads the mirror again encompassed Seaton, and again shot upward and
southward. Five times this maneuver was repeated before Seaton came
down, landing easily in front of them and opening his helmet.

"It's just what we thought it was, only worse," he reported tersely.
"Can't do a thing with it. Gravitation won't work through it--bars
won't--nothing will. And dark? _Dark!_ Folks, you ain't never seen no
darkness, nor heard no silence. It scared me stiff!"

"Poor little boy--afraid of the dark!" exclaimed Dorothy. "We saw
absolute blackness in space."

"Not like this, you didn't. I just saw absolute darkness and heard
absolute silence for the first time in my life. I never imagined
anything like it--come on up with me and I'll show it to you."

"No you won't!" his wife shrieked as she retreated toward Crane. "Some
other time, perhaps."

Seaton removed the harness and glanced at the spot from which he had
taken off, where now appeared a hemispherical hole in the ground.

"Let's see what kind of tracks I left, Mart," and the two men bent over
the depression. They saw with astonishment that the cut surface was
perfectly smooth, with not even the slightest roughness or irregularity
visible. Even the smallest loose grains of sand had been sheared in two
along a mathematically exact hemispherical surface by the inconceivable
force of the disintegrating copper bar.

"Well, that sure wins the----"

An alarm bell sounded. Without a glance around, Seaton seized Dorothy
and leaped into the testing shed. Dropping her unceremoniously to the
floor he stared through the telescope sight of an enormous ray-generator
which had automatically aligned itself upon the distant point of
liberation of intra-atomic energy which had caused the alarm to sound.
One hand upon the switch, his face was hard and merciless as he waited
to make sure of the identity of the approaching space-ship, before he
released the frightful power of his generator upon it.

"I've been expecting DuQuesne to try it again," he gritted, striving to
make out the visitor, yet more than two hundred miles distant. "He's out
to get you, Dot--and this time I'm not just going to warm him up and
scare him away, as I did last time. This time that misguided mutt's
going to get frizzled right.... I can't locate him with this small
telescope, Mart. Line him up in the big one and give me the word, will
you?"

"I see him, Dick, but it is not DuQuesne's ship. It is built of
transparent arenak, like the 'Kondal.' Even though it seems impossible,
I believe it is the 'Kondal'."

"Maybe so, and again maybe DuQuesne built it--or stole it. On second
thought, though, I don't believe that DuQuesne would be fool enough to
tackle us again in the same way--but I'm taking no chances.... O. K., it
is the 'Kondal,' I can see Dunark and Sitar myself, now."

The transparent vessel soon neared the field and the four Terrestrials
walked out to greet their Osnomian friends. Through the arenak walls
they recognized Dunark, Kofedix of Kondal, at the controls, and saw
Sitar, his beautiful young queen, lying in one of the seats near the
wall. She attempted a friendly greeting, but her face was strained as
though she were laboring under a burden too great for her to bear.

As they watched, Dunark slipped a helmet over his head and one over
Sitar's, pressed a button to open one of the doors, and supported her
toward the opening.

"They mustn't come out, Dick!" exclaimed Dorothy in dismay. "They'll
freeze to death in five minutes without any clothes on!"

"Yes, and Sitar can't stand up under our gravitation, either--I doubt if
Dunark can, for long," and Seaton dashed toward the vessel, motioning
the visitor back.

But misunderstanding the signal, Dunark came on. As he clambered heavily
through the door he staggered as though under an enormous weight, and
Sitar collapsed upon the frozen ground. Trying to help her,
half-kneeling over her, Dunark struggled, his green skin paling to a
yellowish tinge at the touch of the bitter and unexpected cold. Seaton
leaped forward and gathered Sitar up in his mighty arms as though she
were a child.

[Illustration: _Trying to help her, half kneeling over her, Dunark
struggled, his green skin paling to a yellowish tinge at the touch of
the bitter and unexpected cold._]

"Help Dunark back in, Mart," he directed crisply. "Hop in, girls--we've
got to take these folks back up where they can live."

Seaton shut the door, and as everyone lay flat in the seats Crane, who
had taken the controls, applied one notch of power and the huge vessel
leaped upward. Miles of altitude were gained before Crane brought the
cruiser to a stop and locked her in place with an anchoring attractor.

"There," he remarked calmly, "gravitation here is approximately the same
as it is upon Osnome."

"Yes," put in Seaton, standing up and shedding clothing in all
directions, "and I rise to remark that we'd better undress as far as the
law allows--perhaps farther. I never did like Osnomian ideas of
comfortable warmth, but we can endure it by peeling down to
bedrock----"

       *       *       *       *       *

Sitar jumped up happily, completely restored, and the three women threw
their arms around each other.

"What a horrible, terrible, frightful world!" exclaimed Sitar, her eyes
widening as she thought of her first experience with our earth. "Much as
I love you, I shall never dare try to visit you again. I have never been
able to understand why you Terrestrials wear what you call 'clothes,'
nor why you are so terribly, brutally strong. Now I really know--I will
feel the utterly cold and savage embrace of that awful earth of yours as
long as I live!"

"Oh, it's not so bad, Sitar." Seaton, who was shaking both of Dunark's
hands vigorously, assured her over his shoulder. "All depends on where
you were raised. We like it that way, and Osnome gives us the pip. But
you poor fish," turning again to Dunark, "with all my brains inside your
skull, you should have known what you were letting yourself in for."

"That's true, after a fashion," Dunark admitted, "but your brain told me
that Washington was _hot_. If I'd have thought to recalculate your
actual Fahrenheit degrees into our loro ... but that figures only
forty-seven and, while very cold, we could have endured it--wait a
minute, I'm getting it. You have what you call 'seasons.' This, then,
must be your 'winter.' Right?"

"Right the first time. That's the way your brain works behind my pan,
too. I could figure anything out all right after it happened, but hardly
ever beforehand--so I guess I can't blame you much, at that. But what I
want to know is, how'd you get here? It would take more than my
brains--you can't see our sun from anywhere near Osnome, even if you
knew exactly where to look for it."

"Easy. Remember those wrecked instruments you threw out of _Skylark I_
when we built _Skylark II_?" Having every minute detail of the
configuration of Seaton's brain engraved upon his own, Dunark spoke
English in Seaton's own characteristic careless fashion. Only when
thinking deeply or discussing abstruse matter did Seaton employ the
carefully selected and precise phrasing, which he knew so well how to
use. "Well, none of them was beyond repair and the juice was still on
most of them. One was an object-compass bearing on the Earth. We simply
fixed the bearings, put on some minor improvements, and here we are."

"Let us all sit down and be comfortable," he continued, changing into
the Kondalian tongue without a break, "and I will explain why we have
come. We are in most desperate need of two things which you alone can
supply--salt, and that strange metal, 'X'. Salt I know you have in great
abundance, but I know that you have very little of the metal. You have
only the one compass upon that planet?"

"That's all--one is all we set on it. However, we've got close to half a
ton of the metal on hand--you can have all you want."

"Even if I took it all, which I would not like to do, that would be less
than half enough. We must have at least one of your tons, and two tons
would be better."

"Two tons! Holy cat! Are you going to plate a fleet of battle cruisers?"

"More than that. We must plate an area of copper of some ten thousand
square miles--in fact, the very life of our entire race depends upon
it."

"It's this way," he continued, as the four earth-beings stared at him in
wonder. "Shortly after you left Osnome we were invaded by the
inhabitants of the third planet of our fourteenth sun. Luckily for us
they landed upon Mardonale, and in less than two days there was not a
single Osnomian left alive upon that half of the planet. They wiped out
our grand fleet in one brief engagement, and it was only the _Kondal_
and a few more like her that enabled us to keep them from crossing the
ocean. Even with our full force of these vessels, we cannot defeat them.
Our regular Kondalian weapons were useless. We shot explosive copper
charges against them of such size as to cause earthquakes all over
Osnome, without seriously crippling their defenses. Their offensive
weapons are almost irresistible--they have generators that burn arenak
as though it were so much paper, and a series of deadly frequencies
against which only a copper-driven ray screen is effective, and even
that does not stand up long."

"How come you lasted till now, then?" asked Seaton.

"They have nothing like the _Skylark_, and no knowledge of intra-atomic
energy. Therefore their space-ships are of the rocket type, and for that
reason they can cross only at the exact time of conjunction, or whatever
you call it--no, not conjunction, exactly, either, since the two planets
do not revolve around the same sun: but when they are closest together.
Our solar system is so complex, you know, that unless the trips are
timed exactly, to the hour, the vessels will not be able to land upon
