[Note 5: The small quantity of ammonium oxalate solution is added
before the second precipitation of the calcium oxalate to insure
the presence of a slight excess of the reagent, which promotes the
separation of the calcium compound.]

[Note 6: On ignition the calcium oxalate loses carbon dioxide and
carbon monoxide, leaving calcium oxide:

CaC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}O --> CaO + CO_{2} + CO + H_{2}O.

For small weights of the oxalate (0.6 gram or less) this reaction may
be brought about in a platinum crucible at the highest temperature of
a Tirrill burner, but it is well to ignite larger quantities than this
over the blast lamp until the weight is constant.]

[Note 7: The heat required to burn the filter, and that subsequently
applied as described, will convert most of the calcium oxalate to
calcium carbonate, which is changed to sulphate by the sulphuric acid.
The reactions involved are

CaC_{2}O_{4} --> CaCO_{3} + CO,
CaCO_{3} + H_{2}SO_{4} --> CaSO_{4} + H_{2}O + CO_{2}.

If a porcelain crucible is employed for ignition, this conversion to
sulphate is to be preferred, as a complete conversion to oxide is
difficult to accomplish.]

[Note 8: The determination of the calcium may be completed
volumetrically by washing the calcium oxalate precipitate from
the filter into dilute sulphuric acid, warming, and titrating
the liberated oxalic acid with a standard solution of potassium
permanganate as described on page 72. When a considerable number of
analyses are to be made, this procedure will save much of the time
otherwise required for ignition and weighing.]




DETERMINATION OF MAGNESIUM


PROCEDURE.--Evaporate the acidified filtrates from the calcium
precipitates until the salts begin to crystallize, but do !not!
evaporate to dryness (Note 1). Dilute the solution cautiously until
the salts are brought into solution, adding a little acid if the
solution has evaporated to very small volume. The solution should be
carefully examined at this point and must be filtered if a precipitate
has appeared. Heat the clear solution to boiling; remove the burner
and add 25 cc. of a solution of disodium phosphate. Then add slowly
dilute ammonia (1 volume strong ammonia (sp. gr. 0.90) and 9 volumes
water) as long as a precipitate continues to form. Finally, add a
volume of concentrated ammonia (sp. gr. 0.90) equal to one third of
the volume of the solution, and allow the whole to stand for about
twelve hours.

Decant the solution through a filter, wash it with dilute ammonia
water, proceeding as prescribed for the determination of phosphoric
anhydride on page 122, including; the reprecipitation (Note 2),
except that 3 cc. of disodium phosphate solution are added before the
reprecipitation of the magnesium ammonium phosphate instead of
the magnesia mixture there prescribed. From the weight of the
pyrophosphate, calculate the percentage of magnesium oxide (MgO) in
the sample of limestone. Remember that the pyrophosphate finally
obtained is from one fifth of the original sample.

[Note 1: The precipitation of the magnesium should be made in as small
volume as possible, and the ratio of ammonia to the total volume of
solution should be carefully provided for, on account of the relative
solubility of the magnesium ammonium phosphate. This matter has
been fully discussed in connection with the phosphoric anhydride
determination.]

[Note 2: The first magnesium ammonium phosphate precipitate is rarely
wholly crystalline, as it should be, and is not always of the proper
composition when precipitated in the presence of such large amounts of
ammonium salts. The difficulty can best be remedied by filtering the
precipitate and (without washing it) redissolving in a small quantity
of hydrochloric acid, from which it may be again thrown down by
ammonia after adding a little disodium phosphate solution. If the
flocculent character was occasioned by the presence of magnesium
hydroxide, the second precipitation, in a smaller volume containing
fewer salts, will often result more favorably.

The removal of iron or alumina from a contaminated precipitate is
a matter involving a long procedure, and a redetermination of the
magnesium from a new sample, with additional precautions, is usually
to be preferred.]




DETERMINATION OF CARBON DIOXIDE


!Absorption Apparatus!

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

The apparatus required for the determination of the carbon dioxide
should be arranged as shown in the cut (Fig. 3). The flask (A) is
an ordinary wash bottle, which should be nearly filled with dilute
hydrochloric acid (100 cc. acid (sp. gr. 1.12) and 200 cc. of water).
The flask is connected by rubber tubing (a) with the glass tube (b)
leading nearly to the bottom of the evolution flask (B) and having its
lower end bent upward and drawn out to small bore, so that the carbon
dioxide evolved from the limestone cannot bubble back into (b). The
evolution flask should preferably be a wide-mouthed Soxhlet extraction
flask of about 150 cc. capacity because of the ease with which tubes
and stoppers may be fitted into the neck of a flask of this type. The
flask should be fitted with a two-hole rubber stopper. The condenser
(C) may consist of a tube with two or three large bulbs blown in
it, for use as an air-cooled condenser, or it may be a small
water-jacketed condenser. The latter is to be preferred if a number of
determinations are to be made in succession.

A glass delivery tube (c) leads from the condenser to the small U-tube
(D) containing some glass beads or small pieces of glass rod and 3 cc.
of a saturated solution of silver sulphate, with 3 cc. of concentrated
sulphuric acid (sp. gr. 1.84). The short rubber tubing (d) connects
the first U-tube to a second U-tube (E) which is filled with small
dust-free lumps of dry calcium chloride, with a small, loose plug of
cotton at the top of each arm. Both tubes should be closed by cork
stoppers, the tops of which are cut off level with, or preferably
forced a little below, the top of the U-tube, and then neatly sealed
with sealing wax.

The carbon dioxide may be absorbed in a tube containing soda lime
(F) or in a Geissler bulb (F') containing a concentrated solution
of potassium hydroxide (Note 2). The tube (F) is a glass-stoppered
side-arm U-tube in which the side toward the evolution flask and one
half of the other side are filled with small, dust-free lumps of soda
lime of good quality (Note 3). Since soda lime contains considerable
moisture, the other half of the right side of the tube is filled with
small lumps of dry, dust-free calcium chloride to retain the moisture
from the soda lime. Loose plugs of cotton are placed at the top of
each arm and between the soda lime and the calcium chloride.

The Geissler bulb (F'), if used, should be filled with potassium
hydroxide solution (1 part of solid potassium hydroxide dissolved in
two parts of water) until each small bulb is about two thirds full
(Note 4). A small tube containing calcium chloride is connected with
the Geissler bulb proper by a ground joint and should be wired to the
bulb for safety. This is designed to retain any moisture from the
hydroxide solution. A piece of clean, fine copper wire is so attached
to the bulb that it can be hung from the hook above a balance pan, or
other support.

The small bottle (G) with concentrated sulphuric acid (sp. gr. 1.84)
is so arranged that the tube (f) barely dips below the surface. This
will prevent the absorption of water vapor by (F) or (F') and serves
as an aid in regulating the flow of air through the apparatus. (H) is
an aspirator bottle of about four liters capacity, filled with water;
(k) is a safety tube and a means of refilling (H); (h) is a screw
clamp, and (K) a U-tube filled with soda lime.

[Note 1: The air current, which is subsequently drawn through the
apparatus, to sweep all of the carbon dioxide into the absorption
apparatus, is likely to carry with it some hydrochloric acid from
the evolution flask. This acid is retained by the silver sulphate
solution. The addition of concentrated sulphuric acid to this solution
reduces its vapor pressure so far that very little water is carried on
by the air current, and this slight amount is absorbed by the calcium
chloride in (E). As the calcium chloride frequently contains a small
amount of a basic material which would absorb carbon dioxide, it is
necessary to pass carbon dioxide through (E) for a short time and then
drive all the gas out with a dry air current for thirty minutes before
use.]

[Note 2: Soda-lime absorption tubes are to be preferred if a
satisfactory quality of soda lime is available and the number of
determinations to be made successively is small. The potash bulbs will
usually permit of a larger number of successive determinations without
refilling, but they require greater care in handling and in the
analytical procedure.]

[Note 3: Soda lime is a mixture of sodium and calcium hydroxides. Both
combine with carbon dioxide to form carbonates, with the evolution
of water. Considerable heat is generated by the reaction, and the
temperature of the tube during absorption serves as a rough index of
the progress of the reaction through the mass of soda lime.

It is essential that soda lime of good quality for analytical purposes
should be used. The tube should not contain dust, as this is likely to
be swept away.]

[Note 4: The solution of the hydroxide for use in the Geissler bulb
must be highly concentrated to insure complete absorption of the
carbon dioxide and also to reduce the vapor pressure of the solution,
thus lessening the danger of loss of water with the air which passes
through the bulbs. The small quantity of moisture which is then
carried out of the bulbs is held by the calcium chloride in the
prolong tube. The best form of absorption bulb is that to which the
prolong tube is attached by a ground glass joint.

After the potassium hydroxide is approximately half consumed in the
first bulb of the absorption apparatus, potassium bicarbonate is
formed, and as it is much less soluble than the carbonate, it often
precipitates. Its formation is a warning that the absorbing power of
the hydroxide is much diminished.]


!The Analysis!

PROCEDURE.-- Weigh out into the flask (B) about 1 gram of limestone.
Cover it with 15 cc. of water. Weigh the absorption apparatus (F)
or (F') accurately after allowing it to stand for 30 minutes in the
balance case, and wiping it carefully with a lintless cloth, taking
care to handle it as little as possible after wiping (Note 1). Connect
the absorption apparatus with (e) and (f). If a soda-lime tube is
used, be sure that the arm containing the soda lime is next the tube
(E) and that the glass stopcocks are open.

To be sure that the whole apparatus is airtight, disconnect the rubber
tube from the flask (A), making sure that the tubes (a) and (b) do not
contain any hydrochloric acid, close the pinchcocks (a) and (k) and
open (h). No bubbles should pass through (D) or (G) after a few
seconds. When assured that the fittings are tight, close (h) and open
(a) cautiously to admit air to restore atmospheric pressure. This
precaution is essential, as a sudden inrush of air will project liquid
from (D) or (F'). Reconnect the rubber tube with the flask (A).
Open the pinchcocks (a) and (k) and blow over about 10 cc. of the
hydrochloric acid from (A) into (B). When the action of the acid
slackens, blow over (slowly) another 10 cc.

The rate of gas evolution should not exceed for more than a few
seconds that at which about two bubbles per second pass through (G)
(Note 2). Repeat the addition of acid in small portions until the
action upon the limestone seems to be at an end, taking care to close
(a) after each addition of acid (Note 3). Disconnect (A) and connect
the rubber tubing with the soda-lime tube (K) and open (a). Then close
(k) and open (h), regulating the flow of water from (H) in such a way
that about two bubbles per second pass through (G). Place a small
flame under (B) and !slowly! raise the contents to boiling and boil
for three minutes. Then remove the burner from under (B) and continue
to draw air through the apparatus for 20-30 minutes, or until (H)
is emptied (Note 4). Remove the absorption apparatus, closing the
stopcocks on (F) or stoppering the open ends of (F'), leave the
apparatus in the balance case for at least thirty minutes, wipe it
carefully and weigh, after opening the stopcocks (or removing plugs).
The increase in weight is due to absorption of CO_{2}, from which its
percentage in the sample may be calculated.

After cleaning (B) and refilling (H), the apparatus is ready for the
duplicate analysis.

[Note 1: The absorption tubes or bulbs have large surfaces on which
moisture may collect. By allowing them to remain in the balance case
for some time before weighing, the amount of moisture absorbed on the
surface is as nearly constant as practicable during two weighings, and
a uniform temperature is also assured. The stopcocks of the U-tube
should be opened, or the plugs used to close the openings of the
Geissler bulb should be removed before weighing in order that the air
contents shall always be at atmospheric pressure.]

[Note 2: If the gas passes too rapidly into the absorption apparatus,
some carbon dioxide may be carried through, not being completely
retained by the absorbents.]

[Note 3: The essential ionic changes involved in this procedure are
the following: It is assumed that the limestone, which is typified by
calcium carbonate, is very slightly soluble in water, and the ions
resulting are Ca^{++} and CO_{3}^{--}. In the presence of H^{+} ions
of the mineral acid, the CO_{3}^{--} ions form [H_{2}CO_{3}]. This
is not only a weak acid which, by its formation, diminishes the
concentration of the CO_{3}^{--} ions, thus causing more of the
carbonate to dissolve to re-establish equilibrium, but it is also an
unstable compound and breaks down into carbon dioxide and water.]

[Note 4: Carbon dioxide is dissolved by cold water, but the gas is
expelled by boiling, and, together with that which is distributed
through the apparatus, is swept out into the absorption bulb by the
current of air. This air is purified by drawing it through the tube
(K) containing soda lime, which removes any carbon dioxide which may
be in it.]




DETERMINATION OF LEAD, COPPER, IRON, AND ZINC IN BRASS

ELECTROLYTIC SEPARATIONS


!General Discussion!

When a direct current of electricity passes from one electrode to
another through solutions of electrolytes, the individual ions present
in these solutions tend to move toward the electrode of opposite
electrical charge to that which each ion bears, and to be discharged
by that electrode. Whether or not such discharge actually occurs in
the case of any particular ion depends upon the potential (voltage) of
the current which is passing through the solution, since for each ion
there is, under definite conditions, a minimum potential below which
the discharge of the ion cannot be effected. By taking advantage
of differences in discharge-potentials, it is possible to effect
separations of a number of the metallic ions by electrolysis, and at
the same time to deposit the metals in forms which admit of direct
weighing. In this way the slower procedures of precipitation and
filtration may frequently be avoided. The following paragraphs present
a brief statement of the fundamental principles and conditions
underlying electro-analysis.

The total energy of an electric current as it passes through a
solution is distributed among three factors, first, its potential,
which is measured in volts, and corresponds to what is called "head"
in a stream of water; second, current strength, which is measured
in amperes, and corresponds to the volume of water passing a
cross-section of a stream in a given time interval; and third, the
resistance of the conducting medium, which is measured in ohms. The
relation between these three factors is expressed by Ohm's law,
namely, that !I = E/R!, when I is current strength, E potential, and R
resistance. It is plain that, for a constant resistance, the
strength of the current and its potential are mutually and directly
interdependent.

As already stated, the applied electrical potential determines whether
or not deposition of a metal upon an electrode actually occurs. The
current strength determines the rate of deposition and the physical
characteristics of the deposit. The resistance of the solution is
generally so small as to fall out of practical consideration.

Approximate deposition-potentials have been determined for a number
of the metallic elements, and also for hydrogen and some of the
acid-forming radicals. The values given below are those required
for deposition from normal solutions at ordinary temperatures
with reference to a hydrogen electrode. They must be regarded as
approximate, since several disturbing factors and some secondary
reactions render difficult their exact application under the
conditions of analysis. They are:

 Zn    Cd    Fe    Ni    Pb    H  Cu    Sb    Hg    Ag    SO_{4}
+0.77 +0.42 +0.34 +0.33 +0.13  0 -0.34 -0.67 -0.76 -0.79 +1.90

From these data it is evident that in order to deposit copper from a
normal solution of copper sulphate a minimum potential equal to the
algebraic sum of the deposition-potentials of copper ions and sulphate
ions must be applied, that is, +1.56 volts. The deposition of zinc
from a solution of zinc sulphate would require +2.67 volts, but, since
the deposition of hydrogen from sulphuric acid solution requires only
+1.90 volts, the quantitative deposition of zinc by electrolysis from
a sulphuric acid solution of a zinc salt is not practicable. On the
other hand, silver, if present in a solution of copper sulphate, would
deposit with the copper.

The foregoing examples suffice to illustrate the application of the
principle of deposition potentials, but it must further be noted
that the values stated apply to normal solutions of the compounds in
question, that is, to solutions of considerable concentrations. As the
concentration of the ions diminishes, and hence fewer ions approach
the electrodes, somewhat higher voltages are required to attract and
discharge them. From this it follows that the concentrations should be
kept as high as possible to effect complete deposition in the least
practicable time, or else the potentials applied must be progressively
increased as deposition proceeds. In practice, the desired result is
obtained by starting with small volumes of solution, using as large an
electrode surface as possible, and by stirring the solution to bring
the ions in contact with the electrodes. This is, in general, a more
convenient procedure than that of increasing the potential of the
current during electrolysis, although that method is also used.

As already stated, those ions in a solution of electrolytes will first
be discharged which have the lowest deposition potentials, and so
long as these ions are present around the electrode in considerable
concentration they, almost alone, are discharged, but, as their
concentration diminishes, other ions whose deposition potentials are
higher but still within that of the current applied, will also begin
to separate. For example, from a nitric acid solution of copper
nitrate, the copper ions will first be discharged at the cathode, but
as they diminish in concentration hydrogen ions from the acid (or
water) will be also discharged. Since the hydrogen thus liberated is a
reducing agent, the nitric acid in the solution is slowly reduced to
ammonia, and it may happen that if the current is passed through for a
long time, such a solution will become alkaline. Oxygen is liberated
at the anode, but, since there is no oxidizable substance present
around that electrode, it escapes as oxygen gas. It should be noted
that, in general, the changes occurring at the cathode are reductions,
while those at the anode are oxidations.

For analytical purposes, solutions of nitrates or sulphates of the
metals are preferable to those of the chlorides, since liberated
chlorine attacks the electrodes. In some cases, as for example, that
of silver, solution of salts forming complex ions, like that of
the double cyanide of silver and potassium, yield better metallic
deposits.

Most metals are deposited as such upon the cathode; a few, notably
lead and manganese, separate in the form of dioxides upon the anode.
It is evidently important that the deposited material should be so
firmly adherent that it can be washed, dried, and weighed without
loss in handling. To secure these conditions it is essential that the
current density (that is, the amount of current per unit of area of
the electrodes) shall not be too high. In prescribing analytical
conditions it is customary to state the current strength in "normal
densities" expressed in amperes per 100 sq. cm. of electrode surface,
as, for example, "N.D_{100} = 2 amps."

If deposition occurs too rapidly, the deposit is likely to be spongy
or loosely adherent and falls off on subsequent treatment. This places
a practical limit to the current density to be employed, for a given
electrode surface. The cause of the unsatisfactory character of
the deposit is apparently sometimes to be found in the coincident
liberation of considerable hydrogen and sometimes in the failure of
the rapidly deposited material to form a continuous adherent surface.
The effect of rotating electrodes upon the character of the deposit is
referred to below.

The negative ions of an electrolyte are attracted to the anode and are
discharged on contact with it. Anions such as the chloride ion yield
chlorine atoms, from which gaseous chlorine molecules are formed
and escape. The radicals which compose such ions as NO_{3}^{-} or
SO_{4}^{--} are not capable of independent existence after discharge,
and break down into oxygen and N_{2}O_{5} and SO_{3} respectively. The
oxygen escapes and the anhydrides, reacting with water, re-form nitric
and sulphuric acids.

The law of Faraday expresses the relation between current strength and
the quantities of the decomposition products which, under constant
conditions, appear at the electrodes, namely, that a given quantity
of electricity, acting for a given time, causes the separation of
chemically equivalent quantities of the various elements or radicals.
For example, since 107.94 grams of silver is equivalent to 1.008 grams
of hydrogen, and that in turn to 8 grams of oxygen, or 31.78 grams of
copper, the quantity of electricity which will cause the deposit of
107.94 grams of silver in a given time will also separate the weights
just indicated of the other substances. Experiments show that a
current of one ampere passing for one second, i.e., a coulomb of
electricity, causes the deposition of 0.001118 gram of silver from a
