By establishment, is meant the planting of new forests and the cutting
of mature forests, in such a way as to encourage a natural growth of new
trees without artificial planting or seeding. The planting may consist
of sowing seed, or of setting out young trees. The establishment of a
forest by cutting may consist of the removal of all mature trees and
dependence upon the remaining stumps to reproduce the forest from
sprouts, or it may consist of the removal of only a portion of the
mature trees, thus giving the young seedlings on the ground room in
which to grow.

By protection, is meant the safeguarding of the forest from fire, wind,
insects, disease and injury for which man is directly responsible. Here,
the forester also prevents injury to the trees from the grazing and
browsing of sheep and goats, and keeps his forest so well stocked that
no wind can uproot the trees nor can the sun dry up the moist forest
soil.

[Illustration: FIG. 122.--A Forest of Bull Pine Cut on Forestry
Principles. (Photograph taken on the Black Hills National Forest, South
Dakota.)]

By utilization, is meant the conservative and intelligent harvesting of
the forest, with the aim of obtaining the greatest amount of product
from a given area, with the least waste, in the quickest time, and
without the slightest deterioration of the forest as a whole. The
forester cuts his mature trees, only, and generally leaves a sufficient
number on the ground to preserve the forest soil and to cast seed for
the production of a new crop. In this way, he secures an annual output
without hurting the forest itself. He studies the properties and values
of the different woods and places them where they will be most useful.
He lays down principles for so harvesting the timber and the
by-products of the forest that there will be the least waste and injury
to the trees which remain standing. He utilizes the forest, but does not
cut enough to interfere with the neighboring water-sheds, which the
forests protect.

[Illustration: 123.--A White Pine Plantation, in Rhode Island, Where the
Crowns of the Trees Have Met. The trees are fifteen years old and in
many cases every other tree had to be removed.]

Forestry, therefore, deals with a vast and varied mass of information,
comprising all the known facts relating to the life of a forest. It does
not deal with the individual tree and its planting and care,--that would
be arboriculture. Nor does it consider the grouping of trees for
aesthetic effect,--that would be landscape gardening. It concerns itself
with the forest as a community of trees and with the utilization of the
forest on an economic basis.

Each one of these activities in Forestry is a study in itself and
involves considerable detail, of which the reader may obtain a general
knowledge in the following pages. For a more complete discussion, the
reader is referred to any of the standard books on Forestry.

The life and nature of a forest: When we think of a forest we are apt to
    think of a large number of individual trees having no special
    relationship to each other. Closer observation, however, will reveal
    that the forest consists of a distinct group of trees, sufficiently
    dense to form an unbroken canopy of tops, and that, where trees grow
    so closely together, they become very interdependent. It is this
    interdependence that makes the forest different from a mere group of
    trees in a park or on a lawn. In this composite character, the
    forest enriches its own soil from year to year, changes the climate
    within its own bounds, controls the streams along its borders and
    supports a multitude of animals and plants peculiar to itself. This
    communal relationship in the life history of the forest furnishes a
    most interesting story of struggle and mutual aid. Different trees
    have different requirements with regard to water, food and light.
    Some need more water and food than others, some will not endure much
    shade, and others will grow in the deepest shade. In the open, a
    tree, if once established, can meet its needs quite readily and,
    though it has to ward off a number of enemies, insects, disease and
    windstorm--its struggle for existence is comparatively easy. In the
    forest, the conditions are different. Here, the tree-enemies have to
    be battled with, just as in the open, and in addition, instead of
    there being only a few trees on a plot of ground, there are
    thousands growing on the same area, all demanding the same things
    out of a limited supply. The struggle for existence, therefore,
    becomes keen, many falling behind and but few surviving.

[Illustration: FIG. 124.--Measuring the Diameter of a Tree and Counting
its Annual Rings.]

    This struggle begins with the seed. At first there are thousands of
    seeds cast upon a given area by the neighboring trees or by the
    birds and the winds. Of these, only a few germinate; animals feed on
    some of them, frost nips some and excessive moisture and unfavorable
    soil conditions prevent others from starting. The few successful
    ones soon sprout into a number of young trees that grow thriftily
    until their crowns begin to meet. When the trees have thus met, the
    struggle is at its height. The side branches encroach upon each
    other (Fig. 123), shut out the light without which the branches
    cannot live, and finally kill each other off. The upper branches vie
    with one another for light, grow unusually fast, and the trees
    increase in height with special rapidity. This is nature's method of
    producing clear, straight trunks which are so desirable for poles
    and large timber. In this struggle for dominance, some survive and
    tower above the others, but many become stunted and fail to grow,
    while the majority become entirely overtopped and succumb in the
    struggle; see Fig. 139.

    But in this strife there is also mutual aid. Each tree helps to
    protect its neighbors against the danger of being uprooted by the
    wind, and against the sun, which is liable to dry up the rich soil
    around the roots. This soil is different from the soil on the open
    lawn. It consists of an accumulation of decayed leaves mixed with
    inorganic matter, forming, together, a rich composition known as
    _humus_. The trees also aid each other in forming a close canopy
    that prevents the rapid evaporation of water from the ground.

    The intensity of these conditions will vary a great deal with the
    composition of the forest and the nature and habits of the
    individual trees. By composition, or type of forest, is meant the
    proportion in which the various species of trees are grouped; i.e.,
    whether a certain section of woodland is composed of one species or
    of a mixture of species. By habit is meant the requirements of the
    trees for light, water and food.

[Illustration: FIG. 125.--Mountain Slopes in North Carolina Well Covered
with Forests.]

    Some trees will grow in deep shade while others will demand the
    open. In the matter of water and food, the individual requirements
    of different trees are equally marked.

    The natural rapidity of growth of different species is also
    important, and one caring for a forest must know this rate of
    growth, not only as to the individual species, but also with respect
    to the forest as a whole. If he knows how fast the trees in a
    forest grow, both in height and diameter, he will know how much
    wood, in cubic feet, the forest produces in a year, and he can then
    determine how much he may cut without decreasing the capital stock.
    The rate of growth is determined in this way: A tree is cut and the
    rings on the cross-section surface are counted and measured; see
    Fig. 124. Each ring represents one year's growth. The total number
    of rings will show the age of the tree. By a study of the rings of
    the various species of trees on a given plot, the rate of growth of
    each species in that location can be ascertained and, by knowing the
    approximate number of trees of each species on the forest area, the
    rate of growth of the whole forest for any given year can be
    determined.

[Illustration: FIG. 126.--Bottom Lands Buried in Waste from Deforested
Mountains. Wu-t'ai-shan, Shan-si Province, China.]

[Illustration: FIG. 127.--Eroded Slope in Western North Carolina.]

Forests prevent soil erosion and floods: Forests help to regulate the
    flow of streams and prevent floods. Most streams are bordered by
    vast tracts of forest growths. The rain that falls on these forest
    areas is absorbed and held by the forest soil, which is permeated
    with decayed leaves, decayed wood and root fibers. The forest floor
    is, moreover, covered with a heavy undergrowth and thus behaves like
    a sponge, absorbing the water that falls upon it and then permitting
    it to ooze out gradually to the valleys and rivers below. A forest
    soil will retain one-half of its own quantity of water; i.e., for
    every foot in depth of soil there can be six inches of water and,
    when thus saturated, the soil will act as a vast, underground
    reservoir from which the springs and streams are supplied (Fig.
    125). Cut the forest down and the land becomes such a desert as is
    shown in Fig. 126. The soil, leaves, branches and fallen trees dry
    to dust, are carried off by the wind and, with the fall of rain, the
    soil begins to wash away and gullies, such as are shown in Fig. 127,
    are formed. Streams generally have their origins in mountain slopes
    and there, too, the forests, impeding the sudden run off of the
    water which is not immediately absorbed, prevent soil erosion.

[Illustration: FIG. 128.--Flood in Pittsburgh, Pa.]

    Where the soil is allowed to wash off, frequent floods are
    inevitable. Rain which falls on bare slopes is not caught by the
    crowns of trees nor held by the forest floor. It does not sink into
    the ground as readily as in the forest. The result is that a great
    deal of water reaches the streams in a short time and thus hastens
    floods. At other periods the streams are low because the water which
    would have fed them for months has run off in a few days. The farms
    are the first to suffer from the drouths that follow and, during the
    period of floods, whole cities are often inundated. Fig. 128 shows
    such a scene. The history of Forestry is full of horrible incidents
    of the loss of life and property from floods which are directly
    traceable to the destruction of the local forests and, on the other
    hand, there are many cases on record where flood conditions have
    been entirely obviated by the planting of forests. France and
    Germany have suffered from inundations resulting from forest
    devastation and, more than a hundred years ago, both of these
    countries took steps to reforest their mountain slopes, and thereby
    to prevent many horrible disasters.

[Illustration: FIG. 129.--Planting a Forest with Seedling Trees on the
Nebraska National Forest. The man on the right is placing the tree in a
slit just made with the spade. The man on the left is shoveling the dry
sand from the surface before making the slit for the tree.]

[Illustration: FIG. 130.--Diagrammatic Illustration of a Selection
Forest.]

How forests are established: New forests may be started from seed or
    from shoots, or suckers. If from seed, the process may be carried on
    in one of three ways:

    First, by sowing the seed directly on the land.

    Second, by first raising young trees in nurseries and later setting
    them out in their permanent locations in the forest. This method is
    applicable where quick results are desired, where the area is not
    too large, or in treeless regions and large open gaps where there
    is little chance for new trees to spring up from seed furnished by
    the neighboring trees. It is a method extensively practiced abroad
    where some of the finest forests are the result. The U.S.
    government, as well as many of the States, maintain forest-tree
    nurseries where millions of little trees are grown from seed and
    planted out on the National and State forests. Fig. 129 shows men
    engaged in this work. The fundamental principles of starting and
    maintaining a nursery have already been referred to in the chapter
    on "What Trees to Plant and How."

    The third method of establishing a forest from seed is by cutting
    the trees in the existing forest so that the seed falling from the
    remaining trees will, with the addition of light and space, readily
    take root and fill in the gaps with a vigorous growth of trees,
    without artificial seeding or planting. This gives rise to several
    methods of cutting or harvesting forests for the purpose of
    encouraging natural reproduction. The cutting may extend to single
    trees over the whole area or over only a part of the whole area.
    Where the cutting is confined to single trees, the system is known
    as the "Selection System," because the trees are selected
    individually, with a view to retaining the best and most vigorous
    stock and removing the overcrowding specimens and those that are
    fully mature or infested with disease or insects.

    Fig. 130 is a diagrammatic illustration of the operation of this
    system. In another system the cutting is done in groups, or in
    strips, and the number of areas of the groups or strips is extended
    from time to time until the whole forest is cleared. This system is
    illustrated in Fig. 131. Still another method consists in
    encouraging trees which will thrive in the shade, such as the beech,
    spruce and hemlock, to grow under light-demanding trees like the
    pine. This system presents a "two-storied" forest and is known by
    that name. The under story often has to be established by planting.

[Illustration: FIG. 131.--Diagrammatic Illustration of the Group or
Strip System.]

    In the system of reproducing forests from shoots or suckers, all
    trees of a certain species on a given area are cut off and the old
    stumps and roots are depended upon to produce a new set of sprouts,
    the strongest of which will later develop into trees. The coniferous
    trees do not lend themselves at all to this system of treatment,
    and, among the broadleaf trees, the species vary in their ability to
    sprout. Some, like the chestnut and poplar, sprout profusely; others
    sprout very little.

How forests are protected: Forestry also tries to protect the forests
    from many destructive agencies. Wasteful lumbering and fire are the
    worst enemies of the forest. Fungi, insects, grazing, wind, snow and
    floods are the other enemies.

[Illustration: FIG. 132.--The Result of a Forest Fire. The trees,
lodgepole pine and Englemann spruce, are all dead and down. Photograph
taken in the Colorado National Forest, Colorado.]

    By wasteful lumbering is meant that the forest is cut with no regard
    for the future and with considerable waste in the utilization of the
    product. Conservative lumbering, which is the term used by foresters
    to designate the opposite of wasteful lumbering, will be described
    more fully later in this study.

    Protection from fire is no less important than protection from
    wasteful lumbering. Forest fires are very common in this country and
    cause incalculable destruction to life and property; see Fig. 132.
    From ten to twelve million acres of forest-land are burnt over
    annually and the timber destroyed is estimated at fifty millions of
    dollars. The history of Forestry abounds in tales of destructive
    fires, where thousands of persons have been killed or left
    destitute, whole towns wiped out, and millions of dollars in
    property destroyed. In most cases, these uncontrollable fires
    started from small conflagrations that could readily, with proper
    fire-patrol, have been put out.

    There are various ways of fighting fires, depending on the character
    of the fire,--whether it is a surface fire, burning along the
    surface layer of dry leaves and small ground vegetation, a ground
    fire, burning below the surface, through the layer of soil and
    vegetable matter that generally lines the forest floor, or a top
    fire, burning high up in the trees.

    When the fire runs along the surface only, the injury extends to the
    butts of the trees and to the young seedlings. Such fires can be put
    out by throwing dirt or sand over the fire, by beating it, and,
    sometimes, by merely raking the leaves away.

    Ground fires destroy the vegetable mold which the trees need for
    their sustenance. They progress slowly and kill or weaken the roots
    of the trees.

[Illustration: FIG. 133.--A Top Fire near Bear Canyon, Arizona.]

    Top fires, Fig. 133, are the most dangerous, destroying everything
    in their way. They generally develop from surface fires, though
    sometimes they are started by lightning. They are more common in
    coniferous forests, because the leaves of hardwoods do not burn so
    readily. Checking the progress of a top fire is a difficult matter.
    Some fires will travel as rapidly as five miles an hour, and the
    heat is terrific. The only salvation for the forest lies, in many
    cases, in a sudden downpour of rain, a change of wind, or some
    barrier which the fire cannot pass. A barrier of this kind is often
    made by starting another fire some distance ahead of the principal
    one, so that when the two fires meet, they will die out for want of
    fuel. In well-kept forests, strips or lanes, free from inflammable
    material, are often purposely made through the forest area to
    furnish protection against top fires. Carefully managed forests are
    also patrolled during the dry season so that fires may be detected
    and attacked in their first stages. Look-out stations, watch-towers,
    telephone-connections and signal stations are other means frequently
    resorted to for fire protection and control. Notices warning campers
    and trespassers against starting fires are commonly posted in such
    forests. (Fig. 143.)

[Illustration: FIG. 134.--Sheep Grazing on Holy Cross National Forest,
Colorado. The drove consists of 1600 sheep, of which only part are shown
in the photograph.]

    The grazing of sheep, goats and cattle in the forest is another
    important source of injury to which foresters must give attention.
