
"No, no, it's not that," Jack said. "Without a diagnosis, we can't do a
thing. Until we have that, our hands are tied, and we aren't even
getting close to it. We don't even know whether this is a bacteria, or a
virus, or what. Maybe the Bruckians are right. Maybe it's a curse."

"I don't think the Black Service of Pathology would buy that for a
diagnosis," Tiger said sourly.

"The Black Service would choke on it--but what other answer do we have?
You two have been doing all you can, but diagnosis is _my_ job. I'm
supposed to be good at it, but the more we dig into this, the farther
away we seem to get."

"Do you want to call for help?" Tiger said.

Jack shook his head helplessly. "I'm beginning to think we should have
called for help a long time ago," he said. "We're into this over our
heads now and we're still going down. At the rate those people are dying
down there, we don't have time to call for help now." He stared at the
piles of notes on the desk and his face was very white. "I don't know, I
just don't know," he said. "The diagnosis on this thing should have been
duck soup. I thought it was going to be a real feather in my cap, just
walking in and nailing it down in a few hours. Well, I'm whipped. I
don't know what to do. If either of you can think of an answer, it's all
yours, and I'll admit it to Black Doctor Tanner himself."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was bitter medicine for Blue Doctor Jack Alvarez to swallow, but that
fact gave no pleasure to Dal or Tiger now. They were as baffled as Jack
was, and would have welcomed help from anyone who could offer it.

And, ironically, the first glimpse of the truth came from the direction
they least expected.

From the very beginning Fuzzy had been watching the proceedings from his
perch on the swinging platform in the control room. If he sensed that
Dal Timgar was ignoring him and leaving him to his own devices much of
the time, he showed no sign of resentment. The tiny creature seemed to
realize that something important was consuming his master's energy and
attention, and contented himself with an affectionate pat now and then
as Dal went through the control room. Everyone assumed without much
thought that Fuzzy was merely being tolerant of the situation. It was
not until they had finally given up in desperation and Tiger was trying
to contact a Hospital Ship for help, that Dal stared up at his little
pink friend with a puzzled frown.

Tiger put the transmitter down for a moment. "What's wrong?" he said to
Dal. "You look as though you just bit into a rotten apple."

"I just remembered that I haven't fed him for twenty-four hours," Dal
said.

"Who? Fuzzy?" Tiger shrugged. "He could see you were busy."

Dal shook his head. "That wouldn't make any difference to Fuzzy. When he
gets hungry, he gets hungry, and he's pretty self-centered. It wouldn't
matter what I was doing, he should have been screaming for food hours
ago."

Dal walked over to the platform and peered down at his pink friend in
alarm. He took him up and rested him on his shoulder, a move that
invariably sent Fuzzy into raptures of delight. Now the little creature
just sat there, trembling and rubbing half-heartedly against Dal's neck.

Dal held him out at arm's length. "Fuzzy, _what's the matter with you?_"

"Do you think something's wrong with him?" Jack said, looking up
suddenly. "Looks like he's having trouble keeping his eyes open."

"His color isn't right, either," Tiger said. "He looks kind of blue."

Quite suddenly the little black eyes closed and Fuzzy began to tremble
violently. He drew himself up into a tight pink globule as the fuzz-like
hair disappeared from view.

Something was unmistakably wrong. As he held the shivering creature, Dal
was suddenly aware that something had been nibbling at the back of his
mind for hours. Not a clear-cut thought, merely an impression of pain
and anguish and sickness, and now as he looked at Fuzzy the impression
grew so strong it almost made him cry out.

Abruptly, Dal knew what he had to do. Where the thought came from he
didn't know, but it was crystal clear in his mind. "Jack, where is our
biggest virus filter?" he asked quietly.

Jack stared at him. "Virus filter? I just took it out of the autoclave
an hour ago."

"Get it," Dal said, "and the suction machine too. _Quickly!_"

Jack went down the corridor like a shot, and reappeared a moment later
with the big porcelain virus filter and the suction tubing attached to
it. Swiftly Dal dumped the limp little creature in his hand into the top
of the filter jar, poured in some sterile saline, and started the
suction.

Tiger and Jack watched him in amazement. "What are you doing?" Tiger
said.

"Filtering him," Dal said. "He's infected. He must have been exposed to
the plague somehow, maybe when our little Bruckian visitor came on board
the other day. And if it's a virus that's causing this plague, the virus
filter ought to hold it back and still let Fuzzy's molecular structure
through."

They watched and sure enough a bluish-pink fluid began moving down
through the porcelain filter, and dripping through the funnel into the
beaker below. Each drop coalesced in the beaker as it fell until Fuzzy's
whole body had been sucked through the filter and into the jar below. He
was still not quite his normal pink color, but as the filter went dry,
a pair of frightened shoe-button eyes appeared and he poked up a pair of
ears. Presently the fuzz began appearing on his body again.

And on the top of the filter lay a faint gray film. "Don't touch it!"
Dal said. "That's real poison." He slipped on a mask and gloves, and
scraped a bit of the film from the filter with a spatula. "I think we
have it," he said. "The virus that's causing the plague on this
planet."




CHAPTER 10

THE BOOMERANG CLUE


It was a virus, beyond doubt. The electron microscope told them that,
now that they had the substance isolated and could examine it. In the
culture tubes in the _Lancet_'s incubators, it would begin to grow
nicely, and then falter and die, but when guinea pigs were inoculated in
the ship's laboratory, the substance proved its virulence. The animals
injected with tiny bits of the substance grew sick within hours and very
quickly died.

The call to the Hospital Ship was canceled as the three doctors worked
in feverish excitement. Here at last was something they could grapple
with, something so common among the races of the galaxy that the doctors
felt certain that they could cope with it. Very few, if any, higher life
forms existed that did not have some sort of submicroscopic parasite
afflicting them. Bacterial infection was a threat on every inhabited
world, and the viruses--the tiniest of all submicroscopic
organisms--were the most difficult and dangerous of them all.

And yet virus plagues had been stopped before, and they could be stopped
again.

Jack radioed down to the planet's surface that the diagnosis had been
made; as soon as the proper medications could be prepared, the doctors
would land to begin treatment. There was a new flicker of hopefulness in
the Bruckian's response, and an appeal to hurry. With renewed energy the
doctors went back to the lab to start working on the new data.

But trouble continued to dog them. This was no ordinary virus. It proved
resistant to every one of the antibiotics and antiviral agents in the
_Lancet_'s stockroom. No drug seemed to affect it, and its molecular
structure was different from any virus that had ever been recorded
before.

"If one of the drugs would only just slow it up a little, we'd be
ahead," Tiger said in perplexity. "We don't have anything that even
touches it, not even the purified globulins."

"What about antibodies from the infected people?" Jack suggested. "In
every virus disease I've ever heard of, the victim's own body starts
making antibodies against the invading virus. If enough antibodies are
made fast enough, the virus dies and the patient is immune from then
on."

"Well, these people don't seem to be making any antibodies at all,"
Tiger said. "At least not as far as I can see. If they were, at least
some of them would be recovering from the disease. So far not a single
one has recovered once the thing started. They all just go ahead and
die."

"I wonder," Dal said, "if Fuzzy had any defense."

Jack looked up. "How do you mean?"

"Well, Fuzzy was infected, we know that. He might have died too, if we
hadn't caught it in time--but as it worked out, he didn't. In fact, he
looks pretty healthy right now."

"That's fine for Fuzzy," Jack said impatiently, "but I don't see how we
can push the whole population of 31 Brucker VII through a virus filter.
They're flesh-and-blood creatures."

"That's not what I mean," Dal said. "Maybe Fuzzy's body developed
antibodies against the virus while he was infected. Remember, he doesn't
have a rigid body structure like we do. He's mostly just basic protein,
and he can synthesize pretty much anything he wants to or needs to."

Jack blinked. "It's an idea, at least. Is there any way we can get some
of his body fluid away from him? Without getting bit, I mean?"

"No problem there," Dal said. "He can regenerate pretty fast if he has
enough of the right kind of food. He won't miss an ounce or two of
excess tissue."

He took a beaker over to Fuzzy's platform and began squeezing off a
little blob of pink material. Fuzzy seemed to sense what Dal wanted;
obligingly he thrust out a little pseudopod which Dal pinched off into
the beaker. With the addition of a small amount of saline solution, the
tissue dissolved into thin, pink suspension.

In the laboratory they found two or three of the guinea pigs in the last
stages of the infection, and injected them with a tiny bit of the pink
solution. The effect was almost unbelievable. Within twenty minutes all
of the injected animals began to perk up, their eyes brighter, nibbling
at the food in their cages, while the ones that had not been injected
got sicker and sicker.

"Well, there's our answer," Jack said eagerly. "If we can get some of
this stuff injected into our friends down below, we may be able to
protect the healthy ones from getting the plague, and cure the sick ones
as well. If we still have enough time, that is."

They had landing permission from the Bruckian spokesman within minutes,
and an hour later the _Lancet_ made an orderly landing on a
newly-repaved landing field near one of the central cities on the
seventh planet of 31 Brucker.

Tiger and Jack had obviously not exaggerated the strange appearance of
the towns and cities on this plague-ridden planet, and Dal was appalled
at the ravages of the disease that they had come to fight. Only one out
of ten of the Bruckians was still uninfected, and another three out of
the ten were clearly in the late stages of the disease, walking about
blankly and blindly, stumbling into things in their paths, falling to
the ground and lying mute and helpless until death came to release them.
Under the glaring red sun, weary parties of stretcher bearers went about
the silent streets, moving their grim cargo out to the mass graves at
the edge of the city.

The original spokesman who had come up to the _Lancet_ was dead, but
another had taken his place as negotiator with the doctors--an older,
thinner Bruckian who looked as if he carried the total burden of his
people on his shoulders. He greeted them eagerly at the landing field.
"You have found a solution!" he cried. "You have found a way to turn the
tide--but hurry! Every moment now is precious."

During the landing procedures, Dal had worked to prepare enough of the
precious antibody suspension, with Fuzzy's co-operation, to handle a
large number of inoculations. By the time the ship touched down he had a
dozen flasks and several hundred syringes ready. Hundreds of the
unafflicted people were crowding around the ship, staring in open wonder
as Dal, Jack and Tiger came down the ladder and went into close
conference with the spokesman.

It took some time to explain to the spokesman why they could not begin
then and there with the mass inoculations against the plague. First,
they needed test cases, in order to make certain that what they thought
would work in theory actually produced the desired results. Controls
were needed, to be certain that the antibody suspension alone was
bringing about the changes seen and not something else. At last, orders
went out from the spokesman. Two hundred uninfected Bruckians were
admitted to a large roped-off area near the ship, and another two
hundred in late stages of the disease were led stumbling into another
closed area. Preliminary skin-tests of the antibody suspension showed no
sign of untoward reaction. Dal began filling syringes while Tiger and
Jack started inoculating the two groups.

"If it works with these cases, it will be simple to immunize the whole
population," Tiger said. "From the amounts we used on the guinea pigs,
it looks as if only tiny amounts are needed. We may even be able to
train the Bruckians to give the injections themselves."

"And if it works we ought to have a brand new medical service contract
ready for signature with Hospital Earth," Jack added eagerly. "It won't
be long before we have those Stars, you wait and see! If we can only get
this done fast enough."

They worked feverishly, particularly with the group of terminal cases.
Many were dying even as the shots were being given, while the first
symptoms of the disease were appearing in some of the unafflicted ones.
Swiftly Tiger and Jack went from patient to patient while Dal kept check
of the names, numbers and locations of those that were inoculated.

And even before they were finished with the inoculations, it was
apparent that they were taking effect. Not one of the infected patients
died after inoculation was completed. The series took three hours, and
by the time the four hundred doses were administered, one thing seemed
certain: that the antibody was checking the deadly march of the disease
in some way.

The Bruckian spokesman was so excited he could hardly contain himself;
he wanted to start bringing in the rest of the population at once.
"We've almost exhausted this first batch of the material," Dal told him.
"We will have to prepare more--but we will waste time trying to move a
whole planet's population here. Get a dozen aircraft ready, and a dozen
healthy, intelligent workers to help us. We can show them how to use the
material, and let them go out to the other population centers all at
once."

Back aboard the ship they started preparing a larger quantity of the
antibody suspension. Fuzzy had regenerated back to normal weight again,
and much to Dal's delight had been splitting off small segments of pink
protoplasm in a circle all around him, as though anticipating further
demands on his resources. A quick test-run showed that the antibody was
also being regenerated. Fuzzy was voraciously hungry, but the material
in the second batch was still as powerful as in the first.

The doctors were almost ready to go back down, loaded with enough
inoculum and syringes to equip themselves and a dozen field workers when
Jack suddenly stopped what he was doing and cocked an ear toward the
entrance lock.

"What's wrong?" Dal said.

"Listen a minute."

They stopped to listen. "I don't hear anything," Tiger said.
