hemisphere of the planet.

We guided our flight by the stars, and from our knowledge of the rotation
period of Mars, and the position which the principal points on its
surface must occupy at certain hours, we were able to tell what part of
the planet lay beneath us.

Having completed our semi-circuit, we found ourselves on the night side
of Mars, and determined to lose no time in executing our coup. But it
was deemed best that an exploration should first be made by a single
electrical ship, and Colonel Smith naturally wished to undertake the
adventure with his own vessel.


Dropping to the Planet.

We dropped rapidly through the black cloud curtain, which proved to be at
least half a mile in thickness, and then suddenly emerged, as if suspended
at the apex of an enormous dome, arching above the surface of the planet
a mile beneath us, which sparkled on all sides with innumerable lights.

These lights were so numerous and so brilliant as to produce a faint
imitation of daylight, even at our immense height above the ground,
and the dome of cloud out of which we had emerged assumed a soft fawn
color that produced an indescribably beautiful effect.

For a moment we recoiled from our undertaking, and arrested the motion
of the electric ship.

But on closely examining the surface beneath us we found that there
was a broad region, where comparatively few bright lights were to be
seen. From my knowledge of the geography of Mars I knew that this was a
part of the Land of Ausonia, situated a few hundred miles northeast of
Hellas, where we had first seen the planet.

Evidently it was not so thickly populated as some of the other parts of
Mars, and its comparative darkness was an attraction to us. We determined
to approach within a few hundred feet of the ground with the electric
ship, and then, in case no enemies appeared, to visit the soil itself.

"Perhaps we shall see or hear something that will be of use to us,"
said Colonel Smith, "and for the purposes of this first reconnaissance
it is better that we should be few in number. The other ships will await
our return, and at any rate we shall not be gone long."

As our car approached the ground we found ourselves near the tops of
some lofty trees.

"This will do," said Colonel Smith, to the electrical steersman. "Stay
right here."

He and I then lowered ourselves into the branches of the trees, each
carrying a small disintegrator, and cautiously clambered down to the
ground.


Landing On Mars.

We believed we were the first of the descendants of Adam to set foot on
the planet of Mars.


An Experience On Mars.

The Great Planet Exhibits Its Wonders to Our Warriors.

At first we suffered somewhat from the effects of the rare atmosphere. It
was so lacking in density that it resembled the air on the summits of
the loftiest terrestrial mountains.

Having reached the foot of the tree in safety, we lay down for a moment
on the ground to recover ourselves and to become accustomed to our new
surroundings.

A thrill, born half of wonder, half of incredulity, ran through me at the
touch of the soil of Mars. Here was I, actually on that planet, which
had seemed so far away, so inaccessible, and so full of mysteries when
viewed from the earth. And yet, surrounding me, were things--gigantic,
it is true--but still resembling and recalling the familiar sights of
my own world.

After a little while our lungs became accustomed to the rarity of the
atmosphere and we experienced a certain stimulation in breathing.


Starting on our Travels.

We then got upon our feet and stepped out from under the shadow of the
gigantic tree. High above we could faintly see our electrical ship,
gently swaying in the air close to the treetop.

There were no electric lights in our immediate neighborhood, but we
noticed that the whole surface of the planet around us was gleaming
with them, producing an effect like the glow of a great city seen from
a distance at night. The glare was faintly reflected from the vast dome
of clouds above, producing the general impression of a moonlight night
upon the earth.

It was a wonderfully quiet and beautiful spot where we had come down. The
air had a delicate feel and a bracing temperature, while a soft breeze
soughed through the leaves of the tree above our heads.

Not far away was the bank of a canal, bordered by a magnificent avenue
shaded by a double row of immense umbrageous trees.

We approached the canal, and, getting upon the road, turned to the left
to make an exploration in that direction. The shadow of the trees falling
upon the roadway produced a dense gloom, in the midst of which we felt
that we should be safe, unless the Martians had eyes like those of cats.


An Alarming Encounter.

As we pushed along, our hearts, I confess, beating a little quickly,
a shadow stirred in front of us.

Something darker than the night itself approached.

As it drew near it assumed the appearance of an enormous dog, as tall
as an ox, which ran swiftly our way with a threatening motion of its
head. But before it could even utter a snarl the whirr of Colonel Smith's
disintegrator was heard and the creature vanished in the shadow.

"Gracious, did you ever see such a beast?" said the Colonel. "Why,
he was as big as a grizzly."

"The people he belonged to must be near by," I said. "Very likely he
was a watch on guard."

"But I see no signs of a habitation."

"True, but you observe there is a thick hedge on the side of the road
opposite the canal. If we get through that perhaps we shall catch sight
of something."


A Palace in View.

Cautiously we pushed our way through the hedge, which was composed
of shrubs as large as small trees, and very thick at the bottom, and,
having traversed it, found ourselves in a great meadow-like expanse which
might have been a lawn. At a considerable distance, in the midst of a
clump of trees, a large building towered skyward, its walls of some red
metal, gleaming like polished copper in the soft light that fell from
the cloud dome.

There were no lights around the building itself, and we saw nothing
corresponding to windows on that side which faced us, but toward the
right a door was evidently open, and out of this streamed a brilliant
shaft of illumination, which lay bright upon the lawn, then crossed the
highway through an opening in the hedge, and gleamed on the water of
the canal beyond.

Where we stood the ground had evidently been recently cleared, and there
was no obstruction, but as we crept closer to the house--for our curiosity
had now become irresistible--we found ourselves crawling through grass so
tall that if we had stood erect it would have risen well above our heads.


Taking Precautions.

"This affords good protection," said Colonel Smith, recalling his
adventures on the Western plains. "We can get close in to the Indians--I
beg pardon, I mean the Martians--without being seen."

Heavens, what an adventure was this! To be crawling about in the night
on the face of another world and venturing, perhaps, into the jaws of
a danger which human experience could not measure!

But on we went, and in a little while we had emerged from the tall grass
and were somewhat startled by the discovery that we had got close to
the wall of the building.

Carefully we crept around toward the open door.

As we neared it we suddenly stopped as if we had been stricken with
instantaneous paralysis.

Out of the door floated, on the soft night air, the sweetest music I
have ever listened to.


A Monstrous Surprise.

It carried me back in an instant to my own world. It was the music of
the earth. It was the melodious expression of a human soul. It thrilled
us both to the heart's core.

"My God!" exclaimed Colonel Smith. "What can that be? Are we dreaming,
or where in heaven's name are we?"

Still the enchanting harmony floated out upon the air.

What the instrument was I could not tell; but the sound seemed more nearly
to resemble that of a violin than of anything else I could think of.


Magnificent Music.

When we first heard it the strains were gentle, sweet, caressing and
full of an infinite depth of feeling, but in a little while its tone
changed, and it became a magnificent march, throbbing upon the air in
stirring notes that set our hearts beating in unison with its stride
and inspiring in us a courage that we had not felt before.

Then it drifted into a wild fantasia, still inexpressibly sweet, and from
that changed again into a requiem or lament, whose mellifluous tide of
harmony swept our thoughts back again to the earth.

"I can endure this no longer," I said. "I must see who it is that makes
that music. It is the product of a human heart and must come from the
touch of human fingers."

We carefully shifted our position until we stood in the blaze of light
that poured out of the door.

The doorway was an immense arched opening, magnificently ornamented,
rising to a height of, I should say, not less than twenty or twenty-five
feet and broad in proportion. The door itself stood widely open and it,
together with all of its fittings and surroundings, was composed of the
same beautiful red metal.


A Beautiful Girl!

Stepping out a little way into the light I could see within the door
an immense apartment, glittering on all sides with metallic ornaments
and gems and lighted from the centre by a great chandelier of electric
candles.

In the middle of the great floor, holding the instrument delicately
poised, and still awaking its ravishing voice, stood a figure, the sight
of which almost stopped my breath.

It was a slender sylph of a girl!

A girl of my own race: a human being here upon the planet Mars!

Her hair was loosely coiled and she was attired in graceful white drapery.

"By ----!" cried Colonel Smith, "she's human!"




Chapter XII.


Still the bewildering strains of the music came to our ears, and yet we
stood there unperceived, though in the full glare of the chandelier.

The girl's face was presented in profile. It was exquisite in beauty,
pale, delicate with a certain pleading sadness which stirred us to
the heart.

An element of romance and a touch of personal interest such as we had
not looked for suddenly entered into our adventure.

Colonel Smith's mind still ran back to the perils of the plains.


A Human Prisoner.

"She is a prisoner," he said, "and by the Seven Devils of Dona Ana we'll
not leave her here. But where are the hellhounds themselves?"

Our attention had been so absorbed by the sight of the girl that we had
scarcely thought of looking to see if there was any one else in the room.

Glancing beyond her, I now perceived sitting in richly decorated chairs
three or four gigantic Martians. They were listening to the music as
if charmed.

The whole story told itself. This girl, if not their slave, was at any
rate under their control, and she was furnishing entertainment for them
by her musical skill. The fact that they could find pleasure in music
so beautiful was, perhaps, an indication that they were not really as
savage as they seemed.

Yet our hearts went out to the girl, and were turned against them with
an uncontrollable hatred.

They were of the same remorseless race with those who so lately had lain
waste our fair earth and who would have completed its destruction had
not Providence interfered in our behalf.

Singularly enough, although we stood full in the light, they had not
yet seen us.


Martians Guarding Her.

Suddenly the girl, moved by what impulse I know not, turned her face in
our direction. Her eyes fell upon us. She paused abruptly in her playing,
and her instrument dropped to the floor. Then she uttered a cry, and
with extended arms ran toward us.

But when she was near she stopped abruptly, the glad look fading from
her face, and started back with terror-stricken eyes, as if, after all,
she had found us not what she expected.

Then for an instant she looked more intently at us, her countenance
cleared once more, and, overcome by some strange emotion, her eyes filled
with tears, and, drawing a little nearer, she stretched forth her hands
to us appealingly.

Meanwhile the Martians had started to their feet. They looked down upon
us in astonishment. We were like pigmies to them; like little gnomes
which had sprung out of the ground at their feet.

One of the giants seized some kind of a weapon and started forward with
a threatening gesture.


The Girl Appeals to Us.

The girl sprang to my side and grasped my arm with a cry of fear.

This seemed to throw the Martian into a sudden frenzy, and he raised
his arms to strike.

But the disintegrator was in my hand.

My rage was equal to his.

I felt the concentrated vengeance of the earth quivering through me as
I pressed the button of the disintegrator and, sweeping it rapidly up
and down, saw the gigantic form that confronted me melt into nothingness.

There were three other giants in the room, and they had been on the point
of following up the attack of their comrade. But when he disappeared
from before their eyes, they paused, staring in amazement at the place
where, but a moment before, he had stood, but where now only the metal
weapon he had wielded lay on the floor.

At first they started back, and seemed on the point of fleeing; then,
with a second glance, perceiving again how small and insignificant we
were, all three together advanced upon us.

The girl sank trembling on her knees.

In the meantime I had readjusted my disintegrator for another discharge,
and Colonel Smith stood by me with the light of battle upon his face.

"Sweep the discharge across the three," I exclaimed. "Otherwise there
will be one left and before we can fire again he will crush us."


The Martians Are Killed.

The whirr of the two instruments sounded simultaneously, and with a quick,
horizontal motion we swept the lines of force around in such a manner
that all three of the Martians were caught by the vibratory streams and
actually cut in two.

Long gaps were opened in the wall of the room behind them, where the
destroying currents had passed, for with wrathful fierceness, we had
run the vibrations through half a gamut on the index.

The victory was ours. There were no other enemies, that we could see,
in the house.

Yet at any moment others might make their appearance, and what more we
did must be done quickly.

The girl evidently was as much amazed as the Martians had been by the
effects which we had produced. Still she was not terrified, and continued
to cling to us and to glance beseechingly into our faces, expressing in
her every look and gesture the fact that she knew we were of her own race.

But clearly she could not speak our tongue, for the words she uttered
were unintelligible.

Colonel Smith, whose long experience in Indian warfare had made him
intensely practical, did not lose his military instincts, even in the
midst of events so strange.

"It occurs to me," he said, "that we have got a chance at the enemies'
supplies. Suppose we begin foraging right here. Let's see if this girl
can't show us the commissary department."

He immediately began to make signs to the girl to indicate that he
was hungry.


The Girl Understands Us.

A look of comprehension flitted over her features, and, seizing our
hands, she led us into an adjoining apartment and pointed to a number
of metallic boxes. One of these she opened, taking out of it a kind
of cake, which she placed between her teeth, breaking off a very small
portion and then handing it to us, motioning that we should eat, but at
the same time showing us that we ought to take only a small quantity.

"Thank God! It's compressed food," said Colonel Smith. "I thought these
Martians with their wonderful civilization would be up to that. And
it's mighty lucky for us, because, without overburdening ourselves,
if we can find one or two more caches like this we shall be able to
reprovision the entire fleet. But we must get reinforcements before we
can take possession of the fodder."


The Prisoner Is Rescued.

Accordingly we hurried out into the night, passed into the roadway, and,
taking the girl with us, ran as rapidly as possible to the foot of the
tree where we had made our descent. Then we signalled to the electric
ship to drop down to the level of the ground.

This was quickly done, the girl was taken aboard, and a dozen men, under
our guidance, hastened back to the house, where we loaded ourselves with
the compressed provisions and conveyed them to the ship.


Beautiful Girl Prisoner.

Establishing the Identity of the Martians' Captive.

On this second trip to the mysterious house we had discovered another
apartment containing a very large number of the metallic boxes, filled
with compressed food.

"By Jove, it is a store house," said Colonel Smith. "We must get more
