
There were any number of ways in which a work-robot could be shot out
of commission with a pistol. All of them would be by the purest of
pure luck. The next time we go into a place like this, Conn thought,
we take a couple of bazookas along.

"Turn everything off and let's go. See what we can do outside."

Anse put on his flashlight and pulled the switch. They got into the
lift and rode down, going outside. As soon as they emerged, they saw a
rectangular object fifteen feet long settle over their aircar, let
down half a dozen clawed arms, and pick it up, flying away with it. It
had taped instructions to remove anything that didn't belong in the
aisleway; it probably asked the supervisor about the aircar, and the
supervisor didn't return an inhibitory signal, so it went ahead. Conn
and Anse both shouted at it, knowing perfectly well that shouting was
futile. Then they were running for their lives with one of the
crablike all-purpose jobs after them. They dived under the slightly
raised bed of a long belt-conveyer and crawled. Jerry Rivas fired
another shot, somewhere.

The robots themselves were having troubles. They had done all the work
they were supposed to do; now the supervisors were insisting that they
do it over again. Uncomplainingly, they swept and raked and
vacuum-cleaned where they had vacuum-cleaned and raked and swept forty
years ago. The scrap-pickers, having picked all the scrap, were going
over the same places and finding nothing, and then getting deflected
and gathering a lot of things not definable as scrap, and then
circling around, darting away from one another in obedience to their
radar-operated evasion-systems, and trying to get to the outside scrap
pile, and finding that the doors wouldn't open because the door
openers weren't turned on, and finally dumping what they were carrying
when the supervisors gave them no instructions.

One of them seemed to have dumped something close to where Clyde
Nichols was hiding; if his language had been a little stronger, it
would have burned out Conn's radio. Their own immediate vicinity being
for the moment clear of flying robots, Conn and Anse rolled from under
the conveyer and legged it between the two production lines.
Immediately, three of the crablike all-purpose handling-robots saw
them, if that was the word for it, and came dashing for them, followed
by a thing that was mostly dump-lifter; it was banging its bin-lid up
and down angrily. About fifty yards ahead, Jerry Rivas stepped from
behind a machine and fired; one of the handling-robots flashed green
from underneath, went off contragravity, and came down with a crash.
Immediately, like wolves on a wounded companion, the other two pounced
upon it, dragging and pulling against each other. That was a hunk of
junk; their orders were to remove it.

The mobile trash-bin went zooming up to the ceiling, reversed within
twenty feet of it and came circling back to the ground, to go zooming
up again. It had gone crazy, literally. It had been getting too many
contradictory orders from its supervisor, and its circuits were
overloaded and its relays jammed. Rats in mazes and human-type people
in financial difficulties go psychotic in very much the same way.

The two surviving all-purpose robots were also headed for a padded
repair shop. They had come close enough to each other to activate
their anticollision safeties. Immediately, they flew apart. Then their
order to pick up that big piece of junk took over, and they started
forward again, to be bounced apart as soon as they were within five
feet of one another. If left alone, their power units would run down
in a year or so; until then, they would keep on trying.

Soulless intelligences, indeed! Then it occurred to him that for the
past however-long-it-had-been he hadn't heard from Mohammed Matsui. He
jiggled his radio.

"Ham, where are you? Are you still alive?"

"I'm back at the power plant," Matsui said exasperatedly. "There's a
big thing circling around here; every time I stick my head out, he
makes a dive at me. I didn't know robots would attack people."

"They don't. He just thinks you're some more trash he's been told to
gather up."

Matsui was indignant. Conn laughed.

"On the level, Ham. He has photoelectric vision, and a picture of what
that aisle is supposed to look like. When you get out in it, he knows
you don't belong there and tries to grab you."

"Hey, there's a lot of junk in here in a couple of baskets at the
converter. Say I chuck one out to him; what would he do?"

"Grab it and take it away, like he's taped to do."

"Okay; wait a minute."

They couldn't see the archway to the power plant, or even the robot
that had Matsui penned up, but after a few minutes they saw it soaring
away, clutching a big wire basket full of broken boxes and other
rubbish. It headed for the mutually repelling swarm of robots around
the door that wouldn't open for them. Conn and Anse and Jerry ran
toward the rear, joined by Clyde Nichols, who popped up from behind a
pile of spools of electric wire. They made it just before the
coffin-shaped thing that had carried off the aircar came over to
investigate.

"You want to be careful back there," Matsui told them, as they started
toward the temporary safety of the power plant. "All the
reactor-repair robots are there; don't get _them_ on the warpath
next."

Of course! There were always repair-robots at a power plant, to go
into places no human could enter and live. Behind the collapsium
shielding, they wouldn't have been activated.

"Let's have a look at them. What kind?"

"Standard reactor-servicers; the same we used at the administration
center."

Matsui opened the door, and they went into the power plant. Conn and
Matsui put on the service-power and activated the two supervisors;
they, in turn, activated their workers. It was tricky work getting
them all outside the collapsium-walled power-plant area; each worker
had to be passed through by the supervisor inside, under Matsui's
control. Because of the close quarters at which they worked inside the
reactor and the converter, they weren't fitted with anticollision
repulsors, and, working under close human supervision, they all had
audiovisual pickups. It took some time to get adequate screens set up
outside the collapsium.

Finally, they were ready. Their two supervisors went up to the
ceiling, one controlled by Conn and the other by Matsui. The larger,
egg-shaped shop-labor supervisors were still moving in irregular
orbits; those of the workers still able to receive commands were
trying to obey them, and the rest were jammed in a swarm at the other
end.

First one, and then the other of the labor-boss robots were captured.
They were by now at the end of what might, loosely, be called their
wits. They weren't used to operating without orders, and had been
sending out commands largely at random. Now they came to a stop, and
then began moving in tight, guided circles; one by one, the worker
robots still able to heed them were brought to ground and turned off.
That left the swarm at the door. The worker-robots under direct
control of the power-plant supervisors went after them, grappling them
and hauling them down to where Anse and Jerry Rivas and Captain
Nichols could turn them off manually.

The aircar was a hopeless wreck, but its radio was still functioning.
Conn called Charley Gatworth, who called a gang under Gomez, working
not far away; they came with another car.

It took all the next day for a gang of six of them to get the place
straightened up. Neither Conn nor Gomez, who was a roboticist himself,
would trust any of the workers or the two supervisors; their
experiences out of control had rendered them unreliable. They took out
their power units and left them to be torn down and repaired later.
Other robots were brought in to replace them. When they were through,
the power-unit cartridge plant was ready for operation.

Jerry Rivas wanted to start production immediately.

"We'll have to go back to Poictesme pretty soon," he said. "We don't
want to go back empty. Well, I know that no matter what we dug up, and
what we could sell or couldn't sell, there's always a market for
power-unit cartridges. Electric-light units, household-appliance
units, aircar and airboat units, any size at all. We run that plant at
full capacity for a few days and we can load the _Harriett Barne_
full, and I'll bet the whole cargo will be sold in a week after we get
in."




XV


The _Harriet Barne_ settled comfortably at the dock, the
bunting-swathed tugs lifting away from her. They had the outside sound
pickups turned as low as possible, and still the noise was deafening.
The spaceport was jammed, people on the ground and contragravity
vehicles swarming above, with police cars vainly trying to keep them
in order. All the bands in Storisende seemed to have been combined;
they were blaring the "Planetary Hymn";

_Genji Gartner's body lies a-moldering in the tomb,
But his soul goes marching on!_

When they opened the airlock, there was a hastily improvised
ceremonial barge, actually a farm-scow completely draped in red and
white, the Planetary colors. They all stopped, briefly, as they came
out, to enjoy the novelty of outdoor air which could actually be
breathed. Conn saw his father in the scow, and beside him Sylvie
Jacquemont, trying, almost successfully, to keep from jumping up and
down in excitement. Morgan Gatworth to meet his son, and Lester Dawes
to meet his. Kurt Fawzi, Dolf Kellton, Colonel Zareff, Tom Brangwyn.
He didn't see his mother, or his sister. Flora he had hardly counted
on, but he was disappointed that his mother wasn't there to meet him.

Sylvie was embracing her father as he shook hands with his; then she
threw her arms around his neck.

"Oh, Conn, I'm so happy! I was watching everything I could on-screen,
everything you saw, and all the places you were, and everything you
were doing...."

The scow--pardon, ceremonial barge--gave a slight lurch, throwing
them together. Over her shoulder, he saw his father and Yves
Jacquemont exchanging grins. Then they had to break it up while he
shook hands with Fawzi and Judge Ledue and the others, and by the time
that was over, the barge was letting down in front of the stand at the
end of the dock, and the band was still deafening Heaven with "Genji
Gartner's Body," and they all started up the stairs to be greeted by
Planetary President Vyckhoven; he looked like an elderly bear who has
been too well fed for too long in a zoo. And by Minister-General
Murchison, who represented the Terran Federation on Poictesme. He was
thin and balding, and he looked as though he had just mistaken the
vinegar cruet for the wine decanter. Genji Gartner's soul stopped
marching on, but the speeches started, and that was worse. And after
the speeches, there was the parade, everybody riding in
transparent-bodied aircars, and the _Lester Dawes_ and the two ships
of the new Planetary Air Navy and a swarm of gunboats in column five
hundred feet above, all firing salutes.

In spite of what wasn't, but might just as well have been, a concerted
conspiracy to keep them apart, he managed to get a few words privately
with Sylvie.

"My mother; she didn't get here. Is anything wrong?"

"Is anything anything else? I've been in the middle of it ever since
you went away. Your mother's still moaning about all these companies
your father's promoting--he never used to do anything like that, and
it's all too big, and it's going to end in a big smash. And then she
gets onto Merlin. You know, she won't say Merlin, she always calls it,
'that thing.'"

"I've noticed that."

"Then she begins talking about all the horrible things that'll happen
when it's found, and that sets Flora off. Flora says Merlin's a big
fake, and you and your father are using it to rob thousands of widows
and orphans of their life savings, and that sets your mother off
again. Self-sustaining cyclic reaction, like the Bethe solar-phoenix.
And every time I try to pour a little oil on the troubled waters, I
find I've gotten it on the fire instead. And then, Flora had this
fight with Wade Lucas, and of course, she blames you for that."

"Good heavens, why?"

"Well, she couldn't blame it on herself, could she? Oh, you mean why
the fight? Lucas is in business with your father now, and she can't
convince him that you and your father are a pair of quadruple-dyed
villains, I suppose. Anyhow, the engagement is _phttt_! Conn, is my
father going back to Koshchei?"

"As soon as we can round up some people to help us on the ship."

"Then I'm going along. I've had it, Conn. I'm a combat-fatigue case."

"But, Sylvie; that isn't any place for a girl."

"Oh, poo! This is Sylvie. We're old war buddies. We soldiered together
on Barathrum; remember?"

"Well, you'd be the only girl, and...."

"That's what you think. If you expect to get any kind of a gang
together, at least a third of them will be girls. A lot of technicians
are girls, and when work gets slack, they're always the first ones to
get shoved out of jobs. I'll bet there are a thousand girl technicians
out of work here--any line of work you want to name. I know what I'll
do; I'll make a telecast appearance. I still have some news value,
from the Barathrum business. Want to bet that I won't be the working
girl's Joan of Arc by this time next week?"

That cheered him. A girl can punch any kind of a button a man can, and
a lot of them knew what buttons to punch, and why. Say she could find
fifty girls....

He had a slightly better chance to talk to his father before the
banquet at the Executive Palace that evening. They shared the same
suite at the Ritz-Gartner, and even welcoming committees seldom chase
their victims from bedroom to bath.

"Yes, I know all about it," Rodney Maxwell said bitterly. "I was home,
a couple of weeks ago. Flora simply will not speak to me, and your
mother begged me, in tears, to quit everything we're doing here. I
tried to give her some idea of what would happen if I dropped this,
even supposing I could; she wouldn't listen to me." He finished
putting the studs in his shirt. "You still think this is worth what
it's costing us?"

"You saw the views we sent back. There's work on Koshchei for a
million people, at least. Why, even these two makeshift ships they're
putting together here at Storisende are giving work, one way or
another, to almost a thousand. Think what things will be like a year
from now, if this keeps on."

Rodney Maxwell gave a wry laugh. "Didn't know I had a real Simon-pure
altruist for a son."

"Pardner, when you call me that, smile."

"I am smiling. With some slight difficulty."

He didn't think well of the banquet. Back in Litchfield, Senta would
have fired half her human help and taken a sledgehammer to her
robo-chef for a meal like that. Even his father's camp cook would have
been ashamed of it. And there were more speeches.

President Vyckhoven managed to get hold of him and Yves Jacquemont
afterward, and steered them into his private study.

"Have you any real reason for thinking that Merlin might be on
Koshchei?" the Planetary President asked.

"Great Ghu, no! We weren't looking for Merlin, Mr. President. We were
looking for a hypership. We have one, too. Calling her _Ouroboros II_.
Twenty-five-hundred-footer. We expect to have her to space in a few
months. I surely don't need to tell you what that will do toward
restoring planetary prosperity."

"No, of course not; a hypership of our own. But...." He looked from
one to the other of them. "But I understood.... That is, Mr. Kurt
Fawzi was saying...."

"Mr. Fawzi is looking for Merlin here on Poictesme. If anybody finds
it, that's where it'll be found. I'm interested in getting business
started again. If Merlin is found, it would help, of course." He
shrugged.

"Don't look at me," Jacquemont said. "Mr. Maxwell--both of them,
father and son--want some spaceships. They hired me to help build
them. That's all I have in it." Then he relit the cigar the President
had given him and leaned back in his chair, staring at the stuffed
alcesoid head with the seven-foot hornspread above the fireplace.

Conn described the interview to his father after they were back at the
hotel.

"I hope you convinced him. You know, he's afraid of Merlin. A lot of
people have been saying that if Merlin's found, it should be used to
determine Government policy. A few extremists are beginning to say
that Merlin ought to _be_ the Government, and Jake Vyckhoven and his
cronies ought to be dumped. Into the handiest mass-energy converter,
preferably. You know, if anybody found Merlin and started it auditing
the Planetary Treasury, Jake Vyckhoven'd be the one who'd be wanting a
hypership."

Tom Brangwyn ran him down the next morning in the dining room.

"Conn, I wish you'd come along with me," he said. "Some of us are up
in Kurt's suite; we'd all like to talk to you."

Somehow, he was acting as though he were making an arrest. That might
have been nothing but professional habit. Conn went up to Fawzi's
suite, and found Fawzi and Judge Ledue and Dolf Kellton and close to a
dozen others there.

"I'm glad you could come, Conn," the Judge greeted him. Now that the
defendant had arrived, the trial could begin. "I wish your father
could have gotten here. I asked him to come, but he had a prior
engagement. A meeting with some of the financial people here, about
some company he's interested in."

"That's right; Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines."

"Interstellar!" Kurt Fawzi almost howled. "Great Ghu! Now it isn't
enough to go out to Koshchei; he wants to go clear out of the
Trisystem. That's what we wanted to talk about; all this nonsense you
and your father are in. Merlin's right here on Poictesme. It's right
at Force Command, and if your father hadn't robbed us of all our best
men, like Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes, we'd have found it by now. I
don't think you and your father care a hoot if we ever find Merlin or
not!"

"Kurt, that's a dreadful thing to say," Dolf Kellton objected in a
shocked voice.

"It's a dreadful thing to have to say," Fawzi replied, "but you tell
me what Conn Maxwell or Rodney Maxwell are doing to help find it."

"Who showed you where Force Command was?" Klem Zareff asked.

Nobody could think of any good quick comeback to that.

Conn took advantage of the pause to ask, "Why do you want to find
Merlin?"

"Why do we ..." Fawzi spluttered indignantly. "If you don't know...."

"I know why I do. I want to see if you do. Do you?"

"Merlin would answer so many questions," Dolf Kellton told him gently.
"Questions I can't answer for myself."

"With Merlin, we could set up a legal code and a system of
jurisprudence that would give everybody absolute justice," Judge Ledue
said.

As if absolute justice wasn't the last thing anybody in his right
senses would want; a robot-judge would have the whole planet in jail
inside a month.

"We have a man who joined us after you went off to Koshchei, Conn,"
Franz Veltrin said. "A Mr. Carl Leibert. He's some kind of a
clergyman, from over Morven way. He says that Merlin could formulate
an entirely new religion, which would regenerate humanity."

"Well, I don't have any such lofty ideas," Fawzi said. "I just want
Merlin to show us how to get some prosperity here; bring things back
to what they were before Poictesme went broke."

"And that's what Father and I are trying to do. You're going into the
woods with a book on how to chop down a tree, and no ax." Fawzi looked
at him in surprise, started to say something, and thought better of
it. "If we want prosperity, we need tools. Our problem is loss of
markets. If we find Merlin, and tape it with everything that's
happened in the forty years since it was shut down, Merlin will tell
us where to find new markets. But the markets won't come to us. We'll
