their ultimate test in the Hunt and the Games. We were badly in need of
a man of your abilities."

"Just what is your work?" Barrent asked. "What do you want to
accomplish?"

"We want to go back to Earth," Eylan said.

"But that's impossible."

"We don't think so," Eylan said. "We've given the matter considerable
study. In spite of the guardships, we think it's possible to return to
Earth. We'll find out for certain in six days, when the breakout must be
made."

Moera said, "It would be better to wait another six months."

"Impossible. A six months' delay would be ruinous. Every society has a
purpose, and the criminal population of Omega is bent upon its own
self-destruction. Barrent, you look surprised. Couldn't you see that?"

"I never thought about it," Barrent said. "After all, I was part of it."

"It's self-evident," Eylan said. "Consider the institutions--all
centered around legalized murder. The holidays are excuses for mass
murders. Even the law, which governs the rate of murder, is beginning to
break down. The population lives near the edge of chaos. And rightfully
so. There's no longer any security. The only way to live is to kill. The
only way to rise in status is to kill. The only safe thing is to
kill--more and more, faster and faster."

"You exaggerate," Moera said.

"I don't think so. I realize that there seems to be a certain permanence
to Omegan institutions, a certain inherent conservatism even to murder.
But it's an illusion. I have no doubt that all dying societies projected
their illusion of permanence--right up to the end. Well, the end of
Omegan society is rapidly approaching."

"How soon?" Barrent asked.

"An explosion point will be reached in about four months," Eylan said.
"The only way to change that would be to give the population a new
direction, a different cause."

"Earth," Barrent said.

"Exactly. That's why the attempt must be made immediately."

"Well, I don't know much about it," Barrent said. "But I'll go along
with you. I'll gladly be a part of any expedition."

Eylan looked uncomfortable again. "I suppose I haven't made myself
clear," he said. "_You_ are going to be the expedition, Barrent. You and
only you.... Forgive me if I've startled you."




Chapter Twenty


According to Eylan, Group Two had at least one serious flaw: the men who
composed it were, for the most part, past their physical prime. There
were some younger members, of course; but they had had little contact
with violence, and little chance to develop traits of self-sufficiency.
Secure in the underground, most of them had never fired a beamer in
anger, had never been forced to run for their lives, had never
encountered the make-or-break situations through which Barrent had
lived. They were brave but unproven. They would willingly undertake the
expedition to Earth; but they would have little chance of success.

"And you think I would have a chance?" Barrent asked.

"I think so. You're young and strong, reasonably intelligent, and
extremely resourceful. You have a high survival quotient. If any man
could succeed, I believe you could."

"Why one man?"

"Because there's no sense in sending a group. The chance of detection
would simply be increased. By using one man, we get maximum security and
opportunity. If you succeed, we will receive valuable information about
the nature of the enemy. If you don't succeed, if you are captured, your
attempt will be considered the action of an individual rather than a
group. We will still be free to start a general uprising from Omega."

"How am I supposed to get back to Earth?" Barrent asked. "Do you have a
starship hidden away somewhere?"

"I'm afraid not. We plan to transport you to Earth aboard the next
prison ship."

"That's impossible."

"Not at all. We've studied the landings. They follow a pattern. The
prisoners are marched out, accompanied by the guards. While they're
assembled in the square, the ship itself is undefended, although loosely
surrounded by a cordon of guards. To get you aboard, we will start a
disturbance. It should take away the guards' attention long enough for
you to get on board."

"Even if I succeed, I'll be captured as soon as the guards return."

"You shouldn't be," Eylan said, "The prison ship is an immense structure
with many hiding places for a stowaway. And the element of surprise will
be in your favor. This may be the first time in the history of Omega
that an escape has been attempted."

"And when the ship reaches Earth?"

"You will be disguised as a member of the ship's personnel," Eylan said.
"Remember, the inevitable inefficiency of a huge bureaucracy will be
working for you."

"I hope so," Barrent said. "Let's suppose I reach Earth safely and get
the information you want. How do I send it back?"

"You send it back on the next prison ship," Eylan said. "We plan to
capture that one."

Barrent rubbed his forehead wearily. "What makes you think that any of
this--my expedition or your uprising--can succeed against an
organization as powerful as Earth?"

"We have to take the chance," Eylan said. "Take it or go down in a
bloody shambles with the rest of Omega. I agree that the odds are
weighted against us. But our choice is either to make the attempt or to
die without making any attempt at all."

Moera nodded at this. "Also, the situation has other possibilities. The
government of Earth is obviously repressive. That argues the existence
of underground resistance groups on Earth itself. You may be able to
contact those groups. A revolt both here _and_ on Earth would give the
government something to think about."

"Maybe," Barrent said.

"We have to hope for the best," Eylan said. "Are you with us?"

"Certainly," Barrent said. "I'd rather die on Earth than on Omega."

"The prison ship lands in six days," Eylan said. "During that time, we
will give you the information we have about Earth. Part of it is memory
reconstruction, part has been skrenned by the mutants, and the rest is
logical constructs. It's all we have, and I think it gives a reasonably
accurate picture of current conditions on Earth."

"How soon do we start?" Barrent asked.

"Right now," Eylan said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barrent received a general briefing on the physical make-up of Earth,
its climate and major population centers. Then he was sent to Colonel
Bray, formerly of the Earth Deep Space Establishment. Bray talked to him
about the probable military strength of Earth as represented by the
number of guardships around Omega and their apparent level of scientific
development. He gave estimates of the size of the Earth forces, their
probable divisions into land, sea, and space groups, their assumed level
of efficiency. An aide, Captain Carell, lectured on special weapons,
their probable types and ranges, their availability to the general Earth
population. Another aide, Lieutenant Daoud, talked about detection
devices, their probable locations, and how to avoid them.

Then Barrent was turned back to Eylan for political indoctrination. From
him, Barrent learned that Earth was believed to be a dictatorship. He
learned the methods of a dictatorship, its peculiar strengths and
weaknesses, the role of the secret police, the use of terror, the
problem of informers.

When Eylan was finished with him, Barrent went to a small, beady-eyed
man who lectured on Earth's memory-destroying system. Using the premise
that memory-destruction was regularly employed to render opposition
ineffective, the man went on to construct the probable nature of an
underground movement on Earth given those circumstances, and how Barrent
might contact them, and what the underground's capabilities might be.

Finally he was given the full details of Group Two's plan for getting
him on board the ship.

When Landing Day came, Barrent felt a definite sense of relief. He was
heartily sick of day and night cramming. Any sort of action would seem
an improvement.




Chapter Twenty-One


Barrent watched the huge prison ship maneuver into position and sink
noiselessly to the ground. It gleamed dully in the afternoon sun,
tangible proof of Earth's long reach and powerful grasp. A hatch opened,
and a landing stage was let down. The prisoners, flanked by guards,
marched down and assembled in the square.

As usual, most of the population of Tetrahyde had gathered to watch and
cheer the disembarkation ceremony. Barrent moved through the crowd and
stationed himself behind the ranks of prisoners and guards. He touched
his pocket to make sure the needlebeam was still there. It had been made
for him by Group Two fabricators, completely of plastic to escape any
metals detector. The rest of his pockets were stuffed with equipment. He
hoped he wouldn't have to use any of it.

The loudspeaker voice began to read off the prisoners' numbers, as it
had when Barrent had disembarked. He listened, knees slightly bent,
waiting for the beginning of the diversion.

The loudspeaker voice was coming to the end of the prisoner list. There
were only ten left. Barrent edged forward. The voice droned on. Four
prisoners left, three....

As the number of the last prisoner was announced, the diversion began. A
black cloud of smoke darkened the pale sky, and Barrent knew that the
Group had set fire to the empty barracks in Square A-2. He waited.

Then it came. There was a stupendous explosion, blasting through two
rows of empty buildings. The shock wave was staggering. Even before
debris began to fall, Barrent was running toward the ship.

The second and third explosions went off as he came into the ship's
shadow. Quickly he stripped off his Omegan outer garments. Under them,
he wore a facsimile of guard's uniform. Now he ran toward the landing
stage.

The loudspeaker voice was calling loudly for order. The guards were
still bewildered.

The fourth explosion threw Barrent to the ground. He got to his feet
instantly and sprinted up the landing stage. He was inside the ship.
Outside, he could hear the guard captain shouting orders. The guards
were beginning to form into ranks, their weapons ready to use against
the restive crowd. They were retreating to the ship in good order.

Barrent had no more time to listen. He was standing in a long, narrow
corridor. He turned to the right and raced toward the bow of the ship.
Far behind him, he could hear the heavy marching tread of the guards.

Now, he thought, the information he had been given about the ship had
better be right, or the expedition was finished before it began.

He sprinted past rows of empty cells, and came to a door marked GUARD
ASSEMBLY ROOM. A lighted green bulb above the door showed that the air
system was on. He went by it, and came to another door. Barrent tried it
now, and found it unlocked. Within was a room stacked high with spare
engine parts. He entered and closed the door.

The guards marched down the corridor. Barrent could hear them talking as
they entered the assembly room.

"What do you think started those explosions?"

"Who knows? Those prisoners are crazy, anyhow."

"They'd blow up the whole planet, if they could."

"Good riddance."

"Well, it didn't cause any damage. There was an explosion like that
about fifteen years ago. Remember?"

"I wasn't here then."

"Well, it was worse than this. Two guards were killed, and maybe a
hundred prisoners."

"What started it?"

"Don't know. These Omegans just enjoy blowing things up."

"Next thing you know, they'll be trying to blow _us_ up."

"Not a chance. Not with the guardships up there."

"You think so? Well, I'll be glad to get back to the checkpoint."

"You said it. Be good to get off this ship and live a little."

"It isn't a bad life at the checkpoint, but I'd rather go back to
Earth."

"Well, you can't have everything."

The last of the guards entered the assembly room and dogged the door
shut. Barrent waited. After a while, he felt the ship vibrate. It was
beginning its departure.

He had learned some valuable information. Apparently all or most of the
guards got off at the checkpoint. Did that mean that another detachment
of guards got on? Probably. And a checkpoint implied that the ship was
searched for escaped prisoners. It was probably only a perfunctory
search, since no prisoner had escaped in the history of Omega. Still, he
would have to figure out a way of avoiding it.

But he would face that when the time came. Now he felt the vibration
cease, and he knew that the ship had left the surface of Omega. He was
aboard, unobserved, and the ship was on its way to Earth. So far,
everything had gone according to plan.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the next few hours, Barrent stayed in the storage room. He was
feeling very tired, and his joints had begun to ache. The air in the
small room had a sour, exhausted smell. Forcing himself to his feet,
Barrent walked to the air vent and put his hand over it. No air was
coming through. He took a small gauge out of his pocket. The oxygen
content of the room was falling rapidly.

Cautiously he opened the storeroom door and peered out. Although he was
dressed in a perfect replica of guard's uniform, he knew he couldn't
pass among men who knew each other so well. He had to stay in hiding.
And he had to have air.

The corridors were deserted. He passed the guard assembly room and heard
faint murmurs of conversation inside. The green light glowed brightly
over the door. Barrent walked on, beginning to feel the first signs of
dizziness. His gauge showed him that the oxygen content in the corridor
was starting to fall.

The Group had assumed that the air system would be used throughout the
ship. Now Barrent could see that, with only guards and crew aboard,
there was no need to supply air for the entire ship. There would be air
in the little man-inhabited islands of the guardroom and the crew's
section, and nowhere else.

Barrent hurried down the dim, silent corridors, gasping for breath. The
air was rapidly growing bad. Perhaps it was being used in the assembly
room before the ship's main air supply was touched.

He passed unlocked doors, but the green bulbs above them were unlighted.
He had a pounding headache, and his legs felt as if they were turning to
jelly. He tried to figure out a course of action.

The crew's section seemed to offer him the best chance. Ship's personnel
