under the Code or not?"

"Of course we are."

"Not necessarily," Belle put in, sharply. "Not slavishly to the letter.
We're so far away and our chance of getting back is so slight that it
should be interpreted in the light of common sense."

        *           *           *

Garlock stared at Belle and she stared back, her eyes as clear and
innocent as a baby's.

"The Code is neither long enough nor complicated enough to require
interpretation," Garlock stated, finally. "It either applies in full and
exactly or not at all. My ruling is that the Code applies, strictly,
until I declare the state of Ultimate Contingency. Are you ready, Belle,
to abandon the project, find an uninhabited Tellurian world, and begin
to populate it?"

"Well, not quite, perhaps."

"Yes or no, please."

"No."

"We are under the Code, then. Go ahead, Jim."

"I broke pairing with Belle and she refused to confirm."

"Certainly I refused. He had no reason to break with me."

"I had plenty of reason!" James snapped. "I'm fed up to here--" he drew
his right forefinger across his forehead, "--with making so-called love
to a woman who can never think of anything except cutting another man's
throat. She's a heartless conniver."

"You both know that reasons are unnecessary and are not discussed in
public," Garlock said, flatly. "Now as to confirmation of a break. In
simple pairing there is no marriage, no registration, no declaration of
intent or of permanence. Thus, legally or logically, there is no
obligation. Morally, however, there is always some obligation. Hence, as
a matter of urbanity, in cases where no injury exists except as concerns
chastity, the Code calls for agreement without rancor. If either party
persists in refusal to confirm, and cannot show injury, that party's
behavior is declared inurbane. Confirmation is declared and the
offending party is ignored."

"Just how would you go about ignoring Prime Operator Belle Bellamy?"

"You've got a point there, Jim. However, she hasn't persisted very long
in her refusal. As a matter of information, Belle, why did you take Jim
in the first place?"

"I didn't." She shrugged her shoulders. "It was pure chance. You saw me
flip the tenth-piece."

"Am I to ignore the fact that you are one of the best telekineticists
living?"

"I don't _have_ to control things unless I want to!" She stamped her
foot. "Can't you conceive of me flipping a coin honestly?"

"No. However, since this is not a screens-down inquiry, I'll give
you--orally, at least--the benefit of the doubt. The next step, I
presume, is for Lola to break with me. Lola?"

"Well ... I hate to say this, Clee.... I thought that mutual consent
would be better, but...." Lola paused, flushing in embarrassment.

"She feels," James said, steadily, "as I do, that there should be much
more to the sexual relation than merely releasing the biological
tensions of two pieces of human machinery. That's hardly civilized."

"I confirm, Lola, of course," Garlock said; then went on, partly
thinking aloud, partly addressing the group at large. "Ha. Reasons
again, and very well put--not off the cuff. Evasions. Flat lies.
Something very unfunny here--as queer as a nine-credit bill. In sum,
indefensible actions based upon unwarranted conclusions drawn from
erroneous assumptions. The pattern is not clear ... but I won't order
screens down until I have to ... if the reason had come from Belle...."

"_Me_?" Belle flared. "Why from me?"

"... instead of Jim...." Ignoring Belle's interruption, Garlock frowned
in thought. After a minute or so his face cleared.

"Jim," he said, sharply, "have you been consciously aware of Belle's
manipulation?"

"Why, no, of course not. She _couldn't_!"

"That's _really_ a brainstorm, Clee," Belle sneered. "You'd better turn
yourself in for an overhaul."

"Nice scheme, Belle," Garlock said. "I underestimated--at least, didn't
consider carefully enough--your power; and overestimated your ethics and
urbanity."

"What are you talking about, Chief?" James asked. "You lost me ten
parsecs back."

"Just this. Belle is behind this whole operation; working under a
perfectly beautiful smokescreen."

"I'm afraid the boss is cracking up, kids," Belle said. "Listen to him,
if you like, but use your own judgment."

"But nobody could make Jim and me really love each other," Lola argued,
"and we really do. It's real love."

"Admitted," Garlock said. "But she could have helped it along; and she's
all set to take every possible advantage of the situation thus created."

"I still don't see it," James objected. "Why, she wouldn't even confirm
our break. She hasn't yet."

"She would have, at the exactly correct psychological moment; after
holding out long enough to put you both under obligation to her. There
would have, also, been certain strings attached. Her plan was, after
switching the pairings...."

"I wouldn't pair with you," Belle broke in viciously, "if you were the
only man left in the macrocosmic universe!"

"Part of the smokescreen," Garlock explained. "The re-pairings would
give her two lines of attack on me, to be used simultaneously. First, to
work on me in bed...."

"See?" Belle interrupted. "He doesn't think I've got any heart at all."

"Oh, you may have one, but it's no softer than your head, and that could
scratch a diamond. Second, to work on you two, with no holds barred, to
form a three-unit team against me. Her charges that I am losing my grip
made a very smart opening lead."

"Do you think I'd _let_ her work on me?" James demanded.

"She's a Prime--you wouldn't know anything about it. However, nothing
will happen. Nor am I going to let her confuse the real issue. Belle,
you are either inside the Code or a free agent outside it. Which?"

"I have made my position clear."

"To me, yes. To Jim and Lola, decidedly unclear."

"Unclear, then. You can _not_ coerce me!"

"If you follow the Code, no. If you don't, I can and will. If you make
any kind of a pass at Jim James from now on, I'll lock you into your
room with a Gunther block."

"_You wouldn't dare_!" she breathed. "Besides, you couldn't, not to
another prime."

"Don't bet on it," he advised.

After a full minute of silence Garlock's attitude changed suddenly to
his usual one of casual friendliness. "Why not let this one drop right
here, Belle? I can marry them, with all the official trimmings. Why not
let 'em really enjoy their honeymoon?"

"Why not?" Belle's manner changed to match Garlock's and she smiled
warmly. "I confirm, Jim. You two are really serious, aren't you?
Marriage, declarations, registration, and everything? I wish--I
sincerely and really wish you--every happiness possible."

"We really _are_ serious," James said, putting his arm around Lola's
waist. "And you won't ... won't interfere?"

"Not a bit. I couldn't, now, even if I wanted to." Belle grinned wryly.
"You see, you kids missed the main feature of the show, since you can't
know exactly what a Prime Operator is. Especially you can't know what
Cleander Simmsworth Garlock really is--he's an out-and-out tiger on
wheels. The three of us could have smacked him bow-legged, but of course
all chance of that blew up just now. So if you two want to take the big
jump you can do it with my blessing as well as Clee's. I'll clear the
table."

        *           *           *

That small chore taken care of--a quick folding-up of everything into
the tablecloth and a heave into the chute did it--Belle set up the
recorder.

"Are you both fully certain that you want the full treatment?" Garlock
asked.

Both were certain, and Garlock read the brief but solemn marriage lines.

As the newlyweds left the room, Belle turned to Garlock with a quizzical
smile. "Are you going to ask me to pair with you, Clee?"

"I certainly am." He grinned back at her. "I owe you that much revenge,
at least. But seriously, I'd like it immensely and we fit like Grace and
Poise. Look at that mirror. Did you ever see a better-matched couple?
Will you give me a try, Belle?"

"I will not," she said, emphatically. I'll take back what I said a while
ago--if you were really the only man left, I would--but as it is, the
answer is a definite, resounding, and final '_No_'."

"'Definite' and 'resounding,' yes. 'Final,' I won't accept. I'll wait."

"You'll wait a long time, Buster. My door will be locked from now on.
Good night, Doctor Garlock, I'm going to bed."

"So am I." He walked with her along the corridor to their rooms, the
doors of which were opposite each other. "In view of the Code, locking
your door is a meaningless gesture. Mine will remain unlocked. I invite
you to come in whenever you like, and assure you formally that no such
entry will be regarded as an invasion of privacy."

Without a word she went into her room and closed the door with a
firmness just short of violence. Her lock clicked sharply.

        *           *           *

The next morning, after breakfast, James followed Garlock into his room
and shut the door.

"Clee, I want to tell you.... I don't want to get sloppy but...."

"Want to lep it?"

"Hell, no!"

"It's about Brownie, then."

"Uh-huh. I've always liked you immensely. Admired you. Hero, sort
of...."

"Yeah. I quote. 'Harder than Pharaoh's heart.' 'Colder than frozen
helium,' and all the rest. But this thing about Brownie...." He reached
out; two hard hands met in a crushing grip. "How could you possibly lay
off? Just the strain, if nothing else."

"A little strain doesn't hurt a man unless he lets it. I've done without
for months at a stretch, with it running around loose on all sides of
me."

"But she's so ... she's got _everything_!"

"There speaketh the ensorcelled bridegroom. For my taste, she hasn't.
She told you, I suppose, when explaining a certain fact, that I told her
she wasn't my type?"

"Yes, but...."

"She still isn't. She's a very fine person, with a very fine
personality. She is one of the two most nearly perfect young women of
her race. Her face is beautiful. Her body is an artist's dream. Her mind
is one of the very best. Besides all that, she's a very good egg and a
mighty tasty dish. But put yourself in my place.

        *           *           *

"Here's this paragon we have just described. She has extremely high
ideals and she's a virgin; never really aroused. Also, she's so full of
this sickening crap they've been pouring into us--propaganda,
rocket-oil, prop-wash, and psychological gobbledygook--that it's running
out of her ears. She's so stuffed with it that she's going to pair with
you, ideals and virginity be damned, even if it kills her; even though
she's shaking, clear down to her shoes--scared yellow. Also, she is and
always will be scared half to death of you--she thinks you're some kind
of robot. She's a starry-eyed, soft-headed sissy. A sapadilla. A sucker
for a smooth line of balloon-juice and flapdoodle. No spine; no bottom.
A gutless doll-baby. Strictly a pet--you could no more love her, ever,
than you could a half-grown kitten...."

"That's a _hell_ of a picture!" James broke in savagely. "Even with your
cold-blooded reputation."

"People in love can't be objective, is all. If I saw her through the
same set of filters you do, I'd be in love with her, too. So let's see
if you can use your brain instead of your outraged sensibilities to
answer a hypothetical question. If the foregoing were true, what would
_you_ do, Junior?"

"I'd pass, I guess. I'd have to, if I wanted to look at myself in the
mirror next morning. But that's such an _ungodly_ cockeyed picture,
Clee.... But if that's actually your picture of Brownie--and you're no
part of a liar--just what kind of a woman could you love? If any?"

"Belle."

"_Belle_! Belle _Bellamy_? Hell's flaming furies! That iceberg? That
egomaniac? That Jezebel? She's the hardest-boiled babe that ever went
unhung."

"Right, on all counts. Also she's crooked and treacherous. She's a
ground-and-lofty liar by instinct and training. I could add a lot more.
But she's got brains, ability, and guts--guts enough to supply the
Women's Army Corps. She's got the spine and the bottom and the drive. So
just imagine her thawed out and really shoveling on the coal--blasting
wide open on all forty torches. Back to back with you when you're
surrounded; she wouldn't cave and she wouldn't give. Or wing and
wing--holding the beam come hell or space-warps. Roll that one around on
your tongue, Jim, and give your taste-buds a treat."

"Well, maybe ... if I've got that much imagination ... that's a tough
blueprint to read. I can't quite visualize the finished article.
However, you're as hard as she is--even harder. You've got more of what
it takes. Maybe _you_ can make a Christian out of her. If so, you might
have something; but I'm damned if I can see exactly what. Whatever it
turned out to be, I wouldn't care for any part of it. You could have it
all."

"Exactly; and you can have your Brownie."

"I'm beginning to see. I didn't think you had anything like that in your
chilled-steel carcass. And I want to apolo...."
