on touching the ground develop roots which fork regularly.

The sporangia are much like those of the ground pines, and produced
singly at the bases of scale leaves arranged in a spike or cone (_A_,
_sp._), but two kinds of spores, large and small, are formed. In the
species figured the lower sporangium produces four large spores
(macrospores); the others, numerous small spores (microspores).

Even before the spores are ripe the development of the prothallium
begins, and this is significant, as it shows an undoubted
relationship between these plants and the lowest of the seed plants,
as we shall see when we study that group.

  If ripe spores can be obtained by sowing them upon moist earth, the
  young plants will appear in about a month. The microspore (Fig. 74,
  _K_) produces a prothallium not unlike that of some of the water
  ferns, there being a single vegetative cell (_x_), and the rest of
  the prothallium forming a single antheridium. The spermatozoids are
  excessively small, and resemble those of the bryophytes.

  The macrospore divides into two cells, a large lower one, and a
  smaller upper one. The latter gives rise to a flat disc of cells
  producing a number of small archegonia of simple structure (Fig. 74,
  _I_, _J_). The lower cell produces later a tissue that serves to
  nourish the young embryo.

  The development of the embryo recalls in some particulars that of
  the seed plants, and this in connection with the peculiarities of
  the sporangia warrants us in regarding the _Ligulatae_ as the highest
  of existing pteridophytes, and to a certain extent connecting them
  with the lowest of the spermaphytes.

Resembling the smaller club mosses in their development, but differing
in some important points, are the quill-worts (_Isoeteae_). They are
mostly aquatic forms, growing partially or completely submerged, and
look like grasses or rushes. They vary from a few centimetres to half
a metre in height. The stem is very short, and the long cylindrical
leaves closely crowded together. The leaves which are narrow above are
widely expanded and overlapping at the base. The spores are of two
kinds, as in _Selaginella_, but the macrosporangia contain numerous
macrospores. The very large sporangia (_M_, _sp._) are in cavities at
the bases of the leaves, and above each sporangium is a little pointed
outgrowth (ligula), which is also found in the leaves of
_Selaginella_. The quill-worts are not common plants, and owing to
their habits of growth and resemblance to other plants, are likely to
be overlooked unless careful search is made.




CHAPTER XIV.

SUB-KINGDOM VI.

SPERMAPHYTES: PHAENOGAMS.


The last and highest great division of the vegetable kingdom has been
named _Spermaphyta_, "seed plants," from the fact that the structures
known as seeds are peculiar to them. They are also commonly called
flowering plants, though this name might be also appropriately given
to certain of the higher pteridophytes.

In the seed plants the macrosporangia remain attached to the parent
plant, in nearly all cases, until the archegonia are fertilized and
the embryo plant formed. The outer walls of the sporangium now become
hard, and the whole falls off as a seed.

In the higher spermaphytes the spore-bearing leaves (sporophylls)
become much modified, and receive special names, those bearing the
microspores being commonly known as stamens; those bearing the
macrospores, carpels or carpophylls. The macrosporangia are also
ordinarily known as "ovules," a name given before it was known that
these were the same as the macrosporangia of the higher pteridophytes.

In addition to the spore-bearing leaves, those surrounding them may be
much changed in form and brilliantly colored, forming, with the
enclosed sporophylls, the "flower" of the higher spermaphytes.

As might be expected, the tissues of the higher spermaphytes are the
most highly developed of all plants, though some of them are very
simple. The plants vary extremely in size, the smallest being little
floating plants, less than a millimetre in diameter, while others are
gigantic trees, a hundred metres and more in height.

There are two classes of the spermaphytes: I., the Gymnosperms, or
naked-seeded ones, in which the ovules (macrosporangia) are borne upon
open carpophylls; and II., Angiosperms, covered-seeded plants, in
which the carpophylls form a closed cavity (ovary) containing the
ovules.


CLASS I.--GYMNOSPERMS (_Gymnospermae_).

The most familiar of these plants are the common evergreen trees
(conifers), pines, spruces, cedars, etc. A careful study of one of
these will give a good idea of the most important characteristics of
the class, and one of the best for this purpose is the Scotch pine
(_Pinus sylvestris_), which, though a native of Europe, is not
infrequently met with in cultivation in America. If this species
cannot be had by the student, other pines, or indeed almost any other
conifer, will answer. The Scotch pine is a tree of moderate size,
symmetrical in growth when young, with a central main shaft, and
circles of branches at regular intervals; but as it grows older its
growth becomes irregular, and the crown is divided into several main
branches.[10] The trunk and branches are covered with a rough, scaly
bark of a reddish brown color, where it is exposed by the scaling off
of the outer layers. Covering the younger branches, but becoming
thinner on the older ones, are numerous needle-shaped leaves. These
are in pairs, and the base of each pair is surrounded by several dry,
blackish scales. Each pair of leaves is really attached to a very
short side branch, but this is so short as to make the leaves appear
to grow directly from the main branch. Each leaf is about ten
centimetres in length and two millimetres broad. Where the leaves are
in contact they are flattened, but the outer side is rounded, so that
a cross-section is nearly semicircular in outline. With a lens it is
seen that there are five longitudinal lines upon the surface of the
leaf, and careful examination shows rows of small dots corresponding
to these. These dots are the breathing pores. If a cross-section is
even slightly magnified it shows three distinct parts,--a whitish
outer border, a bright green zone, and a central oval, colorless area,
in which, with a little care, may be seen the sections of two
fibro-vascular bundles. In the green zone are sometimes to be seen
colorless spots, sections of resin ducts, containing the resin so
characteristic of the tissues of the conifers.

[10] In most conifers the symmetrical form of the young tree is
maintained as long as the tree lives.

The general structure of the stem may be understood by making a series
of cross-sections through branches of different ages. In all, three
regions are distinguishable; viz., an outer region (bark or cortex)
(Fig. 76, _A_, _c_), composed in part of green cells, and, if the
section has been made with a sharp knife, showing a circle of little
openings, from each of which oozes a clear drop of resin. These are
large resin ducts (_r_). The centre is occupied by a soft white tissue
(pith), and the space between the pith and bark is filled by a mass of
woody tissue. Traversing the wood are numerous radiating lines, some
of which run from the bark to the pith, others only part way. These
are called the medullary rays. While in sections from branches of any
age these three regions are recognizable, their relative size varies
extremely. In a section of a twig of the present year the bark and
pith make up a considerable part of the section; but as older branches
are examined, we find a rapid increase in the quantity of wood, while
the thickness of the bark increases but slowly, and the pith scarcely
at all. In the wood, too, each year's growth is marked by a distinct
ring (_A_ i, ii). As the branches grow in diameter the outer bark
becomes split and irregular, and portions die, becoming brown and
hard.

The tree has a very perfect root system, but different from that of
any pteridophytes. The first root of the embryo persists as the main
or "tap" root of the full-grown tree, and from it branch off the
secondary roots, which in turn give rise to others.

The sporangia are borne on special scale-like leaves, and arranged
very much as in certain pteridophytes, notably the club mosses; but
instead of large and small spores being produced near together, the
two kinds are borne on special branches, or even on distinct trees
(_e.g._ red cedar). In the Scotch pine the microspores are ripe about
the end of May. The leaves bearing them are aggregated in small cones
("flowers"), crowded about the base of a growing shoot terminating the
branches (Fig. 77, _A_ [Male]). The individual leaves (sporophylls) are
nearly triangular in shape, and attached by the smaller end. On the
lower side of each are borne two sporangia (pollen sacs) (_C_, _sp._),
opening by a longitudinal slit, and filled with innumerable yellow
microspores (pollen spores), which fall out as a shower of yellow dust
if the branch is shaken.

The macrosporangia (ovules) are borne on similar leaves, known as
carpels, and, like the pollen sacs, borne in pairs, but on the upper
side of the sporophyll instead of the lower. The female flowers appear
when the pollen is ripe. The leaves of which they are composed are
thicker than those of the male flowers, and of a pinkish color. At the
base on the upper side are borne the two ovules (macrosporangia)
(Fig. 77, _E_, _o_), and running through the centre is a ridge that
ends in a little spine or point.

The ovule-bearing leaf has on the back a scale with fringed edge (_F_,
_sc._), quite conspicuous when the flower is young, but scarcely to be
detected in the older cone. From the female flower is developed the
cone (Fig. 75, _A_), but the process is a slow one, occupying two
years. Shortly after the pollen is shed, the female flowers, which are
at first upright, bend downward, and assume a brownish color, growing
considerably in size for a short time, and then ceasing to grow for
several months.

[Illustration: FIG. 75.--Scotch pine (_Pinus sylvestris_). _A_, a ripe
cone, x 1/2. _B_, a year-old cone, x 1. _C_, longitudinal section of
_B_. _D_, a single scale of _B_, showing the sporangia (ovules) (_o_),
x 2. _E_, a scale from a ripe cone, with the seeds (_s_), x 1/2. _F_,
longitudinal section of a ripe seed, x 3. _em._ the embryo. _G_, a
germinating seed, x 2. _r_, the primary root. _H_, longitudinal
section through _G_, showing the first leaves of the young plant still
surrounded by the endosperm, x 4. _I_, an older plant with the leaves
(_l_) withdrawing from the seed coats, x 4. _J_, upper part of a young
plant, showing the circle of primary leaves (cotyledons), x 1. _K_,
section of the same, x 2. _b_, the terminal bud. _L_, cross-section of
the stem of the young plant, x 25. _fb._ a fibro-vascular bundle. _M_,
cross-section of the root, x 25. _x_, wood. _ph._ bast, of the
fibro-vascular bundle.]

In Figure 75, _B_, is shown such a flower as it appears in the winter
and early spring following. The leaves are thick and fleshy, closely
pressed together, as is seen by dividing the flower lengthwise, and
each leaf ends in a long point (_D_). The ovules are still very small.
As the growth of the tree is resumed in the spring, the flower (cone)
increases rapidly in size and becomes decidedly green in color, the
ovules increasing also very much in size. If a scale from such a cone
is examined about the first of June, the ovules will probably be
nearly full-grown, oval, whitish bodies two to three millimetres in
length. A careful longitudinal section of the scale through the ovule
will show the general structure. Such a section is shown in Figure 77,
_G_. Comparing this with the sporangia of the pteridophytes, the first
difference that strikes us is the presence of an outer coat or
integument (_in._), which is absent in the latter. The single
macrospore (_sp._) is very large and does not lie free in the cavity
of the sporangium, but is in close contact with its wall. It is filled
with a colorless tissue, the prothallium, and if mature, with care it
is possible to see, even with a hand lens, two or more denser oval
bodies (_ar._), the egg cells of the archegonia, which here are very
large. The integument is not entirely closed at the top, but leaves a
little opening through which the pollen spores entered when the flower
was first formed.

After the archegonia are fertilized the outer parts of the ovule
become hard and brown, and serve to protect the embryo plant, which
reaches a considerable size before the sporangium falls off. As the
walls of the ovule harden, the carpel or leaf bearing it undergoes a
similar change, becoming extremely hard and woody, and as each one
ends in a sharp spine, and they are tightly packed together, it is
almost impossible to separate them. The ripe cone (Fig. 75, _A_)
remains closed during the winter, but in the spring, about the time
the flowers are mature, the scales open spontaneously and discharge
the ripened ovules, now called seeds. Each seed (_E_, _s_) is
surrounded by a membranous envelope derived from the scale to which it
is attached, which becomes easily separated from the seed. The opening
of the cones is caused by drying, and if a number of ripe cones are
gathered in the winter or early spring, and allowed to dry in an
ordinary room, they will in a day or two open, often with a sharp,
crackling sound, and scatter the ripe seeds.

A section of a ripe seed (_F_) shows the embryo (_em._) surrounded by
a dense, white, starch-bearing tissue derived from the prothallium
cells, and called the "endosperm." This fills up the whole seed which
is surrounded by the hardened shell derived from the integument and
wall of the ovule. The embryo is elongated with a circle of small
leaves at the end away from the opening of the ovule toward which is
directed the root of the embryo.

The seed may remain unchanged for months, or even years, without
losing its vitality, but if the proper conditions are provided, the
embryo will develop into a new plant. To follow the further growth of
the embryo, the ripe seeds should be planted in good soil and kept
moderately warm and moist. At the end of a week or two some of the
seeds will probably have sprouted. The seed absorbs water, and the
protoplasm of the embryo renews its activity, beginning to feed upon
the nourishing substances in the cells of the endosperm. The embryo
rapidly increases in length, and the root pushes out of the seed
growing rapidly downward and fastening itself in the soil (_G_, _r_).
Cutting the seed lengthwise we find that the leaves have increased
much in length and become green (one of the few cases where
chlorophyll is formed in the absence of light). As these leaves
(called "cotyledons" or seed leaves) increase in length, they
gradually withdraw from the seed whose contents they have exhausted,
and the young plant enters upon an independent existence.

The young plant has a circle of leaves, about six in number,
surrounding a bud which is the growing point of the stem, and in many
conifers persists as long as the stem grows (Fig. 75, _K_, _b_). A
cross-section of the young stem shows about six separate
fibro-vascular bundles arranged in a circle (_S_, _fb._). The root
shows a central fibro-vascular cylinder surrounded by a dark-colored
ground tissue. Growing from its surface are numerous root hairs
(Fig. 75, _M_).

  For examining the microscopic structure of the pine, fresh material
  is for most purposes to be preferred, but alcoholic material will
  answer, and as the alcohol hardens the resin, it is for that reason
  preferable.

  Cross-sections of the leaf, when sufficiently magnified, show that
  the outer colorless border of the section is composed of two parts:
  the epidermis of a single row of regular cells with very thick outer
  walls, and irregular groups of cells lying below them. These latter
  have thick walls appearing silvery and clearer than the epidermal
  cells. They vary a good deal, in some leaves being reduced to a
  single row, in others forming very conspicuous groups of some size.
  The green tissue of the leaf is much more compact than in the fern
  we examined, and the cells are more nearly round and the
  intercellular spaces smaller. The chloroplasts are numerous and
  nearly round in shape.

  Scattered through the green tissue are several resin passages (_r_),
  each surrounded by a circle of colorless, thick-walled cells, like
  those under the epidermis. At intervals in the latter are
  openings--breathing pores--(Fig. 76, _J_), below each of which is an
  intercellular space (_i_). They are in structure like those of the
  ferns, but the walls of the guard cells are much thickened like the
  other epidermal cells.

  Each leaf is traversed by two fibro-vascular bundles of entirely
  different structure from those of the ferns. Each is divided into
  two nearly equal parts, the wood (_x_) lying toward the inner, flat
  side of the leaf, the bast (_T_) toward the outer, convex side. This
  type of bundle, called "collateral," is the common form found in the
  stems and leaves of seed plants. The cells of the wood or xylem are
  rather larger than those of the bast or phloem, and have thicker
  walls than any of the phloem cells, except the outermost ones which
  are thick-walled fibres like those under the epidermis. Lying
  between the bundles are comparatively large colorless cells, and
  surrounding the whole central area is a single line of cells that
  separates it sharply from the surrounding green tissue.

  In longitudinal sections, the cells, except of the mesophyll (green
  tissue) are much elongated. The mesophyll cells, however, are short
  and the intercellular spaces much more evident than in the
  cross-section. The colorless cells have frequently rounded
  depressions or pits upon their walls, and in the fibro-vascular
  bundle the difference between the two portions becomes more obvious.
  The wood is distinguished by the presence of vessels with close,
  spiral or ring-shaped thickenings, while in the phloem are found
  sieve tubes, not unlike those in the ferns.

  The fibro-vascular bundles of the stem of the seedling plant show a
  structure quite similar to that of the leaf, but very soon a
  difference is manifested. Between the two parts of the bundle the
  cells continue to divide and add constantly to the size of the
  bundle, and at the same time the bundles become connected by a line
  of similar growing cells, so that very early we find a ring of
  growing cells extending completely around the stem. As the cells in
  this ring increase in number, owing to their rapid division, those
  on the borders of the ring lose the power of dividing, and gradually
  assume the character of the cells on which they border (Fig. 76,
  _B_, _cam._). The growth on the inside of the ring is more rapid
  than on the outer border, and the ring continues comparatively near
  the surface of the stem (Fig. 76, _A_, _cam._). The spaces between
  the bundles do not increase materially in breadth, and as the
  bundles increase in size become in comparison very small, appearing
  in older stems as mere lines between the solid masses of wood that
  make up the inner portion of the bundles. These are the primary
  medullary rays, and connect the pith in the centre of the stem with
  the bark. Later, similar plates of cells are formed, often only a
  single cell thick, and appearing when seen in cross-section as a
  single row of elongated cells (_C_, _m_).

  As the stem increases in diameter the bundles become broader and
  broader toward the outside, and taper to a point toward the centre,
  appearing wedge-shaped, the inner ends projecting into the pith. The
  outer limits of the bundles are not nearly so distinct, and it is
  not easy to tell when the phloem of the bundles ends and the ground
  tissue of the bark begins.

  A careful examination of a cross-section of the bark shows first, if
  taken from a branch not more than two or three years old, the
  epidermis composed of cells not unlike those of the leaf, but whose
  walls are usually browner. Underneath are cells with brownish walls,
  and often more or less dry and dead. These cells give the brown
  color to the bark, and later both epidermis and outer ground tissue
  become entirely dead and disappear. The bulk of the ground tissue is
  made up of rather large, loose cells, the outer ones containing a
  good deal of chlorophyll. Here and there are large resin ducts
  (Fig. 76, _H_), appearing in cross-section as oval openings
  surrounded by several concentric rows of cells, the innermost
  smaller and with denser contents. These secrete the resin that fills
  the duct and oozes out when the stem is cut. All of the cells of the
  bark contain more or less starch.

  The phloem, when strongly magnified, is seen to be made up of cells
  arranged in nearly regular radiating rows. Their walls are not very
  thick and the cells are usually somewhat flattened in a radial
  direction.

  Some of the cells are larger than the others, and these are found to
