The Old Man leaned over his desk, breathing into my face. "It would take
a year to install a new beacon--besides being too expensive--and this
relic is on one of the main routes. We have ships making
fifteen-light-year detours now."

He leaned back, wiped his hands on his handkerchief and gave me Lecture
Forty-four on Company Duty and My Troubles.

"This department is officially called Maintenance and Repair, when it
really should be called trouble-shooting. Hyperspace beacons are made to
last forever--or damn close to it. When one of them breaks down, it is
_never_ an accident, and repairing the thing is never a matter of just
plugging in a new part."

He was telling _me_--the guy who did the job while he sat back on his
fat paycheck in an air-conditioned office.

He rambled on. "How I wish that were all it took! I would have a fleet
of parts ships and junior mechanics to install them. But its not like
that at all. I have a fleet of expensive ships that are equipped to do
almost anything--manned by a bunch of irresponsibles like _you_."

I nodded moodily at his pointing finger.

"How I wish I could fire you all! Combination space-jockeys, mechanics,
engineers, soldiers, con-men and anything else it takes to do the
repairs. I have to browbeat, bribe, blackmail and bulldoze you thugs
into doing a simple job. If you think you're fed up, just think how I
feel. But the ships must go through! The beacons must operate!"

I recognized this deathless line as the curtain speech and crawled to my
feet. He threw the Mark III file at me and went back to scratching in
his papers. Just as I reached the door, he looked up and impaled me on
his finger again.

"And don't get any fancy ideas about jumping your contract. We can
attach that bank account of yours on Algol II long before you could draw
the money out."

I smiled, a little weakly, I'm afraid, as if I had never meant to keep
that account a secret. His spies were getting more efficient every day.
Walking down the hall, I tried to figure a way to transfer the money
without his catching on--and knew at the same time he was figuring a way
to outfigure me.

It was all very depressing, so I stopped for a drink, then went on to
the spaceport.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the time the ship was serviced, I had a course charted. The nearest
beacon to the broken-down Proxima Centauri Beacon was on one of the
planets of Beta Circinus and I headed there first, a short trip of only
about nine days in hyperspace.

To understand the importance of the beacons, you have to understand
hyperspace. Not that many people do, but it is easy enough to understand
that in this _non_-space the regular rules don't apply. Speed and
measurements are a matter of relationship, not constant facts like the
fixed universe.

The first ships to enter hyperspace had no place to go--and no way to
even tell if they had moved. The beacons solved that problem and opened
the entire universe. They are built on planets and generate tremendous
amounts of power. This power is turned into radiation that is punched
through into hyperspace. Every beacon has a code signal as part of its
radiation and represents a measurable point in hyperspace. Triangulation
and quadrature of the beacons works for navigation--only it follows its
own rules. The rules are complex and variable, but they are still rules
that a navigator can follow.

For a hyperspace jump, you need at least four beacons for an accurate
fix. For long jumps, navigators use as many as seven or eight. So every
beacon is important and every one has to keep operating. That is where I
and the other trouble-shooters came in.

We travel in well-stocked ships that carry a little bit of everything;
only one man to a ship because that is all it takes to operate the
overly efficient repair machinery. Due to the very nature of our job, we
spend most of our time just rocketing through normal space. After all,
when a beacon breaks down, how do you find it?

Not through hyperspace. All you can do is approach as close as you can
by using other beacons, then finish the trip in normal space. This can
take months, and often does.

This job didn't turn out to be quite that bad. I zeroed on the Beta
Circinus beacon and ran a complicated eight-point problem through the
navigator, using every beacon I could get an accurate fix on. The
computer gave me a course with an estimated point-of-arrival as well as
a built-in safety factor I never could eliminate from the machine.

I would much rather take a chance of breaking through near some star
than spend time just barreling through normal space, but apparently Tech
knows this, too. They had a safety factor built into the computer so you
couldn't end up inside a star no matter how hard you tried. I'm sure
there was no humaneness in this decision. They just didn't want to lose
the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a twenty-hour jump, ship's time, and I came through in the middle
of nowhere. The robot analyzer chuckled to itself and scanned all the
stars, comparing them to the spectra of Proxima Centauri. It finally
