anybody was the mighty slim chance that our super-ship might be prowling
around out here already, but it isn't, of course. Here they are!"

Reaching out to the control panel, Costigan shot out against the great
vessel wave after wave of lethal vibrations, under whose fiercely
clinging impacts the Nevian defensive screens flared white; but,
strangely enough, their own screens did not radiate. As if contemptuous
of any weapons the lifeboat might wield, the mother ship simply defended
herself from the attacking beams, in much the same fashion as a wildcat
mother wards off the claws and teeth of her spitting, snarling kitten
who is resenting a touch of needed maternal discipline.

"They probably won't fight us, at that," Clio first understood the
situation. "This is their own lifeboat, and they want us alive, you
know."

"There's one more thing we can try--hang on!" Costigan snapped, as he
released his screens and threw all his power into one enormous pressor
beam.

The three were thrown to the floor and held there by an awful weight, as
if the lifeboat darted away at the stupendous acceleration of the beam's
reaction against the unimaginable mass of the Nevian sky-rover; but the
flight was of short duration. Along that pressor beam there crept a dull
rod of energy, which surrounded the fugitive shell and brought it slowly
to a halt. Furiously then Costigan set and reset his controls, launching
his every driving force and his every weapon, but no beam could
penetrate that red murk, and the lifeboat remained motionless in space.
No, not motionless--the red rod was shortening, drawing the truant craft
back toward the launching port from which she had so hopefully emerged a
few days before. Back and back it was drawn; Costigan's utmost efforts
futile to affect by a hair's breadth its line of motion. Through the
open port the boat slipped neatly, and as it came to a halt in its
original position within the multilayered skin of the monster, the
prisoners heard the heavy doors clang shut behind them, one after
another.

And then sheets of blue fire snapped and crackled all about the three
suits of Triplanetary armor--the two large human figures and the small
one were outlined starkly in blinding blue flame.

"That's the first thing that has come off according to schedule."
Costigan laughed, a short, fierce bark. "That is their paralyzing ray;
we've got it stopped cold, and we've each got enough iron to hold it
forever."

"But it looks as though the best we can do is to stalemate," Bradley
argued. "Even if they can't paralyze us, we can't hurt them, and we are
heading back for Nevia."

"I think Nerado will come in for a conference, and we'll be able to make
terms of some kind. He must know what these Lewistons will do, and he
knows that we'll get a chance to use them, some way or other, before he
gets to us again," Costigan asserted confidently--but again he was
wrong.

The door opened, and through it there waddled, rolled, or crawled a
metal-clad monstrosity--a thing with wheels, legs, and writhing
tentacles of jointed bronze; a thing possessed of defensive screens
sufficiently powerful to absorb the full blast of the Triplanetary
projectors without effort. Three brazen tentacles reached out through
the ravening beams of the Lewistons, smashed them to bits, and wrapped
themselves in unbreakable shackles about the armored forms of the three
human beings. Through the door the machine or creature carried its
helpless load, and out into and along a main corridor. And soon the
three Terrestrials, without armor, without arms, and almost without
clothing, were standing in the control room, again facing the calm and
unmoved Nerado. To the surprise of the impetuous Costigan, the Nevian
commander was entirely without rancor.

"The desire for freedom is perhaps common to all forms of animate life,"
he commented, through the transformer. "As I told you before, however,
you are specimens to be studied by the College of Science, and you shall
be so studied in spite of anything you may do. Resign yourselves to
that."

"Well, say that we don't try to make any more trouble; that we
co-operate in the examination and give you whatever information we can,"
Costigan suggested. "Then you will probably be willing to give us a ship
and let us go back to our own world?"

"You will not be allowed to cause any more trouble," the amphibian
declared, coldly. "Your co-operation will not be required. We will take
from you whatever knowledge and information we wish. In all probability
you will never be allowed to return to your own system, because as
specimens you are too unique to lose. But enough of this idle
chatter--take them back to their quarters!"

And back to their inter-communicating rooms the prisoners were led under
heavy guard.

True to his word, Nerado made certain that they had no more
opportunities to escape. All the way back to far-distant Nevia the
space-ship sped, where at once, in manacles, the Terrestrials were taken
to the College of Science, there to undergo the physical and psychical
examinations which Nerado had promised them.

Clio and Costigan learned that the Nevian scientist-captain had not
erred in stating that their co-operation was neither needed nor desired.
Furious but impotent, the human beings were studied in laboratory after
laboratory by the coldly analytical, unfeeling scientists of Nevia, to
whom they were nothing more nor less than specimens; and in full measure
they came to know what it meant to play the part of an unknown, lowly
organism in a biological research. They were photographed, externally
and internally. Every bone, muscle, organ, vessel, and nerve was studied
and charted. Every reflex and reaction was noted and discussed. Meters
registered every impulse and recorders filmed every thought, every idea,
and every sensation. Endlessly, day after day, the nerve-wracking
torture went on, until the frantic subjects could bear no more.
White-faced and shaking, Clio finally screamed wildly, hysterically, as
she was being strapped down upon a laboratory bench; and at the sound
Costigan's nerves, already at the breaking point, gave way in an
outburst of Berserk fury.

The man's struggles and the girl's shrieks were alike futile, but the
surprised Nevians, after a consultation, decided to give the specimens a
vacation. To that end they were installed, together with their earthly
belongings, in a three-roomed structure of transparent metal, floating
in the large central lagoon of the city. There they were left
undisturbed for a time--undisturbed, that is, except by the continuous
gaze of the crowd of hundreds of amphibians which constantly surrounded
the floating cottage.

"First we're bugs under a microscope," Bradley growled, "then we're
goldfish in a bowl. I don't know that...."

He broke off as two of their jailers entered the room. Without a word
into the transformers, they seized Bradley and the girl. As those
tentacular arms stretched out toward Clio, Costigan leaped. A vain
attempt. In midair the paralyzing ray of the Nevians touched him and he
crashed heavily to the crystal floor; and from that floor he looked on
in helpless, raging fury while his sweetheart and his captain were
carried out of their prison and into a waiting submarine.




CHAPTER X

  The _Boise_ Acts


But what of the super-ship? What happened after that inertialess, that
terribly destructive take-off?

Doctor Frederick Rodebush sat at the control panel of Triplanetary's
newly reconstructed space-ship, his hands grasping the gleaming, ebonite
handles of two double-throw switches. Facing the unknown though the
physicist was, yet he grinned whimsically at his friend.

"Something, whatever it is, is about to take place. The _Boise_ is
taking off, under full neutralization. Ready for anything to happen,
Cleve?"

"All ready--shoot!" Laconically. Cleveland also was constitutionally
unable to voice his deeper sentiments in time of stress.

Rodebush flipped the switches clear over in flashing arcs, and instantly
over both men there came a sensation akin to a tremendously intensified
vertigo; but a vertigo as far beyond the space-sickness of
weightlessness, as that horrible sensation is beyond mere terrestrial
dizziness. The pilot tried to reverse the switches he had just thrown,
but his leaden hands utterly refused to obey the dictates of his reeling
mind. His brain was a writhing, convulsive mass of torment
indescribable; expanding, exploding, swelling out with an unendurable
pressure against its confining skull. Fiery spirals, laced with
streaming, darting lances of black and green, flamed inside his bursting
eyeballs. The Universe spun and whirled in mad gyrations about him as he
reeled drunkenly to his feet, staggering and sprawling. He fell. He
realized that he was falling, yet he could not fall! Thrashing wildly,
grotesquely in agony, he struggled madly and blindly across the room,
directly toward the thick steel wall. The tip of one hair of his unruly
thatch touched the wall, and the slim length of that single hair did not
even bend as its slight strength brought to an instant halt the
hundred-and-eighty-odd pounds of mass--mass now entirely without
inertia--that was his body.

But finally the sheer brain power of the man began to triumph over his
physical torture. By indomitable force of will he compelled his groping
hands to seize a life-line, almost meaningless to his dazed
intelligence; and through that nightmare incarnate of hellish torture he
fought his way back to the control board. Hooking one leg around a
standard, he made a seemingly enormous effort and drove the two switches
back into their original positions; then fell flat upon the floor,
weakly but in a wave of relief and thankfulness, as his racked body felt
again the wonted phenomena of weight and of inertia. White, trembling,
frankly and openly sick, the two men stared at each other in half-amazed
joy.

"It worked." Cleveland smiled wanly as he recovered sufficiently to
speak, then leaped to his feet. "Snap it up, Fred! We must be falling
fast--we'll be wrecked when we hit!"

"We're not falling anywhere." Rodebush, foreboding in his eyes, walked
over to the main observation plate and scanned the heavens. "However,
it's not as bad as I was afraid it might be. I can still recognize a few
of the constellations, even though they are all pretty badly distorted.
That means that we can't be more than a couple of light-years or so away
from the Solar System. Of course, since we had so little thrust on,
practically all of our time and energy was spent in getting out of the
atmosphere; but, even at that, it's a good thing that space isn't an
absolutely perfect vacuum or we would have been clear out of the
Universe by this time."

"Huh? Impossible--where are we anyway? Then we must be making mil ...
Oh, I see!" Cleveland exclaimed in disjointed sentences as he also
stared into the plate.

"Right. We aren't traveling at all _now_." Rodebush replied. "We are
perfectly stationary relative to Tellus, since we made the hop without
inertia. We must have attained one hundred percent neutralization, which
we didn't quite expect, and therefore we must have stopped
instantaneously when our inertia was restored. But it isn't _where_ we
are that is worrying me the most--we can fix our place in space
accurately enough by a few observations--it's _when_."

"That's right, too. Say we're two light-years away. You think maybe
we're two years older than we were ten minutes ago, then? That's
possible, of course, maybe probable: there's been a lot of discussion on
that theory. Now's a good time to prove or to disprove it. Let's snap
back to Tellus and find out."

"We'll do that, after a little more experimenting. You see, I had no
intention of giving us such a long push. I was going to throw the
switches over and back, but you know what happened. However, there's one
good thing about it--it's worth two years of anybody's life to settle
that relativity-time thing definitely, one way or the other."

"I'll say it is. But say, we've got a lot of power on our ultra-wave:
enough to reach Tellus, I think. Let's locate the sun and get in touch
with Samms."

"Let's work on these controls a little first, so we'll have something to
report. Out here's a fine place to try the ship out--nothing in the
way."

"All right with me. But I _would_ like to find out whether I'm two years
older than I think I am, or not!"

Then for hours they put the great super-ship through her paces, just as
test-pilots check up on every detail of performance of an airplane of
new and radical design. They found that the horrible vertigo could be
endured, perhaps in time even conquered as space-sickness could be
conquered, by a strong will in a sound body; and that their new
conveyance had possibilities of which even Rodebush had never dreamed.
Finally, their most pressing questions answered, they turned their most
powerful ultra-beam communicator toward the yellowish star which they
knew to be Old Sol.

"Samms ... Samms." Cleveland spoke slowly and distinctly. "Rodebush and
Cleveland reporting from the 'Space-Eating Wampus', now directly in line
with Beta Ursae Minoris from the sun, distance about two point two light
years. It will take six banks of tubes on your tightest beam, LSV3, to
reach us. Barring a touch of an unusually severe type of space-sickness,
everything worked beautifully; even better than our calculations showed.
There's something we want to know right away--have we been gone four
hours and some odd minutes, or better than two years?"

He shut off the power, turned to Rodebush, and went on:

"Nobody knows how fast this ultra-wave travels, but if it goes as fast
as we did coming out it's certainly moving. I'll give him about thirty
minutes, then shoot in another call."

But in less than two minutes the care-ravaged face of their chief
appeared sharp and clear upon their plates and his voice snapped curtly
from the speaker.

"Thank God you're alive, and twice that the ship works!" he exclaimed.
"You've been gone four hours, eleven minutes, and forty-one seconds, but
never mind about abstract theorizing. Get back here, to Pittsburgh, as
fast as you can drive. That Nevian vessel or another like her is mopping
up the city, and has destroyed half the Fleet already!"

"We'll be back there in nine minutes!" Rodebush snapped into the
transmitter. "Two to get from here to atmosphere, four from atmosphere
down to the Hill, and three to cool off. Notify the full four-shift
crew--everybody we've picked out. Don't need anybody else. Ship,
batteries, and armament are _ready_!"

"Two minutes to atmosphere, and it took ten coming out? Think you can do
it?" Cleveland asked, as Rodebush flipped off the power and leaped to
the control panel.

"We could do it in a few seconds if we had to. We used scarcely any
power at all coming out, and I'm not using very much going back," the
physicist explained rapidly, as he set the dials which would determine
their flashing course.

The master switches were thrown and the pangs of inertialessness again
assailed them--but weaker far this time than ever before--and upon their
lookout plates they beheld a spectacle never before seen by eye of man.
For the ultra-beam, with its heterodyned vision, is not distorted by any
velocity yet attained, as are the ether-borne rays of light. Converted
into light only at the plate, it showed their progress as truly as
though they had been traveling at a pace to be expressed in the ordinary
terms of miles per hour. The yellow star that was the sun detached
itself from the firmament and leaped toward them, swelling visibly,
momentarily, into a blinding monster of incandescence. And toward them
also flung the earth, enlarging with such indescribable rapidity that
Cleveland protested involuntarily, in spite of his knowledge of the
peculiar mechanism of the vessel in which they were.

"Hold it, Fred, hold it! Way 'nuff!" he exclaimed.

"I'm using only ten thousand dynes, so she'll stop herself as soon as we
touch atmosphere, long before she can even begin to heat," Rodebush
explained. "Looks bad, but we'll stop without a jar."

And they did. Weightless and without inertia, gravitation powerless
against her neutralizing generators, the great super-ship came from her
practically infinite velocity to an almost instantaneous halt in the
outermost, most tenuous layer of the earth's atmosphere. Her halt was
but momentary. Inertia restored and gravitation allowed again to affect
her mass, she dropped at a sharp angle downward. More than dropped; she
was forced downward by one full battery of projectors; projectors driven
by iron-powered generators. Soon they were over the Hill, whose violet
screens went down at a word.

Flaming a dazzling white from the friction of the atmosphere through
which she had torn her way, the _Boise_ slowed abruptly as she neared
the ground, plunging toward the surface of the small but deep artificial
lake below the Hill's steel apron. Into the cold waters the space-ship
dove, and even before they could close over her, furious geysers of
steam and boiling water erupted as the stubborn alloy gave up its heat
to the cooling liquid. Endlessly the three necessary minutes dragged
their slow way into time, but finally the water ceased boiling and
Rodebush tore the ship from the lake and hurled her into the gaping
doorway of her dock. The massive doors of the air-locks opened, and
while the full crew of picked men hurried aboard with their personal
equipment, Samms talked earnestly to the two scientists in the control
room.
