_Skylark_ and Dunark and Sitar in the Kondal; such was that unearthly
optical instrument and so clear was the impression upon the mind before
him. They saw the attack and the battle. They saw the _Skylark_ throw
off her zone of force and attack; saw this one survivor standing
directly in line with a huge projector-spring, and saw the spring
severed by the zone. The free end, under its thousands of pounds of
tension, had struck the being upon the side of the head, and the force
of the blow, only partially blocked by the heavy helmet, had hurled him
out through the yawning gap in the wall and hundreds of miles out into
space.

Suddenly the clear view of the brain of the Fenachrone became blurred
and meaningless and the flow of knowledge ceased--the prisoner had
regained consciousness and was trying with all his gigantic strength to
break from those intangible bonds that held him. So powerful were the
forces upon him, however, that only a few twitching muscles gave
evidence that he was struggling at all. Glancing about him he recognized
the attractors and repellers bearing upon him, ceased his efforts to
escape, and hurled the full power of his baleful gaze into the black
eyes so close to his own. But DuQuesne's mind, always under perfect
control and now amply reenforced by a considerable proportion of the
stranger's own knowledge and power, did not waver under the force of
even that hypnotic glare.

"It is useless, as you observe," he said coldly, in the stranger's own
tongue, and sneered. "You are perfectly helpless. Unlike you of the
Fenachrone, however, men of my race do not always kill strangers at
sight, merely because they are strangers. I will spare your life, if you
can give me anything of enough value to me to make extra time and
trouble worth while."

"You read my mind while I could not resist your childish efforts. I will
have no traffic whatever with you who have destroyed my vessel. If you
have mentality enough to understand any portion of my mind--which I
doubt--you already know the fate in store for you. Do with me what you
will." This from the stranger.

       *       *       *       *       *

DuQuesne pondered long before he replied; considering whether it was to
his advantage to inform this stranger of the facts. Finally he decided.

"Sir, neither I nor this vessel had anything to do with the destruction
of your warship. Our detectors discovered you floating in empty space;
we stopped and rescued you from death. We have seen nothing else, save
what we saw pictured in your own brain. I know that, in common with all
of your race, you possess neither conscience nor honor, as we understand
the terms. An automatic liar by instinct and training whenever you think
lies will best serve your purpose, you may yet have intelligence enough
to recognize simple truth when you hear it. You already have observed
that we are of the same race as those who destroyed your vessel, and
have assumed that we are with them. In that you are wrong. It is true
that I am acquainted with those others, but they are my enemies. I am
here to kill them, not to aid them. You have already helped me in one
way--I know as much as does my enemy concerning the impenetrable shield
of force. If I will return you unharmed to your own planet, will you
assist me in stealing one of your ships of space, so that I may destroy
that Earth-vessel?"

The Fenachrone, paying no attention to DuQuesne's barbed comments
concerning his honor and veracity, did not hesitate an instant in his
reply.

"I will not. We supermen of the Fenachrone will allow no vessel of ours,
with its secrets unknown to any others of the Universe, to fall into the
hands of any of the lesser breeds of men."

"Well, you didn't try to lie that time, anyway," said DuQuesne, "but
think a minute. Seaton, my enemy, already has one of your vessels--don't
think he is too much of a fool to put it back together and to learn its
every secret. Then, too, remember that I have your mind, and can get
along without you; even though I am willing to admit that you could be
of enough help to me so that I would save your life in exchange for that
help. Also remember that, superman though you may be, your mentality
cannot cope with the forces I have bearing upon you. Neither will your
being a superman enable your body to retain life after I have pushed you
through yonder door, dressed as you are in a silken tunic."

"I have the normal love of life," was the reply, "but some things cannot
be done, even with life at stake. Stealing a vessel of the Fenachrone is
one of those things. I can, however, do this much--if you will return me
to my own planet, you two shall be received as guests aboard one of our
vessels and shall be allowed to witness the vengeance of the Fenachrone
upon your enemy. Then you shall be returned to your vessel and allowed
to depart unharmed."

"Now you are lying by rote--I know just what you'd do," said DuQuesne.
"Get that idea out of your head right now. The attractors now holding
you will not be released until after you have told all. Then, and then
only, will we try to discover a way of returning you to your own world
safely, and yet in a manner which will in no way jeopardize my own
safety. Incidentally, I warn you that the first sign of an attempt to
play false with me in any way will mean your instant death."

The prisoner remained silent, analyzing every feature of the situation,
and DuQuesne continued, coldly:

"Here's something else for you to think about. If you are unwilling to
help us, what is to prevent me from killing you, and then hunting up
Seaton and making peace with him for the duration of this forthcoming
war? With the fragments of your vessel, which he has; with my knowledge
of your mind, reenforced by your own dead brain; and with the vast
resources of all the planets of the green system; there is no doubt that
the plans of the Fenachrone will be seriously interfered with. Myriads
of your race will certainly lose their lives, and it is quite possible
that your entire race would be destroyed. Understand that I care nothing
for the green system. You are welcome to it if you do as I ask. If you
do not, I shall warn them and help them simply to protect my world,
which is now my own personal property."

"In return for our armament and equipment, you promise not to warn the
green system against us? The death of your enemy takes first place in
your mind?" The stranger spoke thoughtfully. "In that I understand your
viewpoint thoroughly. But, after I have remodeled your power-plant into
ours and have piloted you to our planet, what assurance have I that you
will liberate me, as you have said?"

"None whatever--I have made and am asking no promises, since I cannot
expect you to trust me, any more than I can trust you. Enough of this
argument! I am master here, and I am dictating terms. We can get along
without you. Therefore you must decide quickly whether you would rather
die suddenly and surely, here in space and right now, or help us as I
demand and live until you get back home--enjoying meanwhile your life
and whatever chance you think you may have of being liberated within the
atmosphere of your own planet."

"Just a minute, Chief!" Loring said, in English, his back to the
prisoner. "Wouldn't we gain more by killing him and going back to Seaton
and the green system, as you suggested?"

"No." DuQuesne also turned away, to shield his features from the
mind-reading gaze of the Fenachrone. "That was pure bluff. I don't want
to get within a million miles of Seaton until after we have the armament
of this fellow's ships. I couldn't make peace with Seaton now, even if I
wanted to--and I haven't the slightest intention of trying. I intend
killing him on sight. Here's what we're going to do. First, we'll get
what we came after. Then we'll find the _Skylark_ and blow her clear
out of space, and take over the pieces of that Fenachrone ship. After
that we'll head for the green system, and with their own stuff and what
we'll give them, they'll be able to give those fiends a hot reception.
By the time they finally destroy the Osnomians--if they do--we'll have
the world ready for them." He turned to the Fenachrone. "What is your
decision?"

"I submit, in the hope that you will keep your promise, since there is
no alternative but death," and the awful creature, still loosely held by
the attractors and carefully watched by DuQuesne and Loring, fairly tore
into the task of rebuilding the Osnomian power-plant into the
space-annihilating drive of the Fenachrone--for he well knew one fact
that DuQuesne's hurried inspection had failed to glean from the
labyrinthine intricacies of that fearsome brain: that once within the
detector screens of that distant solar system these Earth-beings would
be utterly helpless before the forces which would inevitably be turned
upon them. Also, he realized that time was precious, and resolved to
drive the _Violet_ so unmercifully that she would overtake that fleeing
torpedo, now many hours upon its way--the torpedo bearing news, for the
first time in Fenachrone history, of the overwhelming defeat and capture
of one of its mighty engines of interstellar war.

In a very short time, considering the complexity of the undertaking, the
conversion of the power-plant was done and the repellers, already
supposed the ultimate in protection, were reenforced by a
ten-thousand-pound mass of activated copper, effective for untold
millions of miles. Their monstrous pilot then set the bar and advanced
both levers of the dual power control out to the extreme limit of their
travel.

There was no sense of motion or of acceleration, since the new system of
propulsion acted upon every molecule of matter within the radius of
activity of the bar, which had been set to include the entire hull. The
passengers felt only the utter lack of all weight and the other peculiar
sensations with which they were already familiar, as each had had
previous experience of free motion in space. But in spite of the lack of
apparent motion, the _Violet_ was now leaping through the unfathomable
depths of interstellar space with the unthinkable speed of five times
the velocity of light!




CHAPTER VIII

The Porpoise-Men of Dasor


"How long do you figure it's going to take us to get there, Mart?"
Seaton asked from a corner, where he was bending over his
apparatus-table.

"About three days at this acceleration. I set it at what I thought the
safe maximum for the girls. Should we increase it?"

"Probably not--three days isn't bad. Anyway, to save even one day we'd
have to more than double the acceleration, and none of us could do
anything, so we'd better let it ride. How're you making it, Peg?"

"I'm getting used to weighing a ton now. My knees buckled only once this
morning from my forgetting to watch them when I tried to walk. Don't let
me interfere, though! if I am slowing us down, I'll go to bed and stay
there!"

"It'd hardly pay," said Seaton. "We can use the time to good advantage.
Look here, Mart--I've been looking over this stuff I got out of their
ship and here's something I know you'll eat up. They refer to it as a
chart, but it's three-dimensional and almost incredible. I can't say
that I understand it, but I get an awful kick out of looking at it. I've
been studying it a couple of hours, and haven't started yet. I haven't
found our solar system, the green one, or their own. It's too heavy to
move around now, because of the acceleration we're using--come on over
here and give it a look."

The "chart" was a strip of some parchment-like material, or film,
apparently miles in length, wound upon reels at each end of the machine.
One section of the film was always under the viewing mechanism--an
optical system projecting an undistorted image into a visiplate plate
somewhat similar to their own--and at the touch of a lever, a small
atomic motor turned the reels and moved the film through the projector.

It was not an ordinary star-chart: it was three-dimensional,
ultra-stereoscopic. The eye did not perceive a flat surface, but beheld
an actual, extremely narrow wedge of space as seen from the center of
the galaxy. Each of the closer stars was seen in its true position in
space and in its true perspective, and each was clearly identified by
number. In the background were faint stars and nebulous masses of light,
too distant to be resolved into separate stars--a true representation of
the actual sky. As both men stared, fascinated, into the visiplate,
Seaton touched the lever and they apparently traveled directly along the
center line of that ever-widening wedge. As they proceeded, the nearer
stars grew brighter and larger, soon becoming suns, with their planets
and then the satellites of the planets plainly visible, and finally
passing out of the picture behind the observers. The fainter stars
became bright, grew into suns and solar systems, and were passed in
turn. The chart unrolled, and the nebulous masses of light were
approached, became composed of faint stars, which developed as had the
others, and were passed.

Finally, when the picture filled the entire visiplate, they arrived at
the outermost edge of the galaxy. No more stars were visible: they saw
empty space stretching for inconceivably vast distances before them. But
beyond that indescribable and incomprehensible vacuum they saw faint
lenticular bodies of light, which were also named, and which each man
knew to be other galaxies, charted and named by the almost unlimited
power of the Fenachrone astronomers, but not as yet explored. As the
magic scroll unrolled still farther, they found themselves back in the
center of the galaxy, starting outward in the wedge adjacent to the one
which they had just traversed. Seaton cut off the motor and wiped his
forehead.

"Wouldn't that break you off at the ankles, Mart? Did you ever conceive
the possibility of such a thing?

"It would, and I did not. There are literally miles and miles of film in
each of those reels, and I see that there is a magazine full of reels in
the cabinet. There must be an index or a master-chart."

"Yeah, there's a book in this slot here," said Seaton, "but we don't
know any of their names or numbers--wait a minute! How did he report our
Earth on that torpedo? Planet number three of sun six four something
Pilarone, wasn't it? I'll get the record.

"Six four seven three Pilarone, it was."

"Pilarone ... let's see...." Seaton studied the index volume. "Reel
twenty, scene fifty-one, I'd translate it."

They found the reel, and "scene fifty-one" did indeed show that section
of space in which our solar system is. Seaton stopped the chart when
star six four seven three was at its closest range, and there was our
sun; with its nine planets and their many satellites accurately shown
and correctly described.

"They know their stuff, all right--you've got to hand it to 'em. I've
been straightening out that brain record--cutting out the hazy stretches
and getting his knowledge straightened out so we can use it, and there's
a lot of this kind of stuff in the record you can get. Suppose that you
can figure out exactly where he comes from with this dope and with his
brain record?"

"Certainly. I may be able to get more complete information upon the
green system than the Osnomians have, which will be very useful indeed.
You are right--I am intensely interested in this material, and if you do
not care particularly about studying it any more at this time, I believe
that I should begin to study it now."

"Hop to it. I'm going to study that record some more. No human brain can
take it all, I'm afraid, especially all at once, but I'm going to kinda
peck around the edges and get me some dope that I want pretty badly. We
got a lot of stuff from that wampus."

About sixty hours out, Dorothy, who had been observing the planet
through number six visiplate, called Seaton away from the Fenachrone
brain-record, upon which he was still concentrating.

"Come here a minute, Dickie! Haven't you got that knowledge all packed
away in your skull yet?"

"I'll say I haven't. That bird's brain would make a dozen of mine, and
it was loaded until the scuppers were awash. I'm just nibbling around
the edges yet."

"I've always heard that the capacity of even the human brain was almost
infinite. Isn't that true?" asked Margaret.

"Maybe it is, if the knowledge were built up gradually over generations.
I think maybe I can get most of this stuff into my peanut brain so I can
use it, but it's going to be an awful job."

"Is their brain really as far ahead of ours as I gathered from what I
saw of it?" asked Crane.

"It sure is," replied Seaton, "as far as knowledge and intelligence are
concerned, but they have nothing else in common with us. They don't
belong to the genus 'homo' at all, really. Instead of having a common
ancestor with the anthropoids, as they say we had, they evolved from a
genus which combined the worst traits of the cat tribe and the
carnivorous lizards--the most savage and bloodthirsty branches of the
animal kingdom--and instead of getting better as they went along, they
got worse, in that respect at least. But they sure do know something.
When you get a month or so to spare, you want to put on this harness and
grab his knowledge, being very careful to steer clear of his mental
traits and so on. Then, when we get back to the Earth, we'll simply tear
it apart and rebuild it. You'll know what I mean when you get this stuff
transplanted into your own skull. But to cut out the lecture, what's on
your mind, Dottie Dimple?"

"This planet Martin picked out is all wet, literally. The visibility is
fine--very few clouds--but this whole half of it is solid ocean. If
there are any islands, even, they're mighty small."

       *       *       *       *       *
