
The Jovian guards who were nearest whirled about and raised the black
tubes threateningly. For a moment the Earthmen hesitated and then came
on with a rush. From the tubes came rays of intensely violet light. As
they fell on the front ranks of the charging Terrestrials, the form, on
which the rays impinged grew suddenly tenuous. The sunlight penetrated
through the bodies for a moment and then there was nothing but a group
of dancing motes of light to mark where they had stood.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Undaunted by the fate of their leaders, the balance of the mob surged
forward uttering cries of hate and rage. From all the doorways, fresh
hordes of Earthmen came rushing to join the fray. Again and again the
terrible rays of the Jovian guards blasted scores of their assailants
into nothingness but more came. Presently the tubes of the Jovians began
to lose their power and the violet light became lighter in shade. With a
roar the Earthmen swept forward and the huge guards went down under the
onrushing waves of humanity. Half a dozen of them were dragged down and
hurled back into the milling crowd where they were torn limb from limb.
The balance of the guards, guided by Havenner's stentorian shouts,
closed in around Glavour and the prisoner and battered their way by
sheer brute force toward the Viceregal chariot. They had reached in and
climbed in when a feminine shout pierced the din of conflict.

"Damis! They have Damis prisoner! Rescue him!"

With a roar, the mob charged again. Mightily the Jovians strove but they
were outnumbered by hundreds to one. One after another was torn from the
chariot until Damis freed himself by a mighty effort and leaped to the
ground. As he did so, the driver's hand found the controlling lever and
the chariot shot forward, crushing under its wheels several luckless
Earthmen who stood in its path. A roar of triumph rose from the crowd
and Damis was hastily lifted to their shoulders. He looked down on his
rescuers with an anguished face.

"Lura!" he gasped. "Is she safe?"

One of the Terrestrials shouted something unintelligible and pointed up.
Damis' gaze followed the direction in which he pointed. From an upper
window of the building into which she had fled, Lura's face, wreathed
with smiles, looked down on him. He smiled and waved in triumph to her.
There was a stir on the outskirts of the crowd and an elderly man, tall
for an Earthman and with dignity and authority written large on his
countenance, made his way through the crowd. At a word from him, Damis
was lowered to his feet to face the newcomer.

"Damis," said the elderly man, "I never thought to grasp the hand of a
Nepthalim or of anyone with Jovian blood in his veins in friendship, yet
I can do no less than offer my hand. It is the thanks of a father to the
saviour of his daughter."

                   *       *       *       *       *

Damis met the outstretched hand with a grip that made the elderly man
wince.

"It is an honor and a pleasure to grasp in friendship the hand of
Turgan, the Kildare of this province," he said, "the hand of one who was
born to be ruler in fact, instead of an underling under a Jovian
master."

"It is true that my father was king of this country before the Jovians
came, forty years ago," said Turgan gravely, "yet now there is no honor
or merit in it. Even the rank of Kildare, which is but that of a slave
ruling other more unfortunate slaves, could not have prevented my only
daughter from being dragged away to the seraglio of that monster. To
such a pass has one been brought whose birth made him the peer of any.
But now we must plan and plan swiftly, else are we undone. Glavour will
return with his minions. Safety will be found only in flight, for mere
numbers cannot oppose the weapons they will turn against us. Damis, so
far you have been one with our Jovian masters, as have all of the
Nepthalim. Now it is war to the death between them and us. On which side
do you stand?"

Damis hesitated as the Kildare's keen gray eyes bored into his own.

"My father was Viceroy of the Earth in the days gone by," he said
slowly, "and he planned that I should take his place. His dream was a
peaceful union of the strength and science of Jupiter with the beauty
and humanity of the Earth. True to his dream, I have cleaved to his
people and striven to bring it about, but I can see now the folly of his
ambition. In stature and mental power he was a Jovian, in all else he
was a Terrestrial. Since his death I have seen you stripped bit by bit
of what he left you until now you are lower than the slaves on Jupiter,
who can appeal to Tubain against a cruel master. Even I, a Nepthalim,
the son of a Viceroy, am forced to revolt to save the maiden I love.
Henceforth, I give up my father's dream of peace and do what my heart
tells me is right. It is war to the death between the Sons of God and
the Sons of Man, and I, who am descended from a Son of God and a
Daughter of Man, cleave to my mother's people."

                   *       *       *       *       *

A shout of joy came from all who heard his ringing voice announce his
new allegiance. Damis had ever a reputation as a humane man and he was
guilty of none of the brutalities which made the Jovians so detested and
which were bettered by those of the Nepthalim who had the power. It was
only the influence which Damis had wielded with the Earthmen which had
prevented many an outbreak which would have been ruthlessly crushed by
the Jovian overlords. To know that the son of a Viceroy, reputed one of
the most brilliant as well as one of the strongest of Jovian blood, was
one with them, made them hope that they might make some headway against
their oppressors and wring from them some small measure of liberty.
Turgan's face was wreathed with smiles.

"Again I offer you my hand, Damis," he said. "Before it was as a father
thanking you for the rescue of his daughter. Now it is a father
welcoming the son he has always longed for and whom he feared he would
never have. My consent to your union with Lura which was grudgingly
given only to save her from the dishonor of being dragged a slave to
Glavour's seraglio, is withdrawn, and in its place I give you a happy
father's joyous consent to the marriage."

There were tears in the old Kildare's eyes as he grasped the hand of the
young blond giant. For a moment they stood with clasped hands, two
strong men taking the measure of one another and each found the other
good. The Kildare dropped Damis' hand and turned to the crowd.

"To your homes!" he cried sharply. "The Sons of God will return with new
weapons and it is my wish that none be found to oppose them. All within
sound of my voice who are members of the inner council will join me in
the palace. Damis, come with me."

Followed by Damis and a score of Earthmen, the Kildare led the way into
a building. As they entered, Damis cast a swift glance around and looked
questioningly at Turgan.

"Lura--?" he asked hesitantly.

"Will join us in the council room," said Turgan with a smile.




CHAPTER II

_Turgan's Plan_


Content with the Kildare's answer, Damis followed him down a corridor
and into a large room set around with benches. The Kildare did not pause
but moved to the far end of the room and manipulated a hidden switch. A
portion of the paneled wall swung inward and through the doorway thus
opened, Turgan led the way. The corridor in which they found themselves
was dimly lighted by radium bulbs which Damis shrewdly suspected had
been stolen from the palace of the Viceroy by Earthmen employed there.
It sloped steeply downward and Damis estimated that they were fifty feet
below the level of the ground before another door opened to Turgan's
manipulation of hidden catches and admitted them to a large room
equipped with tables and chairs and well lighted by other radium bulbs.
Damis turned to the Kildare.

"For years there have been rumors among the Sons of God of the existence
of this place," he exclaimed, "yet every effort to find it has been
futile. Glavour and his council have at last decided that it is merely a
myth and that the underground council chamber does not exist. You have
kept your secret well, for never has a breath of suspicion reached him
that Turgan was one of the conspirators who plotted to overthrow the
reign of the Sons of God."

"Let that, Damis, be a sample of the earnestness and loyalty of your new
brethren," said the Kildare. "There are hundreds of Earthmen who know
where this place is and what secrets it holds, yet none has ever
betrayed it. Scores have gone to torture and to the sacrifice of the
games without unsealing their lips. Would a Jovian have done likewise?"

"To give them due credit, I think they would have," replied Damis
thoughtfully, "yet their motive would not have been loyalty, but
stubbornness and a refusal to subordinate their will to another's. I
thought you said that Lura would join us here?"

                   *       *       *       *       *

As Damis spoke a door on the far side of the chamber opened and a half
dozen women entered. Lura was among them and with a cry of joy, she ran
lightly forward and threw herself into Damis' outstretched arms. Turgan
smiled paternally at them for a moment and then touched his daughter
lightly on the shoulder.

"I have freely and gladly given my blessing to your union with Damis,"
he said. "He is now one with us. His presence makes victory possible and
enables us to act at once instead of planning for years. Damis, you can
operate a space flyer, can you not?"

"Certainly. That is knowledge which all Nepthalim possess."

A suppressed cheer greeted his words and the Earthmen crowded around
him, vibrant with excitement.

"The time is at hand!" cried a stern-faced man in the crimson robe which
marked him an Akildare, an under-officer of the Earthmen.

"Before I can operate a space flyer, I will have to have one to
operate," objected Damis.

"That will be supplied," cried a dozen voices. Turgan's voice rose above
the hubbub of sound.

"Let us proceed in orderly fashion," he cried.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The noise died down to silence and at a gesture from their ruler, the
Earthmen took seats. Turgan stood beside Damis.

"For the enlightenment of our new-found brother, I will recite what has
happened and what we have done, although most of you know it and many of
you have done your part in bringing it about.

"Forty years ago, the Earth was prosperous, peopled with free men, and
happy. While we knew little of science and lived in mere huts, yet we
worshipped beauty and Him who ruled all and loved his children. It was
to such a world that the Jovians came.

"When the first space flyer with a load of these inhuman monsters
arrived on the earth, we foolishly took them for the angels whom we had
been taught to believe spent eternity in glorifying Him. We welcomed
them with our best and humbly obeyed when they spoke. This illusion was
fostered by the name the Jovians gave themselves, the 'Sons of God.'
Hortan, their leader and the father of our new brother, was a just and
kindly man and he ruled the earth wisely and well. We learned from them
and they learned from us. That was the golden age. And the Sons of God
saw that the Daughters of Man were fair, and they took of them wives,
such as they chose. And sons were born to them, the Nepthalim, the
mighty men of the Earth.

"In time other flyers came from the heavens above and brought more of
the Sons of God to rule over us. Then Hortan, the Viceroy, died, and
Damis, know you how he died? You were a babe at the time and you know
nothing. Your father and your mother, who was my distant kinswoman, died
under the knives of assassins. It was given out that they had gone to
Jupiter, yet there were some who knew the truth. You, the killers
sought, but one of the Earthmen whose heart bled for your dead mother,
spirited you away. When you had grown to boyhood, he announced your name
and lineage, although his life paid for his indiscretion. The same hand
which struck down your father and your mother struck at him and struck
not unavailingly. You, since all knew your name and lineage, he dared
not strike, lest those who love him not, would appeal to Tubain. Know
you the name of the monster, the traitor to his ruler and the murderer
of your parents?"

                   *       *       *       *       *

Damis' face had paled during the recital and when the old Kildare turned
to him, he silently shook his head.

"It was the monster who now rules over us as Viceroy and who profanes
the name of God by conferring it on his master and who would, if he
dared, assume the name for himself. It was Glavour, Viceroy of the
Earth."

The blood surged back into Damis' face and he raised a hand in a
dramatic gesture.

"Now I vow that I will never rest until he lies low in death and this be
the hand that brings him there!"

A murmur of applause greeted Damis' announcement and Turgan went on with
his tale.

"With the kind and just Hortan dead, Glavour assumed the throne of
power, for none dared oppose him. Once secure, he gave way to every
brutal lust and vice. Your mother was Hortan's only wife and he honored
her as such, and meant that the Nepthalim should in time rule the Earth,
but Glavour had no such ideas. To him, the Daughters of Man were
playthings to satisfy his brutal lusts. By dozens and by scores he swept
the fairest of them into his seraglio, heeding not the bonds of
matrimony nor the wishes of his victims. Only the fact that my daughter
has been kept from his sight until to-day has spared her.

"The Earthmen who had been content to live under Hortan's rule, rebelled
against Glavour but the rebellion was crushed in blood. Time and again
they rose, but each time the mighty weapons of the Jovians stamped out
resistance. At last we realized that craft and not force must win the
battle. This chamber had been built when Hortan erected his new capital
and none of the Jovians knew of its location, so it was chosen as our
meeting place. To-day, Damis, I have twenty thousand men sworn to do my
bidding and to rise when I give the word. Many thousands more will rise
when they see others in arms and know that again the Sons of Man stand
in arms against the Sons of God."

                   *       *       *       *       *

"There are less than a thousand Jovians and perhaps twice that number of
Nepthalim on the Earth, yet that handful would stand victorious against
all the Earthmen living," said Damis thoughtfully. "Even I, and I am a
Nepthalim, do not know the secret weapons in the arsenal of Glavour, but
I know that they are more powerful than anything we have ever seen.
Forget not, too, that a radio message to Jupiter will bring down ships
with hundreds, nay, thousands, of her fighting men with weapons to
overwhelm all opposition."

"Such was the case but it is so no longer since we number you among us,"
replied the Kildare. "Earthmen are employed in the communications net
which the Jovians have thrown around the Earth and it is but a step from
those machines to the huge one with which they talk to their mother
planet. My spies have been busy for years and our plans are all laid.
There is one planet which all the forces of Jupiter have never been able
to conquer; from which their ships have ever retreated in defeat."

"Mars!" exclaimed Damis.

"Exactly," replied Turgan. "The Martians are a peaceful and
justice-loving people, yet they know that peace is given only to those
who are ready and able to fight for it. Ages ago they perfected weapons
before which the Jovians fly, if they are not destroyed. I have
communicated with the Grand Mognac of Mars and laid our plight before
him. He has pledged his aid and has promised us enough of his weapons to
not only destroy the Jovians and the Nepthalim on the Earth, but also to
prevent other Jovian ships from ever landing. The only problem has been
