"Harper!" Gault's voice was like the snapping of a steel trap.

Startled, Harper came to with a jerk. Seeing he was being
watched, he flushed redly, then bent over his charts again. An
apologetic murmur floated from his desk.

"What was he doing?" Pillbot asked puzzledly.

"Doodling!" Gault spat out the word disgustedly.

"Doodling?" echoed the psychiatrist. "Why that is a slang term we
use in psychiatry, to describe the absent-minded scrawls and
designs people make while their attention is elsewhere occupied.
An overflow of the unconscious mind, we call it. Many famous
people are 'doodlers.' Their doodles often are a sign of special
ability--"

"Exactly!" snapped Gault. "It shows a special ability to waste
time. And Harper has become worse since I hired him to do some of
my mathematical work. Some influence in this laboratory--I blush
to confess--seems to bring it on. 'Four dimensional doodling' we
call it, because, as you saw, he doesn't confine it to the
surface of the paper!"

Pillbot looked startled. "By jove," he cried. "I believe you've
hit on something new to psychiatry. This young man may have some
unknown faculty of mind--an instinctive perception of the fourth
dimension. Just as some people have an unerring sense of
direction, so perhaps Harper has a sense of--of a fourth
direction--the fourth dimension! I should like to examine some of
his 'doodles'."

Harper looked up in alarm as his crusty tempered employer
appeared, followed by the stout figure of Pillbot. He rose and
stood aside unassumingly, as Pillbot bent over the scrawls on his
charts, clucking interestedly.

Harper flickered a worried glance over to the corner. He hoped
they wouldn't notice his stress-analyzing clay model standing
there. It looked like a futurist's nightmare, with angles, curves
and knobs stuck out at all angles. Professor Gault might not
understand....

       *       *       *       *       *

For one of his retiring temperament, Harper was aiming high.
There was a standing award of $50,000 for the lucky mathematician
who would solve the mystery of the "stress-barrier" encountered
by skyscrapers as they were built up toward the 150 story mark.
At this height, they encountered stress and strains which
mathematical computations and engineering designs had been unable
to solve. Harper believed the "stress-barrier" was due to an
undetected space-bending close to the earth's surface, a bending
of space greater than ever provided for in the prediction of
Einstein. And if he was right, and could win that award, then
there might be wedding bells, and a little bungalow with
Judith....

Harper's greatest fear was that he would do something to annoy
Gault into firing him, thus depriving him of the privilege of
using the mathematical charts and computing machines available in
the laboratory. Right now, he hoped Gault wouldn't notice that
statue in the corner--

"What's _that_!"

Harper's heart leaped. The Professor was glaring at the statue,
as though it were something the cat brought in.

Pillbot looked up from examination of the "doodles" and followed
Gault over to the futuristic statuary.

As Gault made strangled noises, Pillbot stared interestedly.
"Why--its like some of the designs in his doodling," he
exclaimed.

"And made with some of my best modeling clay for reproducing
geometric solids!" rasped Gault. He wheeled upon Harper.

"Get that thing out of here! I won't stand for such rot in this
laboratory. Throw it into the hall for the janitor!"

"Ye-yessir," said Harper, gulping. He took hold of the statue,
pulled at it.

"It--it won't budge," he exclaimed amazedly.

"Eh? Won't move? It's not heavy, is it?" demanded the Professor.

"No--about thirty pounds, but it wont move!"

Gault took hold of one of the angles of the thing, jerked at it
savagely. He gave it up with an oath, returned to Harper's desk
muttering.

Harper suddenly noticed the top portion of the statue. It didn't
seem to be all there! He was positive there had been another
section on top, shooting off at an angle, representing a problem
in tangential stress. What had happened to that top section?

He would figure that out later, when the occasion was more
propitious. Right now, he realized that only the presence of
Dr. Pillbot prevented Gault from firing him. He cast an apprehensive
glance toward his employer.

With trepidation, he saw Gault reach for something projecting
from behind a bench. Gault pulled it out, held it dangling before
him. A strangled exclamation of wrath came from him. His long
nose pointed accusingly toward Harper, like a finger pointing out
a criminal.

"I was afraid of that!" he grated. "Cutting paper dolls!" Gault
was holding up a large paper cutout of a human figure--a long,
rangy man.

"This is the last straw," Gault went on, his voice rising. "I
have stood enough--"

