
"I don't wonder. Well, if it comes to that, I can do the same. You _can_
convert me, then."

"Yes, sir. But before we do it we must do enough preliminary work to be
sure that you will not be harmed in any way. Also, there will be many
more changes involved than simple substitution."

"Of course. I realize that. Just see what you can do, please, and let me
know."

"We will, sir, and thank you very much."




IX


As has been intimated, no Terran can know what researches Larry and Tuly
and the other Oman specialists performed, or how they arrived at the
conclusions they reached. However, in less than a week Larry reported to
Hilton.

"It can be done, sir, with complete safety. And you will live even more
comfortably than you do now."

"How long?"

"The mean will be about five thousand Oman years--you don't know that an
Oman year is equal to one point two nine three plus Terran years?"

"I didn't, no. Thanks."

"The maximum, a little less than six thousand. The minimum, a little
over four thousand. I'm very sorry we had no data upon which to base a
closer estimate."

"Close enough." He stared at the Oman. "You could also convert my wife?"

"Of course, sir."

"Well, we might be able to stand it, after we got used to the idea.
Minimum, over five thousand Terran years ... barring accidents, of
course?"

"No, sir. No accidents. Nothing will be able to kill you, except by
total destruction of the brain. And even then, sir, there will be the
pattern."

"I'll ... be ... damned...." Hilton gulped twice. "Okay, go ahead."

"Your skins will be like ours, energy-absorbers. Your 'blood' will carry
charges of energy instead of oxygen. Thus, you may breathe or not, as
you please. Unless you wish otherwise, we will continue the breathing
function. It would scarcely be worth while to alter the automatic
mechanisms that now control it. And you will wish at times to speak. You
will still enjoy eating and drinking, although everything ingested will
be eliminated, as at present, as waste."

"We'd add uranexite to our food, I suppose. Or drink radioactives, or
sleep under cobalt-60 lamps."

"Yes, sir. Your family life will be normal; your sexual urges and
satisfactions the same. Fertilization and period of gestation unchanged.
Your children will mature at the same ages as they do now."

"How do you--oh, I see. You wouldn't change any molecular linkages or
configurations in the genes or chromosomes."

"We could not, sir, even if we wished. Such substitutions can be made
only in exact one-for-one replacements. In the near future you will, of
course, have to control births quite rigorously."

"We sure would. Let's see ... say we want a stationary population of a
hundred million on our planet. Each couple to have two children, a boy
and a girl. Born when the parents are about fifty ... um-m-m. The gals
can have all the children they want, then, until our population is about
a million; then slap on the limit of two kids per couple. Right?"

"Approximately so, sir. And after conversion you alone will be able to
operate with the full power of your eight, without tiring. You will
also, of course, be able to absorb almost instantaneously all the
knowledges and abilities of the old Masters."

Hilton gulped twice before he could speak. "You wouldn't be holding
anything else back, would you?"

"Nothing important, sir. Everything else is minor, and probably known to
you."

"I doubt it. How long will the job take, and how much notice will you
need?"

"Two days, sir. No notice. Everything is ready."

Hilton, face somber, thought for minutes. "The more I think of it the
less I like it. But it seems to be a forced put ... and Temple will blow
sky high ... and _have_ I got the guts to go it alone, even if she'd let
me...." He shrugged himself out of the black mood. "I'll look her up and
let you know, Larry."

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked her up and told her everything. Told her bluntly; starkly;
drawing the full picture in jet black, with very little white.

"There it is, sweetheart. The works," he concluded. "We are not going to
have ten years; we may not have ten months. So--if such a brain as that
can be had, do we or do we not have to have it? I'm putting it squarely
up to you."

Temple's face, which had been getting paler and paler, was now as nearly
colorless as it could become; the sickly yellow of her skin's light tan
unbacked by any flush of red blood.

Her whole body was tense and strained.

"There's a horrible snapper on that question.... Can't _I_ do it? Or
_anybody_ else except you?"

"No. Anyway, whose job is it, sweetheart?"

"I know, but ... but I know just how close Tuly came to killing you. And
that wasn't _anything_ compared to such a radical transformation as
this. I'm afraid it'll kill you, darling. And I just simply couldn't
_stand_ it!"

She threw herself into his arms, and he comforted her in the ages-old
fashion of man with maid.

"Steady, hon," he said, as soon as he could lift her tear-streaked face
from his shoulder. "I'll live through it. I thought you were getting the
howling howpers about having to live for six thousand years and never
getting back to Terra except for a Q strictly T visit now and then."

She pulled away from him, flung back her wheaten mop and glared. "So
_that's_ what you thought! What do I care how long I live, or how, or
where, as long as it's with you? But what makes you think we can
possibly live through such a horrible conversion as that?"

"Larry wouldn't do it if there was any question whatever. He didn't say
it would be painless. But he did say I'd live."

"Well, he knows, I guess ... I hope." Temple's natural fine color began
to come back. "But it's understood that just the second you come out of
the vat, I go right in."

"I hadn't ought to let you, of course. But I don't think I could take it
alone."

That statement required a special type of conference, which consumed
some little time. Eventually, however, Temple answered it in words.

"Of course you couldn't, sweetheart, and I wouldn't let you, even if you
could."

There were a few things that had to be done before those two secret
conversions could be made. There was the matter of the wedding, which
was now to be in quadruplicate. Arrangements had to be made so that
eight Big Wheels of the Project could all be away on honeymoon at once.

All these things were done.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of the conversion operations themselves, nothing more need be said. The
honeymooners, having left ship and town on a Friday afternoon, came back
one week from the following Monday[1] morning. The eight met joyously in
Bachelors' Hall; the girls kissing each other and the men
indiscriminately and enthusiastically; the men cooperating zestfully.

[1] While it took some time to recompute the exact Ardrian calendar,
Terran day names and Terran weeks were used from the first. The Omans
manufactured watches, clocks, and chronometers which divided the Ardrian
day into twenty-four Ardrian hours, with minutes and seconds as usual.

Temple scarcely blushed at all, she was so engrossed in trying to find
out whether or not anyone was noticing any change. No one seemed to
notice anything out of the ordinary. So, finally, she asked.

"Don't _any_ of you, really, see anything different?"

The six others all howled at that, and Sandra, between giggles and
snorts, said: "No, precious, it doesn't show a bit. Did you really think
it would?"

Temple blushed furiously and Hilton came instantly to his bride's
rescue. "Chip-chop the comedy, gang. She and I aren't human any more.
We're a good jump toward being Omans. I couldn't make her believe it
doesn't show."

That stopped the levity, cold, but none of the six could really believe
it. However, after Hilton had coiled a twenty-penny spike into a perfect
helix between his fingers, and especially after he and Temple had each
chewed up and swallowed a piece of uranexite, there were no grounds left
for doubt.

"That settles it ... it _tears_ it," Karns said then. "Start all over
again, Jarve. We'll listen, this time."

Hilton told the long story again, and added: "I had to re-work a couple
of cells of Temple's brain, but now she can read and understand the
records as well as I can. So I thought I'd take her place on Team One
and let her boss the job on all the other teams. Okay?"

"So you don't want to let the rest of us in on it." Karns's level stare
was a far cry from the way he had looked at his chief a moment before.
"If there's any one thing in the universe I never had _you_ figured for,
it's a dog in the manger."

"Huh? You mean you actually _want_ to be a ... a ... hell, we don't even
know _what_ we are!"

"I do want it, Jarvis. We all do." This was, of all people, Teddy! "No
one in all history has had more than about fifty years of really
productive thinking. And just the idea of having enough time ..."

"Hold it, Teddy. Use your brain. The Masters couldn't take it--they
committed suicide. How do you figure we can do any better?"

"Because we'll _use_ our brains!" she snapped. "They didn't. The Omans
will serve us; and that's _all_ they'll do."

"And do you think you'll be able to raise your children and
grandchildren and so on to do the same? To have guts enough to resist
the pull of such an ungodly habit-forming drug as this Oman service is?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm sure of it." She nodded positively. "And we'll run all applicants
through a fine enough screen to--that is, if we ever consider anybody
except our own BuSci people. And there's another reason." She grinned,
got up, wriggled out of her coverall, and posed in bra and panties.
"Look. I can keep most of this for five years. Quite a lot of it for
ten. Then comes the struggle. What do _you_ think I'd do for the
ability, whenever it begins to get wrinkly or flabby, to peel the whole
thing off and put on a brand-spanking-new smooth one? You name it, I'll
do it! Besides, Bill and I will _both_ just simply and cold-bloodedly
murder you if you try to keep us out."

"Okay." Hilton looked at Temple; she looked at him; both looked at all
the others. There was no revulsion at all. Nothing but eagerness.

Temple took over.

"I'm surprised. We're both surprised. You see, Jarve didn't want to do
it at all, but he had to. I not only didn't want to, I was scared green
and yellow at just the idea of it. But I had to, too, of course. We
didn't think anybody would really want to. We thought we'd be left here
alone. We still will be, I think, when you've thought it clear through,
Teddy. You just haven't realized yet that we aren't even human any more.
We're simply nothing but _monsters_!" Temple's voice became a wail.

"I've said my piece," Teddy said. "You tell 'em, Bill."

"Let me say something first," Kincaid said. "Temple, I'm ashamed of you.
This line isn't at all your usual straight thinking. What you actually
are is _homo superior_. Bill?"

"I can add one bit to that. I don't wonder that you were scared silly,
Temple. Utterly new concept and you went into it stone cold. But now we
see the finished product and we like it. In fact, we drool."

"I'll say we're drooling," Sandra said. "I could do handstands and
pinwheels with joy."

"Let's see you," Hilton said. "That we'd all get a kick out of."

"Not now--don't want to hold this up--but sometime I just will. Bev?"

"I'm for it--and _how_! And won't Bernadine be amazed," Beverly laughed
gleefully, "at her wise-crack about the 'race to end all human races'
coming true?"

"I'm in favor of it, too, one hundred per cent," Poynter said. "Has it
occurred to you, Jarve, that this opens up intergalactic exploration? No
supplies to carry and plenty of time and fuel?"

"No, it hadn't. You've got a point there, Frank. That might take a
little of the curse off of it, at that."

"When some of our kids get to be twenty years old or so and get married,
I'm going to take a crew of them to Andromeda. We'll arrange, then, to
extend our honeymoons another week," Hilton said. "What will our policy
be? Keep it dark for a while with just us eight, or spread it to the
rest?"

"Spread it, I'd say," Kincaid said.

"We can't keep it secret, anyway," Teddy argued. "Since Larry and Tuly
were in on the whole deal, every Oman on the planet knows all about it.
Somebody is going to ask questions, and Omans always answer questions
and always tell the truth."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Questions have already been asked and answered," Larry said, going to
the door and opening it.

Stella rushed in. "We've been hearing the _damnedest_ things!" She
kissed everybody, ending with Hilton, whom she seized by both shoulders.
"Is it actually true, boss, that you can fix me up so I'll live
practically forever and can eat more than eleven calories a day without
getting fat as a pig? Candy, ice cream, cake, pie, eclairs, cream puffs,
French pastries, sugar and gobs of thick cream in my coffee...?"

Half a dozen others, including the van der Moen twins, came in. Beverly
emitted a shriek of joy. "Bernadine! The mother of the race to end all
human races!"

"You whistled it, birdie!" Bernadine caroled. "I'm going to have ten or
twelve, each one weirder than all the others. I told you I was a
prophet--I'm going to hang out my shingle. Wholesale and retail
prophecy; special rates for large parties." Her voice was drowned out
in a general clamor.

"Hold it, everybody!" Hilton yelled. "Chip-chop it! _Quit_ it!" Then, as
the noise subsided, "If you think I'm going to tell this tall tale over
and over again for the next two weeks you're all crazy. So shut down the
plant and get everybody out here."

"Not _everybody_, Jarve!" Temple snapped. "We don't want scum, and
there's some of that, even in BuSci."

"You're so right. Who, then?"

"The rest of the heads and assistants, of course ... and all the lab
girls and their husbands and boy-friends. I know they are all okay. That
will be enough for now, don't you think?"

"I do think;" and the indicated others were sent for; and in a few
minutes arrived.

The Omans brought chairs and Hilton stood on a table. He spoke for ten
minutes. Then: "Before you decide whether you want to or not, think it
over very carefully, because it's a one-way street. Fluorine can not be
displaced. Once in, you're stuck for life. _There is no way back._ I've
told you all the drawbacks and disadvantages I know of, but there may be
a lot more that I haven't thought of yet. So think it over for a few
days and when each of you has definitely made up his or her mind, let me
know." He jumped down off the table.

       *       *       *       *       *

His listeners, however, did not need days, or even seconds, to decide.
Before Hilton's feet hit the floor there was a yell of unanimous
approval.

He looked at his wife. "Do you suppose _we're_ nuts?"

"Uh-uh. Not a bit. Alex was right. I'm going to just _love_ it!" She
hugged his elbow ecstatically. "So are you, darling, as soon as you stop
looking at only the black side."

"You know ... you could be right?" For the first time since the
"ghastly" transformation Hilton saw that there really was a bright side
and began to study it. "With most of BuSci--and part of the Navy, and
selectees from Terra--it _will_ be slightly terrific, at that!"

"And that 'habit-forming-drug' objection isn't insuperable, darling,"
Temple said. "If the younger generations start weakening we'll fix the
Omans. I wouldn't want to wipe them out entirely, but ..."

