could see a few men sitting at the side of the road, leaning back
against their packs. He went forward a few more paces, then selected a
comfortable looking bit of moss.

So what had happened? A little guy named Donald Michaels had been
disguised as a clanless mat maker. He leaned back against the pack.
And, brother, had they given him a stock of mats to sell. This clansman
in Riandar would be busy for a month, just unloading all these things
from his stock.

He thought of those daydreams he had once had. A king's councilor, he
had imagined, was a highly important, greatly respected individual. He
had dreamed of himself, dressed in the ornate formal robes he'd seen in
pictures of the old nobility. He'd pictured himself exchanging urbane
chatter with other beautifully turned out characters, who hung on his
every word. He'd seen himself striding between low-bowing lines of
assorted courtiers and soldiery, pausing now and then to tap at the
pavement with his jeweled staff. He'd---- Hah!

He looked at the dusty trail. He'd been striding, all right, but the
field reeds didn't look too much like bowing lines of---- Yeah, and his
staff didn't have too many jewels, either. No pavement, even, and this
fool pack didn't feel much like a finely tailored robe of office. He
shrugged.

"This is no dream," he told himself. "You let one of Stern's people get
suspicious, and you'll find out just how real things can get." He
twisted around to get the package of food and the water bottle which
dangled from the pack.

Distastefully, he looked at the little packet of powder which was in
the food package. He glanced around quickly, then dumped the powder
into his mouth, quickly gulping water to wash it down.

"Gaah!" he growled, "does it have to taste like the inside of an old
shoe? Oh, well, it'll keep me nice and dark for the next thirty hours
or so." He pulled a strip of dried meat from the package. Maybe this
will help take the taste out.

He sighed and worked his jaws on the leatherlike substance. It started
to soften a little.

Well, anyway, he knew how to get to the vault where the ancestral
volumes of the Waernu were kept. And he knew just which volume to pick
out. Only one small problem remained. How was he going to get into the
house--and on into the little pond in the inner garden? He grinned as
he thought of Pete's remark.

"It'll be simple for you," he had said enviously. "All you have to do
is tell any guard you meet to stand aside and forget he ever saw you.
Then you go on down to the vault. Wish I had that ability of yours."

"Sure," he told himself, "hang your clothes on yonder bush--and get
right into the water. It's just a simple matter of diving down ten feet
and pushing the right rock the right number of times--in the right
directions. Nothing to it. And then you go through the pressure trap,
and there you are. Simple!"

And who was going to guard the pond while he was down there? Suppose he
broke surface right in front of a flock of trigger-happy Enforcers? He
sighed.

"Oh, well," he told himself. "You asked for it. Now, you've got it.
Have fun." He looked into the food package and selected a meal cake.

                    *      *      *      *      *

At last, he dusted his fingers and leaned back lazily against his pack,
looking into the clear sky. For a few minutes, he simply relaxed, his
eyes fixed on the infinite distance, his mind a near blank.

Other pack-laden men strode past him, intent on their destination. At
last, a group swung by and the sound of their conversation brought Don
out of his semitrance. Behind the group was another, who walked a
little faster than the others, in an apparent effort to catch up. Don
pushed himself up with the aid of his staff, drew a few deep breaths,
and started pacing along behind him.

Ahead, the group went around a curve in the path. The man ahead of Don
cut over into the grass, still intent on catching up with his
companions, who were not more than a few meters ahead. Don watched him
casually.

There was no use, he thought, in trying to keep up with this fellow or
his companions. It was too hot. Besides, this was probably a clan group
who would not welcome company--especially the company of one of no
clan.

He started to slow down to a normal pace, then his attention was caught
by movement by a rock just ahead of the other. A small, greenish-brown
body was vaguely outlined in the long grass nearly in the man's path.

Don looked more closely. The animal was heavy-bodied, with rather short
forelegs. Powerful hind legs were tucked under the body, twitching a
little now. The forelegs pawed slightly at the grass and the flat, wide
head probed out, extending toward the approaching man.

"Hey!" yelled Don. "Look out. Gersal!" He started forward in a half
run, his staff poised for a blow.

The other jumped sideways but the furry body grazed his leg and spun,
claws and teeth working furiously. The man looked down and screamed.

Don's staff came down in a chopping blow and the animal bounced out
onto the open path. Its paws raised little spurts of dust as it spun
about and prepared for another spring.

Again, Don's staff swung down. The gersal flopped about for an instant
in the dust of the path, then faced toward him, an angry scream coming
from its throat.

Again, it tried to get its balance for a spring, but one hind leg
dragged limply. Again, the staff swung, tumbling the beast over in the
dust.

There was a flurry of paws and the gersal struggled up to its haunches,
then sat up, its brilliant red eyes fixed on Don. It stretched out
short forelegs in seeming supplication, then batted futilely at the
punching staff end.

Disregarding the pleading attitude of the beast, Don continued to punch
at the squirming body till it was obvious that no vestige of life could
remain. Then, he looked at the other man.

The fellow had managed to get to the center of the path before he had
collapsed. He half sat, half lay against his pack, breathing raggedly.
Sweat stood out on his forehead. He looked at Don vaguely, making an
obvious effort to focus his eyes.

"Thanks ... Friend," he mumbled. "You tried---- Oooh!" He closed his
eyes and stiffened, his legs stretching out and his back arching.

The men who walked ahead had been attracted by the commotion. They came
back and one jerked off his pack and bent over the man in the path. He
looked over at the dead animal, then glanced up at Don.

"How many times was he bitten?"

"I doubt if he got more than one," Don told him.

The other nodded and looked searchingly at the victim. Then, he reached
into his clothing and removed a small packet. He opened it and pulled
the protective cover off a syrette.

"There's a small chance, then," he remarked. He poked the needle of the
syrette into the sufferer's forearm and squeezed the tube.

The stricken man moved convulsively and opened one eye. His companion
nodded.

"You might make it, Delm," he said cautiously. "Only one bite, and we
got to you soon." He nodded.

"If you can hang on for just five minutes, you'll walk the trail
again." He looked up at Don.

"That was quick action," he said. "You may have saved our clan
brother." He looked down at the torn place on the man's leg.

"A couple of more bites, and he'd surely be dead by now." He got to his
feet.

"Whom do we have to thank?"

Don looked down at the path in apparent discomfort.

"I am Kalo," he said, "of the mountains."

The other's eyes clouded. "Oh," he said tonelessly. He looked down at
his companion, then back at the dead animal.

"Well," he said slowly, "we are grateful, Clanless One. Go your way in
peace. We will take care of our brother."

Don started to turn away. "I hope he----"

The other nodded curtly. "The gersal's poison is strong," he said. "But
soon we shall see. May your way be safe." He turned back to his
patient.

Don turned away and went around the curve in the path. Well, maybe the
Korental had been right, he thought. So long as they kept from
bothering others, the clanless ones weren't molested. And they
certainly didn't form any associations that might be embarrassing later
on. He glanced back.

"Hope that guy lives through it," he told himself, "but I'm glad I
don't have to put up with a three-day celebration. Haven't got the
time."

In the distance, he could see the walls and towers of Riandar. The walk
was nearly over now. He stepped his pace up a little, then slowed down
again. There was no sense in coming through the gate all hot and
sweaty, he reminded himself. It would be way out of character.

                    *      *      *      *      *

It was funny, Don thought, that he hadn't remembered this store when
the Korental had described its location. Probably it was the use of the
word "shop." This was a large department store. He'd done some shopping
here at one time or another, himself. He started to go by the front,
then a display in one of the windows attracted his attention. He
paused.

Someone had designed a tasteful array of furniture, set up like a
nobleman's bedroom suite. One could, without too much effort, imagine
himself standing on the enclosed walkway of a palace, facing away from
the inner garden. The furniture, he noted, was of excellent quality. In
fact, when he started refinishing the ranch, maybe he'd come in here.
He glanced at the display floor. The mats were similar in design to
those in his pack.

Suddenly, he remembered his own present status and stepped back, away
from the window. Simple mat makers don't concern themselves with
examining displays that would cost more than they'd make in a lifetime.
This window was strictly for people who could afford large platters of
luxury. He turned away, looking for another, less elaborate entrance.

Down the street, at the corner of the building, he found an
inconspicuous door. A brass plate indicated that this was the
employees' entrance to the Blue Mountain Mercantile Company's offices.
Another plate indicated that the delivery entrance was around the
corner. Don shrugged and went into the door.

He found himself in a narrow hallway. Before him was a stairway, its
lowest step blocked by a light chain. To his right, a man sat in a
small cubby.

"You're in the wrong door," he said expressionlessly. "Deliveries are
received around the corner."

"I know," Don told him. "I'm from the Kor-en. I'd like to see
Korentona."

The man frowned fleetingly. "Tell you," he said casually, "maybe it
would be better if you made your delivery right now. Then you can come
back later on."

Don examined him for a moment. "You mean something is----"

"That's right." The man nodded. "Go around to the receiving room. Drop
your pack, and come back--say in about an hour." He glanced upward as
footsteps sounded on the stairs.

"Oh, oh," he added softly. "Keep quiet and let me handle this."

A heavy-set man came down the stairs. He looked sharply at Don, taking
in his appearance and the details of his pack.

"What's this, Mora?" he demanded.

The timekeeper shrugged casually. "Just some porter," he said
negligently. "Can't read too well, I guess. Got in the wrong door. I
was telling him where to drop his pack."

"Oh?" The other looked at Don more closely. "Looks like another load of
those mats from the Morek. Look, Fellow, you wouldn't be from one of
those clans, would you now?"

Don shook his head. "I am Kalo," he said, "of the mountains. I have no
clan. I make mats. And twice a year I come here to Riandar to sell
them."

"Been here before?"

"I have been in Riandar many times."

"That's not what I mean. Have you been here--to this store--before?"

Don shook his head. "Not to this store, no. But they told me the Blue
Mountain was paying better than some others. I thought I'd try----"

[Illustration]

"Yeah," the other said coldly. "Sure. Now, suppose we take a little
walk, you and I? Some people down the street would like to talk to
you."

Don shook his head. "I merely came here to sell mats," he insisted. "I
make good mats."

The heavy man frowned. "Maybe," he snapped. "We'll see about that after
we've had a talk with you." He stepped closer. "If you're just a mat
maker, nothing will happen to you. If you really have good mats, you
might even get a nice price for some of your stuff. Come on."

He reached out to take Don's sleeve. Don stepped back, his face
suddenly losing its vague, apologetic expression. His features
sharpened, to become hard, uncompromising.

"Get over to that wall, Fellow," he ordered sharply. "Move!"

The man's hand dropped. For a moment, he stared slackly at Don.

"Come on!" Don's voice raised a little. "Get over to that wall. And
then stand still." He started to shuck off the straps of his pack.

The man before him sobbed helplessly, then shuffled away. Don knelt
down and stripped the pack off. Then he stepped aside and raised a hand
in a beckoning gesture.

"Now get over here," he snapped. "Pick up that pack and take it up to
Mr. Tona's office. I'll follow you."

The man in the cubby rubbed his head for a moment, then picked up the
phone. Don swung toward him. "Put that phone back," he ordered, "and
come out of there. You're coming with us."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Korentona looked up as the small procession entered his office.

"What's happened now?"

Don nodded at him, then faced the man with the pack.
