He was ushered into a curtained booth. There was an auto-dispenser so
that those using it need not be interrupted by servants, and an
ultrasonic globe on the table was already vibrating to soundproof the
region. Lancaster's gaze went to the man sitting there. In spite of
being short, he was broad-shouldered and compact in plain gray evening
pajamas. His face was round and freckled, almost cherubic, under a shock
of sandy hair, but there were merry little devils in his eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Good evening, Dr. Lancaster," he said. "Please sit down. What'll you
have?"

"Thanks, I'll have Scotch and soda." Might as well make this expensive,
if the government was footing the bill. And if this--Berg--thought him
un-American for drinking an imported beverage, what of it? The scientist
lowered himself into the seat opposite his host.

"I'm having the same, as a matter of fact," said Berg mildly. He twirled
the dial and slipped a couple of five-dollar coins into the dispenser
slot. When the tray was ejected, he sipped his drink appreciatively and
looked across the rim of the glass at the other man.

"You're a high-ranking physicist on the Arizona Project, aren't you, Dr.
Lancaster?" he asked.

That much was safe to admit. Lancaster nodded.

"What is your work, precisely?"

"You know I can't tell you anything like that."

"It's all right. Here are my credentials." Berg extended a wallet.
Lancaster scanned the cards and handed them back.

"Okay, so you're in Security," he said. "I still can't tell you
anything, not without proper clearance."

Berg chuckled amiably. "Good. I'm glad to see you're discreet. Too many
labmen don't understand the necessity of secrecy, even between different
branches of the same organization." With a sudden whip-like sharpness:
"You didn't tell anyone about this meeting, did you?"

"No, of course not." Despite himself, Lancaster was rattled. "That is, a
friend asked if I'd care to go out with her tonight, but I said I was
meeting someone else."

"That's right." Berg relaxed, smiling. "All right, we may as well get
down to business. You're getting quite an honor, Dr. Lancaster. You've
been tapped for one of the most important jobs in the Solar System."

"Eh?" Lancaster's eyes widened behind the contact lenses. "But no one
else has informed me--"

"No one of your acquaintance knows of this. Nor shall they. But tell me,
you've done work on dielectrics, haven't you?"

"Yes. It's been a sort of specialty of mine, in fact. I wrote my thesis
on the theory of dielectric polarization and since then--no, that's
classified."

"M-hm." Berg took another sip of his drink. "And right now you're just a
cog in a computer-development Project. You see, I do know a few things
about you. However, we've decided--higher up, you know, in fact on the
very top level--to take you off it for the time being and put you on
this other job, one concerning your specialty. Furthermore, you won't be
part of a great organizational machine, but very much on your own. The
fewer who know of this, the better."

Lancaster wasn't sure he liked that. Once the job was done--if he were
possessed of all information on it--he might be incarcerated or even
shot as a Security risk. Things like that had happened. But there wasn't
much he could do about it.

"Have no fears." Berg seemed to read his thoughts. "Your reward may be a
little delayed for Security reasons, but it will come in due time." He
leaned forward, earnestly. "I repeat, this project is _top secret_. It's
a vital link in something much bigger than you can imagine, and few men
below the President even know of it. Therefore, the very fact that
you've worked on it--that you've done any outside work at all--must
remain unknown, even to the chiefs of your Project."

"Good stunt if you can do it," shrugged Lancaster. "But I'm hot.
Security keeps tabs on everything I do."

"This is how we'll work it. You have a furlough coming up in two weeks,
don't you--a three months' furlough? Where were you going?"

"I thought I'd visit the Southwest. Get in some mountain climbing, see
the canyons and Indian ruins and--"

"Yes, yes. Very well. You'll get your ticket as usual and a reservation
at the Tycho Hotel in Phoenix. You'll go there and, on your first
evening, retire early. Alone, I need hardly add. We'll be waiting for
you in your room. There'll be a very carefully prepared
duplicate--surgical disguise, plastic fingerprinting tips, fully
educated in your habits, tastes, and mannerisms. He'll stay behind and
carry out your vacation while we smuggle you away. A similar exchange
will be affected when you return, you'll be told exactly how your double
spent the summer, and you'll resume your ordinary life."

"Ummm--well--" It was too sudden. Lancaster had to hedge. "But
look--I'll be supposedly coming back from an outdoor vacation, with a
suntan and well rested. Somebody's going to get suspicious."

"There'll be sun lamps where you're going, my friend. And I think the
chance to work independently on something that really interests you will
prove every bit as restful to your nerves as a summer's travel. I know
the scientific mentality." Berg chuckled. "Yes, indeed."

       *       *       *       *       *

The exchange went off so smoothly that it was robbed of all melodrama,
though Lancaster had an unexpectedly eerie moment when he confronted his
double. It was his own face that looked at him, there in the impersonal
hotel room, himself framed against blowing curtains and darkness of
night. Then Berg gestured him to follow and they went down a cord ladder
hanging from the window sill. A car waited in the alley below and slid
into easy motion the instant they had gotten inside.

There was a driver and another man in the front seat, both shadows
against the moving blur of street lamps and night. Berg and Lancaster
sat in the rear, and the secret agent chatted all the way. But he said
nothing of informational content.

When the highway had taken them well into the loneliness of the desert,
the car turned off it, bumped along a miserable dirt track until it had
crossed a ridge, and slowed before a giant transcontinental dieselectric
truck. A man emerged from its cab, waving an unhurried arm, and the car
swung around to the rear of the van. There was a tailgate lowered,
forming a ramp; above it, the huge double doors opened on a cavern of
blackness. The car slid up the ramp, and the man outside pushed it in
after them and closed the doors. Presently the truck got into motion.

"This is _really_ secret!" whistled Lancaster. He felt awed and
helpless.

"Quite so. Security doesn't like the government's right hand to know
what its left is doing." Berg smiled, a dim flash of teeth in his
shadowy face. Then he was serious. "It's necessary, Lancaster. You don't
know how strong and well-organized the subversives are."

"They--" The physicist closed his mouth. It was true--he hadn't the
faintest notion, really. He followed the news, but in a cursory fashion,
without troubling to analyze the meaning of it. Damn it all, he had
enough else to think about. Just as well that elections had been
suspended and bade fair to continue indefinitely in abeyance. If he, a
member of the intelligentsia, wasn't sufficiently acquainted with the
political and military facts of life to make rational decisions, it
certainly behooved the ill-educated masses to obey.

"We might as well stretch ourselves," said the driver. "Long way to go
yet." He climbed out and switched on an overhead light.

       *       *       *       *       *

The interior of the van was roomy, even allowing for the car. There were
bunks, a table and chairs, a small refrigerator and cookstove. The
driver, a lean saturnine man who seemed to be forever chewing gum, began
to prepare coffee. The other sat down, whistling tunelessly. He was
young and powerfully built, but his right arm ended in a prosthetic
claw. All of them were dressed in inconspicuous civilian garb.

"Take us about ten hours, maybe," said Berg. "The spaceship's 'way over
in Colorado."

He caught Lancaster's blank stare, and grinned. "Yes, my friend, your
lab is out in space. Surprised?"

"Mmm--yeah. I've never been off Earth."

"Sokay. We run at acceleration, you won't be spacesick." Berg drew up a
chair, sat down, and tilted it back against a wall. The steady rumble of
engines pulsed under his words:

"It's interesting, really, to consider the relationship between
government and military technology. The powerful, authoritarian
governments have always arisen in such times as the evolution of warfare
made a successful fighting machine something elaborate, expensive, and
maintainable by professionals only. Like in the Roman Empire. It took
years to train a legionnaire and a lot of money to equip an army and
keep it in the field. So Rome became autarchic. However, it was not so
expensive a proposition that a rebellious general couldn't put some
troops up for a while--or he could pay them with plunder. So you did get
civil wars. Later, when the Empire had broken up and warfare relied
largely on the individual barbarian who brought his own weapons with
him, government loosened. It had to--any ruler who got to throwing his
weight around too much would have insurrection on his hands. Then as war
again became an art--well, you see how it goes. There are other factors,
of course, like religion--ideology in general. But by and large, it's
worked out the way I explained it. Because there are always people
