mind. Forget about Beth and your father. Think about Lucky Starr for a
minute. Remember him?"

"Sure," Malone said. "I liked those books. You know it's funny, but
the books you read when you're a kid, they kind of stay with you. Know
what I mean? I can still remember that one about Venus, for instance.
Gee, that was--"

"Never mind about Venus, too," Burris said sharply. "Keep your mind on
the problem."

"Yes, sir," Malone said. He paused. "What problem, sir?" he added.

"The problem we're discussing," Burris said. He gave Malone a bright,
blank stare. "My God," he said. "Just listen to me."

"Yes, sir."

"All right, then." Burris took a deep breath. He seemed nervous. Once
again he stood up and went to the window. This time, he spoke without
turning. "Remember how everybody used to laugh about spaceships, and
orbital satellites, and life on other planets? That was just in those
Lucky Starr books. That was all just for kids, wasn't it?"

"Well, I don't know," Malone said slowly.

"Sure it was all for kids," Burris said. "It was laughable. Nobody
took it seriously."

"Well, _somebody_ must--"

"You just keep quiet and listen," Burris said.

"Yes, sir," Malone said.

Burris nodded. His hands were clasped behind his back. "We're not
laughing any more, are we, Malone?" he said without moving.

There was silence.

"Well, are we?"

"Did you want me to answer, sir?"

"Of course I did!" Burris snapped.

"You told me to keep quiet and--"

"Never mind what I told you," Burris said. "Just do what I told you."

"Yes, sir," Malone said. "No, sir," he added after a second.

"No, sir, what?" Burris asked softly.

"No, sir, we're not laughing any more," Malone said.

"Ah," Burris said. "And why aren't we laughing any more?"

There was a little pause. Malone said, tentatively: "Because there's
nothing to laugh about, sir?"

Burris whirled. "On the head!" he said happily. "You've hit the nail
on the head, Kenneth. I knew I could depend on you." His voice grew
serious again, and thoughtful. "We're not laughing any more because
there's nothing to laugh about. We have orbital satellites, and we've
landed on the Moon with an atomic rocket. The planets are the next
step, and after that the stars. Man's heritage, Kenneth. The stars.
And the stars, Kenneth, belong to Man--not to the Russians!"

"Yes, sir," Malone said soberly.

"So," Burris said, "we should learn not to laugh any more. But have
we?"

"I don't know, sir."

"We haven't," Burris said with decision. "Can you read my mind?"

"No, sir," Malone said.

"Can I read your mind?"

Malone hesitated. At last he said: "Not that I know of, sir."

"Well, I can't," Burris snapped. "And can any of us read each other's
mind?"

Malone shook his head. "No, sir," he said.

Burris nodded. "That's the problem," he said. "That's the case I'm
sending you out to crack."

This time, the silence was a long one.

At last, Malone said: "What problem, sir?"

"Mind reading," Burris said. "There's a spy at work in the Nevada
plant, Kenneth. And the spy is a telepath."

                              * * * * *

The video tapes were very clear and very complete. There were a great
many of them, and it was long after nine o'clock when Kenneth Malone
decided to take a break and get some fresh air. Washington was a good
city for walking, even at night, and Malone liked to walk. Sometimes
he pretended, even to himself, that he got his best ideas while
walking, but he knew perfectly well that wasn't true. His best ideas
just seemed to come to him, out of nowhere, precisely as the situation
demanded them.

He was just lucky, that was all. He had a talent for being lucky. But
nobody would ever believe that. A record like his was spectacular,
even in the annals of the FBI, and Burris himself believed that the
record showed some kind of superior ability.

Malone knew that wasn't true, but what could he do about it? After
all, he didn't want to resign, did he? It was kind of romantic and
exciting to be an FBI agent, even after three years. A man got a
chance to travel around a lot and see things, and it was interesting.
The pay was pretty good, too.

The only trouble was that, if he didn't quit, he was going to have to
find a telepath.

The notion of telepathic spies just didn't sound right to Malone. It
bothered him in a remote sort of way. Not that the idea of telepathy
itself was alien to him--after all, he was even more aware than the
average citizen that research had been going on in that field for
something over a quarter of a century, and that the research was even
speeding up.

But the cold fact that a telepathy-detecting device had been invented
somehow shocked his sense of propriety, and his notions of privacy. It
wasn't decent, that was all.

There ought to be something sacred, he told himself angrily.

He stopped walking and looked up. He was on Pennsylvania Avenue,
heading toward the White House.

That was no good. He went to the corner and turned off, down the
block. He had, he told himself, nothing at all to see the President
about.

Not yet, anyhow.

The streets were dark and very peaceful. _I get my best ideas while
walking_, Malone said without convincing himself. He thought back to
the video tapes.

The report on the original use of the machine itself had been on one
of the first tapes, and Malone could still see and hear it. That was
one thing he did have, he reflected; his memory was pretty good.

Burris had been the first speaker on the tapes, and he'd given the
serial and reference number in a cold, matter-of-fact voice. His face
had been perfectly blank, and he looked just like the head of the FBI
people were accustomed to seeing on their TV and newsreel screens.
Malone wondered what had happened to him between the time the tapes
had been made and the time he'd sent for Malone.

Maybe the whole notion of telepathy was beginning to get him, Malone
thought.

Burris recited the standard tape-opening in a rapid mumble, like a
priest involved in the formula of the Mass: "Any person or agent
unauthorized for this tape please refrain from viewing further, under
penalties as prescribed by law." Then he looked off, out past the
screen to the left, and said: "Dr. Thomas O'Connor, of Westinghouse
Laboratories. Will you come here, Dr. O'Connor?"

Dr. O'Connor came into the lighted square of screen slowly, looking
all around him. "This is very fascinating," he said, blinking in the
lamplight. "I hadn't realized that you people took so many
precautions--"

He was, Malone thought, somewhere between fifty and sixty, tall and
thin with skin so transparent that he nearly looked like a living X-
ray. He had pale blue eyes and pale white hair, and, Malone thought,
if there ever were a contest for the best-looking ghost, Dr. Thomas
O'Connor would win it hands (or phalanges) down.

"This is all necessary for the national security," Burris said, a
little sternly.

"Oh," Dr. O'Connor said quickly. "I realize that, of course.
Naturally. I can certainly see that."

"Let's go ahead, shall we?" Burris said.

O'Connor nodded. "Certainly. Certainly."

Burris said: "Well, then," and paused. After a second he started
again: "Now, Dr. O'Connor, would you please give us a sort of verbal
rundown on this for our records?"

"Of course," Dr. O'Connor said. He smiled into the video cameras and
cleared his throat. "I take it you don't want an explanation of how
this machine works. I mean: you don't want a technical exposition, do
you?"

"No," Burris said, and added: "Not by any means. Just tell us what it
does."

Dr. O'Connor suddenly reminded Malone of a professor he'd had in
college for one of the law courses. He had, Malone thought, the same
smiling gravity of demeanor, the same condescending attitude of
absolute authority. It was clear that Dr. O'Connor lived in a world of
his own, a world that was not even touched by the common run of men.

"Well," he began, "to put it very simply, the device indicates whether
or not a man's mental--ah--processes are being influenced by outside--
by outside influences." He gave the cameras another little smile. "If
you will allow me, I will demonstrate on the machine itself."

He took two steps that carried him out of camera range, and returned
wheeling a large heavy-looking box. Dangling from the metal covering
were a number of wires and attachments. A long cord led from the box
to the floor and snaked out of sight to the left.

"Now," Dr. O'Connor said. He selected a single lead, apparently,
Malone thought, at random. "This electrode--"

"Just a moment, Doctor," Burris said. He was eyeing the machine with a
combination of suspicion and awe. "A while back you mentioned
something about 'outside influences.' Just what, specifically, does
that mean?"

With some regret, Dr. O'Connor dropped the lead. "Telepathy," he said.
"By outside influences, I meant influences on the mind, such as
telepathy or mind-reading of some nature."

"I see," Burris said. "You can detect a telepath with this machine."

"I'm afraid--"

"Well, some kind of a mind-reader anyhow," Burris said. "We won't
quarrel about terms."

"Certainly not," Dr. O'Connor said. The smile he turned on Burris was
as cold and empty as the inside of Orbital Station One. "What I meant
was--if you will permit me to continue--that we cannot detect any sort
of telepathy or mind-reader with this device. To be frank, I very much
wish that we could; it would make everything a great deal simpler.
However, the laws of psionics don't seem to operate that way."

"Well, then," Burris said, "what does the thing do?" His face wore a
mask of confusion. Momentarily, Malone felt sorry for his chief. He
could remember how he'd felt, himself, when that law professor had
come up with a particularly baffling question in class.

"This machine," Dr. O'Connor said with authority, "detects the slight
variations in mental activity that occur when a person's mind is
_being_ read."

"You mean, if my mind were being read right now--"

"Not right now," Dr. O'Connor said. "You see, the bulk of this machine
is in Nevada; the structure is both too heavy and too delicate for
transport. And there are other qualifications--"

"I meant theoretically," Burris said.

"Theoretically--" Dr. O'Connor began, and smiled
again--"Theoretically, if your mind were being read, this machine
would detect it, supposing that the machine were in operating
condition and all of the other qualifications had been met. You see,
Mr. Burris, no matter how poor a telepath a man may be, he has some
slight ability--even if only very slight--to detect the fact that his
mind is being read."

"You mean, if somebody was reading my mind, I'd know it?" Burris said.
His face showed, Malone realized, that he plainly disbelieved this
statement.

"You would know it," Dr. O'Connor said, "but you would never know you
knew it. To elucidate: in a normal person--like you, for instance, or
even like myself--the state of having one's mind read merely results
in a vague, almost sub-conscious feeling of irritation, something that
could easily be attributed to minor worries, or fluctuations in one's
hormonal balance. The hormonal balance, Mr. Burris, is--"

"Thank you," Burris said with a trace of irritation. "I know what
hormones are."

"Ah. Good," Dr. O'Connor said equably. "In any case, to continue: this
machine interprets those specific feelings as indications that the
mind is being--ah--'eavesdropped' upon."

You could almost see the quotation marks around what Dr. O'Connor
considered slang dropping into place, Malone thought.

"I see," Burris said with a disappointed air. "But what do you mean,
it won't detect a telepath? Have you ever actually worked with a
telepath?"

"Certainly we have," Dr. O'Connor said. "If we hadn't, how would we be
able to tell that the machine was, in fact, indicating the presence of
telepathy? The theoretical state of the art is not, at present,
sufficiently developed to enable us to--"

"I see," Burris said hurriedly. "Only wait a minute."

"Yes?"

"You mean you've actually got a real mind-reader? You've found one?
One that works?"

Dr. O'Connor shook his head sadly. "I'm afraid I should have said, Mr.
Burris, that we did once have one," he admitted. "He was,
