"I should have checked that it was off!" protested his second. "It's my
fault!"

Bors shrugged. Deciding whose fault it was wouldn't repair the damage.
There'd been a human error. Bors had approached Garen on the low-power
overdrive that Logan had computed for him. There was a special switch to
cut it in, instead of the standard overdrive. It should have been cut
out when the standard overdrive was used. But somebody in the
engine-room had simply thrown the main-drive switch when preparations
for overdrive travel began. When the ship should have gone into
overdrive, it didn't. The two parallel circuits amounted to an effective
short-circuit. Generators, condensers--even the overdrive field coils in
their armored mounts outside the hull--everything blew.

So the _Isis_ was left with a solar-system drive and rockets and nothing
else. If the drive used only in solar systems were put on full, and the
_Isis_ headed for Glamis, and if the food and water held out, it would
arrive at that distant world in eighty-some years. It could reach Tralee
in fifty. But there were emergency rations for a few weeks only. It was
not conceivable that repairs could be made. This was no occasion calling
for remarkable ingenuity to make some sort of jury-rigged drive. This
was final.

"I've got to think," said Bors heavily.

He went to his own cabin.

Talents, Incorporated couldn't improvise or precognize or calculate an
answer to this! And all previous plans had to be cancelled. Absolutely.
He dismissed at once and for all time the idea that the _Isis_ could be
repaired short of months in a well-equipped space-yard on a friendly
planet. She should be blown up, after adequate pains were taken to
destroy any novelties in her make-up. There were the tables of Logan's
calculation. Bors found himself thinking sardonically that Logan should
be shot because he had no obligation of loyalty to Kandar, and could as
readily satisfy his hunger for recognition in the Mekinese service as
in Kandar's. The crew....

That was the heart of the situation. The _Isis_ could not be salvaged.
She should be destroyed. There was only one world within reach on which
human beings could live. That world was Garen. The _Isis_ could sit down
on Garen, disembark her crew, and be blown up before Mekinese
authorities could interfere. Perhaps--possibly--her crew could try to
function on Garen as marooned pirates, as outlaws, as rebels against the
puppet planetary government. But they knew too much. Every man aboard
knew how the interceptor-proof missiles worked. Logan might be the only
man who had ever calculated the tables for their use, but if any member
of the _Isis's_ crew were captured and made to talk, he could tell
enough for Mekinese mathematicians to start work with. If Logan were
captured he could tell more. He could re-compute not only the tables for
the missiles, but the data for low-power overdrive which would make any
fleet invincible.

And there was the Kandarian fleet. If its existence became known, it
would mean the destruction of Kandar. Every soul of all its millions
would die with every tree and blade of grass, every flower, beast and
singing bird, even the plankton in its seas.

Bors had arrived at the grimmest decision of his life when his cabin
speaker said curtly:

"_Captain Bors, sir. Space-yacht_ Sylva _calling. Asks for you._"

"I'm here," said Bors.

Gwenlyn's voice came out of the speaker.

"_Are you in trouble, Captain? One of our Talents insists that you
are._"

Bors swallowed.

"I thought you'd gone on as you were supposed to do. Yes. There is
trouble. It amounts to shipwreck. How many of my men can you take off?"

"_We've lots of room!_" said Gwenlyn. "_My father kept most of the
Talents with him. We're heading your way, Captain._"

"Very good," said Bors. "Thank you." He was grateful, but help from a
woman--from Gwenlyn!--galled him.

He heard her click off, and shivered.

Presently the _Sylva_ was alongside. The transfer of the _Isis's_ crew
began. Bors went over the ship for the last time. The ship's log went
aboard the _Sylva_, as did Logan's calculated tables for low-power
overdrive. Bors made quite sure that nothing else could be recovered
from the _Isis_. He looked strained and irritable when he finally went
into one of the lifeboat blisters on the _Isis_ left vacant by the
sacrifice of two space-boats in the Garen cutting-out expedition. A boat
from the _Sylva_ was there to receive him.

"Technically," said Bors, "I should go down with my ship, or fly apart
with it. But there's no point in being romantic!"

"I'm the one," said his second-in-command, "who will stand
court-martial!"

"I doubt it very much," said Bors. "They can't court-martial you for
partly accomplishing something they're in trouble for failing at. Into
the boat with you!"

He threw a switch and entered the boat. The blister opened. The small
space-boat floated free. Its drive hummed and it drove far and away from
the seemingly unharmed but completely helpless _Isis_. Bors looked
regretfully back at the abandoned light cruiser. Sunlight glinted on its
hull. Somehow a slow rotary motion had been imparted to it during the
process of abandoning ship. The little fighting ship pointed as though
wistfully at all the stars about her, to none of which she would ever
drive again.

The _Sylva_ loomed up. The last space-boat nestled into its blister and
the grapples clanked. The leaves closed. When the blister air-pressure
showed normal and green lights flashed and flashed, Bors got out of the
boat and went to the _Sylva's_ control-room. Gwenlyn was there, quite
casually controlling the operation of the yacht by giving suggestions to
its official skipper. She turned and beamed at Bors.

"We'll pull off a way," she observed, "and make sure your time-bomb
works. You wouldn't want her discovered and salvaged."

"No," said Bors.

He stood by a viewport as the _Sylva_ drove away. The _Isis_ ceased to
be a shape and became the most minute of motes. Bors looked at his
watch.

"Not far enough yet," he said depressedly. "Everything will go."

The yacht drove on. Fifteen--twenty minutes at steadily increasing
solar-system speed.

"It's about due," said Bors.

Gwenlyn came and stood beside him. They looked together out at the
stars. There were myriads upon myriads of them, of all the colors of the
spectrum, of all degrees of brightness, in every possible asymmetric
distribution.

There was a spark in remoteness. Instantly it was vastly more than a
spark. It was a globe of deadly, blue-white incandescence. It flamed
brilliantly as all the _Isis's_ fuel and the warheads on all its
unexpended missiles turned to pure energy in the hundred-millionth of a
second. It was many times brighter than a sun. Then it was not. And the
violence of the explosion was such that there was not even glowing
metal-vapor where it had been. Every atom of the ship's substance had
been volatilized and scattered through so many thousands of cubic miles
of emptiness that it did not show even as a mist.

"A good ship," said Bors grimly. Then he growled. "I wonder if they saw
that on Garen and what they thought about it!" He straightened himself.
"How did you know we were in trouble?"

"There's a Talent," said Gwenlyn matter-of-factly, "who can always tell
how people feel. She doesn't know what they think or why. But she can
tell when they're uneasy and so on. Father uses her to tell him when
people lie. When what they say doesn't match how they feel, they're
lying."

"I think," said Bors, "that I'll stay away from her. But that won't do
any good, will it?"

Gwenlyn smiled at him. It was a very nice smile.

"She could tell that things had gone wrong with the ship," she observed,
"because of the way you felt. But I've forbidden her ever to tell when
someone lies to me or anything like that. I don't want to know people's
feelings when they want to hide them."

"Fine!" said Bors. "I feel better." Standing so close to Gwenlyn, he
also felt light-headed.

She smiled at him again, as if she understood.

"We'll head for Glamis now," she said. "The situation there should have
changed a great deal because of what you've done."

"It would be my kind of luck," said Bors half joking, "for it to have
changed for the worse."

It had.




Chapter 9


"The decision," said King Humphrey the Eighth, stubbornly, "is exactly
what I have said. In full war council it has been agreed that the fleet,
through a new use of missiles, is a stronger fighting force than ever
before. This was evidenced in the late battle and no one questions it.
But it is also agreed that we remain hopelessly outnumbered. We are in a
position where we simply cannot fight! For us to have fought would
probably have been forgiven if we had been wiped out in the recent
battle--preferably with only slight loss to the Mekinese. We offered
battle expecting exactly that. Unfortunately, we annihilated the fleet
that was to have occupied Kandar. In consequence we have had to pretend
that we were destroyed along with them. And if we are discovered to be
alive, and certainly if we offer to fight, Kandar will be exterminated
as a living world, to punish us and as a warning to future victims of
the Mekinese."

"Yes, Majesty," Bors said through tight lips. "But may I point out--"

"I know what you want to point out," the king broke in irritably. "With
the help of these Talents, Incorporated people, you've worked out a new
battle tactic you want to put into practice. You've explained it to the
War Council. The War Council has decided that it is too risky. We cannot
gamble the lives of the people on Kandar. We have not the right to
expose them to Mekinese vengeance!"

"I agree, Majesty," said Bors, "but at the same time--"

The king leaned back in his chair.

"I don't like it any better than you do," he said peevishly. "I expected
to get killed in a space-battle--not very gloriously, but at least with
self-respect. Unfortunately we had bad luck. We won the fight. I do not
like what we have to do in consequence, but we have to do it!"

Bors bit his lips. He liked and respected King Humphrey, as he had
respect and affection for his uncle, the Pretender of Tralee. Both were
honest and able men who'd been forced to learn the disheartening lesson
that some things are impossible. But Bors believed that King Humphrey
had learned the lesson too well.

"You plan, Majesty," he said after a moment, "to send me out again to
capture food-ships if I can."

"Obviously," said the king.

"The idea being," Bors went on, "that if I can get enough food for the
fleet so it can make a journey of several hundreds of light-years--"

"It is necessary to go a long way," the king confirmed unhappily. "We
need to take the fleet to where Mekin is only a name and Kandar not even
that."

"Where you will disband the fleet--"

"Yes."

"And hope that Mekin will not take vengeance anyhow for the fight the
fleet has already put up."

The king said heavily, "It will be a very long time before word drifts
back that the fleet of Kandar did not die in battle. It may never come.
If it does, it will come as a vague rumor, as an idle tale, as absurd
gossip about a fleet whose home planet may not even be remembered when
the tales are told. There will be trivial stories about a fleet which
abandoned the world it should have defended, and fled so far that its
enemies did not bother to follow it. If the tale reaches Mekin, it may
not be believed. It may not ever be linked to Kandar. And if some day it
is believed, by then Kandar will be long occupied. Perhaps it will be
resigned to its status. It will be a valuable subject world. Mekin will
not destroy it merely to punish scattered, forgotten men who will never
know that they have been punished."

"And you want me," repeated Bors, "to find the stores of food that will
let the fleet travel to--oblivion."

"Yes," said the king again. He looked very weary. "In a sense, of
course, we will simply be doing what we set out to do--to throw away our
lives. We intended to do that. We are doing no more now."

Bors said grimly, "I'm not sure. But I will obey orders, Majesty. Do you
object if I pass out the details of the new device among some junior
officers? I speak of the way to compute overdrive speed exactly and how
to vary it. It could help the fleet to stay together, even in
overdrive."

The king shrugged. "That would be desirable. I do not object."

"I'll do it then, Majesty," said Bors. "I'll be assigned a new ship. I'd
like the same crew. I'll do my best, in a new part of the Mekinese
empire, this time."

"Yes," said the king drearily. "Don't make a pattern of raids that would
suggest that you have a base. You understand, it is impossible to use
more than one ship...."

"Naturally," agreed Bors. "One more suggestion, Majesty. A ship could be
sent back to Kandar--not to land but to watch. If a single Mekinese ship
went there to ask questions, it could be destroyed, perhaps. Which would
gain us time."

"I will think about it," said the king doubtfully. "Maybe it has
occurred to someone else. I will see. Meantime you will go to the
admiral for a new ship. And then do what you can to find provisions for
the fleet. It is not good for us to merely stay here waiting for
nothing. Even action toward our own disappearance is preferable."

Bors saluted. He went to the office of the admiral. The
commander-in-chief of the Kandarian fleet was making an inspection, to
maintain tight discipline in the absence of hope. A young vice-admiral
was on duty in the admiral's stead. He regarded Bors with approval. He
listened with attention, and agreed with most of what Bors had to say.

"I'll push the idea of a sentry over Kandar," he said confidentially.
"I'll make it two ships or three and take command. I want to send some
of my engineer officers to get the details of that low-power overdrive.
A very pretty tactical idea! It should be spread throughout the fleet."

"It will help," Bors said with irony, "when we go so far away that we'll
never be heard of any more."

"Eh?" The vice-admiral looked at him blankly. "Oh. Perhaps. You wouldn't
be likely to pick up a cargo-ship loaded with Mekinese missiles, would
you? We could adapt them to our use."

"If I did," Bors answered, "I suspect that somehow that ship would land
itself on Mekin and blow up as it touched ground."

The vice-admiral raised his eyebrows. Bors saluted quickly and left.

Presently he was back on the _Sylva_. His new command would be supplied
with extra missiles from other ships. Despite the fleet action against
the Mekinese, there was not yet a shortage of such ammunition. When a
missile could not be intercepted and itself did not try to intercept,
the economy of missiles was great. In the battle of the gas-giant
planet, the fleet had fired no more than three or four missiles for
every enemy ship destroyed.

Morgan took Bors aside.

"I'm going to keep Logan here this trip. I'm working on the commanders.
I need him. And our Talent for Detecting Lies,--she was the one who knew
you were in trouble, Gwenlyn tells me--is very necessary. I was hampered
by not having her while Gwenlyn was away. But she did a good job for
you!"

Bors shrugged. He did not like depending upon Talents. He still wasn't
inclined toward acceptance of what he considered the occult. Now he
