Though it might be best to make clear your separate areas of control.
This is your project Neel, and Adao Costa will be your assistant,
following your orders and doing whatever he can to help. You know he
isn't a graduate Societist, but he has done a lot of field work for us
and can help you greatly in that. And, of course, he will be acting as
an observer for the UN, and making his own reports in this connection."

Neel's anger was hot and apparent. "So he's a UN observer now. I wonder
if he still holds his old job at the same time. I think it only fair,
sir, that you know. He works for Interpol."

Abravanel's ancient and weary eyes looked at both men, and he sighed.
"Wait outside Costa," he said, "Neel will be with you in a minute."

Costa left without a word and Abravanel waved Neel back to his chair.
"Listen to me now," he said, "and stop playing tunes on that infernal
buzzer." Neel snapped his hand away from the belt computer, as if it had
suddenly grown hot. A hesitant finger reached out to clear the figures
he had nervously been setting up, then thought better of it. Abravanel
sucked life into his ancient pipe and squinted at the younger man.

"Listen," he said. "You have led a very sheltered life here at the
university, and that is probably my fault. No, don't look angry, I don't
mean about girls. In that matter undergraduates have been the same for
centuries. I'm talking about people in groups, individuals, politics,
and all the complicated mess that makes up human life. This has been
your area of study and the program is carefully planned so you can study
it secondhand. The important thing is to develop the abstract viewpoint,
since any attempt to prejudge results can only mean disaster. And it has
been proved many times that a man with a certain interest will make many
unwitting errors to shape an observation or experiment in favor of his
interest. No, we could have none of that here.

"We are following the proper study of mankind and we must do that by
keeping personally on the outside, to preserve our perspective. When you
understand that, you understand many small things about the university.
Why we give only resident student scholarships at a young age, and why
the out-of-the-way location here in the Dolomites. You will also see the
reason why the campus bookstore stocks all of the books published, but
never has an adequate supply of newspapers. The agreed policy has been
to see that you all mature with the long view. Then--hopefully--you will
be immune to short-term political interests after you leave.

"This policy has worked well in turning out men with the correct
attitude towards their work. It has also turned out a fair number of
self-centered, egocentric horrors."

       *       *       *       *       *

Neel flushed. "Do you mean that I--"

"No, I don't mean you. If I did, I would say so. Your worst fault--if
you can call it a fault, since it is the very thing we have been trying
to bring about--is that you have a very provincial attitude towards the
universe. Now is the time to re-examine some of those ideas. Firstly,
what do you think the attitude of the UN is towards Societics?"

There was no easy answer, Neel could see traps ready for anything he
said. His words were hesitant. "I can't say I've really ever thought
about it. I imagine the UN would be in favor of it, since we make their
job of world government that much easier--"

"No such thing," Abravanel said, tempering the sharpness of his words
with a smile. "To put it in the simplest language, they hate our guts.
They wish I had never formulated Societics, and at the same time they
are very glad I did. They are in the position of the man who caught the
tiger by the tail. The man enjoys watching the tiger eat all of his
enemies, but as each one is consumed his worry grows greater. What will
happen when the last one is gone? Will the tiger then turn and eat him?

"Well--we are the UN's tiger. Societics came along just at the time it
was sorely needed. Earth had settled a number of planets, and governed
them. First as outposts, then as colonies. The most advanced planets
very quickly outgrew the colony stage and flexed their independent
muscles. The UN had no particular desire to rule an empire, but at the
same time they had to insure Earth's safety. I imagine they were
considering all sorts of schemes--including outright military
control--when they came to me.

"Even in its early, crude form, Societics provided a stopgap that would
give them some breathing time. They saw to it that my work was well
endowed and aided me--unofficially of course--in setting up the first
control experiments on different planets. We had results, some very
good, and the others not so bad that the local police couldn't get
things back under control after a while. I was, of course, happy to
perfect my theories in practice. After a hundred years I had all the
rough spots evened down and we were in business. The UN has never come
up with a workable alternative plan, so they have settled down to the
uncomfortable business of holding the tiger's tail. They worry and spend
vast sums of money keeping an eye on our work."

"But _why_?" Neel broke in.

"Why?" Abravanel gave a quick smile. "Thank you for fine character
rating. I imagine it is inconceivable to you that I might want to be
Emperor of the Universe. I could be, you know. The same forces that hold
the lids on the planets could just as easily blow them off."

Neel was speechless at the awful enormity of the thought. Abravanel rose
from behind his desk with an effort, and shambled over to lay a thin and
feather-light arm on the younger man's shoulders. "Those are the facts
of life my boy. And since we cannot escape them, we must live with them.
Costa is just a man doing his duty. So try and put up with him. For my
sake if not for your own."

"Of course," Neel agreed quickly. "The whole thing takes a bit of
getting used to, but I think I can manage. We'll do as good a job on
Himmel as it is possible to do. Don't worry about me, sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

Costa was waiting in the next room, puffing quietly on a long cigarette.
They left together, walking down the hall in silence. Neel glanced
sideways at the wiry, dark-skinned Brazilian and wondered what he could
say to smooth things out. He still had his reservations about Costa, but
he'd keep them to himself now. Abravanel had ordered peace between them,
and what the old man said was the law.

It was Costa who spoke first. "Can you brief me on Himmel--what we'll
find there, and be expected to do?"

"Run the basic survey first, of course," Neel told him. "Chances are
that that will be enough to straighten things out. Since the completion
last year of the refining equations of Debir's Postulate, all sigma-110
and alpha-142 graph points are suspect--"

"Just stop there please, and run the flag back down the pole." Costa
interrupted. "I had a six-months survey of Societics seven years ago, to
give me a general idea of the field. I've worked with survey teams since
then, but I have only the vaguest idea of the application of the
information we got. Could you cover the ground again--only a bit
slower?"

Neel controlled his anger successfully and started again, in his best
classroom manner.

"Well, I'm sure you realize that a good survey is half the problem. It
must be impartial and exact. If it is accurately done, application of
the k-factor equations is almost mechanical."

"You've lost me again. Everyone always talks about the k-factor, but no
one has ever explained just what it is."

Neel was warming to his topic now. "It's a term borrowed from
nucleonics, and best understood in that context. Look, you know how an
atomic pile works--essentially just like an atomic bomb. The difference
is just a matter of degree and control. In both of them you have
neutrons tearing around, some of them hitting nuclei and starting new
neutrons going. These in turn hit and start others. This goes on faster
and faster and _bam_, a few milliseconds later you have an atomic bomb.
This is what happens if you don't attempt to control the reaction.

"However, if you have something like heavy water or graphite that will
slow down neutrons and an absorber like cadmium, you can alter the speed
of the reaction. Too much damping material will absorb too many neutrons
