another. Add a month for errors in judgment, lack of materials, and
mistakes--and another for unavoidable delays--it would be at least six
months before the Egg would be spaceworthy.

Six months.

Not too long if everything went well, but far too long if there were
any mistakes. He would have to be careful, yet he must not give the
impression of being careful. He shook his head. Being a subversive was
going to require a greater amount of acting ability than he had ever
been called upon to display.

And what of Copper? How would she behave under the double strain of
knowledge that she was human and knowledge of the spaceship? Women
weren't noted for their tight-lipped reticence. Would she tell the other
Lani? Would she crack under the pressure? Did she have the qualities of
a good conspirator?

As it turned out, he didn't need to worry. As a partner in crime, Copper
was all that could be wished. Everything was normal. She was still
obedient, helpful, and gay as ever. To watch her, no one would ever
think that her bright head was full of knowledge that could rock Flora
to its foundations. Never by look or word did she betray the slightest
trace of strain or guilt.

And in her other moments she was ecstatic in her love and helpful with
the repair work on the Egg whenever Kennon could get time to visit the
old spaceship.

"You amaze me," Kennon said as they eased the cover of the spindizzy
in place and spun the bolts on the lugs that held it to the outer
shielding. He picked up a heavy wrench and began methodically to seat
the bolts as Copper wiped the white extrusion of the cover sealant from
the shining case.

"How?"

"The way you hide your knowledge of this ship from the others. I know
you better than anyone else on this island, and yet you would fool me."

"We Lani are used to hiding things. You men have been our masters for
centuries, yet you do not know our redes. Nor do you know what we think,
We obey you, but there are parts of us you do not own. It is easy to
hide a little thing like this."

Kennon nodded. It figured. He seated another bolt. Three more and
the drive room would be restored and they could start on the control
circuits. "I wish you were as clever about adopting human customs as you
are about hiding guilty knowledge," he said.

Copper laughed. "You mean those silly things you have been teaching me?
Why should I learn them? I'm happy as I am. I love you, you love me, and
that is all that matters."

"It's not all that matters. Can't you get it through your head that
civilized customs are necessary in a civilized society?" He gave the
next-to-last bolt an extra-vicious wrench. "You'll have to know them if
you expect to get along on Beta."

"But I will never see Beta."

"I am going there when my duty here is over. And you're going with me."

"When will that be?"

"Three years."

"So long? Well--we can think of it then, but I don't think Man Alexander
will let you take me."

"Then I shall take you without his consent."

She smiled. "It would be easier to stay here. In another fifteen years I
will be old and you will not want me."

"I'll never do that. I'll always want you."

"You swear too easily," she said gently. "You men live forever. We Lani
are a short-lived race."

"But you needn't be. It's obviously--"

"It's been tried, my love--and those who were treated died. Man
Alexander tried many years ago to make us long-lived like you. But he
failed. You see, he loved one of us too."

"But--"

"Let us think no more of it. Let us enjoy what we have and be grateful
to the Gods for the love we enjoy--or do you have any Gods?"

"One."

"Two are better. More, anyway. And besides, Ulf and Lyssa and the
God-Egg are responsible for our joy."

"They are indeed," Kennon said.

"Then why should you think of leaving the place where they rule? You
should stay here. There will be other Lani when I am gone. You will be
happy always."

"Not without you," Kennon said. "Don't you understand that I love you?"

"And I you. But I am a Lani. You are a man."

"You're as human as I am," Kennon said abruptly.

"That is what you say," Copper replied. "I am not so sure. I need more
proof than this." She waved her hand at the ship.

"What proof do you need?"

"The same as the proof you men require. If I should have your child,
then I would believe that I was human."

"I've told you a thousand times that the radiation on this ship must
have affected Ulf and Lyssa's germ plasm. Can't you understand that?"

"I can understand it all right, but it does not change things. Ulf and
Lyssa may have been human before they came here, but they were not when
they landed. They were Lani, and their children were Lani."

"But they were of human stock."

"The law that lets men become our masters does not agree with you."

"Then the law is wrong. It should be changed."

Copper shrugged. "Two people cannot change a law."

"They can try--particularly if the law is unjust."

Copper sighed. "Is it not enough for us to love? Must you try to run
through a wall?"

"When the wall stands in the way of right and justice I must."

Copper looked at him with pity in her green eyes. "This I do not
understand. I know nothing of right and justice. What are these things?
Just words. Yet you will endanger our happiness for them. If it is my
happiness you wish--then leave this foolishness alone. I have fifteen
years I can live with you before I am old and you tire of me. With those
years I can be content."

"But I can't," Kennon said. "Call me selfish if you wish, but I want you
with me as long as I live. I don't want to live my life without you."

"You want too much," Copper said softly. "But if it makes you happy to
try to get it, I shall help. And if we do not succeed you will at least
be happier for trying. And if you are happy"--she shrugged--"then the
rest makes little difference."

That was the crux of the matter, Kennon reflected bitterly. He was
convinced she was human. She was not. And until her mind could be
changed on that point she would help him but her heart wouldn't be in
it. And the only thing that would convince her that she was human would
be a child--a child of his begetting. He could perhaps trick her with
an artificial insemination of Lani sperm. There were drugs that could
suspend consciousness, hypnotics that would make her believe anything
she was told while under their influence.

But in the end it would do no good. All witnesses in Brotherhood court
actions were examined under psychoprobe, and a hypnotic was of no value
against a lie detector that could extract the deepest buried truth.
And he would be examined too. The truth would out--and nothing would be
gained. In fact--everything would be lost. The attempt at trickery would
prejudice any court against the honest evidence they had so painfully
collected.

He sighed. The only thing to do was to go on as they were--and hope that
the evidence would hold. With Betan legal talent at their back it
might. And, of course, they could try to produce a child as nature had
intended. They could try--but Kennon knew it would not succeed. It never
had.



CHAPTER XV

Copper had been acting strangely of late, Kennon thought as he rolled
over in his bed and watched her standing before the full-length mirror
on the bathroom door. She pivoted slowly before the glass, eying herself
critically, raising her arms over her head, holding them at her sides,
flexing her supple spine and tightening muscles that moved like silken
cords beneath her golden skin.

"What are you trying to do--become a muscle dancer?" Kennon asked idly.

She whirled, a crimson blush deepening the tan of her face. "You were
supposed to be asleep," she said.

"I'm an unregenerate heel," he replied, "and I don't sleep too well
nowadays unless you're beside me."

"Well--I suppose you might as well know now as later," she said. "You'll
know in any event."

"Know what?"

"That you're right. I am human."

"And what brought on this sudden change of--" He stopped abruptly, his
eyes widening.

"Yes," Copper said. "I am with child. Your child."

"But that's impossible."

She shook her head. "It's a miracle perhaps, but it's not impossible.
It's happened. Can't you see the difference?"

"See what? You look just as you always do."

"I suppose you can't see it yet," she admitted. "But I am with child.
I'm two weeks past my time."

Kennon's mind leaped to the obvious conclusion. Pseudo-pregnancy. He had
seen it before among Lani at Hillside Farm. It was an odd syndrome
which occasionally occurred in humans and animals. The brain, desiring
children, made demands upon the body and the body responded to its
desire by tricking the brain. Lani were fairly subject to its probably
because they had better imaginations. He would run a few tests when they
went down to the hospital, and once she realized the practical joke her
body was playing everything would be all right. No wonder she seemed
excited.

"We'll find out about that later," he said equably. "We'll settle this
when we get back to the hospital."

Copper smiled confidently and patted her stomach. "I know what you are
thinking, but you're wrong. We Lani know about these things. In forty
generations I am the first to conceive as the Master intended."

"I hope you haven't," Kennon said with such bitter sincerity that Copper
looked at him wide-eyed. "Not now. Because if you have, neither your
life nor mine is safe."

"Why?"

"The Alexanders. Do you think they'll take it lying down? We're not
ready for them yet. They'll fight, and the first thing they'll do is
kill you and erase me so we would never be able to talk. You have been
declared an animal, and you will not be allowed to change."

"What can we do?" Copper asked. She shivered. "I do not want to die."

"Nor do I want you to," Kennon said.

"I could tell the others."

"And just what would that accomplish?"

"In a week every Lani on the island would know it. There would be
revolt. For the Lani would no longer be dependent upon Men to survive.
Their greatest hold on us would be gone. And we would be free again on
our island world."

"You would not!" Kennon said. "That sort of thinking is foolishness.
Alexander would have men here within a week, and a week after that you
would be smashed. Don't you realize that there are thousands of millions
of men in the galaxy--and to every one of them you would be animals. You
know nothing about what you would face. Your puny hundreds couldn't even
stand against a fraction of the power Alexander could mount against you.
Have you seen a Burkholtz blaster work? Have you seen remote-control
antipersonnel missiles? Have you push-pull projectors, atomic warheads?
All of these weapons Alexander can command. Don't you realize he's an
entrepreneur?--one of the most powerful men in this sector?"

Copper shook her head. "No," she said in a small voice. "I know nothing
about these things."

"And do you think forty generations of absolute obedience to men can be
overcome because one Lani says she is pregnant by a man?"

Copper frowned. "You put that in a different way. You talk as if it were
my belief rather than the truth."

"What is truth?" Kennon said heavily. "Who would believe you? There are
hundreds of others with child.

"Sure you're human. You know it. I know it. I've been trying to convince
you for the past two months. You're just as human as I am. But pray that
you're not pregnant. We can't get out of here in less than four months
and by then everybody will know about you. Someone will certainly check
the records. And after that will come the psychoprobes. Everything will
come to light. The Egg will be destroyed. I will be erased. You will be
dead. And that will be the end of it." He looked down at her with an odd
expression of pity on his face. "You see?" he demanded harshly.

Copper nodded. "I didn't understand," she said. "Don't be angry with me.
I shouldn't have told you. I thought you'd be happy."

"I was never angry with you, but I am with myself. I was stupid. I
didn't figure on the remote possibility that we might be genetically
compatible. I should have my head examined for putting you in such
danger. However there's the possibility--the probability--that your body
is playing a trick upon you."

She shook her head. "You are wrong. I am not mistaken. I am with child
and the child is yours. But the fault is no more yours than mine. I
wanted you before you looked on me. I still do and I do not feel at
fault. That I am yours, that my child is yours is a thing of wonder and
joy. Never could I have expected so much."

Kennon looked down at her smudged face, streaked with the sudden
rivulets of tears, and bitterness galled his throat. Dear God--let her
be wrong, he prayed silently. Let it be pseudopregnancy this time. Let
the tests be negative.

But they weren't. Unequivocally they confirmed Copper's diagnosis. Here
was the proof he needed. The final test that would prove the Lani human.
And he had no way of getting it where it would do any good. It would
take at least four months of steady labor before the ship was ready, and
he didn't have that sort of time. He was needed here and his prolonged
absence would cause suspicion and investigation. Something would have to
be done--but what? He couldn't take Copper off the island in an airboat.
They were checked with microscopic care by Otpen One's IFF. A jeep
didn't have enough range to take them to the mainland. And even if they
got there they couldn't get off the planet. Alexander knew everything
that happened on Kardon's two spaceports. The Egg was the only way, but
the Egg was unfinished and unspaceworthy.

Frantically Kennon considered concealing Copper. He shook his head. It
wouldn't work. It would be impossible, to hide a baby on a place where
every birth was recorded. Nor could one hide evidence of pregnancy in a
Lani. Childbearing leaves telltale marks upon the body, and Copper, even
if she could be concealed for the duration of her pregnancy, could never
survive the sharp-eyed scrutiny of her fellows or the other humans.
Questions would inevitably be asked.

There had to be a solution. He rubbed his forehead wearily. It was
strange how so little a thing as the union of a spermatozoon and an ovum
could produce so much trouble. He looked across the office at Copper
placidly filing case cards. She wasn't worrying. With sublime faith,
she was sure that he would find the answer, the one that would solve
everything. He shuddered. The only logical solution was abortion--and
that was unthinkable! He would not murder his child--nor would Copper
permit it if he was capable of doing so.

It was almost a relief when his phone rang and Blalok's voice came
cheerfully across the wire.

"Tried to get you about an hour ago," the superintendent said, "but your
girl said you were busy."

"I was."

"You through now?"

"Yes."

"Well, get up to the fortress. Alexander just flew in and he's calling a
meeting. Something important has come up."

Something important! A wave of ice rattled down Kennon's spine, and then
he grinned feebly. Alexander didn't know. He couldn't know. It had to be
something else.

"I'll be right up," he said, marveling at the calmness in his voice.

Kennon couldn't help comparing this meeting with the one a year ago.
The location was different--the conference room in Alexandria was more
formal than Blalok's parlor but the same people were present: Alexander,
Blalok, Jordan, and himself. Somehow Alexander seemed to have shrunk. He
was no longer as impressive as he had been. But the man still radiated
force, even though it didn't seem quite so overpowering. The year,
Kennon thought, had done much to build his self-confidence. He felt
assured rather than nervous.

"Good to see you, Kennon," Alexander said. "Reports say you're doing a
good job."

"I can't claim the credit," Kennon said. "Eighty-five per cent of our
success is due to co-operation from the operating staff. And that's
Blalok's doing--he knocked the heads of the division managers together
and they took care of their staffs. Otherwise we could have had a bad
time."

"But you didn't," Alexander said. "And you were the motive force."

"I've darn near motivated myself out of a job," Kennon said. "They
co-operate all too well nowadays."

"Which goes to prove that my theories on preventive medicine are right,"
Alexander said, turning to Blalok.

"It looks that way," Blalok admitted, "but that could be because you
picked a good man."

"He's good in more ways than one," Alexander said. "Or did he tell you
he saved Douglas's life out on Otpen One?"

"He's never said a word."

Alexander smiled. "Another point in his favor. He knows how to keep his
mouth shut."

"Not when he's telling someone what to do about disease," Jordon
interjected.

"Or telling someone off when they haven't followed directions," Blaiok
added.

"Better and better. I was sure that he was the one we needed when we
first met."

Kennon felt his ears turn flaming red.

