very similarly from the brown fliers and did not return for a second
look.

A black-haired housewife spied them over her back fence, crossed herself
and grabbed her walkie-talkie from the laundry basket. Seconds later,
the yawning correspondent of a regional newspaper was jotting down the
lead of a humorous news story which, recalling the old flying-saucer
scares, stated that now apparently bread was to be included in the mad
aerial tea party.

The congregation of an open-walled country church, standing up to recite
the most familiar of Christian prayers, had just reached the petition
for daily sustenance, when a sub-flight of the loaves, either forced
down by a vagrant wind or lacking the natural buoyancy of the rest, came
coasting silently as the sunbeams between the graceful pillars at the
altar end of the building.

Meanwhile, the main flight, now augmented by other bread flocks from
scores and hundreds of walking mills that had started work a little
later, mounted slowly and majestically into the cirrus-flecked upper
air, where a steady wind was blowing strongly toward the east.

About one thousand miles farther on in that direction, where a cluster
of stratosphere-tickling towers marked the location of the metropolis of
NewNew York, a tender scene was being enacted in the pressurized
penthouse managerial suite of Puffy Products. Megera Winterly, Secretary
in Chief to the Managerial Board and referred to by her underlings as
the Blonde Icicle, was dealing with the advances of Roger ("Racehorse")
Snedden, Assistant Secretary to the Board and often indistinguishable
from any passing office boy.

"Why don't you jump out the window, Roger, remembering to shut the
airlock after you?" the Golden Glacier said in tones not unkind. "When
are your high-strung, thoroughbred nerves going to accept the fact that
I would never consider marriage with a business inferior? You have about
as much chance as a starving Ukrainian kulak now that Moscow's clapped
on the interdict."

       *       *       *       *       *

Roger's voice was calm, although his eyes were feverishly bright, as he
replied, "A lot of things are going to be different around here, Meg, as
soon as the Board is forced to admit that only my quick thinking made it
possible to bring the name of Puffyloaf in front of the whole world."

"Puffyloaf could do with a little of that," the business girl observed
judiciously. "The way sales have been plummeting, it won't be long
before the Government deeds our desks to the managers of Fairy Bread and
asks us to take the Big Jump. But just where does your quick thinking
come into this, Mr. Snedden? You can't be referring to the helium--that
was Rose Thinker's brainwave."

She studied him suspiciously. "You've birthed another promotional
bumble, Roger. I can see it in your eyes. I only hope it's not as big a
one as when you put the Martian ambassador on 3D and he thanked you
profusely for the gross of Puffyloaves, assuring you that he'd never
slept on a softer mattress in all his life on two planets."

"Listen to me, Meg. Today--yes, today!--you're going to see the Board
eating out of my hand."

"Hah! I guarantee you won't have any fingers left. You're bold enough
now, but when Mr. Gryce and those two big machines come through that
door--"

"Now wait a minute, Meg--"

"Hush! They're coming now!"

Roger leaped three feet in the air, but managed to land without a sound
and edged toward his stool. Through the dilating iris of the door strode
Phineas T. Gryce, flanked by Rose Thinker and Tin Philosopher.

The man approached the conference table in the center of the room with
measured pace and gravely expressionless face. The rose-tinted machine
on his left did a couple of impulsive pirouettes on the way and
twittered a greeting to Meg and Roger. The other machine quietly took
the third of the high seats and lifted a claw at Meg, who now occupied a
stool twice the height of Roger's.

"Miss Winterly, please--our theme."

The Blonde Icicle's face thawed into a little-girl smile as she chanted
bubblingly:

    "_Made up of tiny wheaten motes
    And reinforced with sturdy oats,
    It rises through the air and floats--
    The bread on which all Terra dotes!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Thank you, Miss Winterly," said Tin Philosopher. "Though a purely
figurative statement, that bit about rising through the air always gets
me--here." He rapped his midsection, which gave off a high musical
_clang_.

"Ladies--" he inclined his photocells toward Rose Thinker and Meg--"and
gentlemen. This is a historic occasion in Old Puffy's long history, the
inauguration of the helium-filled loaf ('So Light It Almost Floats
Away!') in which that inert and heaven-aspiring gas replaces
old-fashioned carbon dioxide. Later, there will be kudos for Rose
Thinker, whose bright relays genius-sparked the idea, and also for Roger
Snedden, who took care of the details.

"By the by, Racehorse, that was a brilliant piece of work getting the
helium out of the government--they've been pretty stuffy lately about
