Ah, hours and days of exciting preparation! What a round of packing and
buying; what a filling out of forms and a stamping of visas; what an
orgy of injections and inoculations and preventive therapy! Merely
getting ready for the trip made my pulse race faster and my adrenalin
balance rise to the very point of paranoia; it was like being given a
true blue new chance to live.

At last I was ready. I stepped into the transmission capsule; set the
dials; unlocked the door, stepped out; collapsed the capsule and stored
it away in my carry-all; and looked about at my new home.

Pyew! Kwel smell of staleness, of sourness, above all of coldness! It
was a close matter then if I would be able to keep from a violent
eructative stenosis, as you say. I closed my eyes and remembered warm
violets for a moment, and then it was all right.

The coldness was not merely a smell; it was a physical fact. There was a
damp grayish substance underfoot which I recognized as snow; and in a
hard-surfaced roadway there were a number of wheeled vehicles moving,
which caused the liquefying snow to splash about me. I adjusted my coat
controls for warmth and deflection, but that was the best I could do.
The reek of stale decay remained. Then there were also the buildings,
painfully almost vertical. I believe it would not have disturbed me if
they had been truly vertical; but many of them were minutes of arc from
a true perpendicular, all of them covered with a carbonaceous material
which I instantly perceived was an inadvertent deposit from the air. It
was a bad beginning!

However, I was not _bored_.

       *       *       *       *       *

I made my way down the "street," as you say, toward where a group of
young men were walking toward me, five abreast. As I came near, they
looked at me with interest and kwel respect, conversing with each other
in whispers.

I addressed them: "Sirs, please direct me to the nearest recruiting
office, as you call it, for the dread Camorra."

They stopped and pressed about me, looking at me intently. They were
handsomely, though crudely dressed in coats of a striking orange color,
and long trousers of an extremely dark material.

I decreed that I might not have made them understand me--it is always
probable, it is understood, that a quicknik course in dialects of the
past may not give one instant command of spoken communication in the
field. I spoke again: "I wish to encounter a representative of the
Camorra, in other words the Black Hand, in other words the cruel and
sinister Sicilian terrorists named the Mafia. Do you know where these
can be found?"

One of them said, "Nay. What's that jive?"

I puzzled over what he had said for a moment, but in the end decreed
that his message was sensefree. As I was about to speak, however, he
said suddenly: "Let's rove, man." And all five of them walked quickly
away a few "yards." It was quite disappointing. I observed them
conferring among themselves, glancing at me, and for a time proposed
terminating my venture, for I then believed that it would be better to
return "home," as you say, in order to more adequately research the
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

However, the five young men came toward me again. The one who had spoken
before, who I now detected was somewhat taller and fatter than the
others, spoke as follows: "You're wanting the Mafia?" I agreed. He
looked at me for a moment. "Are you holding?"

He was inordinately hard to understand. I said, slowly and with
patience, "Keska that 'holding' say?"

"Money, man. You going to slip us something to help you find these
cats?"

"Certainly, money. I have a great quantity of money instantly
available," I rejoined him. This appeared to relieve his mind.

There was a short pause, directly after which this first of the young
men spoke: "You're on, man. Yeah, come with us. What's to call you?" I
queried this last statement, and he expanded: "The name. What's the
name?"

"You may call me Foraminifera 9," I directed, since I wished to be
incognito, as you put it, and we proceeded along the "street." All five
of the young men indicated a desire to serve me, offering indeed to take
my carry-all. I rejected this, politely.

I looked about me with lively interest, as you may well believe. Kwel
dirt, kwel dinginess, kwel cold! And yet there was a certain charm which
I can determine no way of expressing in this language. Acts and facts,
of course. I shall not attempt to capture the subjectivity which is the
charm, only to transcribe the physical datum--perhaps even data, who
knows? My companions, for example: They were in appearance overwrought,
looking about them continually, stopping entirely and drawing me with
them into the shelter of a "door" when another man, this one wearing
blue clothing and a visored hat appeared. Yet they were clearly devoted
to me, at that moment, since they had put aside their own projects in
order to escort me without delay to the Mafia.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mafia! Fortunate that I had found them to lead me to the Mafia! For it
had been clear in the historical work I had consulted that it was not
ultimately easy to gain access to the Mafia. Indeed, so secret were they
that I had detected no trace of their existence in other histories of
the period. Had I relied only on the conventional work, I might never
have known of their great underground struggle against what you term
society. It was only in the actual contemporary volume itself, the
curiosity titled _U.S.A. Confidential_ by one Lait and one Mortimer,
that I had descried that, throughout the world, this great revolutionary
organization flexed its tentacles, the plexus within a short distance of
where I now stood, battling courageously. With me to help them, what
heights might we not attain! Kwel dramatic delight!

My meditations were interrupted. "Boomers!" asserted one of my five
escorts in a loud, frightened tone. "Let's cut, man!" he continued,
leading me with them into another entrance. It appeared, as well as I
could decree, that the cause of his ejaculative outcry was the discovery
of perhaps three, perhaps four, other young men, in coats of the same
shiny material as my escorts. The difference was that they were of a
different color, being blue.

       *       *       *       *       *

We hastened along a lengthy chamber which was quite dark, immediately
after which the large, heavy one opened a way to a serrated incline
leading downward. It was extremely dark, I should say. There was also an
extreme smell, quite like that of the outer air, but enormously
intensified; one would suspect that there was an incomplete combustion
of, perhaps, wood or coal, as well as a certain quantity of general
decay. At any rate, we reached the bottom of the incline, and my escort
behaved quite badly. One of them said to the other four, in these words:
"Them jumpers follow us sure. Yeah, there's much trouble. What's to
prime this guy now and split?"
