"That's funny," he said after a minute. "I never would have picked you
for one of these so-called adventurers. You're too quiet and peaceful
looking. I would have put you down as a doctor or maybe a writer."

"N-no," Hall said. "I w-was in the war."

"Well, that shows you can't tell by looking at a fellow," the agent said
philosophically. He handed Hall his papers. "There you are. The left
door leads out to the copter field. Good luck on Earth!"

Hall pocketed the stamped documents. "Thanks," he said. "I'm glad to be
here."

He walked down the wide station room to a far exit and pushed the door
open. A few steps farther and he was standing on a cement path dug into
a hillside.

       *       *       *       *       *

Across the valley, bright in the noon sun lay the pine covered slopes of
the Argus mountains, and at his feet the green Mojave flowering with
orchards stretched far to the north and south. Between the trees, in the
center of the valley, the Sacramento River rolled southward in a
man-made bed of concrete and steel giving water and life to what had a
century before been dry dead earth.

There was a small outcropping of limestone near the cement walk, and he
stepped over to it and sat down. He would have been happy to rest and
enjoy for a few moments his escape and his triumph, but he had to let
the others know so that they might have hope.

He closed his eyes and groped across the stars toward Grismet. Almost
immediately he felt an impatient tug at his mind, strong because there
were many clamoring at once to be heard. He counted them. There were
seventeen. So one more had been captured since he had left Grismet.

"Be quiet," the told them. "I'll let you see, after a while. First I
have to reach the two of us that are still free."

Obediently, the seventeen were still, and he groped some more and found
another of his kind deep in an ice cave in the polar regions of Grismet.

"How goes it?" he asked.

The figure on Grismet lay stretched out at full length on the blue ice,
his eyes closed. He answered without moving: "They discovered my
radiation about an hour ago. Pretty soon, they'll start blasting through
the ice."

The one on Earth felt the chill despair of his comrade and let go. He
groped about again until he found the last one, the only other one left.
He was squatting in the cellar of a warehouse in the main city of
Grismet.

"Have they picked up your trail yet?" he asked.

"No," answered the one in the cellar. "They won't for a while. I've
scattered depots of radiation all through the town. They'll be some time
tracking them all down, before they can get to me."

In a flash of his mind, Hall revealed his escape and the one on Grismet
nodded and said: "Be careful. Be very careful. You are our only hope."

Hall returned then to the seventeen, and he said with his thoughts: "All
right, now you can look." Immobile in their darkness, they snatched at
his mind, and as he opened his eyes, they, too, saw the splendors of the
mountains and the valley, the blue sky, and the gold sun high overhead.

       *       *       *       *       *

The new man was young, only twenty-six. He was lean and dark and very
enthusiastic about his work. He sat straight in his chair waiting
attentively while his superior across the desk leafed through a folder.

"Jordan. Tom Jordan," the older man finally said. "A nice old Earth
name. I suppose your folks came from there."

"Yes, sir," the new man said briskly.

The chief closed the folder.

"Well," he said, "your first job is a pretty important one."

"I realize that, sir," Jordan said. "I know it's a great responsibility
for a man just starting with the Commission, but I'll give it every
thing I have."

The chief leaned back in his seat and scratched his chin thoughtfully.

"Normally we start a beginner like you working in a pair with an older
man. But we just haven't got enough men to go around. There are eight
thousand planets there"--he pointed with his thumb over his shoulder to
a wall-sized map of the galaxy--"and we've got to cover every one. It
seems reasonable that if he escaped this planet, he'll go to another
that will by its atmosphere or its temperature give him some natural
advantage over us--some place that is either burning hot or at absolute
zero, or perhaps with a chlorine or sulfur dioxide atmosphere. That's
why"--he hesitated a minute, but continued because he was a truthful
man--"I picked you for Earth. It's the most populated of all the planets
and it seems the least likely one that he would choose."

Jordan's face dropped a little bit when he heard the last piece of
information, but he said: "I understand, sir, and if he's there, I'll
bring him back."

The chief slouched farther back in his seat. He picked up a shard of
rubidium that served as a paper weight and toyed with it.

"I guess you know most of the facts. They are made out of permallium.
Have you ever seen any of the stuff?"

The new man shook his head. "I read about it though--some new alloy,
isn't it?"

"Plenty new. It's the hardest stuff anybody has ever made. If you set
off one hundred successive atom blasts over a lump of permallium, you
might crystallize and scale maybe a micron off the surface. It will
stand any temperature or pressure we can produce. That just means
there's no way to destroy it."

Jordan nodded. He felt a little honored that the chief was giving him
this explanation in person rather than just turning him over to one of
the scientific personnel for a briefing. He did not understand that the
old man was troubled and was talking the situation through as much for
his own sake as for anyone else's.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's the problem," the chief continued. "Essentially an
indestructible machine with a built-in source of power that one can't
reach. It had to be built that way--a war instrument, you know."

He stopped and looked squarely at the bright young man sitting across
the desk. "This lousy war. You'd think the human race would grow up some
time, wouldn't you?" He filled a pipe with imported Earth tobacco and
lit it, and took a few deep puffs. "There's something else. I don't know
how they do it, but they can communicate with one another over long
distances. That made them very useful for military purposes.

"They are loyal to one another, too. They try to protect each other and
keep one another from being captured. Do you find that surprising?"

The question caught Jordan unprepared. "Well, yes. It is, kind of--" he
said. "They are only machines."

The chief closed his eyes for a moment. He seemed tired.

"Yes," he repeated, "they are only machines. Anyway, we don't know
everything about them, even yet. There are still a few secret angles, I
think. The men who could tell us are either dead or in hiding.

"There's one fact though that gives us a great advantage. Their
brain"--he stopped on the word and considered it--"I mean their thinking
apparatus gives off a very penetrating short-wave length radiation which
you can pick up on your meters anywhere in a radius of two thousand
miles, and you can locate the source accurately if you get within fifty
miles.

"The only real problem you'll have in finding them is the confusion
created by illegal atomic piles. You'd be surprised how many of them we
have turned up recently. They are owned by private parties and are run
illegally to keep from paying the tax on sources of power. You have to
track those down, but once you get them labeled it will be clear
sailing."

He stopped to take a few puffs on his pipe.

"Don't try to be a hero," he said after a few moments. "Don't get close
to the thing you are hunting. None of them yet has injured any of us,
but if one should want to, he could crush you to death with two
fingers. Use the permallium nets and net bombs if you locate him."

He tamped his pipe out. "Well, that's it," he said.
