Cellulose is distinguished by its inherent constructive functions, and
these functions take effect in the plastic or colloidal condition of the
substance. These properties are equally conspicuous in the synthetical
derivatives of the compound. Without reference, therefore, to further
speculations, and not deterred by any apparent hopelessness of solving
so large a problem, it is clear that we have to exhaust this field by
exact measurements of all the constants which can be reduced to
numerical expression. It is most likely that the issue may conflict with
some of our current views of the molecular state which are largely drawn
from a study of the relatively dissociated forms of matter. But such
conflicts are only those of enlargement, and we anticipate that all
chemists look for an enlargement of the molecular horizon precisely in
those regions where the forces of cell-life manifest themselves.

The _cellulose group_ has been further differentiated by later
investigations. The fibrous celluloses of which the typical members
receive important industrial applications, graduate by insensible stages
into the hemicelluloses which may be regarded as a well-established
sub-group. In considering their morphological and functional
relationships it is evident that the graduation accords with their
structure and the less permanent functions which they fulfil. They are
aggregates of monoses of the various types, chiefly mannose, galactose,
dextrose, &c., so far as they have been investigated.

Closely connected with this group are the constituents of the tissues of
fungi. The recent researches of Winterstein and Gilson, which are noted
in this present volume, have established definitely that they contain a
nitrogenous group in intimate combination with a carbohydrate complex.
This group is closely related to chitin, yielding glucosamin and acetic
acid as products of ultimate hydrolysis. Special interest attaches to
these residues, as they are in a sense intermediate products between the
great groups of the carbohydrates and proteids (E. Fischer, Ber. 19,
1920), and their further investigation by physiological methods may be
expected to disclose a genetic connection.

The _lignocelluloses_ have been further investigated. Certain new types
have been added, notably a soluble or 'pectic' form isolated from the
juice of the white currant (p. 152), and the pith-like wood of the
AEschynomene (p. 135).

Further researches on the typical fibrous lignocellulose have given us a
basis for correcting some of the conclusions recorded in our original
work, and a study of the esters has thrown some light on the
constitution of the complex (p. 130).

Of importance also is the identification of the hydroxyfurfurals as
constituents of the lignocelluloses generally, and the proof that the
characteristic colour-reactions with phenols (phloroglucinol) may be
ascribed to the presence of these compounds (p. 116).

The _pectocelluloses_ have not been the subject of systematic chemical
investigation, but the researches of Gilson ('La Cristallisation de la
Cellulose et la Composition Chimique de la Membrane Cellulaire
Vegetale,' 'La Revue,' 'La Cellule,' i. ix.) are an important
contribution to the natural history of cellulose, especially in relation
to the 'pectic' constituents of the parenchymatous celluloses.
Indirectly also the researches of Tollens on the 'pectins' have
contributed to the subject in correcting some of the views which have
had a text-book currency for a long period. These are dealt with on p.
151. The results establish that the pectins are rather the soluble
hydrated form of cellulosic aggregates in which acid groups may be
represented; but such groups are not to be regarded as essentially
characteristic of this class of compounds.

~Furfural-yielding Substances~ (Furfuroids).--This group of plant products
has been, by later investigations, more definitely and exclusively
connected with the celluloses--i.e. with the more permanent of plant
tissues. From the characteristic property of yielding furfural, which
they have in common with the pentoses, they have been assumed to be the
anhydrides of these C_{5} sugars or pentosanes; but the direct evidence
for this assumption has been shown to be wanting. In regard to their
origin the indirect evidences which have accumulated all point to their
formation in the plant from hexoses. Of special interest, in its
bearings on this point, is the direct transformation of levulose into
furfural derivatives, which takes place under the action of condensing
agents. The most characteristic is that produced by the action of
anhydrous hydrobromic acid in presence of ether [Fenton], yielding a
brommethyl furfural

     C_{6}H_{12}O_{6} - 4H_{2}O + HBr = C_{5}H_{3}.O_{2}.CH_{2}Br

with a Br atom in the methyl group. These researches of Fenton's appear
to us to have the most obvious and direct bearings upon the genetic
relationships of the plant furfuroids and not only _per se_. To give
them their full significance we must recall the later researches of
Brown and Morris, which establish that cane sugar is a primary or direct
product of assimilation, and that starch, which had been assumed to be a
species of universal _matiere premiere_, is probably rather a general
reserve for the elaborating work of the plant. If now the aldose groups
tend to pass over into the starch form, representing a temporary
overflow product of the assimilating energy, it would appear that the
ketose or levulose groups are preferentially used up in the elaboration
of the permanent tissue. We must also take into consideration the
researches of Lobry de Bruyn showing the labile functions of the typical
CO group in both aldoses and hexoses, whence we may conclude that in the
plant-cell the transition from dextrose to levulose is a very simple and
often occurring process.

We ourselves have contributed a link in this chain of evidence
connecting the furfuroids of the plant with levulose or other
keto-hexose. We have shown that the hydroxyfurfurals are constituents of
the lignocelluloses. The proportion present in the free state is small,
and it is not difficult to show that they are products of breakdown of
the lignone groups. If we assume that such groups are derived ultimately
from levulose, we have to account for the detachment of the methyl
group. This, however, is not difficult, and we need only call to mind
that the lignocelluloses are characterised by the presence of methoxy
groups and a residue which is directly and easily hydrolysed to acetic
acid. Moreover, the condensation need not be assumed to be a simple
dehydration with attendant rearrangement; it may very well be
accompanied or preceded by fixation of oxygen. Leaving out the
hypothetical discussion of minor variations, there is a marked
convergence of the evidence as to the main facts which establish the
general relationships of the furfuroid group. This group includes both
saturated and unsaturated or condensed compounds. The former are
constituents of celluloses, the latter of the lignone complex of the
lignocelluloses.

The actual production of furfural by boiling with condensing acids is a
quantitative measure of only a portion, i.e. certain members of the
group. The hydroxyfurfurals, not being volatile, are not measured in
this way. By secondary reactions they may yield some furfural, but as
they are highly reactive compounds, and most readily condensed, they are
for the most part converted into complex 'tarry' products. Hence we have
no means, as yet, of estimating those tissue constituents which yield
hydroxyfurfurals; also we have no measure of the furfurane-rings
existing performed in such a condensed complex as lignone. But, chemists
having added in the last few years a large number of facts and
well-defined probabilities, it is clear that the further investigation
of the furfuroid group will take its stand upon a much more adequate
basis than heretofore. On the view of 'furfural-yielding' being
co-extensive with 'pentose or pentosane,' not only were a number of
important facts obscured or misinterpreted, but there was a barrenness
of suggestion of genetic relationships. As the group has been widened
very much beyond these limits, it is clear that if any group term or
designation is to be retained that of 'furfuroid' is 'neutral' in
character, and equally applicable to saturated substances of such widely
divergent chemical character as pentoses, hexosones, glycuronic acid,
and perhaps, most important of all, levulose itself, all of which are
susceptible of condensation to furfural or furfurane derivatives, as
well as to those unsaturated compounds, constituents of plant tissues
which are already furfurane derivatives.

From the chemical point of view such terms are perhaps superfluous. But
physiological relationships have a significance of their own; and there
is a physiological or functional cohesion marking this group which
calls for recognition, at least for the time, and we therefore propose
to retain the term furfuroid.[1]

~General Experimental Methods.~--In the investigation of the cellulose
group it is clear that methods of ultimate hydrolysis are of first
importance. None are so convenient as those which are based on the
action of sulphuric acid, more or less concentrated (H_{2}SO_{4}.3H_{2}O
- H_{2}SO_{4}H_{2}O). Such methods have been frequently employed in the
investigations noted in this volume. We notice a common deficiency in
the interpretation of the results. It appears to be sufficient to
isolate and identify a crystalline monose, without reference to the
yield or proportion to the parent substance, to establish some main
point in connection with its constitution. On the other hand, it is
clear that in hydrolysing a given cellulose-complex we ought to aim at
complete, i.e. _quantitative, statistics_. The hydrolytic transformation
of starch to dextrins and maltose has been followed in this way, and the
methods may serve as a model to which cellulose transformations should
be approximated. In fact, what is very much wanted is a systematic
re-examination of the typical celluloses in which all the constants of
the terms between the original and the ultimate monose groups shall be
determined. Such constants are similar to those for the starch-dextrose
series, viz. opticity and cupric reduction. Various methods of
fractionation are similarly available, chiefly the precipitation of the
intermediate 'dextrins' by alcohol.

Where the original celluloses are homogeneous we should thus obtain
transformation series, similarly expressed to those of starch. In the
case of the celluloses which are mixtures, or of complex constitution,
there are various methods of either fractionating the original, or of
selectively attacking particular monoses resulting from the
transformation. By methods which are approximately quantitative a
mixture of groups, such as we have, for instance, in jute cellulose,
could be followed through the several stages of their resolution into
monoses. To put the matter generally, in these colloidal and complex
carbohydrates the ordinary physical criteria of molecular weight are
wanting. Therefore, we cannot determine the relationship of a given
product of decomposition to the parent molecule save by means of a
quantitative mass-proportion. Physical criteria are only of determining
value when associated with such constants as cupric reduction, and
these, again, must be referred to some arbitrary initial weight, such
as, for convenience, 100 parts of the original.

Instead of adopting these methods, without which, as a typical case, the
mechanism of starch conversions could not have been followed, we have
been content with a purely qualitative study of the analogous series
obtainable from the celluloses under the action of sulphuric acid. A
very important field of investigation lies open, especially to those who
are generally familiar with the methods of studying starch conversions;
and we may hope in this direction for a series of valuable contributions
to the problem of the actual constitution of the celluloses.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] In this we are confirmed by other writers. See Tollens, _J. fuer
Landw._ 1901, p. 27.




SECTION I. GENERAL CHEMISTRY OF THE TYPICAL COTTON CELLULOSE


(p. 3)[2] ~Ash Constituents.~--It is frequently asserted that silica has a
structural function _sui generis_ in the plant skeleton, having a
relationship to the cellulosic constituents of the plant, distinct from
that of the inorganic ash components with which it is associated. It
should be noted that the matter has been specifically investigated in
two directions. In Berl. Ber. 5, 568 (A. Ladenburg), and again in 11,
822 (W. Lange), appear two papers 'On the Nature of Plant Constituents
containing Silicon,' which contain the results of experimental
investigations of equisetum species--distinguished for their
exceptionally high 'ash' with large proportion of silica--to determine
whether there are any grounds for assuming the existence of
silicon-organic compounds in the plant, the analogues of carbon
compounds. The conclusions arrived at are entirely negative. In
reference to the second assumption that the cuticular tissues of cereal
straws, of esparto, of the bamboo, owe their special properties to
siliceous components, it has been shown by direct experiment upon the
former that their rigidity and resistance to water are in no way
affected by cultivation in a silica-free medium. In other words, the
structural peculiarities of the gramineae in these respects are due to
the physical characteristics chiefly of the (lignified) cells of the
hypodermal tissue, and to the composition and arrangement of the cells
of the cuticle.

_'Swedish' filter papers_ of modern make are so far freed from inorganic
constituents that the weight of the ash may be neglected in nearly all
quantitative experiments [Fresenius, Ztschr. Anal Chem. 1883, 241]. It
represents usually about 1/1000 mgr. per 1 sq. cm. of area of the paper.

_The form of an 'ash'_ derived from a fibrous structure, is that of the
'organic' original, more or less, according to its proportion and
composition. The proportion of 'natural ash' is seldom large enough, nor
are the components of such character as to give a coherent ash, but if
in the case of a fibrous structure it is combined or intimately mixed
with inorganic compounds deposited within the fibres from solution, the
latter may be made to yield a perfect skeleton of the fibre after
burning off the organic matter. It is by such means that the mantles
used in the Welsbach system of incandescent lighting are prepared. A
purified cotton fabric--or yarn--is treated with a concentrated solution
of the mixed nitrates of thorium and cerium, and, after drying, the
cellulose is burned away. A perfect and coherent skeleton of the fabric
is obtained, composed of the mixed oxides. Such mantles have fulfilled
the requirements of the industry up to the present time, but later
experiments forecast a notable improvement. It has been found that
artificial cellulose fibres can be spun with solutions containing
considerable proportions of soluble compounds of these oxides. Such
fibres, when knitted into mantles and ignited, yield an inorganic
skeleton of the oxides of homogeneous structure and smooth contour. De
Mare in 1894, and Knofler in 1895, patented methods of preparing such
cellulose threads containing the salts of thorium and cerium, by
spinning a collodion containing the latter in solution. When finally
ignited, after being brought into the suitable mantle form, there
results a structure which proves vastly more durable than the original
Welsbach mantle. The cause of the superiority is thus set forth by V.
H. Lewes in a recent publication (J. Soc. of Arts, 1900, p. 858): 'The
alteration in physical structure has a most extraordinary effect upon
the light-giving life of the mantle, and also on its strength, as after
burning for a few hundred hours the constant bombardment of the mantle
by dust particles drawn up by the rush of air in the chimney causes the
formation of silicates on the surface of the mantle owing to silica
being present in the air, and this seems to affect the Welsbach
structure far more than it does the "Clamond" type, with the result that
when burned continuously the Welsbach mantle falls to so low a pitch of
light emissivity after 500 to 600 hours, as to be a mere shadow of its
former self, giving not more than one-third of its original light,
whilst the Knofler mantle keeps up its light-emitting power to a much
greater extent, and the Lehner fabric is the most remarkable of all. Two
Lehner mantles which have now been burning continuously in my laboratory
for over 3,000 hours give at this moment a brighter light emissivity
than most of the Welsbachs do in their prime.' ...'The new developments
of the Clamond process form as important a step in the history of
incandescent gas lighting as the discoveries which gave rise to the
original mantles.'

It has further been found that the oxides themselves can be dissolved in
the cellulose alkaline sulphocarbonate (viscose) solution, and
artificial threads have been spun containing from 25 to 30 p.ct. of the
oxides in homogeneous admixture with the cellulose. This method has
obvious advantages over the collodion method both in regard to the
molecular relationship of the oxides to the cellulose and to cheapness
of production.


UNTERSUCHUNGEN UeBER VERSCHIEDENE BESTIMMUNGSMETHODEN DER CELLULOSE.

H. SURINGAR AND B. TOLLENS (Ztschr. angew. Chem. 1896, No. 23).

~INVESTIGATION OF METHODS OF DETERMINING CELLULOSE.~

_Introduction._--This is an exhaustive bibliography of the subject,
describing also the various methods of cellulose estimation, noted in
historical sequence. First, the Weende 'crude fibre' method (Henneberg)
with modifications of Wattenberg, Holdefleiss, and others is dealt with.
The product of this treatment, viz. 'crude fibre' is a mixture,
containing furfuroids and lignone compounds. Next follows a group of
processes which aim at producing a 'pure cellulose' by eliminating
lignone constituents, for which the merely hydrolytic treatments of the
Weende method are ineffectual. The method of F. Schulze--prolonged
digestion with dilute nitric acid, with addition of chlorate--has been
largely employed, though the composition of the product is more or less
divergent from a 'pure cellulose.'

Dilute nitric acid at 60-80 deg. (Cross and Bevan) and a dilute mixture of
nitric and sulphuric acids (Lifschutz) have been employed for isolating
cellulose from the lignocelluloses. Hoffmeister modifies the method of
Schulze by substituting hydrochloric acid for the nitric acid. Treatment
with the halogens associated with alkaline processes of hydrolysis is
the basis of the methods of Hugo Muller (bromine water) and Cross and
Bevan (chlorine gas). Lastly, the authors notice the methods based upon
the action of the alkaline hydrates at high temperatures (180 deg.) in
presence of water (Lange), or of glycerin (Gabriel). The process of
heating to 210 deg. with glycerin only (Hoenig) yields a very impure and
ill-defined product.

For comparative investigation of these processes certain celluloses and
cellulosic materials were prepared as follows:

(a) _'Rag' cellulose._--A chemical filter paper, containing only
cotton and linen celluloses, was further purified by boiling with dilute
acid and dilute alkali. After thorough washing it was air-dried.

(b) _Wood cellulose._--Pine wood sawdust was treated by digestion for
fourteen days with dilute nitric acid with addition of chlorate
(Schulze). The mass was washed and digested with alkaline lye (1.25
p.ct. KOH), and exhaustively washed, treated with dilute acetic acid;
again washed, and finally air-dried.

This product was found to yield 2.3 p.ct. furfural on distillation with
HCl (1.06 sp.gr.).

(c) _Purified wood._--Pine wood sawdust was treated in succession with
dilute alkalis and acids, in the cold, and with alcohol and ether until
exhausted of products soluble in these liquids and reagents.

In addition to the above the authors have also employed jute fibre and
raw cotton wool in their investigations.

They note that the yield of cellulose is in many cases sensibly lowered
by treating the material after drying at the temperature of 100 deg.. The
material for treatment is therefore weighed in the air-dry condition,
and a similar sample weighed off for drying at 100 deg. for determination of
moisture.

The main results of the experimental investigation are as follows:--

_Weende process_ further attacks the purified celluloses as follows:
Wood cellulose losing in weight 8-9 p.ct.; filter paper, 6-7.5 p.ct.,
and the latter treated a second time loses a further 4-5 p.ct. It is
clear, therefore, that the process is of purely empirical value.

_Schulze._--This process gave a yield of 47.6 p.ct. cellulose from pine
wood. The celluloses themselves, treated by the process, showed losses
of 1-3 p.ct. in weight, much less therefore than in the preceding case.

_Hoenig's_ method of heating with glycerin to 210 deg. was found to yield
products very far removed from 'cellulose.' The process may have a
certain value in estimations of 'crude fibre,' but is dismissed from
further consideration in relation to cellulose.

_Lange._--The purpose of the investigation was to test the validity of
the statement that the celluloses are not attacked by alkaline hydrates
