
And to Neal Cloud, atomic physicist, sitting there at his desk in torn,
despairing abstraction, with black maggots of thought gnawing holes in
his brain, the catastrophe was doubly galling because of its cruel
irony. For he was second from the top in the Atomic Research Laboratory;
his life's work had been a search for a means of extinguishment of
exactly such loose vortices as had destroyed his all.

His eyes focussed vaguely upon the portrait. Clear, honest gray eyes ...
lines of character and of humor ... sweetly curved lips, ready to smile
or to kiss....

He wrenched his eyes away and scribbled briefly upon a sheet of paper.
Then, getting up stiffly, he took the portrait and moved woodenly across
the room to a furnace. As though enshrining it he placed the plastic
block upon a refractory between the electrodes and threw a switch. After
the flaming arc had done its work he turned and handed the paper to a
tall man, dressed in plain gray leather, who had been watching him with
quiet, understanding eyes. Significant enough to the initiated of the
importance of this laboratory is the fact that it was headed by an
Unattached Lensman.

"As of now, Phil, if it's QX with you."

The Gray Lensman took the document, glanced at it, and slowly,
meticulously, tore it into sixteen equal pieces.

"Uh, uh, Storm," he denied, gently. "Not a resignation. Leave of
absence, yes--indefinite--but not a resignation."

"Why?" It was scarcely a question; Cloud's voice was level,
uninflected. "I won't be worth the paper I'd waste."

"Now, no," the Lensman conceded, "but the future's another matter. I
haven't said anything so far, because to anyone who knew you and Jo as I
knew you it was abundantly clear that nothing could be said." Two hands
gripped and held. "For the future, though, four words were uttered long
ago, that have never been improved upon. 'This, too, shall pass.'"

"You think so?"

"I don't think so, Storm--I know so. I've been around a long time. You
are too good a man, and the world has too much use for you, for you to
go down permanently out of control. You've got a place in the world, and
you'll be back--" A thought struck the Lensman, and he went on in an
altered tone. "You wouldn't--but of course you wouldn't--you couldn't."

"I don't think so. No, I won't--that never was any kind of a solution to
any problem."

Nor was it. Until that moment, suicide had not entered Cloud's mind, and
he rejected it instantly. His kind of man did not take the easy way out.

After a brief farewell Cloud made his way to an elevator and was whisked
down to the garage. Into his big blue DeKhotinsky Sixteen Special and
away.

Through traffic so heavy that front-, rear-, and side-bumpers almost
touched he drove with his wonted cool skill; even though, consciously,
he did not know that the other cars were there. He slowed, turned,
stopped, "gave her the oof," all in correct response to flashing signals
in all shapes and colors--purely automatically. Consciously, he did not
know where he was going, nor care. If he thought at all, his numbed
brain was simply trying to run away from its own bitter imaging--which,
if he had thought at all, he would have known to be a hopeless task. But
he did not think; he simply acted, dumbly, miserably. His eyes saw,
optically; his body reacted, mechanically; his thinking brain was
completely in abeyance.

Into a one-way skyway he rocketed, along it over the suburbs and into
the transcontinental super-highway. Edging inward, lane after lane, he
reached the "unlimited" way--unlimited, that is, except for being
limited to cars of not less than seven hundred horsepower, in perfect
mechanical condition, driven by registered, tested drivers at speeds not
less than one hundred and twenty-five miles an hour--flashed his
registry number at the control station, and shoved his right foot down
to the floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now everyone knows that an ordinary DeKhotinsky Sporter will do a
hundred and forty honestly-measured miles in one honestly measured hour;
but very few ordinary drivers have ever found out how fast one of those
brutal big souped-up Sixteens can wheel. They simply haven't got what it
takes to open one up.

"Storm" Cloud found out that day. He held that two-and-a-half-ton
Juggernaut on the road, wide open, for two solid hours. But it didn't
help. Drive as he would, he could not outrun that which rode with him.
Beside him and within him and behind him. For Jo was there. Jo and the
kids, but mostly Jo. It was Jo's car as much as it was his. "Babe, the
big blue ox," was Jo's pet name for it; because, like Paul Bunyan's
fabulous beast, it was pretty nearly six feet between the eyes.
Everything they had ever had was that way. She was in the seat beside
him. Every dear, every sweet, every luscious, lovely memory of her was
there ... and behind him, just out of eye-corner visibility, were the
three kids. And a whole lifetime of this loomed ahead--a vista of
emptiness more vacuous far than the emptiest reaches of intergalactic
space. Damnation! He couldn't stand much more of--

High over the roadway, far ahead, a brilliant octagon flared red. That
meant "STOP!" in any language. Cloud eased up his accelerator, eased
down his mighty brakes. He pulled up at the control station and a
trimly-uniformed officer made a gesture.

"Sorry, sir," the policeman said, "but you'll have to detour here.
There's a loose atomic vortex beside the road up ahead--

"Oh! It's Dr. Cloud!" Recognition flashed into the guard's eyes. "I
didn't recognize you at first. You can go ahead, of course. It'll be two
or three miles before you'll have to put on your armor; you'll know when
better than anyone can tell you. They didn't tell us they were going to
send for _you_. It's just a little new one, and the dope we got was that
they were going to shove it off into the canyon with pressure."

"They didn't send for me." Cloud tried to smile. "I'm just driving
around--haven't my armor along, even. So I guess I might as well go
back."

He turned the Special around. A loose vortex--new. There might be a
hundred of them, scattered over a radius of two hundred miles. Sisters
of the one that had murdered his family--the hellish spawn of that
accursed Number Eleven vortex that that damnably incompetent bungling
ass had tried to blow up.... Into his mind there leaped a picture,
wire-sharp, of Number Eleven as he had last seen it, and simultaneously
an idea hit him like a blow from a fist.

He thought. _Really_ thought, now; cogently, intensely, clearly. If he
could do it ... could actually blow out the atomic flame of an atomic
vortex ... not exactly revenge, but.... By Klono's brazen bowels, it
would work--it'd _have_ to work--he'd _make_ it work! And grimly,
quietly, but alive in every fiber now, he drove back toward the city
practically as fast as he had come away.

