viewplates. Slowly he began to see.

He perceived that he was not alone. A group of people stood in front of
him, respectful, their own eyes full of fear and wonder. Some one
uttered a hoarse cry and pointed at his helmet. The unclouding of the
viewplates must have stricken them with awe.

The air was wonderful to breathe. He would have liked to remove his
helmet and fill his lungs with it unhampered, expose his face to its
soft caress, expand his chest with the constriction of the suit. But
these people--

They must have seen him tumble down from the sky and land unhurt. They
carried food and flowers, and now they were kneeling down to him as to
a--Suddenly he realized. To them he was a god.

The thought of it made him weak. To Malevski and the ship's crew he was
a criminal, a cheap chiseler and pickpocket, almost a murderer, escaping
credit for _that_ crime only by grace of his own good luck and his
victim's thick skull. They had felt such contempt for him that they
hadn't even bothered to guard him too carefully. They had thought him a
complete coward, without the courage to risk an escape, without the
intelligence to find the opportunities that might be offered to him.

They hadn't realized how terrified he was of the thing with which they
threatened him. Regeneration, the giving up of his old identity? Not for
him. They hadn't realized that he preferred the risks of a dangerous
escape to the certainty of _that_.

And here he was a god.

       *       *       *       *       *

He lifted his hand without thinking, to wipe away the perspiration that
covered his forehead. But before the hand touched his helmet he realized
what he was doing, and let the hand drop again.

To the people watching him the gesture must have seemed one of double
significance. It was at once a sign of acceptance of their food and
flowers, and their offer of good-will, and at the same time an order to
withdraw. They bowed, and moved backwards away from him. Behind him they
left their gifts.

They seemed human, human enough for the features on the men's faces to
impress him as strong and resourceful, for him to recognize that the
women were attractive. And if they were human, the food must be fit for
human beings. Whether it was or wasn't, however, again he had no choice.

He waited until they were out of sight, and then, stiffly, he removed
his helmet and ate. The food tasted good. And with his helmet off, with
the wind on his face, and the woods around him whispering in his ears,
it was a meal fit for the being they thought him to be.

He was a god. Possibly it was the space suit which made him one,
especially the goggle-eyed helmet. He could take no chance of becoming
an ordinary mortal, and that would mean that he would have to wear the
space suit continually. Or at least the helmet. That, he decided, was
what he would do. That would leave his body reasonably free, and at the
same time impress them with the fact that he was different from them.

By manipulating the air valve he would be able to make the viewplates
cloud and uncloud at will, thus giving dramatic expression to his
feelings. It would be a pleasant game to play until he had learned
something of their language. It would be safer than trying to make
things clear to them with speech and gestures that they could not
understand anyway.

He wondered how long it would be before Malevski would find the
shattered lifeboat drifting in space, and then trace its course and
decide where he had landed. That would be the end of his divinity.
Meanwhile, until then--

Until then he was a god. Unregenerated. Permanently unregenerated.
Holding his helmet, he threw back his head and laughed loud and long,
and wondered what his mother would have thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

For awhile he was being left alone. They were afraid of him, of course,
fearful of intruding with their merely mortal affairs upon the
meditations of so divine a being. Later, however, curiosity and perhaps
a desire to show him off to newcomers might draw them back. In the
interval, it would be well to find out what sort of place this was in
which he had landed.

He looked around him. There were trees, with sharp green branches, sharp
green twigs, sharp red leaves. He shuddered as he thought of what would
have happened to him if he had fallen on the point of a branch. The
trees seemed rigid and unbending in the wind that caressed his face.
There were no birds that he could see. Small black objects bounded from
one branch to another as if engaged in complicated games of tag. He
wondered if the games were as serious as the one he had been playing
with Malevski, with himself as It.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were no ground animals in sight. If any showed up later, they
couldn't be too dangerous, not with the natives living here in such
apparent peace and contentment. There probably wouldn't be anything that
his pocket gun, which he had taken the precaution to remove from the
lifeboat before that shattered, wouldn't be able to handle.

Near him was a strange spring, or little river, or whatever you might
call it. It broke from the ground, ran along the hard rocky surface for
a dozen feet, and then plunged underground again. There were other
springs of a similar nature scattered here and there, and now he
realized that their combined murmuring was the noise he had mistaken, on
first removing his helmet, for the rustle of the wind in the woods.

He would have enough to drink. The natives would bring him food. What
else could any reasonable man want?

