natural laws will prevail. We've learned ways to take advantage of those
natural laws, to do certain things that will make them work for us
instead of against us.

"We've always argued that for any kind of intelligence to arise in the
universe it, too, would have to become aware of these natural laws; that
it, too, would have to do these same certain things to take advantage of
those laws; that because the laws and what to do about them would always
be similar man would have a lot in common with that other intelligence,
and a means of communicating because of that similarity.

"We'd argue that whatever its evolutionary physical shape, this wasn't
so important as its mental evolution--because that mental evolution
would follow the same course as ours. They wouldn't be truly alien,
because science would be a common denominator.

"Now it appears we could be wrong. Maybe our concept of science is too
narrow. Maybe we're like the turkey. We've become so fixed in our
pattern of solving a problem we can't change, can't back off and take
another look, see the problem not as it appears but as it really is."

"But isn't that the science of E?" Tom asked curiously. "To be able to
extrapolate any co-ordinate system? I'm not criticizing," he added
hastily. "Just asking."

"I suspect even our means of extrapolation are too limited, too based on
the relationship of things and forces to each other, too set in the
notion that only physical tools can affect physical things. We may be
looking at a low fence, calling it a log, and therefore not able to
understand why we can't walk around the obstruction in the usual
manner." He stopped, and added with a shrug. "Stupid, maybe. Or like the
turkey, the yard is so big that he never gets a picture of it as a whole
enclosure. By the time he's wandered down this side of the fence he's
forgot what he found on the other side. Never can put the whole thing
together in his mind. That's my trouble, anyhow. So far, I'm not able to
put the whole thing together, see it all as one piece.

"When I do, if I do, then maybe like a caged animal I'll see how to
unlock an opening, or maybe realize the only way out is to fly."

There beside the softly flowing river, where water was obeying natural
law without any trouble, the three men broke off their discussion when
they saw a bright flash high in the sky above them. All three knew what
it meant.

Another E ship had arrived.

No doubt the ship would expect light signals from the colonists in
acknowledgment of their space flare.

If the ship had come while this portion of the planet was still in
daylight, they would have seen there was no village, no ship, no
equipment for direct communication. They may even have reasoned there
was no means of signaling with artificial light.

But there was nothing to tell them that those on Eden could not build a
fire.

As if they were present on the ship themselves, the three men could
anticipate what must be happening there. Right now they would be
anxiously waiting for signal flares to light up, to spring up like
signal fires on a lonely island where a marooned man has, at last,
sighted a ship on the horizon.

The colonists were no longer hiding, but were freely wandering in open
spaces. If the ship had arrived before dusk they would have seen the men
and women in the viewscopes. If after dusk, they still might have
spotted them in the infrared viewers which picked up the heat
differentials and gave a fair approximation of shapes.

The men on the ship would be waiting and looking at their watches. How
long, they would be asking, does it take those colonists, that E down
there, to get a signal fire going?

About five minutes passed, and another flare lighted the heavens.

"Get off the dime down there!" it seemed to say. "Acknowledge us!"

Cal took the chance that they might have an infrared viewscope directly
on him, and he waved his arms above his head. But apparently they had
not spotted him, for there was no answering flare.

At intervals of five minutes at first, then later cut to fifteen
minutes, throughout the long night the flares continued to light the
sky.

"Talk to us," the flares begged. "Surely you were expecting us. Surely
you would not all be sleeping so soundly that our light could not rouse
you."

Several times the three men stood up and waved their arms, but it
brought no answer from the ship. In the darkness perhaps the equipment
wasn't good enough. Perhaps in the night breeze bushes and trees also
swayed with movement.

Once there was a rustle in the brush, and in the starlight they
recognized the figure of Louie approaching them.

"This has got to stop," he said worriedly as he came up to them. "That
light is an unnatural thing. It will anger Them. It is not meant for the
peace of Eden to be disturbed by any artificial thing. And if They
should turn Their wrath upon us--woe, woe!"

His face was stricken in the light of a new flare, and as suddenly as he
had come to object, he left, plunged back under the trees to seek his
people, be beside them, comforting them when disaster struck down.

After a time the three men gave up trying to wave their acknowledgment
of the flares in darkness. They watched for an hour or so, and then
tried to sleep. The periodic flares continued to come throughout the
long night, as if now no longer pleading for acknowledgment, but rather
reassuring men in such deep distress that they could not answer.
Reassuring them that help was at hand and morning would come.

They tried to sleep, and although fitfully disturbed by the continuing
flares, they did sleep. But at the first hint of dawn, Cal awoke and
aroused his two companions, and by the time there was enough light for
the ship to see clear detail upon the ground, the three men were ready
for a better attempt at answering the ship's signal.

They went up to the village site, where the colonists were sleeping in
the way a herd is bedded down together. They awoke Frank and Martha,
Ahmed and Dirk, and told them of their plan. Louie, too, awoke, heard
the plan, and tried to warn them against it. Any attempt, he said, to
communicate with those not on Eden would surely increase the wrath of
Those who wanted only the natural state here--a wrath still withheld
because of superhuman mercy, but which must not be tried too far.

In spite of his warnings, Cal, and those co-operating with him, got
together enough colonists to carry out his plan.

Good-naturedly, the colonists did as they were told, but with the
attitude that it was something amusing, that there was nothing they'd
rather be doing at the moment. Any sense of urgency about communicating
with home seemed to have been washed from their minds.

In a clear space, on the soft grass, Cal got the colonists to sit or lie
in certain positions. Checked against Tom's knowledge of ancient signal
patterns, those certain positions took the shape of space-navy patterns.

Three men lay in a triangle. Next to that, six men sat in a circle, and
last three more men lay in another triangle. Cal hoped someone on the
ship would be able to read the ancient message.

"Keep clear of me. I am maneuvering with difficulty."

The signal had no more than formed when there was a flash from the ship
so bright that it could be seen in the morning sky. They had read his
signal, and now they began a series of flashes, of questions. "What's
going on down there?" was the essence of their questioning.

It was well the ship had caught the first signal, for the colonists lost
all interest in the game which had no point. They simply stood up and
wandered away in search of their breakfasts from the trees and bushes.

Louie, who had stood to one side glowering, now took charge of them
again and shepherded them to a grove of trees where the fruit seemed
especially large and succulent.

But now that the ship had spotted him, Cal could signal alone. He lay
down on the ground, himself, to move his arms in semaphore positions.
But even as he lay back, he became conscious that he, too, could hardly
care less. With a detached interest that amounted to amusement at such
childish, primitive things, he watched his arms spell out one more
message.

"Keep off! No mechanical science allowed in this co-ordinate system."

He stood up then, and made a farewell gesture toward the ship.

At that instant he felt strangely that he had passed into another stage
of growth, completed a task, cut himself off from an environment that
had held him back. What the ship did, in response to his warnings, no
longer mattered. If it landed, its personnel too would join the
colonists. If it obeyed the request of an E, it might circle there
indefinitely.

Indefinitely watching the turkeys circle inside their low fence, unable
to aid them, release them.

He did not particularly care what they did.

They could go on, spluttering out their signals, trying to question him.
He didn't even try to read their messages. It didn't matter. Their
science had nothing to do with him, nothing to offer him. Through it he
could not reach a solution.

Somehow he knew that already.




19


"This time," the communications supervisor said with all the firmness he
could muster, "this time there must not be any interference with
communication. There just absolutely must not be!"

"Well, it wasn't my fault," the operator retorted with an exasperation
that blanketed prudent restraint. "You heard what E McGinnis said--that
they could identify E Gray, and the ship's crew, and many of the
colonists, but that there was no sign of the ship that took them there.
If there wasn't any ship there couldn't be any communication. It's not
my fault. I can't receive something that wasn't sent."

"I know, I know," the supervisor said, and then, worried that he may be
giving the appearance of backing down, commanded savagely, "just watch
it, that's all!" He chewed violently at his knuckle and glared at the
operator.

"Just watch it," the operator mumbled bitterly. "Just watch it, the man
says. And what will I watch if the message stops coming?"

"Now, now, now, now," the supervisor nagged, "we'll have no
insubordination, if you please."

And upstairs this time more than Bill Hayes, sector chief, were
monitoring the message. The top administrative brass of E.H.Q. were
assembled in their big plush conference room used for arriving at major
policy decisions that sometimes affected the whole course of man's
progress and direction in occupying the universe.

They sat in worried silence as E McGinnis reported the two messages he
had received from Junior E Gray.

First: Keep clear of me. I am maneuvering with difficulty.

Then: Keep off. No mechanical science allowed in this co-ordinate
system.

They looked at one another under beetled brows. They wondered, at first
privately and then openly if that Junior E had blown his stack. They had
looked at many a problem finally solved by the E's, but never before had
such a ridiculous situation come up.

And right at the time, too, when the civil government had decided to
place a curb on E.H.Q.'s freedom of movement, its control over the
experimental phases of planet development. The injunction to halt a
Junior E from taking over the Eden problem fooled none of them. They
knew that Gunderson wasn't concerned for those colonists out there, that
he was merely using the public furor to advance his own personal power.
They knew that the police worked unremittingly, unceasingly, always and
ever to bring every phase of human activity under their control. They
knew it was a centuries-old tactic to wait for the right situation to
arise, so that the lawmakers could be stampeded into passing some law
which seemed only to apply to this given condition but in actuality
broadened police powers over a wide area of man's actions.

Yes, there was far more at stake here than the fate of fifty colonists.
In a sense E.H.Q. itself was the stake. The whole science of E was at
stake.

And E McGinnis had played right into Gunderson's hands. It was he who
had been the E influence in deciding to allow a Junior to handle the
problem in the first place. It was he who was standing off from the
planet, not landing and taking over things as he should.

There was obviously no danger. By his own report, the people on Eden
were in good health, and from their apparent actions, not even
distressed.

This message about no mechanical science being allowed, for example. Did
the Junior mean the colonists wouldn't allow it? Must mean that. What
else could prevent it? But when an E, a real E, took charge in an
experimental colony, the colonists had nothing further to say about the
matter. True, when the five-year experimental period was over and the
three-generation colonists took over a planet, then it came more under
civil control, and E.H.Q. largely withdrew with the provision that it
could step back in at any time the problem seemed not to have been
solved after all.

But while under the five-year test ... The E was the final word, or
should be. The colonists knew it. The E knew it, or should know it.
Obviously then it was weakness on the part of the Junior if he allowed
the colonists to dictate that there could be no mechanical science.
Proof of his inability to handle the job.

A perfect setup for Gunderson!

They decided they were forced to take a strong hand with McGinnis.
Ordinarily the E was the final word, not only with the colonists, but
with the administration at E.H.Q. But maybe there were times when he
shouldn't be. Yes, definitely they should take a hand. After all, Gray
was still a Junior, hardly more than a boy. Was it right that a mere boy
could stop investigation by anyone except himself? Tell Earth with all
its power and might what to do?

Definitely there was a time when an exception to general E policy should
be made. Definitely this was that time. If nothing else, they must take
a strong hand to prevent Gunderson from moving in with his police
powers. Protect the E science from Gunderson, or at least salvage what
they might.

Their conference over, they asked for a connection with McGinnis.

"We assume you will land and take charge, E McGinnis?" the board
chairman asked.

"Certainly not," McGinnis snapped back. "An E has forbidden it."

"Well now," the chairman argued, and sweat began to come out on his
forehead. "He's only a Junior. We have decided his judgment isn't mature
enough for this problem."

"I have every confidence in Junior E Gray," McGinnis said acidly. "And
every E in the system will back me. It makes no difference what you have
decided. Either the science of E means something, or it doesn't. Either
we have complete freedom to handle a problem, or we don't. Let me remind
you, gentlemen, this isn't the first time that laymen have decided the E
is a fool and tried to take matters into their own hands. Do you want to
repeat past disasters?"

"If we don't land a ship, E McGinnis"--the chairman was all but pleading
now--"Gunderson's police will. We feel we must land a ship to take a
firmer control over the situation. Public sentiment demands it. Policy
demands it. Perhaps the whole future of E demands it."

A new voice cut into the communications hookup, a feminine voice.

"Gentlemen," she said, "this is Linda Gray. I requested that I be cut in
on any communication concerning my husband, and E McGinnis made it an
order before he left. If another ship does land, I must be on it. I want
to be with my husband."

"I will not be landing on Eden, Linda," E McGinnis said firmly. "An E
has forbidden it. That is enough for any other E in the universe. No
other E will land. Your husband is all right. He is in good health, and
apparently mentally sound. At least sound enough to warn us against
landing. He must have a reason. We don't know, yet, what it is.

"Now he has stopped communicating, we don't know why. He must have a
reason for that, too. It is probably a sound reason. E science has been
drilled into him until it is a part of his every mind cell, perhaps even
every body cell.

"I assume he is not communicating because we can't help him, because
communicating with us distracts him from solving the problem. If E.H.Q.
decides to send out a ship on its own, and risk landing in an unknown
co-ordinate system, against the orders of two E's, which will become the
combined orders of all E's in the universe, that is their decision. If
you wish to be on it, that is your decision.

"I am cutting off now. It will be no accident that E.H.Q. cannot connect
with me. I'm cutting out because I don't want to be distracted any
further. I'm trying to think."

The acid rebuff of the old E left the administrative board hanging in a
