unfortunately led to a very personal tone in the book.

With regard to the arts treated of in the following pages, matters
about which information is easily acquired--such as carpentering,
blacksmithing, turning, and the arts of the watchmaker--have been
left on one side.  With regard to the last, which is of immense use in
the laboratory, there happen to be at least two excellent and handy
books, viz.  Saunier's Watchmakers' Handbook, Tripplin, London, 1892;
and Britton's Watchmakers' Dictionary and Guide.

With regard to carpentering, turning, and blacksmithing, almost any
one who so desires can obtain a little practical experience in any
village.  A short chapter has been devoted to glass-blowing, in spite
of there being an excellent and handy book by Mr. Shenstone (The
Methods of Glass-blowing, Rivington) on the subject already in
existence.  The reason for this exception lies in the fact that the
writer's methods differ considerably from those advocated by Mr.
Shenstone.

The chapter on opticians' work has had to be compressed to an extent
which is undesirable in dealing with so complex and delicate an art,
but it is hoped that it will prove a sufficient introduction for
laboratory purposes.  In this matter the writer is under great
obligations to his friend and assistant, Mr. James Cook, F.R.A.S, who
gave him his first lessons in lens-making some twenty years ago.  To
Mr. John A.  Brashear of Allegheny, Pa, thanks are due for much
miscellaneous information on optical work, which is included verbatim
in the text, some of it contained originally in printed papers, and
some most kindly communicated to the writer for the purpose of this
book.  In particular, the writer would thank Mr. Brashear for his
generously accorded information as to the production of those "flat"
surfaces for which he is so justly famous.

The writer is also indebted to Mr. A.  E.  Kennelly for some
information as to American practice in the use of insulating material
for electrical work, and to his friends Mr. J.  A.  Pollock and Dr. C.
J.  Martin for many valuable suggestions.  For the illustrations
thanks are due to Mrs.  Threlfall and Mr. James Cook.  With regard to
matters which have come to the writer's knowledge by his being
specifically instructed in them from time to time, due acknowledgment
is, it is hoped, made in the text.

With regard to the question as to what matters might be included and
what omitted, the general rule has been to include information which
the author has obtained with difficulty, and to leave on one side that
which he has more easily attained.  All the "unities" have been
consistently outraged by a deliberate use of the English and metric
systems side by side.  So long as all the materials for mechanical
processes have to be purchased to specifications in inches and feet,
it is impossible to use the centimetre consistently without
introducing inconvenience.  However, everybody ought to, and probably
does, use either system with equal facility.

No attempt has been made at showing how work can be done without
tools.  Though, no doubt, a great deal can be done with inferior
appliances where great economy of money and none of time is an object,
the writer has long felt very strongly that English physical
laboratory practice has gone too far in the direction of starving the
workshop, and he does not wish, even indirectly, 'to give any
countenance to such a mistaken policy.  Physical research is too
difficult in itself, and students' time is too valuable, for it to be
remunerative to work with insufficient appliances.

In conclusion, the writer would ask his readers to regard the book to
some extent as tentative, and as a means to the procuring and
organising of information bearing upon laboratory arts.  Any
information which can be given will be always thankfully received, and
the author hereby requests any reader who may happen to learn
something of value from the book to communicate any special
information he may possess, so that it may be of use to others should
another edition ever be called for.

CHAPTER I

HINTS ON THE MANIPULATION OF GLASS AND ON GLASS-BLOWING FOR LABORATORY
PURPOSES

Sec. 1.  THE art of glass-blowing has the conspicuous advantage, from the
point of view of literary presentation, of being to a great extent
incommunicable.  As in the case of other delightful arts--such as
those treated of in the Badminton Library, for instance--the most
that can be done by writing is to indicate suitable methods and to
point out precautions which experience has shown to be necessary, and
which are not always obvious when the art is first approached.  It is
not the object of this work to deal with the art of glass-blowing or
any other art after the manner befitting a complete treatise, in which
every form of practice is rightly included.  On the contrary, it is my
wish to avoid the presentation of alternative methods.

I consider that the presentation of alternative methods would, for my
present purpose, be a positive disadvantage, for it would swell this
book to an outrageous size;  and to beginners--I speak from
experience--too lavish a treatment acts rather by way of obscuring
the points to be aimed at than as a means of enlightenment.  The
student often does not know which particular bit of advice to follow,
and obtains the erroneous idea that great art has to be brought to
bear to enable him to accomplish what is, after all, most likely a
perfectly simple and straightforward operation.

This being understood, it might perhaps be expected that I should
describe nothing but the very best methods for obtaining any proposed
result.  Such, of course, has been my aim, but it is not likely that I
have succeeded in every case, or even in the majority of cases, for I
have confined myself to giving such directions as I know from my own
personal experience will, if properly carried out, lead to the result
claimed.  In the few cases in which I have to refer to methods of
which I have no personal experience, I have endeavoured to give
references (usually taking the form of an acknowledgment), so that an
idea of their value may be formed.  All methods not particularised may
be assumed by the reader to have come within my personal experience.

Sec. 2.  Returning to glass-blowing, we may note that two forms of
glass-blowing are known in the arts, "Pot" blowing and  "Table"
blowing.  In the former case large quantities of fluid "metal"
(technical term for melted glass) are assumed to be available, and as
this is seldom the case in the laboratory, and as I have not yet felt
the want of such a supply, I shall deal only with "table"  blowing.
Fortunately there is a convenient book on this subject, by Dr.
Shenstone (Rivingtons), so that what I have to say will be as brief as
possible, consistent with sufficiency for everyday work.  As a matter
of fact there is not very much to say, for if ever there was an art in
which manual dexterity is of the first and last importance, that art
is glass-working.

I do not think that a man can become an accomplished glass-blower from
book instructions merely--at all events, not without much unnecessary
labour,--but he can learn to do a number of simple things which will
make an enormous difference to him both as regards the progress of his
work and the state of his pocket.

Sec. 3.  The first thing is to select the glass.  In general, it will
suffice to purchase tubes and rods;  in the case where large pieces
(such as the bulbs of Geissler pumps) have to be specially prepared by
pot-blowing, the student will have to observe precautions to be
mentioned later on.  There are three kinds of glass most generally
employed in laboratories.

Sec. 4.  Soft Soda Glass, obtained for the most part from factories in
Thuringia, and generally used in assembling chemical apparatus.--This
glass is cheap, and easily obtainable from any large firm of apparatus
dealers or chemists.  It should on no account be purchased from small
druggists, for the following reasons:-

(a) It is usually absurdly dear when obtained in this way.

(b) It is generally made up of selections of different age and
different composition, and pieces of different composition, even if
the difference is slight, will not fuse together and remain together
unless joined in a special manner.

(c) It is generally old, and this kind of glass often devitrifies with
age, and is then useless for blowpipe work, though it may be bent
sufficiently for assembling chemical apparatus.  Devitrified glass
looks frosty, or, in the earlier stages, appears to be covered by
cobwebs, and is easily picked out and rejected.

Sec. 5.  It might be imagined that the devitrification would disappear
when the glass is heated to the fusing point; and so it does to a
great extent, but for many operations one only requires to soften the
glass, and the devitrification often persists up to this temperature.
My experience is that denitrified glass is also more likely to crack
in the flame than good new glass, though the difference in this
respect is not very strongly marked with narrow tubes.

Sec. 6.  Flint Glass.

Magnificent flint glass is made both in England and France.  The
English experimenter will probably prefer to use English glass, and,
if he is wise, will buy a good deal at a time, since it does not
appear to devitrify with age, and uniformity is thereby more likely to
be secured.  I have obtained uniformly good results with glass made by
Messrs.  Powell of Whitefriars, but I daresay equally good glass may
be obtained elsewhere.

For general purposes flint glass is vastly superior to the soft soda
mentioned above.  In the first place, it is very much stronger, and
also less liable to crack when heated--not alone when it is new, but
also, and especially, after it has been partly worked.  Apparatus made
of flint glass is less liable to crack and break at places of unequal
thickness than if made of soda glass.  This is not of much importance
where small pieces of apparatus only are concerned, because these can
generally be fairly annealed; and if the work is well done, the
thickness will not be uneven.  It is a different matter where large
pieces of apparatus, such as connections to Geissler pumps, are
concerned, for the glass has often to be worked partly in situ, and
can only be imperfectly annealed.

Joints made between specimens of different composition are much more
likely to stand than when fashioned in soda glass.  Indeed, if it is
necessary to join two bits of soda glass of different kinds, it is
better to separate them by a short length of flint glass;  they are
more likely to remain joined to it than to each other.  A particular
variety of flint glass, known as white enamel, is particularly
suitable for this purpose, and, indeed, may be used practically as a
cement.

Sec. 7, It is, however, when the necessity of altering or repairing
apparatus complicated by joints arises that the advantage of flint
glass is most apparent.  A crack anywhere near to a side, or inserted
joint, can scarcely ever be repaired in the case of soda glass
apparatus, even when the glass is quite thin and the dimensions small.

It should also be mentioned that flint glass has a much more brilliant
appearance than soda glass.  Of course, there is a considerable
difference between different kinds of flint glass as to the melting
point, and this may account for the divergency of the statements
usually met with as to its fusibility compared with that of soda
glass.  The kind of flint glass made by Messrs.  Powell becomes
distinctly soft soon after it is hot enough to be appreciably luminous
in a darkened room, and at a white heat is very fluid.  This fluidity,
though of advantage to the practised worker, is likely to give a
beginner some trouble.

Sec. 8.  As against the advantages enumerated, there are some drawbacks.
The one which will first strike the student is the tendency of the
glass to become reduced in the flame of the blow-pipe.  This can be
got over by proper adjustment of the flame, as will be explained later
on.  A more serious drawback in exact work is the following.  In
making a joint with lead glass it is quite possible to neglect to fuse
the glass completely together at every point; in fact, the joint will
stand perfectly well even if it be left with a hole at one side, a
thing which is quite impossible with soft soda glass, or is at least
exceedingly unusual.  An accident of this kind is particularly likely
to happen if the glass be at all reduced.  Hence, if a joint does not
crack when cold, the presumption is, in the case of soda glass, that
the joint is perfectly made, and will not allow of any leak;  but this
is not the case with flint glass, for which reason all joints between
flint glass tubes require the most minute examination before they are
passed.  If there are any air bubbles in the glass, especial care must
be exercised.

Sec. 9.  Hard or Bohemian, Glass.

This is, of course, used where high temperatures are to be employed,
and also in certain cases where its comparative insolubility in water
is of importance.  It is very unusual for the investigator to have to
make complicated apparatus from this glass.  Fused joints may be made
between hard glass and flint glass without using enamel, and though
they often break in the course of time, still there is no reason
against their employment, provided the work be done properly, and they
are not required to last too long.

Sec. 10.  On the Choice of Sizes of Glass Tube.

It will be found that for general purposes tubes about one-quarter
inch in inside diameter, and from one-twentieth to one-fortieth of an
inch thick, are most in demand.  Some very thin soda glass of these
dimensions (so-called "cylinder" tubes) will be found very handy for
many purposes.  For physico-chemical work a good supply of tubing,
from one-half to three-quarters of an inch inside diameter, and from
one-twentieth to one-eighth inch thick, is very necessary.  A few
tubes up to three inches diameter, and of various thicknesses, will
also be required for special purposes.

Thermometer and "barometer" tubing is occasionally required, the
latter, by the way, making particularly bad barometers.  The
thermometer tubing should be of all sizes of bore, from the finest
obtainable up to that which has a bore of about one-sixteenth of an
inch.  Glass rods varying from about one-twentieth of an inch in
diameter up to, say, half an inch will be required, also two or three
sticks of white enamel glass for making joints.

To facilitate choice, there is appended a diagram of sizes from the
catalogue of a reliable German firm, Messrs. Desaga of Heidelberg, and
the experimenter will be able to see at a glance what sizes of glass
to order.  It is a good plan to stock the largest and smallest size of
each material as well as the most useful working sizes.

Fig.  1.

Sec. 11.  Testing Glass.

"Reject glass which has lumps or knots, is obviously conical, or has
long drawn-out bubbles running through the substance." If a scratch be
made on the surface of a glass tube, and one end of the scratch be
touched by a very fine point of fused glass, say not more than
one-sixteenth inch in diameter, the tube, however large it is (within
reason), ought to crack in the direction of the scratch.  If a big
crack forms and does not run straight, but tends to turn
longitudinally, it is a sign that the glass is ill annealed, and
nothing can be done with it.  If such glass be hit upon in the course
of blow-pipe work, it is inadvisable to waste time upon it; the best
plan is to reject it at once, and save it for some experiment where it
will not have to be heated.

The shortest way of selecting glass is to go to a good firm, and let
it be understood that if the glass proves to be badly annealed it will
be returned.  Though it was stated above that the glass should not be
distinctly conical, of course allowance must be made for the length of
the pieces, and, on the other hand, a few highly conical tubes will be
of immense service in special cases, and a small supply of such should
be included.

The glass, as it is obtained, should be placed in a rack, and covered
by a cloth to reduce the quantity of dust finding its way into the
tubes.  It has been stated by Professor Ostwald that tubes when reared
up on end tend to bend permanently.  I have not noticed this with lead
glass well supported.  Each different supply should be kept by itself
and carefully described on a label pasted on to the rack, and tubes
from different lots should not be used for critical welds.  This
remark is more important in the case of soda than of lead glass.

In the case of very fine thermometer tubes it will be advisable to
cover the ends with a little melted shellac, or, in special cases, to
obtain the tubes sealed from the works.  Soda glass can generally be
got in rather longer lengths than lead glass;  the longer the lengths
are the better, for the waste is less.

It is useful to be able to distinguish the different kinds of glass by
the colour.  This is best observed by looking towards a bright surface
along the whole length of the tube and through the glass.  Lead glass
is yellow, soda glass is green, and hard glass purple in the samples
in my laboratory, and I expect this is practically true of most
samples.  [Footnote: Some new lead glass I have is also almost purple
in hue.  If any doubt exists as to the kind of glass, it may be tested
at once in the blow-pipe flame, or by a mixture of oils of different
refractive indices, as will be explained later.]

Sec. 12.  The question of the solubility of glass in reagents is one of
great importance in accurate work, though it does not always meet with
the attention it deserves.  It is impossible here to go into the
matter with sufficient detail, and the reader is therefore referred to
the Abstracts of the Chemical Society, particularly for the years 1889
and 1892.  The memoir by F.  Kohlrausch, Wied.  Ann.  xliv, should be
consulted in the original.  The following points may be noted.  A
method of testing the quality of glass is given by Mylius (C.  S.  J.
Abstracts, 1889, p.  549), and it is stated that the resistance of
glass to the action of water can generally be much increased by
leaving it in contact with cold water for several days, and then
heating it to 300 deg. to 400 deg. C.  This improvement seems to be due to the
formation of a layer of moist silica on the surface, and its
subsequent condensation into a resisting layer by the heating.  Mylius
(C.  S.  J.  Abstracts, 1892, p.  411), and Weber, and Sauer (C.  S.
J.  Abstracts, 1892, p.  410) have also shown that the best glass for
general chemical purposes consists of:

Silica, 7 to 8 parts

Lime, 1 part

Alkali, 1.5 to 1.1 parts.

This is practically "Bohemian" tube glass.

The exact results are given in the Berichte of the German Chemical
Society, vol.  xxv.  An excellent account of the properties of glass
will be found in Grove's edition of Miller's Elements of Chemistry.

Sec. 13.  Cleaning Glass Tubes.

This is one of the most important arts in chemistry.  If the tubes are
