his marriage, on Owl Carver, the father of his wife? On Sun Woman, who
he was sure would stay with the British Band? On the people who had been
part of his life as far back as he could remember?

Staying meant facing the long knives' guns. It meant starvation. It
meant pain. Those who whooped for Black Hawk tonight did not see that.
Or maybe they did see it but still embraced it. To see it clearly and
accept it, not only for himself but for Redbird and Eagle Feather, hurt
like biting off one of his own limbs. But he would not abandon his
people. He had run away from his last fight over land. He would not run
away from this one.

Owl Carver, holding up his owl-headed medicine stick with its red
feathers, stood before the council fire. "He Who Moves Alertly thinks he
is the only one who knows the Americans. But one of our own British Band
has been to the big towns in the East. And he is a shaman to whom the
Turtle has given special visions. I ask White Bear to tell us what he
has seen."

At the sound of his name, White Bear felt a coldness spread upward from
the base of his spine. He saw the look of earnest invitation on Owl
Carver's face, he saw Black Hawk's expectancy. He would as soon spit at
these two men he respected so much as disappoint them deeply. But now he
must.

Redbird's fingers dug into his arm. Her slanting eyes were wide.

"Speak truly," she whispered.

Slowly he stood up. It hurt to pull his arm from Redbird's grip, as if
he was stripping his own skin from his arm. His eyes momentarily met
those of He Who Moves Alertly, who stared at him intently.

As Owl Carver had, he raised the medicine stick he had cut for himself
after his first vision, decorated with a single string of red and white
beads. He held it up uncertainly. He hoped his shaman's adornments, the
paint, the earrings, necklaces and bracelets, would impress them.

He was prepared in another way, as well. He had never spoken before the
leaders of his band; but at St. George's School each boy was required to
give a short speech to the members of his class once a week and a longer
one before the whole school twice a year. Those speeches had to be
written and memorized, and now White Bear must speak as the spirit moved
him. But he knew how to stand, how to project his voice, how to measure
his words. In his heart he thanked Mr. Winans for teaching him all that.

"The big American towns in the East are bigger than the biggest towns
ever built by any red men," he began. "In those villages the pale eyes
swarm like bees in a honey tree.

"Every summer the Americans have a great feast to celebrate the day they
told the Great Father of the British that they would no longer be his
children. One summer in a big town called New York I saw long knives
walk in long lines to honor this big day. Each man had a new rifle.
Eight at a time walked side by side, and it would take half a day to go
from one end of their line to the other. Then came more long knives on
horseback, as many as a herd of buffalo. And after them horses pulled
big thunder guns on wheels that shoot iron balls the size of a man's
head.

"The long knives were led by their Great Father, Sharp Knife, who was
visiting New York. He is very thin, with a cruel face and white hair. He
sits straight on his horse and wears a long knife at his belt.

"After all those long knives had walked through the town they came to an
open field, where they fired off all their thunder guns. The noise made
the earth tremble."

Allowing his legs and hands to shake also, as they demanded to do, White
Bear paused and let his gaze travel over the faces in the big circle
around the fire.

The red glow of the setting sun fell on the faintly smiling He Who Moves
Alertly. Black Hawk's back was to the sun, his face in shadow. Redbird
looked up at White Bear, eyes bright and full of love. Others might hate
what he said, but he was glad that Redbird heard how well and truly he
spoke.

Angry words hissed and sputtered like the burning logs. White Bear saw
Wolf Paw poke Little Crow, one of the leading braves, who was seated
beside him, and speak to him with muted voice but urgent gestures. The
brave got up and left the fire.

Owl Carver, seated beside Black Hawk, lifted his head. White Bear saw
bewilderment on his teacher's face, and shrank within himself at the
sight.

Owl Carver said, "White Bear is both pale eyes and Sauk. So far he
speaks to us only with the pale eyes half of his head. Let White Bear
tell us what vision the Turtle has given him."

White Bear felt a small surge of hope. What he had seen as a traveler
among the pale eyes might not discourage the British Band from making
war, but his vision might move them more.

"The Turtle showed me Black Hawk talking to Sharp Knife," he said,
pointing to the war chief, who lifted his feather-crowned head at the
sound of his name. "They were in the house of the Great Father of the
Americans in the village called Washington City."

He heard amazed murmurings all around him. Encouraged, he went on.

"Then I saw great numbers of long knives running toward me over a field.
They were shooting and being shot at. I saw many of them hit, and they
fell and died, but they kept coming on. I saw a tall, thin man with a
beard, a sad man whom I have never seen before, mourning over the fallen
long knives."

The sun had gone down. Now he could see the dark listening faces only by
the yellow glow of the fire.

Owl Carver said, "White Bear's vision brings us hope. He sees our own
Black Hawk meeting with Sharp Knife in Sharp Knife's house. Black Hawk
will go to Sharp Knife's very house to lay down peace terms to the
Americans."

_That is not what it means!_ White Bear thought, shocked.

Owl Carver went on. "White Bear saw long knives dying. White Bear's
vision foretells victory for the British Band."

From all around the campfire he heard grunts of approval at Owl Carver's
words. White Bear's heart felt lost and sinking, like a stone thrown
into the Great River.

"Listen!" he cried. "Owl Carver is my father in spirit, but he did not
see this vision or feel its sadness. I did. I stood there before the
Turtle, and I know that what he showed me was a warning. If the British
Band takes to the path of war, Black Hawk will be Sharp Knife's
prisoner."

Shouts of protest erupted around him. He saw Little Crow come back to
the fire with a bundle of bright red and blue cloth in his hands.

White Bear spoke on over the outcry. "Listen! When I saw the long knives
dying, more and more of them came forward, and their numbers were
endless. They were not fighting our warriors. They were fighting other
long knives. The vision said that there would be many, many long knives
in summers and winters to come, so many that they would fight each
other."

Owl Carver said in a voice just loud enough for White Bear to hear, "Say
no more. You do great harm."

"I must say more. You have asked me to speak. Now I must tell what I
know. You must listen. The Turtle also spoke to me. He said, 'The many
who follow Black Hawk across the Great River will be few when they cross
back.'"

After a moment's hesitation Owl Carver lifted his hands. "They will be
few because we will win back our land on the other side and stay there."

Before White Bear could answer, Black Hawk stood up, his face in the
firelight a mask of wrath. White Bear trembled.

"Black Hawk will never be Sharp Knife's prisoner!" the war chief roared.
"Black Hawk will die first."

Someone else was standing up before the fire. A woman.

Redbird.

White Bear felt himself trapped in a nightmare. Had his wife gone mad?
She could not speak to a council of chiefs and braves. His heart beating
furiously, he reached out to silence her. But she was already speaking.

"You are fools if you do not listen to White Bear," she cried. "He is
gifted with the power of prophecy." She turned to Owl Carver. "My
father, you know that the whole tribe crosses the river from east to
west every year for the winter hunt. If the Turtle says few will cross
back over the Great River, he means the rest of us will be dead."

Her words were greeted not with anger but with shouts of scornful
laughter. White Bear knew that the chiefs and braves did not care what
she said; they were merely amused that a woman dared try to speak to
them at all. He burned with shame for himself and Redbird.

Beyond the circle of firelight he saw the shadows of men and women
standing in the twilight. Word of the dispute at the council fire must
be spreading through the camp and drawing more people to hear, perhaps
to speak their own minds, as was their right. He glimpsed Sun Woman
hurrying toward him, picking her way through the seated men.

Wolf Paw strode toward White Bear, holding in his hands the bundle of
red and blue cloth Little Crow had brought him. He glared at Redbird.

"It is bad medicine for women to speak to the council."

Redbird stepped in front of White Bear to face Wolf Paw. "A medicine
woman tells you: the words of White Bear are _good_ medicine."

"How can White Bear tell the British Band what to do when he cannot make
his wife behave as a woman should?" Wolf Paw said. "Sit down, Redbird."
And he pushed her aside.

Rage shot White Bear forward like an arrow from a bow, arms outstretched
to grapple with Wolf Paw. He lifted his medicine stick as if to strike
at the red-crested brave.

Hands gripped his arms. He struggled, blind with fury, flailing his arms
and kicking. Wolf Paw, his teeth bared, wrenched the medicine stick from
White Bear's hand.

"Do not harm the medicine stick!" shouted Owl Carver.

Without looking at the old shaman, Wolf Paw handed him White Bear's
medicine stick. Two big warriors held White Bear as Wolf Paw approached
him, stretching his lips in a grin.

"A woman speaks for peace with the pale eyes," Wolf Paw said, "because
peace is women's way. I once saw Redbird going to White Bear when he was
on his vision quest. Maybe he gets his visions from her."

More and more men were on their feet, and they roared with laughter at
Wolf Paw's gibe.

Sun Woman had made her way into the inner ring around the fire and now
held Redbird.

"Come away, daughter," she said in a strong but soothing voice. "This
does not help White Bear."

"Look!" shouted Wolf Paw. "Now he has both his wife and his mother at
the council fire."

He shook out the red and blue cloth. It was a woman's dress.

"He speaks like a woman," Wolf Paw said. "He says what women tell him to
say. Women speak for him. Let him dress like a woman. A pale eyes
woman."

Wolf Paw flung the dress over White Bear's head, and the two men who
held him pulled it down around him. White Bear felt wrapped in
hopelessness as the cloth covered his head.

And he had wanted to be a prophet for the Sauk.

_The truer his words, the less they hear him._

He struggled halfheartedly. He no longer cared what they did to him. His
own failure and the sure destruction of his people chained him so that
he could barely move. The warriors pulled the dress straight down over
his arms, pinioning them to his sides. As his head emerged through the
collar, laughter battered at him. Teeth gleamed in the firelight.

He saw Sun Woman holding Redbird. Tears squeezed through his wife's
tightly shut eyelids. The face of his mother was heavy with woe.

Too despairing to resist, he let Wolf Paw and his men push and drag him
away from the council fire and run him through the camp. He was blind to
the laughing faces around him, deaf to the mocking cries.

But he saw one sight that all but killed him--looking up at him from
somewhere in the crowd, the hurt, bewildered eyes of his son, Eagle
Feather.




13

The Volunteers


Nicole and Frank had walked halfway across the main room of the trading
post blockhouse when Nicole heard Raoul's voice thundering from the
stone-walled counting office in the far corner.

"You and the boys will stay at Victoire!"

Nicole touched Frank's arm, and they stopped and drew back a little,
standing beside the long black barrel of the six-pounder naval cannon
Raoul had set up in the blockhouse. It would be best not to intrude on
Raoul when he was in the midst of a quarrel.

"But none of them French people there like me," a woman answered, high,
nasal, with a Missouri twang. "It's downright lonesome." Nicole
recognized Clarissa Greenglove's voice.

"I'm going to be gone and your father's coming with me. Where the hell
else would you stay?"

"With my Aunt Melinda in St. Louis. That'd be a perfect place. You could
send me down on the _Victory_.'"

"Of course I could." Raoul's voice was creamy with sarcasm. "And then do
you know what would happen? Half those men who are out in the courtyard
now volunteering for my militia company would quit. Because if I send
you and Phil and Andy away, it means _their_ families aren't safe. And
so they'd insist on staying home to protect them."

His voice rose to a shout. "Do you understand now, goddamn it? Then get
the hell out of here."

A moment later Clarissa scurried out past the iron-reinforced door of
Raoul's counting room. The two small boys she'd borne to Raoul ran
beside her floor-length calico skirt. She'd gotten to be
round-shouldered, Nicole saw.

Clarissa nodded. "Mister, Miz Hopkins."

"Morning, Clarissa," said Nicole. To call her by her first name felt not
quite respectful, but to call her "Miss Greenglove," especially with her
two sons right there with her, seemed cruel.

Clarissa gave Nicole a woebegone look that seemed to be asking for
something--Nicole wasn't quite sure what. Then she ducked her head, and
her bonnet hid her eyes.

Phil, the five-year-old, looked up at Nicole. He had very light blond
hair, almost silver, and large eyes that seemed set deep in his pale,
thin face. A little ghost.

"My dad's gonna fight Injuns."

"That's fine." Nicole didn't know what else to say. Clarissa, who had
taken a few steps ahead, reached back and jerked Phil's arm so hard that
he hollered.

Raoul, when they entered his office, seemed unperturbed by his argument
with Clarissa. But his eyes widened and flashed with momentary anger
when he saw Nicole. Then he grinned, teeth white under his black
mustache.

"Well, Nicole and Frank. Come to lay your hatchets to rest? Now that the
Indians are waving theirs around?"

"That's why we're here, Raoul," said Frank.

"Yeah, I've read your paragraphs in the _Visitor_," said Raoul, one side
of his mouth twisted up in a contemptuous smile. "Seems you'd just love
to give Illinois back to the Indians."

"Nothing of the kind," Frank said gruffly.

How unfair, Nicole thought. Frank had written only that if the 1804 land
agreement had been obtained through fraud, it would be better to
negotiate a new treaty with the Sauk and Fox rather than meet them with
armed force.

Raoul's tanned face reddened and his nostrils flared. "Give back
Illinois," he persisted, "just like you wanted to give Victoire to
Pierre's mongrel bastard."

Nicole saw not a trace of guilt on that broad, hard face over what he
had done to Auguste. She clenched her fists. She must try to contain her
anger.

Frank spoke. "Don't bring up Auguste now, Raoul. He's what divides us,
and we oughtn't to be divided now. We want to talk to you about
protecting Victor."

Heat lightning flickered in Raoul's eyes, shifting quickly to a derisive
gleam. "Well, that should be easy, Frank, with your attitude. You can
make a white flag out of any bedsheet."

Nicole thought, _He's just using our coming here as an opportunity to
rub our faces in the dirt_.

"Don't make this so hard for us, Raoul," she said. "We need each other."

"Really? What do I need you for?" His eyes were cold.

Many answers crowded Nicole's mind, but she thought for a moment before
speaking.

"You need the people of this town to make a success of the estate, now
you've taken it over, your orchards and farms, your shipping line, your
trading ventures. Most of the people who live in Victor work for you,
directly or indirectly. And you're leaving them unprotected."

Before Raoul could answer, Frank joined in. "From what I've seen, you
plan to march every man who knows how to shoot a rifle away from here to
fight the Indians down by the Rock River. If you take all the fighting
men away, who's going to defend Victor and Victoire?"

Raoul threw back his head and roared with laughter. "God, I can't
believe I'm hearing you right. Ever since last fall you've wished I
would disappear from the face of the earth. Now you come to me begging
for protection."

"It's not for ourselves that we're asking," said Nicole. "We just want
you to leave enough men behind to defend the women and children and
noncombatants who stay here."

Raoul's eyes narrowed and fixed on Frank. "Noncombatants like you,
Frank? You won't pick up a rifle yourself, but you want some of my men
to stay and guard you."

Frank looked back steadily. "I'm learning to shoot. Your father is
teaching me." Nicole felt a rush of love for Frank, and pride in his
willingness to learn to do something he hated, because he had to.

Raoul spread his hands. "Good for you, and good for Papa." He looked
down, and his face reddened slightly. When he looked up, his dark eyes
met Nicole's.

"How is Papa?"

Nicole checked the urge to remind him that he had nearly killed their
father, and said, "He's tolerably well. The little house Frank has been
building for him is finished. And he's able to walk. Guichard takes care
of him."

Raoul clapped his hands together. "Good, good! Then that's two riflemen
you've got right there. And I'll bet old Guichard could even shoot if it
came to that. And you'll have David Cooper, he's a veteran of 'Twelve.
He's going to keep an eye on the trading post for me, along with Burke
Russell. I'm sure there'll be a few others. As for the rest of the men,
if I didn't lead them down to the Rock River, they'd go anyway. They're
raring to hunt redskins."

Nicole recalled the line of men she had seen just now in the trading
post courtyard signing up for the Smith County volunteer militia. There
must have been over a hundred of them, some wearing coonskin caps and
fringed buckskins, others with straw hats, calico shirts and tow-linen
pantaloons, two dozen or so sporting the head kerchiefs favored by men
of French descent. They'd been in high spirits, laughing and talking
about bringing back scalps.

Frank said, "Of course you don't _want_ to think there'll be an Indian
attack on Victor while you're gone. What you want is to go down to the
Rock River country with the militia and win a great victory over the
Indians. Or something you can call a great victory."

Raoul held out his hands. "Frank, you printed Reynolds's proclamation in
your damned paper."

He pointed over his shoulder, where a copy of the Illinois governor's
call to arms, cut from the _Victor Visitor_ for April 17, 1832, was
nailed to the wall. Nicole's eyes traveled over the opening lines.

                            FELLOW CITIZENS

    Your country requires your services. The Indians have assumed a
    hostile attitude and have invaded the State in violation of the
    treaty of last summer.

    The British Band of Sauks and other hostile Indians, headed by Black
    Hawk, are in possession of the Rock River country, to the great
    terror of the frontier inhabitants. I consider the settlers on the
    frontiers to be in imminent danger ...

Raoul said, "He doesn't say stay home and defend your town. He says
rendezvous at Beardstown. That is a lot closer to Black Hawk than it is
to Victor."

Frank said, "That proclamation is for towns that are in safe territory.
We're the settlers _on_ the frontier, the ones Reynolds says are in
danger. I was talking yesterday to a man from Galena, Raoul. Up there,
the volunteers have formed a militia company, but they're going to stay
right where they are, in case of Indian attack. We aren't _expected_ to
supply troops to chase Black Hawk."

Raoul shook his head. "We've got to hit Black Hawk hard and fast with
all the men we can muster. Once we do, there'll be no danger to Victor."

Frank said, "If something like what happened at Fort Dearborn happens
here at Victor, innocent people will pay for your decision. You want
that on your conscience?"

At the mention of Fort Dearborn, Raoul's face had gone expressionless.
He sat there and stared at Frank for a moment, then stood up abruptly.

"My conscience is clear," he said.

_You have no conscience_, Nicole thought. She stared sadly into the
bright blue eyes that looked so blankly at her now, and wondered where
her smiling little brother had gone, so many years ago. The smile still
came readily to his face; but now it only mocked and taunted. Did those
years of captivity with the Indians fully explain Raoul, or was he a
throwback to some robber-baron ancestor whose only law was the sword?

       *       *       *       *       *

"When a man goes off to war, Miss Nancy, it means the world to him to
know he has someone to come home to."

Raoul smiled down from his chestnut stallion, Banner, at Nancy Hale in
the driver's seat of her black buggy. At nineteen, she was a woman in
full bloom. She'd probably have married a long time ago if she'd stayed
back East. There were a lot of men out here on the frontier, but few
good enough to court a woman like her.

_She'd be a fool not to take my offer seriously. It's the best one
she'll ever get._

Nancy looked first at the dusty road over the grass-covered hills
between Victoire and Victor, the morning sun beating down on it, then up
at him. The deep blue of her eyes was a marvel.

"You already have someone to come home to, Mr. de Marion. And children."

Children, yes, but the mingling of his de Marion blood with the
nondescript Greenglove line could hardly produce the children he wanted.
Nancy, on the other hand, from an old New England family that probably
went back to even better English stock, was just the sort of woman he
wanted to breed with.

"Clarissa and I have never stood up before a priest or a minister, Miss
Hale. I've just been passing my time with her until the right lady came
along."

Her gaze was cool and level. "As far as I'm concerned you're as good as
married, and you have no right to be talking to me this way."

"Necessity makes your bedfellows out here on the frontier."

"Not mine." She shook her head, blond braids swinging. He could picture
all that honey-gold hair spread out on a pillow, and he felt a pulse
beat in his throat.

Nancy went on, "You must know how wrong it is for you to speak to me
this way. Otherwise you wouldn't have ambushed me out here."

"I've waited days for a chance to speak to you in private."

Josiah Hode, Hodge Hode's boy, had ridden fast to the trading post this
morning to tell Raoul that Miss Hale was driving her buggy into town and
was traveling, for once, without her father. It was the news Raoul had
been hoping for ever since the governor's proclamation had arrived in
Victor. Knowing Miss Nancy was indignant over his treatment of the
mongrel, Raoul had delayed approaching her. Now he could delay no
longer.

"I leave with the militia next Monday," he said. "That gives you three
days to think it over. I hope to carry your favorable answer with me
when I ride off to defend you from the savages."

She smiled, but the smile was without humor or warmth. "Carry this
answer with you if you wish: No." She flicked the reins, and her dappled
gray horse speeded up to a trot.

Raoul spurred his own horse to keep pace with her. "Take time to
consider."

"The answer will always be no."

White-hot anger exploded within him. His fists clenched on Banner's
reins.

"You'll end up an old maid schoolmarm!" he shouted. "You'll never know
what it is to have a man between your legs."

Her face went white. He had hurt her, and that made him feel better.

He kicked his heels hard into Banner's sides and the stallion uttered an
angry whicker and broke into a gallop, leaving Nancy Hale and her buggy
enveloped in dust.

He wished the country around here weren't so damned open. If he could
have dragged her out of that buggy and into the woods, given her a taste
of the real thing, she'd have changed her mind about him.

_Is she still pining for the mongrel?_

Well, he thought, as the gray log walls of the trading post came into
sight around a bend in the ridge road, he _would_ carry her answer to
the war. And the Indians would suffer the more for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prophet's Town was deserted. Black Hawk and his allies had fled.

Raoul reined up Banner in the very center of the rings of dark, silent
Indian houses. Armand Perrault, Levi Pope, Hodge Hode and Otto Wegner
stopped beside him. He did not know whether he was relieved or
disappointed. His cap-and-ball pistol drawn, the hammer pulled back, he
drew angry breaths and glared about him. He felt exposed, realizing that
at any time an arrow aimed at his heart could come winging out of one of
those long loaf-shaped bark and frame Winnebago lodges.

Because of Raoul's experience in the skirmishing around Saukenuk last
year, General Henry Atkinson had commissioned him a colonel and put him
in command of the advance guard, known as the spy battalion. He enjoyed
the prestige of leading the spies, but he felt a constant tightness in
his belly.

He reached down for the canteen in the Indian blanketwork bag strapped
to his saddle, uncorked it and took a quick swallow of Old Kaintuck. It
went down hot and spread warmth from his stomach through his whole body.
He cooled his throat with water from a second canteen.

For three weeks now, slowed by heavy spring rains that swelled creeks to
nearly impassable torrents, the militia had followed Black Hawk's trail
up the Rock River. To the whites' disappointment, the Indians had
bypassed Saukenuk, doubtless aware that the militia had come out against
them. Instead, Black Hawk's band had trekked twenty-five miles upriver,
reportedly stopping at Prophet's Town. Now, they were not here either.

Raoul hated the Indian village on sight. Built on land that sloped
gently down to the south bank of the Rock River, it surrounded him,
threatened him, lay dark, sullen and sinister under a gray sky heavy
with rain. It reminded him too vividly of the redskin villages where
he'd spent those two worst years of his life.

He saw no cooking fires, no drying meat or stacks of vegetables by the
dark doorways, no poles flaunting feathers, ribbons and enemy scalps.
That characteristic odor of Indian towns, a mixture of tobacco smoke and
cooking hominy, hung in the air but was very faint. He figured the
Indians had left here days ago.

"Otto," Raoul said, "ride back to General Atkinson and report the enemy
has abandoned Prophet's Town."

Wegner gave Raoul a strenuous Prussian salute, pulled his spotted gray
horse's head around and rode off.

The two hundred men of the spy battalion were trickling in behind Raoul,
hoofs pattering on the bare earth. In their coonskin caps and dusty gray
shirts and buckskin jackets, the men didn't look like soldiers, but they
had taken the oath and were under military discipline till their term of
enlistment was up at the end of May.

The men called to one another and laughed as they gazed around at the
empty lodges. They were enjoying themselves immensely, Raoul thought.
This time of year most of them would be breaking their backs doing
spring plowing and planting. Now they could earn twenty-one cents a day
while going on something like an extended hunting trip.

_Most men would rather fight than work any day._

Eli Greenglove, on a brown and white pony, trotted up beside Raoul. His
silver lace captain's stripes glittered on the upper arms of the blue
tunic Raoul had bought for him. A long cavalry saber hung from his white
leather belt.

Eli grinned, and Raoul had to look away. It seemed that every other
tooth in Eli's head was missing, and the ones that were left were
stained brown from years of chewing tobacco.

And now Clarissa had taken up pipe smoking, making it even harder for
Raoul to enjoy bedding down with her.

_If only Nancy--_

But Nancy had made it plain that she despised him.

Damn shame. Of course, old Eli here would slit his throat if he had any
idea what Raoul was thinking.

Eli said, "You figger the Prophet's Town Injuns have joined up with
Black Hawk's bunch?"

"Of course," said Raoul. "And that means Black Hawk now has about a
thousand warriors behind him."

A movement on the south edge of the village in the surrounding woods
caught Raoul's eyes. He swung around in that direction, pointing his
pistol.

"Eli, get your rifle ready," he said.

"Loaded 'n' primed," said Greenglove, pulling his bright new Cramer
percussion lock rifle--another present from Raoul--from its saddle
sling, controlling his pony easily with his knees alone.

Indians walked out of the woods, four men. They held their empty hands
high over their heads and shuffled forward slowly.

"Watch 'em," said Eli. "They may just be trying to get close enough to
jump us."

Raoul studied the four advancing men. Two had their heads wrapped in
turbans, one red, one blue. All four wore fringed buckskin leggings and
gray flannel shirts. He saw no weapons.

Then he caught sight of more shadowy figures in the trees beyond the
Indians. Instantly, he straighted his arm in that direction and pulled
the trigger. His pistol went off with a boom, puffing out a cloud of
gray smoke. He handed it to Armand to reload it while he reached for his
own new rifle, a breech-loading Hall.

The Indian with the red turban was shouting something. Raoul recognized
the language--Potawatomi. The sound of it made the blood pound in his
temples.

"Those are only squaws and papooses," the Indian called in Potawatomi.
"Please do not shoot them."

Raoul felt like shooting them all, just for being Potawatomi, but he
held the impulse in check. He had to find out whatever they could tell
him.

He addressed the Indians in their language, indelibly engraved in his
mind by the acids of fear and hatred. "Tell them all to come out. We
will kill anyone who hides from us."

The red-turbaned Indian called over his shoulder, and slowly a group of
women and small children came out of the woods.

Raoul took his reloaded pistol back from Armand and walked Banner over
to the little group. They started to lower their hands.

"Keep them up." He gestured with the pistol. Slowly the copper-skinned
men straightened their raised arms again, looking at one another
unhappily.

_Probably thought we'd welcome them with kind words and gifts._ The
muscles in his neck and shoulders were so rigid they ached, and his
stomach was boiling. In his mind he saw again the scarred face of Black
Salmon, the brown fist raised, holding a horsewhip to beat him. The
sounds of Potawatomi speech brought it all back.

He handed his horse's reins to Armand, who tied Banner to an upright
post in front of a nearby lodge.

"Who are you?" Raoul demanded.

"I am Little Foot," said the Indian wearing the red turban. "I am head
of the Deer Clan. We live here in the town of the Winnebago Prophet."

Little Foot's skin was dark, and he had a wide, flat nose. He wore no
feathers on his head, probably not wanting to look warlike. Black hair
streaked here and there with white hung down from under his turban in
two braids to his shoulders. Raoul judged him to be in his fifties.

_He could have been at Fort Dearborn twenty years ago._

One thing was certain. Little Foot was Potawatomi. Raoul felt his
fingers tightening on his pistol as he held it at waist level.

Raoul turned to Levi Pope and some of his other Smith County boys who
were seated on horses nearby. "Tie them up."

Levi, who wore six pistols at his belt, all primed and loaded, got down
from his horse and unhooked a coiled rope from his saddle. "The squaws
and little ones too?"

"Put their families in one of the lodges and keep a guard on them."
Another thought occurred to him. "Eli, take some men and search these
huts. Make sure there aren't any more Indians hiding out somewhere in
this town."

Levi went to the red-turbaned Indian and pulled his arms down roughly to
his sides. In a moment he had Little Foot's hands securely tied behind
his back, while other grinning Smith County boys had done the same to
the other three Indian men.

"Ankles too," said Raoul, and Levi and his men cut lengths of rope and
knelt to hobble the Indians.

With his free hand Raoul took another long drink from the whiskey
canteen hanging from his saddle.

He walked close to Little Foot and looked him in the eye. He did not
like the way the Indian looked back at him. He saw no fear.

With a sudden movement he hooked his boot behind the Indian's hobbled
ankles and pushed him hard. Little Foot fell heavily to the ground on
his back, wincing with the unexpected pain.

As he pushed himself awkwardly into a sitting position, there was no
mistaking the hatred in the way he looked up at Raoul.

"Why did you stay here?" Raoul asked.

"We do not think Black Hawk can win. We hope the long knives will treat
kindly those who do not make war on them."

Raoul said, "Where has Black Hawk gone? What is he planning? Where are
the people who were living in this town?"

"I promised the Winnebago Prophet I would say nothing about where they
went. I will be accursed if I break my promise."

"The Winnebago Prophet's curse is nothing. You should be more afraid of
me."

Little Foot remained stone-faced and silent.

What a pleasure to have a bunch of Potawatomi right where he could do
anything he wanted to them.

A light rain started to patter down on the bark roofs and the
hard-packed earth.

While Raoul had been talking with the Indians, more militiamen had
reached Prophet's Town. Columns of men on horseback, four abreast, came
to a halt in the grassland to the south of the village and fell out at
their officers' commands. They climbed off their horses and walked them.

Otto Wegner rode up and dismounted.

"General Atkinson is going to encamp the rest of the army outside
Prophet's Town, sir," he said, giving Raoul his usual vigorous salute,
nearly dislodging the big hunting knife sheathed in a pocket of his
leather shirt.

Raoul returned the salute carelessly, went back to Banner and took
another swallow from the whiskey canteen.

Surprising that Atkinson should decide to set up camp here, when the day
was only half over. Well, Henry Atkinson had a reputation for going
slowly. Raoul had heard from friends among the regular officers that
Atkinson had already received a sharply worded letter from the Secretary
of War in Washington City reprimanding him for not moving fast enough to
crush the Indians.

_If I get a chance to take a crack at them I sure as hell won't be
slow._

The early arrivals already had their tents up. Officers' tents were of
white canvas, six feet from the ground to their peaked tops. Enlisted
men set up pup tents just large enough to cover two men lying down. Most
men didn't bother to carry tents and slept out in the open, rolled up in
the coarse blankets they all carried.

Men were wandering through Prophet's Town peering into the lodges. They
walked with slow caution, rifles ready.

Raoul watched Justus Bennett, in civilian life Smith County's land
commissioner, ordering two privates in buckskins and coonskin caps to
put up a tent for him. Bennett was always trying to make himself as
comfortable as possible. His packhorse carried his tenting, a big bag
full of fancy clothes, and a couple of heavy law books. Why on earth a
man would think he needed such things in the wilderness, Raoul had no
idea.

"Bennett!" Raoul called. "Take charge of the guard on those Indians."

Bennett looked annoyed, but gave some final instructions to the men
putting up his tent and slouched over to the four Indians. A
round-shouldered man of slight build, he looked decidedly unmilitary,
but he'd explained to Raoul that for anyone who wanted to get ahead in
politics, a war record would be a godsend.

Raoul called out, "Levi, you leave off guarding the Indians and get my
tent up."

A crowd of men had gathered in a circle around the Indians. Maybe they
wanted to give the redskins a few licks of their own.

"Afternoon, Colonel."

Raoul was used to looking down at other men, but he had to look up, a
little, at the man who addressed him. His skinniness was like Pierre's
in a way, but this man was a heap uglier than Raoul's brother had been.
He looked like a half-starved nag.

