in waste places, the Washington pear was found in a hedge, and the Emperor
peach in a wood. (22/20. Downing 'Fruit-trees of North America' page 422;
Foley in 'Transact. Hort. Soc.' volume 6 page 412.)

With respect to wheat, some writers have spoken (22/21. 'Gardener's Chronicle'
1847 page 244.) as if it were an ordinary event for new varieties to be found
in waste places; the Fenton wheat was certainly discovered growing on a pile
of basaltic detritus in a quarry, but in such a situation the plant would
probably receive a sufficient amount of nutriment. The Chidham wheat was
raised from an ear found ON a hedge; and Hunter's wheat was discovered BY the
roadside in Scotland, but it is not said that this latter variety grew where
it was found. (22/22. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1841 page 383; 1850 page 700;
1854 page 650.)]

Whether our domestic productions would ever become so completely habituated to
the conditions under which they now live, as to cease varying, we have no
sufficient means for judging. But, in fact, our domestic productions are never
exposed for a great length of time to uniform conditions, and it is certain
that our most anciently cultivated plants, as well as animals, still go on
varying, for all have recently undergone marked improvement. In some few
cases, however, plants have become habituated to new conditions. Thus,
Metzger, who cultivated in Germany during many years numerous varieties of
wheat, brought from different countries (22/23. 'Die Getreidearten' 1843 s.
66, 116, 117.), states that some kinds were at first extremely variable, but
gradually, in one   instance after an interval of twenty-five years, became
constant; and it does not appear that this resulted from the selection of the
more constant forms.

ON THE ACCUMULATIVE ACTION OF CHANGED CONDITIONS OF LIFE.

We have good grounds for believing that the influence of changed conditions
accumulates, so that no effect is produced on a species until it has been
exposed during several generations to continued cultivation or domestication.
Universal experience shows us that when new flowers are first introduced into
our gardens they do not vary; but ultimately all, with the rarest exceptions,
vary to a greater or less extent. In a few cases the requisite number of
generations, as well as the successive steps in the progress of variation,
have been recorded, as in the often quoted instance of the Dahlia. (22/24.
Sabine in 'Hort. Transact.' volume 3 page 225; Bronn 'Geschichte der Natur' b.
2 s. 119.) After several years' culture the Zinnia has only lately (1860)
begun to vary in any great degree. "In the first seven or eight years of high
cultivation, the Swan River daisy (Brachycome iberidifolia) kept to its
original colour; it then varied into lilac and purple and other minor shades."
(22/25. 'Journal of Horticulture' 1861 page 112; on Zinnia 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1860 page 852.) Analogous facts have been recorded with the Scotch
rose. In discussing the variability of plants several experienced
horticulturists have spoken to the same general effect. Mr. Salter (22/26.
'The Chrysanthemum, its History, etc.' 1865 page 3.) remarks, "Every one knows
that the chief difficulty is in breaking through the original form and colour
of the species, and every one will be on the look-out for any natural sport,
either from seed or branch; that being once obtained, however trifling the
change may be, the result depends upon himself." M. de Jonghe, who has had so
much success in raising new varieties of pears and strawberries (22/27.
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1855 page 54; 'Journal of Horticulture' May 9, 1865
page 363.), remarks with respect to the former, "There is another principle,
namely, that the more a type has entered into a state of variation, the
greater is its tendency to continue doing so; and the more it has varied from
the original type, the more it is disposed to vary still farther." We have,
indeed, already discussed this latter point when treating of the power which
man possesses, through selection, of continually augmenting in the same
direction each modification; for this power depends on continued variability
of the same general kind. The most celebrated horticulturist in France,
namely, Vilmorin (22/28. Quoted by Verlot 'Des Varietes' etc. 1865 page 28.),
even maintains that, when any particular variation is desired, the first step
is to get the plant to vary in any manner whatever, and to go on selecting the
most variable individuals, even though they vary in the wrong direction; for
the fixed character of the species being once broken, the desired variation
will sooner or later appear.

As nearly all our animals were domesticated at an extremely remote epoch, we
cannot, of course, say whether they varied quickly or slowly when first
subjected to new conditions. But Dr. Bachman (22/29. 'Examination of the
Characteristics of Genera and Species' Charleston 1855 page 14.) states that
he has seen turkeys raised from the eggs of the wild species lose their
metallic tints and become spotted with white in the third generation. Mr.
Yarrell many years ago informed me that the wild ducks bred on the ponds in
St. James's Park, which had never been crossed, as it is believed, with
domestic ducks, lost their true plumage after a few generations. An excellent
observer (22/30. Mr. Hewitt 'Journal of Hort.' 1863 page 39.), who has often
reared ducks from the eggs of the wild bird, and who took precautions that
there should be no crossing with domestic breeds, has given, as previously
stated, full details on the changes which they gradually undergo. He found
that he could not breed these wild ducks true for more than five or six
generations, "as they then proved so much less beautiful. The white collar
round the neck of the mallard became much broader and more irregular, and
white feathers appeared in the ducklings' wings." They increased also in size
of body; their legs became less fine, and they lost their elegant carriage.
Fresh eggs were then procured from wild birds; but again the same result
followed. In these cases of the duck and turkey we see that animals, like
plants, do not depart from their primitive type until they have been subjected
during several generations to domestication. On the other hand, Mr. Yarrell
informed me that the Australian dingos, bred in the Zoological Gardens, almost
invariably produced in the first generation puppies marked with white and
other colours; but, these introduced dingos had probably been procured from
the natives, who keep them in a semi-domesticated state. It is certainly a
remarkable fact that changed conditions should at first produce, as far as we
can see, absolutely no effect; but that they should subsequently cause the
character of the species to change. In the chapter on pangenesis I shall
attempt to throw a little light on this fact.

Returning now to the causes which are supposed to induce variability. Some
authors (22/31. Devay 'Mariages Consanguins' pages 97, 125. In conversation I
have found two or three naturalists of the same opinion.) believe that close
interbreeding gives this tendency, and leads to the production of
monstrosities. In the seventeenth chapter some few facts were advanced,
showing that monstrosities are, as it appears, occasionally thus induced; and
there can be no doubt that close interbreeding causes lessened fertility and a
weakened constitution; hence it may lead to variability: but I have not
sufficient evidence on this head. On the other hand, close interbreeding, if
not carried to an injurious extreme, far from causing variability, tends to
fix the character of each breed.

It was formerly a common belief, still held by some persons, that the
imagination of the mother affects the child in the womb. (22/32. Muller has
conclusively argued against this belief, 'Elements of Phys.' English
translation volume 2 1842 page 1405.) This view is evidently not applicable to
the lower animals, which lay unimpregnated eggs, or to plants. Dr. William
Hunter, in the last century, told my father that during many years every woman
in a large London Lying-in Hospital was asked before her confinement whether
anything had specially affected her mind, and the answer was written down; and
it so happened that in no one instance could a coincidence be detected between
the woman's answer and any abnormal structure; but when she knew the nature of
the structure, she frequently suggested some fresh cause. The belief in the
power of the mother's imagination may perhaps have arisen from the children of
a second marriage resembling the previous father, as certainly sometimes
occurs, in accordance with the facts given in the eleventh chapter.

CROSSING AS A CAUSE OF VARIABILITY.

In an early part of this chapter it was stated that Pallas (22/33. 'Act. Acad.
St. Petersburg' 1780 part 2 page 84 etc.) and a few other naturalists maintain
that variability is wholly due to crossing. If this means that new characters
never spontaneously appear in our domestic races, but that they are all
directly derived from certain aboriginal species, the doctrine is little less
than absurd; for it implies that animals like Italian greyhounds, pug-dogs,
bull-dogs, pouter and fantail pigeons, etc., were able to exist in a state of
nature. But the doctrine may mean something widely different, namely, that the
crossing of distinct species is the sole cause of the first appearance of new
characters, and that without this aid man could not have formed his various
breeds. As, however, new characters have appeared in certain cases by bud-
variation, we may conclude with certainty that crossing is not necessary for
variability. It is, moreover, certain that the breeds of various animals, such
as of the rabbit, pigeon, duck, etc., and the varieties of several plants, are
the modified descendants of a single wild species. Nevertheless, it is
probable that the crossing of two forms, when one or both have long been
domesticated or cultivated, adds to the variability of the offspring,
independently of the commingling of the characters derived from the two
parent-forms; and this implies that new characters actually arise. But we must
not forget the facts advanced in the thirteenth chapter, which clearly prove
that the act of crossing often leads to the reappearance or reversion of long-
lost characters; and in most cases it would be impossible to distinguish
between the reappearance of ancient characters and the first appearance of
absolutely new characters. Practically, whether new or old, they would be new
to the breed in which they reappeared.

[Gartner declares (22/34. 'Bastarderzeugung' s. 249, 255, 295.), and his
experience is of the highest value on such a point, that, when he crossed
native plants which had not been cultivated, he never once saw in the
offspring any new character; but that from the odd manner in which the
characters derived from the parents were combined, they sometimes appeared as
if new. When, on the other hand, he crossed cultivated plants, he admits that
new characters occasionally appeared, but he is strongly inclined to attribute
their appearance to ordinary variability, not in any way to the cross. An
opposite conclusion, however, appears to me the more probable. According to
Kolreuter, hybrids in the genus Mirabilis vary almost infinitely, and he
describes new and singular characters in the form of the seeds, in the colour
of the anthers, in the cotyledons being of immense size, in new and highly
peculiar odours, in the flowers expanding early in the season, and in their
closing at night. With respect to one lot of these hybrids, he remarks that
they presented characters exactly the reverse of what might have been expected
from their parentage. (22/35. 'Nova Acta, St. Petersburg' 1794 page 378; 1795
pages 307, 313, 316; 1787 page 407.)

Prof. Lecoq (22/36. 'De la Fecondation' 1862 page 311.) speaks strongly to the
same effect in regard to this same genus, and asserts that many of the hybrids
from Mirabilis jalapa and multiflora might easily be mistaken for distinct
species, and adds that they differed in a greater degree than the other
species of the genus, from M. jalapa. Herbert, also, has described (22/37.
'Amaryllidaceae' 1837 page 362.) certain hybrid Rhododendrons as being "as
UNLIKE ALL OTHERS in foliage, as if they had been a separate species." The
common experience of floriculturists proves that the crossing and recrossing
of distinct but allied plants, such as the species of Petunia, Calceolaria,
Fuchsia, Verbena, etc., induces excessive variability; hence the appearance of
quite new characters is probable. M. Carriere (22/38. Abstracted in
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1860 page 1081.) has lately discussed this subject: he
states that Erythrina cristagalli had been multiplied by seed for many years,
but had not yielded any varieties: it was then crossed with the allied E.
herbacea, and "the resistance was now overcome, and varieties were produced
with flowers of extremely different size, form, and colour."

From the general and apparently well-founded belief that the crossing of
distinct species, besides commingling their characters, adds greatly to their
variability, it has probably arisen that some botanists have gone so far as to
maintain (22/39. This was the opinion of the elder De Candolle, as quoted in
'Dic. Class. d'Hist. Nat.' tome 8 page 405. Puvis in his work 'De la
Degeneration' 1837 page 37, has discussed this same point.) that, when a genus
includes only a single species, this when cultivated never varies. The
proposition made so broadly cannot be admitted; but it is probably true that
the variability of monotypic genera when cultivated is generally less than
that of genera including numerous species, and this quite independently of the
effects of crossing. I have shown in my 'Origin of Species' that the species
belonging to small genera generally yield a less number of varieties in a
state of nature than those belonging to large genera. Hence the species of
small genera would, it is probable, produce fewer varieties under cultivation
than the already variable species of larger genera.

Although we have not at present sufficient evidence that the crossing of
species, which have never been cultivated, leads to the appearance of new
characters, this apparently does occur with species which have been already
rendered in some degree variable through cultivation. Hence crossing, like any
other change in the conditions of life, seems to be an element, probably a
potent one, in causing variability. But we seldom have the means of
distinguishing, as previously remarked, between the appearance of really new
characters and the reappearance of long-lost characters, evoked through the
act of crossing. I will give an instance of the difficulty in distinguishing
such cases. The species of Datura may be divided into two sections, those
having white flowers with green stems, and those having purple flowers with
brown stems: now Naudin (22/40. 'Comptes Rendus' Novembre 21, 1864 page 838.)
crossed Datura laevis and ferox, both of which belong to the white section,
and raised from them 205 hybrids. Of these hybrids, every one had brown stems
and bore purple flowers; so that they resembled the species of the other
section of the genus, and not their own two parents. Naudin was so much
astonished at this fact, that he was led carefully to observe both parent-
species, and he discovered that the pure seedlings of D. ferox, immediately
after germination, had dark purple stems, extending from the young roots up to
the cotyledons, and that this tint remained ever afterwards as a ring round
the base of the stem of the plant when old. Now I have shown in the thirteenth
chapter that the retention or exaggeration of an early character is so
intimately related to reversion, that it evidently comes under the same
principle. Hence probably we ought to look at the purple flowers and brown
stems of these hybrids, not as new characters due to variability, but as a
return to the former state of some ancient progenitor.

Independently of the appearance of new characters from crossing, a few words
may be added to what has been said in former chapters on the unequal
combination and transmission of the characters proper to the two parent-forms.
When two species or races are crossed, the offspring of the first generation
are generally uniform, but those subsequently produced display an almost
infinite diversity of character. He who wishes, says Kolreuter (22/41. 'Nova
Acta, St. Petersburg' 1794 page 391.), to obtain an endless number of
varieties from hybrids should cross and recross them. There is also much
variability when hybrids or mongrels are reduced or absorbed by repeated
crosses with either pure parent-form: and a still higher degree of variability
when three distinct species, and most of all when four species, are blended
together by successive crosses. Beyond this point Gartner (22/42.
'Bastarderzeugung' s. 507, 516, 572.), on whose authority the foregoing
statements are made, never succeeded in effecting a union; but Max Wichura
(22/43. 'Die Bastardbefruchtung' etc. 1865 s. 24.) united six distinct species
of willows into a single hybrid. The sex of the parent species affects in an
inexplicable manner the degree of variability of hybrids; for Gartner (22/44.
'Bastarderzeugung' s. 452, 507.) repeatedly found that when a hybrid was used
as a father and either one of the pure parent-species, or a third species, was
used as the mother, the offspring were more variable than when the same hybrid
was used as the mother, and either pure parent or the same third species as
the father: thus seedlings from Dianthus barbatus crossed by the hybrid D.
chinensi-barbatus were more variable than those raised from this latter hybrid
fertilised by the pure D. barbatus. Max Wichura (22/45. 'Die
Bastardbefruchtung' s. 56.) insists strongly on an analogous result with his
hybrid willows. Again Gartner (22/46. 'Bastarderzeugung' s. 423.) asserts that
the degree of variability sometimes differs in hybrids raised from reciprocal
crosses between the same two species; and here the sole difference is, that
the one species is first used as the father and then as the mother. On the
whole we see that, independently of the appearance of new characters, the
variability of successive crossed generations is extremely complex, partly
from the offspring partaking unequally of the characters of the two parent-
forms, and more especially from their unequal tendency to revert to such
characters or to those of more ancient progenitors.]

ON THE MANNER AND ON THE PERIOD OF ACTION OF THE CAUSES WHICH INDUCE
VARIABILITY.

This is an extremely obscure subject, and we need here only consider, whether
inherited variations are due to certain parts being acted on after they have
been formed, or through the reproductive system being affected before their
formation; and in the former case at what period of growth or development the
effect is produced. We shall see in the two following chapters that various
agencies, such as an abundant supply of food, exposure to a different climate,
increased use or disuse of parts, etc., prolonged during several generations,
certainly modify either the whole organisation or certain organs; and it is
clear at least in the case of bud-variation that the action cannot have been
through the reproductive system.

[With respect to the part which the reproductive system takes in causing
variability, we have seen in the eighteenth chapter that even slight changes
in the conditions of life have a remarkable power in causing a greater or less
degree of sterility. Hence it seems not improbable that beings generated
through a system so easily affected should themselves be affected, or should
fail to inherit, or inherit in excess, characters proper to their parents. We
know that certain groups of organic beings, but with exceptions in each group,
have their reproductive systems much more easily affected by changed
conditions than other groups; for instance, carnivorous birds, more readily
than carnivorous mammals, and parrots more readily than pigeons; and this fact
harmonises with the apparently capricious manner and degree in which various
groups of animals and plants vary under domestication.

Kolreuter (22/47. 'Dritte Fortsetzung' etc. 1766 s. 85.) was struck with the
parallelism between the excessive variability of hybrids when crossed and
recrossed in various ways,--these hybrids having their reproductive powers
more or less affected,--and the variability of anciently cultivated plants.
Max Wichura (22/48. 'Die Bastardbefruchtung' etc. 1865 s. 92: see also the
Rev. M.J. Berkeley on the same subject in 'Journal of Royal Hort. Soc.' 1866
page 80.) has gone one step farther, and shows that with many of our highly
cultivated plants, such as the hyacinth, tulip, auricula, snapdragon, potato,
cabbage, etc., which there is no reason to believe have been hybridised, the
anthers contain many irregular pollen-grains in the same state as in hybrids.
He finds also in certain wild forms, the same coincidence between the state of
the pollen and a high degree of variability, as in many species of Rubus; but
in R. caesius and idaeus, which are not highly variable species, the pollen is
sound. It is also notorious that many cultivated plants, such as the banana,
pineapple, bread-fruit, and others previously mentioned, have their
reproductive organs so seriously affected as to be generally quite sterile;
and when they do yield seed, the seedlings, judging from the large number of
cultivated races which exist, must be variable in an extreme degree. These
facts indicate that there is some relation between the state of the
reproductive organs and a tendency to variability; but we must not conclude
that the relation is strict. Although many of our highly cultivated plants may
have their pollen in a deteriorated condition, yet, as we have previously
seen, they yield more seeds, and our anciently domesticated animals are more
prolific, than the corresponding species in a state of nature. The peacock is
almost the only bird which is believed to be less fertile under domestication
than in its native state, and it has varied in a remarkably small degree. From
these considerations it would seem that changes in the conditions of life lead
either to sterility or to variability, or to both; and not that sterility
induces variability. On the whole it is probable that any cause affecting the
organs of reproduction would likewise affect their product,--that is, the
offspring thus generated.

The period of life at which the causes that induce variability act, is
likewise an obscure subject, which has been discussed by various authors.
(22/49. Dr. P. Lucas has given a history of opinion on this subject 'Hered.
Nat.' 1847 tome 1 page 175.) In some of the cases, to be given in the
following chapter, of modifications from the direct action of changed
conditions, which are inherited, there can be no doubt that the causes have
acted on the mature or nearly mature animal. On the other hand, monstrosities,
which cannot be distinctly separated from lesser variations, are often caused
by the embryo being injured whilst in the mother's womb or in the egg. Thus I.
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (22/50. 'Hist. des Anomalies' tome 3 page 499.) asserts
that poor women who work hard during their pregnancy, and the mothers of
illegitimate children troubled in their minds and forced to conceal their
state, are far more liable to give birth to monsters than women in easy
circumstances. The eggs of the fowl when placed upright or otherwise treated
unnaturally frequently produce monstrous chickens. It would, however, appear
that complex monstrosities are induced more frequently during a rather late
than during a very early period of embryonic life; but this may partly result
from some one part, which has been injured during an early period, affecting
by its abnormal growth other parts subsequently developed; and this would be
less likely to occur with parts injured at a later period. (22/51. Ibid tome 3
pages 392, 502. The several memoirs by M. Dareste hereafter referred to are of
special value on this whole subject.) When any part or organ becomes monstrous
through abortion, a rudiment is generally left, and this likewise indicates
that its development had already commenced.

Insects sometimes have their antennae or legs in a monstrous condition, the
larvae of which do not possess either antennae or legs; and in these cases, as
Quatrefages (22/52. See his interesting work 'Metamorphoses de l'Homme' etc.
1862 page 129.) believes, we are enabled to see the precise period at which
the normal progress of development was troubled. But the nature of the food
given to a caterpillar sometimes affects the colours of the moth, without the
caterpillar itself being affected; therefore it seems possible that other
characters in the mature insect might be indirectly modified through the
larvae. There is no reason to suppose that organs which have been rendered
monstrous have always been acted on during their development; the cause may
have acted on the organisation at a much earlier stage. It is even probable
that either the male or female sexual elements, or both, before their union,
may be affected in such a manner as to lead to modifications in organs
developed at a late period of life; in nearly the same manner as a child may
inherit from his father a disease which does not appear until old age.

In accordance with the facts above given, which prove that in many cases a
close relation exists between variability and the sterility following from
changed conditions, we may conclude that the exciting cause often acts at the
earliest possible period, namely, on the sexual elements, before impregnation
has taken place. That an affection of the female sexual element may induce
variability we may likewise infer as probable from the occurrence of bud-
variations; for a bud seems to be the analogue of an ovule. But the male
element is apparently much oftener affected by changed conditions, at least in
a visible manner, than the female element or ovule and we know from Gartner's
and Wichura's statements that a hybrid used as the father and crossed with a
pure species gives a greater degree of variability to the offspring, than does
the same hybrid when used as the mother. Lastly, it is certain that
variability may be transmitted through either sexual element, whether or not
originally excited in them, for Kolreuter and Gartner (22/53. 'Dritte
Fortsetzung' etc. s. 123; 'Bastarderzeugung' s. 249.) found that when two
species were crossed, if either one was variable, the offspring were rendered
variable.]

SUMMARY.

From the facts given in this chapter, we may conclude that the variability of
organic beings under domestication, although so general, is not an inevitable
contingent on life, but results from the conditions to which the parents have
been exposed. Changes of any kind in the conditions of life, even extremely
slight changes, often suffice to cause variability. Excess of nutriment is
perhaps the most efficient single exciting cause. Animals and plants continue
to be variable for an immense period after their first domestication; but the
conditions to which they are exposed never long remain quite constant. In the
course of time they can be habituated to certain changes, so as to become less
variable; and it is possible that when first domesticated they may have been
even more variable than at present. There is good evidence that the power of
changed conditions accumulates; so that two, three, or more generations must
be exposed to new conditions before any effect is visible. The crossing of
distinct forms, which have already become variable, increases in the offspring
the tendency to further variability, by the unequal commingling of the
characters of the two parents, by the reappearance of long-lost characters,
and by the appearance of absolutely new characters. Some variations are
induced by the direct action of the surrounding conditions on the whole
organisation, or on certain parts alone; other variations appear to be induced
indirectly through the reproductive system being affected, as we know is often
the case with various beings, which when removed from their natural conditions
become sterile. The causes which induce variability act on the mature
organism, on the embryo, and, probably, on the sexual elements before
impregnation has been effected.


CHAPTER 2.XXIII.

DIRECT AND DEFINITE ACTION OF THE EXTERNAL CONDITIONS OF LIFE.

SLIGHT MODIFICATIONS IN PLANTS FROM THE DEFINITE ACTION OF CHANGED CONDITIONS,
IN SIZE, COLOUR, CHEMICAL PROPERTIES, AND IN THE STATE OF THE TISSUES.
LOCAL DISEASES.
CONSPICUOUS MODIFICATIONS FROM CHANGED CLIMATE OR FOOD, ETC.
PLUMAGE OF BIRDS AFFECTED BY PECULIAR NUTRIMENT, AND BY THE INOCULATION OF
POISON.
LAND-SHELLS.
MODIFICATIONS OF ORGANIC BEINGS IN A STATE OF NATURE THROUGH THE DEFINITE
ACTION OF EXTERNAL CONDITIONS.
COMPARISON OF AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN TREES.
GALLS.
EFFECTS OF PARASITIC FUNGI.
CONSIDERATIONS OPPOSED TO THE BELIEF IN THE POTENT INFLUENCE OF CHANGED
EXTERNAL CONDITIONS.
PARALLEL SERIES OF VARIETIES.
AMOUNT OF VARIATION DOES NOT CORRESPOND WITH THE DEGREE OF CHANGE IN THE
CONDITIONS.
BUD-VARIATION.
MONSTROSITIES PRODUCED BY UNNATURAL TREATMENT.
SUMMARY.

If we ask ourselves why this or that character has been modified under
domestication, we are, in most cases, lost in utter darkness. Many
naturalists, especially of the French school, attribute every modification to
the "monde ambiant," that is, to changed climate, with all its diversities of
heat and cold, dampness and dryness, light and electricity, to the nature of
the soil, and to varied kinds and amount of food. By the term definite action,
as used in this chapter, I mean an action of such a nature that, when many
individuals of the same variety are exposed during several generations to any
particular change in their conditions of life, all, or nearly all the
individuals, are modified in the same manner. The effects of habit, or of the
increased use and disuse of various organs, might have been included under
this head; but it will be convenient to discuss this subject in a separate
chapter. By the term indefinite action I mean an action which causes one
individual to vary in one way and another individual in another way, as we
often see with plants and animals after they have been subjected for some
generations to changed conditions of life. But we know far too little of the
causes and laws of variation to make a sound classification. The action of
changed conditions, whether leading to definite or indefinite results, is a
totally distinct consideration from the effects of selection; for selection
depends on the preservation by man of certain individuals, or on their
survival under various and complex natural circumstances, and has no relation
whatever to the primary cause of each particular variation.

I will first give in detail all the facts which I have been able to collect,
rendering it probable that climate, food, etc., have acted so definitely and
powerfully on the organisation of our domesticated productions, that new sub-
varieties or races have been thus formed without the aid of selection by man
or nature. I will then give the facts and considerations opposed to this
conclusion, and finally we will weigh, as fairly as we can, the evidence on
both sides.

When we reflect that distinct races of almost all our domesticated animals
exist in each kingdom of Europe, and formerly even in each district of
England, we are at first strongly inclined to attribute their origin to the
definite action of the physical conditions of each country; and this has been
the conclusion of many authors. But we should bear in mind that man annually
has to choose which animals shall be preserved for breeding, and which shall
be slaughtered. We have also seen that both methodical and unconscious
selection were formerly practised, and are now occasionally practised by the
most barbarous races, to a much greater extent than might have been
anticipated. Hence it is difficult to judge how far differences in the
conditions between, for instance, the several districts in England, have
sufficed to modify the breeds which have been reared in each. It may be argued
that, as numerous wild animals and plants have ranged during many ages
throughout Great Britain, and still retain the same character, the difference
in conditions between the several districts could not have modified in a
marked manner the various native races of cattle, sheep, pigs, and horses. The
same difficulty of distinguishing between the effects of natural selection and
the definite action of external conditions is encountered in a still higher
degree when we compare closely allied species inhabiting two countries, such
as North America and Europe, which do not differ greatly in climate, nature of
soil, etc., for in this case natural selection will inevitably and rigorously
have acted during a long succession of ages.

Prof. Weismann has suggested (23/1. 'Ueber den Einfluss der Isolirung auf die
Artbildung' 1872.) that when a variable species enters a new and isolated
country, although the variations may be of the same general nature as before,
yet it is improbable that they should occur in the same proportional numbers.
After a longer or shorter period, the species will tend to become nearly
uniform in character from the incessant crossing of the varying individuals;
but owing to the proportion of the individuals varying in different ways not
being the same in the two cases, the final result will be the production of
two forms somewhat different from one another. In cases of this kind it would
falsely appear as if the conditions had induced certain definite
modifications, whereas they had only excited indefinite variability, but with
the variations in slightly different proportional numbers. This view may throw
some light on the fact that the domestic animals which formerly inhabited the
several districts in Great Britain, and the half wild cattle lately kept in
several British parks, differed slightly from one another; for these animals
were prevented from wandering over the whole country and intercrossing, but
would have crossed freely within each district or park.

[From the difficulty of judging how far changed conditions have caused
definite modifications of structure, it will be advisable to give as large a
body of facts as possible, showing that extremely slight differences within
the same country, or during different seasons, certainly produce an
appreciable effect, at least on varieties which are already in an unstable
condition. Ornamental flowers are good for this purpose, as they are highly
variable, and are carefully observed. All floriculturists are unanimous that
certain varieties are affected by very slight differences in the nature of the
artificial compost in which they are grown, and by the natural soil of the
district, as well as by the season. Thus, a skilful judge, in writing on
Carnations and Picotees (23/2. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1853 page 183.) asks
"where can Admiral Curzon be seen possessing the colour, size, and strength
which it has in Derbyshire? Where can Flora's Garland be found equal to those
at Slough? Where do high-coloured flowers revel better than at Woolwich and
Birmingham? Yet in no two of these districts do the same varieties attain an
equal degree of excellence, although each may be receiving the attention of
the most skilful cultivators." The same writer then recommends every
cultivator to keep five different kinds of soil and manure, "and to endeavour
to suit the respective appetites of the plants you are dealing with, for
without such attention all hope of general success will be vain." So it is
with the Dahlia (23/3. Mr. Wildman 'Floricultural Soc.' February 7, 1843
reported in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1843 page 86.): the Lady Cooper rarely
succeeds near London, but does admirably in other districts; the reverse holds
good with other varieties; and again, there are others which succeed equally
well in various situations. A skilful gardener (23/4. Mr. Robson in 'Journal
of Horticulture' February 13, 1866 page 122.) states that he procured cuttings
of an old and well-known variety (pulchella) of Verbena, which from having
been propagated in a different situation presented a slightly different shade
of colour; the two varieties were afterwards multiplied by cuttings, being
carefully kept distinct; but in the second year they could hardly be
distinguished, and in the third year no one could distinguish them.

The nature of the season has an especial influence on certain varieties of the
Dahlia: in 1841 two varieties were pre-eminently good, and the next year these
same two were pre-eminently bad. A famous amateur (23/5. 'Journal of
Horticulture' 1861 page 24.) asserts that in 1861 many varieties of the Rose
came so untrue in character, "that it was hardly possible to recognise them,
and the thought was not seldom entertained that the grower had lost his
tally." The same amateur (23/6. Ibid 1862 page 83.) states that in 1862 two-
thirds of his Auriculas produced central trusses of flowers, and such trusses
are liable not to keep true; and he adds that in some seasons certain
varieties of this plant all prove good, and the next season all prove bad;
whilst exactly the reverse happens with other varieties. In 1845 the editor of
the 'Gardener's Chronicle' (23/7. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1845 page 660.)
remarked how singular it was that this year many Calceolarias tended to assume
a tubular form. With Heartsease (23/8. Ibid 1863 page 628.) the blotched sorts
do not acquire their proper character until hot weather sets in; whilst other
varieties lose their beautiful marks as soon as this occurs.

Analogous facts have been observed with leaves: Mr. Beaton asserts (23/9.
'Journal of Hort.' 1861 pages 64, 309.) that he raised at Shrubland, during
six years, twenty thousand seedlings from the Punch Pelargonium, and not one
had variegated leaves; but at Surbiton, in Surrey, one-third, or even a
greater proportion, of the seedlings from this same variety were more or less
variegated. The soil of another district in Surrey has a strong tendency to
cause variegation, as appears from information given me by Sir F. Pollock.
Verlot (23/10. 'Des Varietes' etc. page 76.) states that the variegated
strawberry retains its character as long as grown in a dryish soil, but soon
loses it when planted in fresh and humid soil. Mr. Salter, who is well known
for his success in cultivating variegated plants, informs me that rows of
strawberries were planted in his garden in 1859, in the usual way; and at
various distances in one row, several plants simultaneously became variegated;
and what made the case more extraordinary, all were variegated in precisely
the same manner. These plants were removed, but during the three succeeding
years other plants in the same row became variegated, and in no instance were
the plants in any adjoining row affected.

The chemical qualities, odours, and tissues of plants are often modified by a
change which seems to us slight. The Hemlock is said not to yield conicine in
Scotland. The root of the Aconitum napellus becomes innocuous in frigid
climates. The medicinal properties of the Digitalis are easily affected by
culture. As the Pistacia lentiscus grows abundantly in the South of France,
the climate must suit it, but it yields no mastic. The Laurus sassafras in
Europe loses the odour proper to it in North America. (23/11. Engel 'Sur les
Prop. Medicales des Plantes' 1860 pages 10, 25. On changes in the odours of
plants see Dalibert's Experiments quoted by Beckman 'Inventions' volume 2 page
344; and Nees in Ferussac 'Bull. des Sc. Nat.' 1824 tome 1 page 60. With
respect to the rhubarb etc. see also 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1849 page 355;
1862 page 1123.) Many similar facts could be given, and they are remarkable
because it might have been thought that definite chemical compounds would have
been little liable to change either in quality or quantity.

The wood of the American Locust-tree (Robinia) when grown in England is nearly
worthless, as is that of the Oak-tree when grown at the Cape of Good Hope.
(23/12. Hooker 'Flora Indica' page 32.) Hemp and flax, as I hear from Dr.
Falconer, flourish and yield plenty of seed on the plains of India, but their
fibres are brittle and useless. Hemp, on the other hand, fails to produce in
England that resinous matter which is so largely used in India as an
intoxicating drug.

The fruit of the Melon is greatly influenced by slight differences in culture
and climate. Hence it is generally a better plan, according to Naudin, to
improve an old kind than to introduce a new one into any locality. The seed of
the Persian Melon produces near Paris fruit inferior to the poorest market
kinds, but at Bordeaux yields delicious fruit. (23/13. Naudin 'Annales des Sc.
Nat.' 4th series, Bot. tome 11 1859 page 81. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1859 page
464.) Seed is annually brought from Thibet to Kashmir (23/14. Moorcroft
'Travels' etc. volume 2 page 143.) and produces fruit weighing from four to
ten pounds, but plants raised next year from seed saved in Kashmir give fruit
weighing only from two to three pounds. It is well known that American
varieties of the Apple produce in their native land magnificent and brightly-
coloured fruit, but these in England are of poor quality and a dull colour. In
Hungary there are many varieties of the kidney-bean, remarkable for the beauty
of their seeds, but the Rev. M.J. Berkeley (23/15. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1861
page 1113.) found that their beauty could hardly ever be preserved in England,
and in some cases the colour was greatly changed. We have seen in the ninth
chapter, with respect to wheat, what a remarkable effect transportal from the
north to the south of France, and conversely, produced on the weight of the
grain.]

When man can perceive no change in plants or animals which have been exposed
to a new climate or to different treatment, insects can sometimes perceive a
marked change. A cactus has been imported into India from Canton, Manilla
Mauritius, and from the hot-houses of Kew, and there is likewise a so-called
native kind which was formerly introduced from South America; all these plants
belong to the same species and are alike in appearance, but the cochineal
insect flourishes only on the native kind, on which it thrives prodigiously.
(23/16. Royle 'Productive Resources of India' page 59.) Humboldt remarks
(23/17. 'Personal Narrative' English translation volume 5 page 101. This
statement has been confirmed by Karsten 'Beitrag zur Kenntniss der
Rhynchoprion' Moscow 1864 s. 39 and by others.) that white men "born in the
torrid zone walk barefoot with impunity in the same apartment where a
European, recently landed, is exposed to the attacks of the Pulex penetrans."
This insect, the too well-known chigoe, must therefore be able to perceive
what the most delicate chemical analysis fails to discover, namely, a
difference between the blood or tissues of a European and those of a white man
born in the tropics. But the discernment of the chigoe is not so surprising as
it at first appears; for according to Liebig (23/18. 'Organic Chemistry'
English translation 1st edition page 369.) the blood of men with different
complexions, though inhabiting the same country, emits a different odour.

[Diseases peculiar to certain localities, heights, or climates, may be here
briefly noticed, as showing the influence of external circumstances on the
human body. Diseases confined to certain races of man do not concern us, for
the constitution of the race may play the more important part, and this may
have been determined by unknown causes. The Plica Polonica stands, in this
respect, in a nearly intermediate position; for it rarely affects Germans, who
inhabit the neighbourhood of the Vistula, where so many Poles are grievously
affected; neither does it affect Russians, who are said to belong to the same
original stock as the Poles. (23/19. Prichard 'Phys. Hist. of Mankind' 1851
volume 1 page 155.) The elevation of a district often governs the appearance
of diseases; in Mexico the yellow fever does not extend above 924 metres; and
in Peru, people are affected with the verugas only between 600 and 1600 metres
above the sea; many other such cases could be given. A peculiar cutaneous
complaint, called the Bouton d'Alep, affects in Aleppo and some neighbouring
districts almost every native infant, and some few strangers; and it seems
fairly well established that this singular complaint depends on drinking
certain waters. In the healthy little island of St. Helena the scarlet-fever
is dreaded like the Plague; analogous facts have been observed in Chili and
Mexico. (23/20. Darwin 'Journal of Researches' 1845 page 434.) Even in the
different departments of France it is found that the various infirmities which
render the conscript unfit for serving in the army, prevail with remarkable
inequality, revealing, as Boudin observes, that many of them are endemic,
which otherwise would never have been suspected. (23/21. These statements on
disease are taken from Dr. Boudin 'Geographie et Statistique Medicale' 1857
tome 1 pages 44 and 52; tome 2 page 315.) Any one who will study the
distribution of disease will be struck with surprise at what slight
differences in the surrounding circumstances govern the nature and severity of
the complaints by which man is at least temporarily affected.

The modifications as yet referred to are extremely slight, and in most cases
have been caused, as far as we can judge, by equally slight differences in the
conditions. But such conditions acting during a series of generations would
perhaps produce a marked effect.

With plants, a considerable change of climate sometimes produces a conspicuous
result. I have given in the ninth chapter the most remarkable case known to
me, namely, that of varieties of maize, which were greatly modified in the
course of only two or three generations when taken from a tropical country to
a cooler one, or conversely. Dr. Falconer informs me that he has seen the
English Ribston-pippin apple, a Himalayan oak, Prunus and Pyrus, all assume in
the hotter parts of India a fastigiate or pyramidal habit; and this fact is
the more interesting, as a Chinese tropical species of Pyrus naturally grows
thus. Although in these cases the changed manner of growth seems to have been
directly caused by the great heat, we know that many fastigiate trees have
originated in their temperate homes. In the Botanic Gardens of Ceylon the
apple-tree (23/22. 'Ceylon' by Sir J.E. Tennent volume 1 1859 page 89.) "sends
out numerous runners under ground, which continually rise into small stems,
and form a growth around the parent-tree.) The varieties of the cabbage which
produce heads in Europe fail to do so in certain tropical countries (23/23.
Godron 'De l'Espece' tome 2 page 52.) The Rhododendron ciliatum produced at
Kew flowers so much larger and paler-coloured than those which it bears on its
native Himalayan mountain, that Dr. Hooker (23/24. 'Journal of Horticultural
Soc.' volume 7 1852 page 117.) would hardly have recognised the species by the
flowers alone. Many similar facts with respect to the colour and size of
flowers could be given.

The experiments of Vilmorin and Buckman on carrots and parsnips prove that
abundant nutriment produces a definite and inheritable effect on the roots,
with scarcely any change in other parts of the plant. Alum directly influences
the colour of the flowers of the Hydrangea. (23/25. 'Journal of Hort. Soc.'
volume 1 page 160.) Dryness seems generally to favour the hairiness or
villosity of plants. Gartner found that hybrid Verbascums became extremely
woolly when grown in pots. Mr. Masters, on the other hand, states that the
Opuntia leucotricha "is well clothed with beautiful white hairs when grown in
a damp heat, but in a dry heat exhibits none of this peculiarity." (23/26. See
Lecoq on the Villosity of Plants 'Geograph. Bot.' tome 3 pages 287, 291;
Gartner 'Bastarderz.' s. 261; Mr. Masters on the Opuntia in 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1846 page 444.) Slight variations of many kinds, not worth
specifying in detail, are retained only as long as plants are grown in certain
soils, of which Sageret (23/27. 'Pom. Phys.' page 136.) gives some instances
from his own experience. Odart, who insists strongly on the permanence of the
varieties of the grape, admits (23/28. 'Ampelographie' 1849 page 19.) that
some varieties, when grown under a different climate or treated differently,
vary in a slight degree, as in the tint of the fruit and in the period of
ripening. Some authors have denied that grafting causes even the slightest
difference in the scion; but there is sufficient evidence that the fruit is
sometimes slightly affected in size and flavour, the leaves in duration, and
the flowers in appearance. (23/29. Gartner 'Bastarderz.' s. 606, has collected
nearly all recorded facts. Andrew Knight in 'Transact. Hort. Soc.' volume 2
page 160, goes so far as to maintain that few varieties are absolutely
permanent in character when propagated by buds or grafts.)

There can be no doubt, from the facts given in the first chapter, that
European dogs deteriorate in India, not only in their instincts but in
structure; but the changes which they undergo are of such a nature, that they
may be partly due to reversion to a primitive form, as in the case of feral
animals. In parts of India the turkey becomes reduced in size, "with the
pendulous appendage over the beak enormously developed." (23/30. Mr. Blyth
'Annals and Mag of Nat. Hist.' volume 20 1847 page 391.) We have seen how soon
the wild duck, when domesticated, loses its true character, from the effects
of abundant or changed food, or from taking little exercise. From the direct
action of a humid climate and poor pasture the horse rapidly decreases in size
in the Falkland Islands. From information which I have received, this seems
likewise to be the case to a certain extent with sheep in Australia.

Climate definitely influences the hairy covering of animals; in the West
Indies a great change is produced in the fleece of sheep, in about three
generations. Dr. Falconer states (23/31. 'Natural History Review' 1862 page
113.) that the Thibet mastiff and goat, when brought down from the Himalaya to
Kashmir, lose their fine wool. At Angora not only goats, but shepherd-dogs and
cats, have fine fleecy hair, and Mr. Ainsworth (23/32. 'Journal of Roy.
Geographical Soc.' volume 9 1839 page 275.) attributes the thickness of the
fleece to the severe winters, and its silky lustre to the hot summers. Burnes
states positively (23/33. 'Travels in Bokhara' volume 3 page 151.) that the
Karakool sheep lose their peculiar black curled fleeces when removed into any
other country. Even within the limits of England, I have been assured that the
wool of two breeds of sheep was slightly changed by the flocks being pastured
in different localities. (23/34. See also on the influence of marshy pastures
on the wool Godron 'L'Espece' tome 2 page 22.) It has been asserted on good
authority (23/35. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire 'Hist. Nat. Gen.' tome 3 page
438.) that horses kept during several years in the deep coal-mines of Belgium
become covered with velvety hair, almost like that on the mole. These cases
probably stand in close relation to the natural change of coat in winter and
summer. Naked varieties of several domestic animals have occasionally
appeared; but there is no reason to believe that this is in any way related to
the nature of the climate to which they have been exposed. (23/36. Azara has
made some good remarks on this subject 'Quadrupedes du Paraguay' tome 2 page
337. See an account of a family of naked mice produced in England 'Proc.
Zoolog. Soc.' 1856 page 38.)

It appears at first sight probable that the increased size, the tendency to
fatten, the early maturity and altered forms of our improved cattle, sheep,
and pigs, have directly resulted from their abundant supply of food. This is
the opinion of many competent judges, and probably is to a great extent true.
But as far as form is concerned, we must not overlook the more potent
influence of lessened use on the limbs and lungs. We see, moreover, as far as
size is concerned, that selection is apparently a more powerful agent than a
large supply of food, for we can thus only account for the existence, as
remarked to me by Mr. Blyth, of the largest and smallest breeds of sheep in
the same country, of Cochin-China fowls and Bantams, of small Tumbler and
large Runt pigeons, all kept together and supplied with abundant nourishment.
Nevertheless there can be little doubt that our domesticated animals have been
modified, independently of the increased or lessened use of parts, by the
conditions to which they have been subjected, without the aid of selection.
For instance, Prof. Rutimeyer (23/37. 'Die Fauna der Pfahlbauten' 1861 s. 15.)
shows that the bones of domesticated quadrupeds can be distinguished from
those of wild animals by the state of their surface and general appearance. It
is scarcely possible to read Nathusius's excellent 'Vorstudien' (23/38.
'Schweineschadel' 1864 s. 99.) and doubt that, with the highly improved races
of the pig, abundant food has produced a conspicuous effect on the general
form of the body, on the breadth of the head and face, and even on the teeth.
Nathusius rests much on the case of a purely bred Berkshire pig, which when
two months old became diseased in its digestive organs, and was preserved for
observation until nineteen months old; at this age it had lost several
