cloak, showed in a patch of light behind Moa. He looked my way and then
retreated into the lounge archway.

Miko called, "You must yield. We want you, Haljan."

"No doubt," I jeered.

"Alive. It is easy to kill you."

       *       *       *       *       *

I could not doubt that. Carter and I were little more than rats in a
trap, here in the chart-room. But Miko wanted to take me alive: that was
not so simple. He added persuasively:

"We want you to help us navigate. Will you?"

"No."

"Will you help us, Captain Carter? Tell your cub, this Haljan, to yield.
You are fools. We understand that Haljan has been handling the ship's
mathematics. Him we need most."

Carter roared: "Get back from there! This is no truce!"

I shoved aside his levelled bullet-projector. "Wait a minute!" I called
to Miko. "Navigate--where?"

"Oh," he retorted, "that is our business, not yours. When you lay down
your weapons and come out of there, I will give you the course."

"Back to the earth?" I suggested.

I could fancy him grinning behind the sheen of his barrage at my
question.

"The earth? Yes--shall we go there? Give me your orders, Gregg Haljan.
Of course I will obey them."

His sardonic words were interrupted. And I realized that all this parley
was a ruse of Miko's to take me alive. He had made a gesture. Hahn,
watching from the turret window, doubtless flashed a signal down to the
hull-corridors. The magnetizer control under the chart-room was
altered, our artificial gravity cut off. I felt the sudden lightness; I
gripped the window casement and clung. Carter was startled into
incautious movement. It flung him out into the center of the chart-room,
his arms and legs grotesquely flailing.

       *       *       *       *       *

And across the chart-room, in the opposite window, I felt rather than
saw the shape of something. A figure--almost invisible, but not
quite--was trying to climb in! I flung the empty rifle I was holding. It
hit something solid in the window; in a flare of sparks a black-hooded
figure materialized. A man climbing in! His weapon spat. There was a
tiny electronic flash, deadly silent. The intruder had shot at Carter;
struck him. Carter gave one queer scream. He had floated to the floor;
his convulsive movement when he was hit hurled him to the ceiling. His
body struck, twitched; bounced back and sank inert on the floor-grid
almost at my feet.

I clung to the casement. Across the space of the weightless room the
hooded intruder was also clinging. His hood fell back. It was Johnson.
He leered at me.

"Killed him, the bully! Well, he deserved it. Now for you, Mr. Third
Officer Haljan!"

But he did not dare fire at me--Miko had forbidden it. I saw him reach
under his robe, doubtless for a low-powered paralyzing ray such as Miko
already had used on me. But he never got it out. I had no weapon within
reach. I leaned into the room, still holding the casement, and doubled
my legs under me. I kicked out from the window.

The force catapulted me across the space of the room like a volplane. I
struck the purser. We gripped. Our locked, struggling bodies bounced out
into the room. We struck the floor, surged up like balloons to the
ceiling, struck it with a flailing arm or a leg and floated back.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grotesque, abnormal combat! Like fighting in weightless water. Johnson
clutched his weapon, but I twisted his wrist, held his arm outstretched
so that he could not aim it. I was aware of Miko's voice shouting on the
deck outside.

Johnson's left hand was gouging at my face, his fingers plucking at my
eyes. We lunged down to the floor, then up again, close to the ceiling.

I twisted his wrists. He dropped the weapon and it sank away. I tried to
reach it, but could not. Then I had him by the throat. I was stronger
than he, and more agile. I tried choking him, his thick bull-neck within
my fingers. He kicked, scrambled, tore and gouged at me. Tried to shout,
but it ended in a gurgle. And then, as he felt his breath stopped, his
hands came up in an effort to tear mine loose.

We sank again to the floor. We were momentarily upright. I felt my feet
touch. I bent my knees. We sank further.

And then I kicked violently upward. Our locked bodies shot to the
ceiling. Johnson's head was above me. It struck the steel roof of the
chart-room. A violent blow. I felt him go suddenly limp. I cast him off,
and, doubling my body, I kicked at the ceiling. It sent me diagonally
downward to the window, where I clung and regained stability.

And I saw Miko standing on the deck with a weapon levelled at me!


CHAPTER XIII

_The Torture_

"Haljan! Yield or I'll fire! Moa, give me the smaller one. This
cursed--"

He had in his hand too large a projector. Its ray would kill me. If he
wanted to take me alive, he would not fire. I chanced it.

"No!"

I tried to draw myself beneath the window. An automatic bullet projector
was on the floor where Carter had dropped it. I pulled myself down.
Miko did not fire. I reached the revolver. The dead bodies of the
captain and purser had drifted together on the floor in the center of
the room.

I hitched myself back to the window. With upraised weapon I gazed
cautiously out. Miko had disappeared. The deck within my line of vision
was empty.

But was it? Something told me to beware. I clung to the casement, ready
upon the instant to shove myself down. There was a movement in a shadow
along the deck. Then a figure rose up.

"Don't fire, Haljan!"

The sharp command, half appeal, stopped the pressure of my finger on the
trigger of the automatic. It was the tall lanky Englishman, Sir Arthur
Coniston, as he called himself. So he too was one of Miko's band! The
light through a dome-window fell full on him.

"If you fire, Haljan, and kill me--Miko will kill you then, surely."

From where he had been crouching he could not command my window. But
now, upon the heels of his placating words, he abruptly shot. The
low-powered ray, had it struck, would have felled me without killing.
But it went over my head as I dropped. Its aura made my senses reel.

Coniston shouted, "Haljan!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I did not answer. I wondered if he would dare approach to see if I had
been hit. A minute passed. Then another. I thought I heard Miko's voice
on the deck outside. But it was an aerial, microscopic whisper close
beside me.

"We see you, Haljan! You must yield!"

Their eavesdropping vibrations, with audible projection, were upon me. I
retorted aloud.

"Come and get me! You cannot take me alive."

I do protest if this action of mine in the chart-room may seem bravado.
I had no wish to die. There was within me a very healthy desire for
life. But I felt, by holding out, that some chance might come wherewith
I might turn events against these brigands. Yet reason told me it was
hopeless. Our loyal members of the crew were killed, no doubt. Captain
Carter and Balch were killed. The lookouts and Course-masters also. And
Blackstone.

There remained only Dr. Frank and Snap. Their fate I did not yet know.
And there was George Prince. He, perhaps, would help me if he could.
But, at best, he was a dubious ally.

"You are very foolish, Haljan," murmured the projection of Miko's voice.
And then I heard Coniston:

"See here, why would not a hundred pounds of gold-leaf tempt you? The
code-words which were taken from Johnson--I mean to say, why not tell us
where they are?"

So that was one of the brigands new difficulties! Snap had taken the
code-word sheet, that time we sealed the purser in the cage.

I said, "You'll never find them. And when a police ship sights us, what
will you do then?"

The chances of a police ship were slim indeed, but the brigands
evidently did not know that. I wondered again what had become of Snap.
Was he captured--or still holding them off?

I was watching my windows; for at any moment, under cover of this talk,
I might be assailed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gravity came suddenly to the room. Miko's voice said. "We mean well by
you, Haljan. There is your normality. Join us. We need you to chart our
course."

"And a hundred pounds of gold-leaf," urged Coniston. "Or more. Why, this
treasure--"

I could hear an oath from Miko. And then his ironic voice: "We will not
bother you, Haljan. There is no hurry. You will be hungry in good time.
And sleepy. Then we will come and get you. And a little acid will make
you think differently about helping us...."

His vibrations died away. The pull of gravity in the room was normal. I
was alone in the dim silence, with the bodies of Carter and Johnson
lying huddled on the grid. I bent to examine them. Both were dead.

My isolation was no ruse this time. The outlaws made no further attack.
Half an hour passed. The deck outside, what I could see of it, was
vacant. Balch lay dead close outside the chart-room door. The bodies of
Blackstone and the Course-master had been removed from the turret
window. A forward lookout--one of Miko's men--was on duty in the nearby
tower. Hahn was at the turret controls. The ship was under orderly
handling, heading back upon a new course. For the Earth? Or the Moon? It
did not seem so.

I found, in the chart-room, a Benson curve-light projector which poor
Captain Carter had very nearly assembled. I worked on it, trained it
through my rear window, along the empty deck; bent it into the lounge
archway. Upon my grid the image of the lounge interior presently
focused. The passengers in the lounge were huddled in a group.
Disheveled, frightened, with Moa standing watching them. Stewards were
serving them with a meal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Upon a bench, bodies were lying. Some were dead. I saw Rance Rankin.
Others were evidently only injured. Dr. Frank was moving among them,
attending them. Venza was there, unharmed. And I saw the gamblers, Shac
and Dud, sitting white-faced, whispering together. And Glutz's little
be-ribboned, be-curled figure on a stool.

George Prince was there, standing against the walls shrouded in his
mourning cloak, watching the scene with alert, roving eyes. And by the
opposite doorway, the huge towering figure of Miko stood on guard. But
Snap was missing.

A brief glimpse. Miko saw my Benson-light. I could have equipped a
heat-ray, and fired along the curved Benson-light into that lounge. But
Miko gave me no time.

He slid the lounge door closed, and Moa leaped to close the one on my
side. My light was cut off; my grid showed only the blank deck and
door.

Another interval. I had made plans. Futile plans! I could get into the
turret perhaps, and kill Hahn. I had the invisible cloak which Johnson
was wearing. I took it from his body. Its mechanism could be repaired.
Why, with it I could creep about the ship, kill these brigands one by
one perhaps. George Prince would be with me. The brigands who had been
posing as the stewards and crew-members were unable to navigate; they
would obey my orders. There were only Miko, Coniston and Hahn to kill.

Futile plans! From my window I could gaze up to the helio-room. And now
abruptly I heard Snap's voice:

"No! I tell you--no!"

And Miko: "Very well. We will try this."

So Snap was captured, but not killed. Relief swept me. He was in the
helio-room, and Miko was with him. But my relief was short-lived.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a brief interval there came a moan from Snap. It floated down from
the silence overhead. It made me shudder.

My Benson-beam shot into the helio window. It showed me Snap lying there
on the floor. He was bound with wire. His torso had been stripped. His
livid face was ghastly plain in my light.

Miko was bending over him. Miko with a heat-cylinder no longer than a
finger. Its needle-beam played upon Snap's naked chest. I could see the
gruesome little trail of smoke rising; and as Snap twisted and jerked,
there on his flesh was the red and blistered trail of the violet-hot
ray.

"Now will you tell?"

"No!"

Miko laughed. "No? Then I shall write my name a little deeper...."

A black scar now--a trail etched in the quivering flesh.

"Oh!--" Snap's face went white as chalk as he pressed his lips
together.

"Or a little acid? This fire-writing does not really hurt? Tell me what
you did with those code-words!"

"No!"

In his absorption Miko did not notice my light. Nor did I have the wit
to try and fire along it. I was trembling. Snap under torture!

As the beam went deeper, Snap suddenly screamed. But he ended, "No! I
will send--no message for you--"

It had been only a moment. In the chart-room window beside me again a
figure appeared! No image. A solid, living person, undisguised by any
cloak of invisibility. George Prince had chanced my fire and had crept
up upon me.

"Haljan! Don't attack me."

       *       *       *       *       *

I dropped my light connections. As impulsively I stood up, I saw through
the window the figure of Coniston on the deck watching the result of
Prince's venture.

"Haljan--yield."

Prince no more than whispered it. He stood outside on the deck; the low
window casement touched his waist. He leaned over it.

"He's torturing Snap! Call out that you will yield."

The thought had already been in my mind. Another scream from Snap
chilled me with horror. I shouted,

"Miko! Stop!"

I rushed to the window and Prince gripped me.

"Louder!"

I called louder. "_Miko!_ Stop!" My upflung voice mingled with Snap's
agony of protest. Then Miko heard me. His head and shoulders showed up
there at the helio-room oval.
