I had stood up to take aim. I saw the bullet chip a bit of rock. Anita
pulled me sharply down beside her.

"Gregg, he's armed!"

It was his turn to fire. It came--the familiar vague flash of the
paralyzing ray. It spat its tint of color on the rocks near us, but
could not reach us.

Miko rose a moment later and bounded to another rock. I scrambled up,
and shot at him, but missed. Then he crouched and returned my fire
from his new angle; but Anita and I had shifted.

Time passed--only a few moments. I could not see Miko momentarily.
Perhaps he was crouching; perhaps he had moved away again. He was, or
had been, on slightly higher ground than the bottom of our bowl. It
was dim down here where we were lying, but I feared that every moment
Miko might appear and strike at us. His ray at any short range would
penetrate our visor-panes, even though our suits might temporarily
resist it.

"Anita--it's too dangerous here."

Had I been alone, I might perhaps have leaped up to lure Miko. But
with Anita I did not dare chance it.

"We've got to get back to the camp," I told her. The audiphone brought
her comment:

"Perhaps he has gone."

       *       *       *       *       *

But he had not. We saw him again, out in a distant patch of
Earthlight. He was further from us than before, but on still higher
ground. We had extinguished our small helmet-lights. But he knew we
were here, and possibly he could see us. His projector flashed again.
But we had again shifted, and were untouched. He was a hundred feet or
more away now. His weapon was of longer range than mine. I did not
answer his fire, for I could not hope to hit him at such a distance,
and the flash of my weapon would help him with his aim.

I murmured to Anita, "We must get out of here."

Yet how did I dare take Anita from these concealing shadows? Miko
could reach us so easily as we bounded away, in plain view in the
Earthlight of the open summit! We were caught, at bay in this little
bowl.

The camp from here was not visible. But out through the broken gully,
beyond the staircase top, a white beam of light suddenly came up from
below.

"_Haljan._"

It spelled the signal.

"_Haljan._"

It was coming from the Grantline instrument room, I knew.

I could answer it with my helmet-light, but I did not dare. I
hesitated.

"Try it," urged Anita.

       *       *       *       *       *

We crouched where we thought we might be safe from Miko's fire. My
little light-beam shot up from the bowl. It was undoubtedly visible to
the camp.

"_Yes? I am Haljan._"

And I added:

"_Help! Send us help._"

I did not mention Anita. Miko could doubtless read these signals. And
in the camp they must have missed Anita by now. They answered:

"_Cannot_--"

I lost the rest of it. There came a flash from Miko's weapon. But it
gave us confidence. He could not reach us at the moment.

The Grantline beam repeated:

"_Cannot come out. Portes broken. You cannot get in. Stay where you
are--an hour or two. We may be able to repair portes._"

The portes were broken! Stay here an hour or two! But I could not hold
this position against Miko that long! Sooner or later he would find a
place from where he could sweep this bowl beyond possibility of our
hiding. I saw him running now, well beyond my range, to ferret out
another point of vantage.

I extinguished my light. What use was it to tell Grantline anything
further? Besides, my light was dangerous.

But the Grantline beam spelled another message:

"_The brigand ship is coming! It will be here before we can get out to
you! No lights! We will try and hide our location._"

And the signal-beam brought a last appeal to me:

"_Miko and his men will divulge where we are. Unless you can stop
them_--"

The beam vanished. The lights of the Grantline camp made a faint glow
that showed above the crater-edge. The glow died, as the camp now was
plunged into darkness.


CHAPTER XXVII

_Anita's Plan_

We crouched in the shadows, the Earthlight filtering down to us. The
skulking figure of Miko had vanished; but he was out there somewhere
on the crags I was sure, lurking, maneuvering to where he could strike
us with his ray. Anita's metal-gloved hand was on my arm; in my ear
diaphragm her voice sounded eager and unmistakable:

"What was the signal, Gregg?"

She could not read the semaphore lights. I told her.

"Oh Gregg, the Martian ship coming!"

Her mind clung to that as the most important thing. But not so myself.
To me there was only the realization that Anita was caught out here,
almost at the mercy of Miko's ray. Grantline's men could not get out
to help us, nor could I get Anita into the camp.

She added, "Where do you suppose the ship is? In telescopic view?"

"Yes--twenty or thirty thousand miles up, probably."

The stars and the Earth were visible over us. Somewhere up there
disclosed by Grantline's instrument but not yet discernible to the
naked eye, Miko's reinforcements were hovering.

I stood up cautiously to try and locate Miko. Immediately I saw him.
He jumped as though fearing my coming bullet, and I dropped back,
barely avoiding his flash, which swept across the top of our bowl.

"Gregg--Gregg, don't take such a chance!"

We lay for a moment in silence. It was horribly nerve-straining. Miko
could be creeping up on us. Would he dare chance my sudden fire?
Creeping--or would he make a swift, unexpected rush?

The feeling that he was upon us abruptly swept me. I jumped to my
feet, against Anita's effort to hold me. But again Miko had vanished.
Where was he now?

       *       *       *       *       *

I sank back. "That ship will be here in a few hours."

I told her what Grantline's signal had suggested: the ship was
hovering overhead. It must be fairly close; for Grantline's telescope
had revealed its identity as a bandit flyer, unmarked by any of the
standard code-identification lights. It was doubtless too far away as
yet to have located the whereabouts of Grantline's camp. The Martian
brigands knew that we were in the vicinity of Archimedes, but no more
than that. Searching this glowing Moon surface, our little lights, the
tiny local semaphore beams we had momentarily been using, could easily
pass unnoticed.

But as the brigand ship approached now--dropping close to Archimedes
as it probably would--our danger was that Miko and his men would then
signal it, join it, and reveal the camp's location, and the brigand
attack would be upon us.

I told this now to Anita. "The signal said, '_Unless you can stop
them_.'"

It was an appeal to me. But how could I respond to it? What could I
do, alone out here with Anita, to cope with this enemy?

Anita made no comment.

I added, "That ship will land near Archimedes I imagine, within an
hour or two! If Grantline can repair his portes, and I can get you
inside--"

Again she made no comment. Then suddenly she gripped me. "Gregg, look
there!"

Out through the gully break in our bowl the figure of Miko showed! He
was running. But not at us. Circling the summit, leaping to keep
himself behind the upstanding crags. He passed the head of the
staircase; he did not descend it, but headed off along the summit of
the curving crater-rim.

       *       *       *       *       *

I stood up to watch him. He was making off. Abandoning us!

"He's going!"

I let her stand up beside me; cautiously, at first, for it occurred to
me that this might be a ruse to cover some other of Miko's men who
might be lurking up here.

But the summit seemed clear. The figure of Miko was a thousand feet
away now. We could see the tiny blob of it bobbing over the rocks.
Then it plunged down--not into the crater-valley, but out toward the
open Moon surface.

Miko had abandoned his attack on us. The reason seemed plain. He had
come here from his encampment with Coniston, had sent Coniston ahead
to lure and kill Wilks. When this was done, Coniston had flashed his
brief signal to Miko, who was hiding nearby.

It was not like the brigand leader to remain in the background. Miko
was no coward. But Coniston could impersonate Wilks, whereas Miko's
giant stature at once would reveal his identity. Miko had been engaged
in smashing the portes. He had looked up and seen me kill Coniston. He
had come up to assail me. And then he had read Grantline's signal to
me. It was his first knowledge that his ship was at hand. With the
camp exits inoperative, Grantline and his men were imprisoned. Miko
made an effort to kill me. He did not know my companion was Anita. The
effort was taking too long: with the Grantline camp imprisoned and his
ship at hand, it was Miko's best move to return to his own camp,
rejoin his men, and await their opportunity to signal the ship.

At least, so I reasoned it. Anita and I stood alone. What could we do?

       *       *       *       *       *

We went to the brink of the cliff. The unlighted Grantline buildings
showed vaguely in the Earthlight.

I said, "We'll go down, I'll leave you there. You can wait at the
porte. They'll repair it soon, perhaps, and let you in."

"And what will you do?" she demanded.

I was hurrying her down the stairs. But suddenly she stopped. "What
are you going to do, Gregg?"

I had not intended to tell her. "Hurry, Anita!"

"Why?" She stood stock still. Through the visors I could see her white
face gazing at me rebelliously.

"Why should I hurry, Gregg?"

"Because I want to leave you at the porte. I'm going after Miko--try
and locate where he and his men are camping."

I had indeed no specific plan as yet. But it seemed useless for me to
sit at the porte waiting to be let in.

"But he's gone, Gregg."

She was right on that. Miko was already a mile or more away, down on
the outer surface, making off. He would soon be out of sight. It would
be impossible to follow him.

"Gregg, let me go with you."

She jerked away from me and bounded back up the staircase. I caught
her on the summit.

"Anita!"

"I'm going with you."

"You're going to stay here."

"I'm not!"

This exasperating controversy! And time was so precious!

"Anita, please."

"I'll be safer with you than waiting here, Gregg."

       *       *       *       *       *

It almost decided me. Perhaps she would. It was only my intention to
follow Miko at a distance. And with much more of this delay here, he
would be lost to me.

And she added, "Besides, I won't stay, and you can't make me."

We ran along the crater-top. At its distant edge the lower plain
spread before us. Far down, and far away on the distant broken
surface, the leaping figure of Miko showed.

We plunged down the broken outer slope, reached the level. Soon, as we
ran, the little Grantline crater faded behind us.

Anita ran more skillfully than I. Ten minutes or so passed. We had seen
Miko, and the direction he was taking, but down here on the plain we
could no longer see him. It struck me that this was purposeless--and
dangerous. Suppose Miko were to see us following? Suppose he stopped and
lay in ambush to fire at us as we came leaping heedlessly by?

"Anita, wait," I said, checking her.

I drew her down amid a group of tumbled boulders. And then abruptly
she clung to me.

"Gregg, I know what we can do! Gregg, don't tell me you won't let me
try it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I listened to her plan. Incredible! Incredibly dangerous! Yet, as I
pondered it, the very daring of the thing seemed the measure of its
possible success. The brigands would never imagine we could be so
rash!

"But Anita--"

"Gregg, you're stupid!" It was her turn to be exasperated. In truth, I
was indeed in no mood for daring, for my mind was obsessed with
Anita's safety. I had been planning that we might see the glow of
Miko's encampment, and then return to Grantline and hope that he would
have the portes repaired.

"But Gregg--the safety of the treasure--of all the Grantline men...."

"To the infernal with that! It's you--your safety."

"My safety, then! If you put me in the camp and the brigands attack it
and I am killed--what then? But this plan of mine, if we can do it,
Gregg ... safety, in the end, for all of us."

And it seemed possible. We crouched, discussing it. So daring a thing!

The brigand ship would come down near Archimedes. That was fifty miles
from Grantline. The brigands from Mars would not have seen the dark
Grantline buildings hidden in the little crater-pit. They would wait
for Miko and his men to make their whereabouts known.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miko's encampment was ahead of us now, undoubtedly. We had been
following him toward the Mare Imbrium; we were at its borders now.
Archimedes from here was also about fifty miles.

And Anita proposed that we go to Archimedes, climb in slope and await
the coming of the brigand ship. Miko would be off in the Mare Imbrium.
Or at least, we hoped so. He would signal his ship. But Anita and I,
closer to it, would also signal it--and, posing as brigands, could
join it!

"Remember, Gregg, I am Anita Prince, George's sister." Her voice
trembled as, she mentioned her dead brother. "They know that George
was in Miko's pay, and I am his sister.... It will help convince
them."

This daring scheme! If we could join the ship, we might be able to
persuade its leader that Miko's distant signals were merely a ruse of
Grantline to lure the brigands in that direction. A long-range
projector from the ship would kill Miko and his men as they came
forward to join it! And then we could falsely direct the brigands,
