       *       *       *       *       *

The pain shook every fraction of their souls.

"We--we are in some pit of hell, into which they have thrown us,
John," gasped Madge.

He knew she was shivering with the torture of that great vibration
from which there was no escape, that they were in a prison-pit of
Hell's Dimension.

"I--oh--John--I'm dying!"

But he was powerless to help her. He suffered as much as she. Yet
there was no weakening of his sensations; he was in as much torture as
he had been at the start. He knew that they could not die and could
never escape from this misery of hell.

Their cries seemed to disturb the vacuum about. Lambert, shivering and
shaking with pain, was aware that great eyes, similar to those which
they had thought they saw above, were now upon them. Squeaks were
impressed upon him, squeaks which expressed disapprobation. There were
some of the beings in the pit with them.

Madge knew they were there, too. She cried out in terror, "Will they
add to our misery?"

But the creatures in the vacuum were pinned to the spots they
occupied, as were Madge and Lambert. From their squeaks it was evident
they suffered, too, and were fellow prisoners of the mortals.

"Probably the cries we make disturb them," said Lambert. "Vibrations
to which we and they are not attuned are torture to the form we are
in. Evidently the inhabitants of this hell world punish offenders by
condemning them to this eternal torture."

"Why--why did they treat us so?"

"Perhaps we jarred upon them, hurt them, because we were not of their
kind exactly," said Lambert. "Perhaps it was just their natural hatred
of us as strangers."

       *       *       *       *       *

They did not grow used to the terrible eternity of torments. No, if
anything, it grew worse as it went on. Still, they could visualize no
end to the existence to which they were bound. Throbs of awful
intensity rent them, tore them apart myriad times, yet they still felt
as keenly as before and suffered just as much. There was no death for
them, no release from the intangible world in which they were.

Their fellow prisoners squeaked at them, as though imploring them not
to add to the agony by uttering discordant cries. But it was
impossible for Madge to keep quiet, and Lambert shouted in anguish
from time to time.

There seemed to be no end to it.

And yet, after what was eternity to the sufferers, Madge spoke
hopefully.

"Darling John, I--I fear I am really going to die. I am growing
weaker. I can feel the pain very little now. It is all vague, and is
getting less real to me. Good-by, sweetheart, I love you, and I always
will--"

Lambert uttered a strangled cry, "No, no. Don't leave me, Madge."

He clung to her, yet she was becoming extremely intangible to him. She
was melting away from his embrace, and Lambert felt that he, too, was
weaker, even less real than he had been. He hoped that if it was the
end, they would go together.

Desperately, he tried to hold her with him, but he had little ability
to do so. The torture was still racking his consciousness, but was
becoming more dreamlike.

There was a terrific snap, suddenly, and Lambert lost all
consciousness....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Water, water!"

Lambert, opening his eyes, felt his body writhing about, and
experienced pain that was--mortal. A bluish-green light dazzled his
pupils and made him blink.

Something cut into his flesh, and Lambert rolled about, trying to
escape. He bumped into something, something soft; he clung to this
form, and knew that he was holding on to a human being. Then the light
died out, and in its stead was the yellow, normal glow of the electric
lights. Weak, famished, almost dead of thirst, Lambert looked about
him at the familiar sights of his laboratory. He was lying on the
floor, close by the metal plate, and at his side, unconscious but
still alive to judge by her rising and falling breast, was Madge
Crawford.

Someone bent over him, and pressed a glass of water against his lips.
He drank, watching while a mortal whom Lambert at last realized was
Detective Phillips bathed Madge Crawford's temples with water from a
pitcher and forced a little between her pale, drawn lips.

Lambert tried to rise, but he was weak, and required assistance. He
was dazed, still, and they sat him down in a chair and allowed him to
come to.

He shuddered from time to time, for he still thought he could feel the
torture which he had been undergoing. But he was worried about Madge,
and watched anxiously as Phillips, assisted by another man, worked
over the girl.

At last, Madge stirred and moaned faintly. They lifted her to a bench,
where they gently restored her to full consciousness.

When she could sit up, she at once cried out for Lambert.

The scientist had recovered enough to rise to his feet and stagger
toward her. "Here I am, darling," he said.

"John--we're alive--we're back in the laboratory!"

"Ah, Lambert. Glad to see you." A heavy voice spoke, and Lambert for
the first time noticed the black-clad figure which stood to one side,
near the switchboard, hidden by a large piece of apparatus.

"Dr. Morgan!" cried Lambert.

Althaus Morgan, the renowned physicist, came forward calmly, with
outstretched hand. "So, you realized your great ambition, eh?" he said
curiously. "But where would you be if I had not been able to bring you
back?"

"In Hell--or Hell's Dimension, anyway," said Lambert.

He went to Madge, took her in his arms. "Darling, we are safe. Morgan
has managed to re-materialize us. We will never again be cast into the
void in this way. I shall destroy the apparatus and my notes."

Doherty, who had been out of the room on some errand, came into the
laboratory. He shouted when he saw Lambert standing before him.

"So you got him," he cried. "Where was he hidin'?"

His eyes fell upon Madge Crawford, then, and he exclaimed in
satisfaction. "You found her, eh?"

"No," said Phillips. "They came back. They suddenly appeared out of
nothing, Doherty."

"Don't kid me," growled Doherty. "They were hidin' in a closet
somewhere. Maybe they can fool you guys, but not me."

Lambert spoke to Phillips. "I'm starving to death and I think Miss
Crawford must be, too. Will you tell Felix to bring us some food,
plenty of it?"

One of the sleuths went to the kitchen to give the order. Lambert
turned to Morgan.

"How did you manage to bring us back?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morgan shrugged. "It was all guess work at the last. I at first could
check the apparatus by your notes, and this took some time. You know
you have written me in detail about what you were working on, so when
I was summoned by Detective Phillips, who said you had mentioned my
name to him as the only one who could help, I could make a good
conjecture as to what had occurred. I heard the stories of all
concerned, and realized that you must have dematerialized Miss
Crawford by mistake, and then, unable to bring her back, had followed
her yourself.

"I put on your insulation outfit, and went to work. I have not left
here for a moment, but have snatched an hour or two of sleep from time
to time. Detective Phillips has been very good and helpful.

"Finally, I had everything in shape, but I reversed the apparatus in
vital spots, and tried each combination until suddenly, a few minutes
ago, you were re-materialized. It was a desperate chance, but I was
forced to take it in an endeavor to save you."

Lambert held out his hand to his friend. "I can never thank you
enough," he said gratefully. "You saved us from a horrible fate. But
you speak as though we had been gone a long while. Was it many hours?"

"Hours?" repeated Morgan, his lips parting under his black beard.
"Man, it was eight days! You have been gone since a week ago last
night!"

Lambert turned to Phillips. "I must ask you not to release this story
to the newspapers," he begged.

Phillips smiled and turned up his hands in a gesture of frank wonder.
"Professor Lambert," he said, "I can't believe what I have seen
myself. If I told such a yarn to the reporters, they'd never forget
it. They'd kid me out of the department."

"Aw, they were hidin' in a closet," growled Doherty. "Come on, we've
wasted too much time on this job already. Just a couple of nuts, says
I."

       *       *       *       *       *

The sleuths, after Phillips had shaken hands with Lambert, left the
laboratory. Morgan, a large man of middle age, joined them in a meal
which Felix served to the three on a folding table brought in for the
purpose. Felix was terribly glad to see Madge and Lambert again, and
manifested his joy by many bobs and leaps as he waited upon them. A
grin spread across his face from ear to ear.

Morgan asked innumerable questions. They described as best they could
what they could recall of the strange dominion in which they had been,
and the physicist listened intently.

"It is some Hell's Dimension, as you call it," he said at last.

"Where it is, or exactly what, I cannot say," said Lambert. "I surely
have no desire to return to that world of hate."

Madge, happy now, smiled at him and he leaned over and kissed her
tenderly.

"We have come from Hell, together," said Lambert, "and now we are in
Heaven!"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Advertisement]




The World Behind the Moon

_By Paul Ernst_

[Illustration: _They fell, for hours, into a deep chasm._]

[Sidenote: Two intrepid Earth-men fight it out with the horrific
monsters of Zeud's frightful jungles.]


Like pitiless jaws, a distant crater opened for their ship.
Helplessly, they hurtled toward it: helplessly, because they were
still in the nothingness of space, with no atmospheric resistance on
which their rudders, or stern or bow tubes, could get a purchase to
steer them.

Professor Dorn Wichter waited anxiously for the slight vibration that
should announce that the projectile-shaped shell had entered the new
planet's atmosphere.

"Have we struck it yet?" asked Joyce, a tall blond young man with the
shoulders of an athlete and the broad brow and square chin of one who
combines dreams with action. He made his way painfully toward
Wichter. It was the first time he had attempted to move since the
shell had passed the neutral point--that belt midway between the moon
and the world behind it, where the pull of gravity of each satellite
was neutralized by the other. They, and all the loose objects in the
shell, had floated uncomfortably about the middle of the chamber for
half an hour or so, gradually settling down again; until now it was
possible, with care, to walk.

"Have we struck it?" he repeated, leaning over the professor's
shoulder and staring at the resistance gauge.

"No." Absently Wichter took off his spectacles and polished them.
"There's not a trace of resistance yet."

They gazed out the bow window toward the vast disc, like a serrated,
pock-marked plate of blue ice, that was the planet Zeud--discovered
and named by them. The same thought was in the mind of each. Suppose
there were no atmosphere surrounding Zeud to cushion their descent
into the hundred-mile crater that yawned to receive them?

"Well," said Joyce after a time, "we're taking no more of a chance
here than we did when we pointed our nose toward the moon. We were
almost sure that was no atmosphere there--which meant we'd nose dive
into the rocks at five thousand miles an hour. On Zeud there might be
anything." His eyes shone. "How wonderful that there should be such a
planet, unsuspected during all the centuries men have been studying
the heavens!"

Wichter nodded agreement. It was indeed wonderful. But what was more
wonderful was its present discovery: for that would never have
transpired had not he and Joyce succeeded in their attempt to fly to
the moon. From there, after following the sun in its slow journey
around to the lost side of the lunar globe--that face which the earth
has never yet observed--they had seen shining in the near distance
the great ball which they had christened Zeud.

       *       *       *       *       *

Astronomical calculations had soon described the mysterious hidden
satellite. It was almost a twin to the moon; a very little smaller,
and less than eighty thousand miles away. Its rotation was nearly
similar, which made its days not quite sixteen of our earthly days. It
was of approximately the weight, per cubic mile, of Earth. And there
it whirled, directly in a line with the earth and the moon, moving as
the moon moved so that it was ever out of sight beyond it, as a dime
would be out of sight if placed in a direct line behind a penny.

Zeud, the new satellite, the world beyond the moon! In their
excitement at its discovery, Joyce and Wichter had left the
moon--which they had found to be as dead and cold as it had been
surmised to be--and returned summarily to Earth. They had replenished
their supplies and their oxygen tanks, and had come back--to circle
around the moon and point the sharp prow of the shell toward Zeud. The
gift of the moon to Earth was a dubious one; but the gift of a
possibly living planet-colony to mankind might be the solution of the
overcrowded conditions of the terrestial sphere!

"Speed, three thousand miles an hour," computed Wichter. "Distance to
Zeud, nine hundred and eighty miles. If we don't strike a few atoms of
hydrogen or something soon we're going to drill this nearest crater a
little deeper!"

Joyce nodded grimly. At two thousand miles from Earth there had still
been enough hydrogen traces in the ether to give purchase to the
explosions of their water-motor. At six hundred miles from the moon
they had run into a sparse gaseous belt that had enabled them to
change direction and slow their speed. They had hoped to find hydrogen
at a thousand or twelve hundred miles from Zeud.

"Eight hundred and thirty miles," commented Wichter, his slender,
bent body tensed. "Eight hundred miles--ah!"

A thrumming sound came to their ears as the shell quivered,
imperceptibly almost, but unmistakeably, at the touch of some faint
resistance outside in space.

"We've struck it, Joyce. And it's much denser than the moon's, even as
we'd hoped. There'll be life on Zeud, my boy, unless I'm vastly
mistaken. You'd better look to the motor now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Joyce went to the water-motor. This was a curious, but extremely
simple affair. There was a glass box, ribbed with polished steel,
about the size and shape of a cigar box, which was full of water.
Leading away from this, to the bow and stern of the shell, were two
small pipes. The pipes were greatly thickened for a period of three
feet or so, directly under the little tank, and were braced by
bed-plates so heavy as to look all out of proportion. Around the
thickened parts of the pipes were coils of heavy, insulated copper
wire. There were no valves nor cylinders, no revolving parts: that was
all there was to the "motor."

Joyce didn't yet understand the device. The water dripped from the
tank, drop by drop, to be abruptly disintegrated, made into an
explosive, by being subjected to a powerful magnetic field induced in
the coils by a generator in the bow of the shell. As each drop of
water passed into the pipes, and was instantaneously broken up, there
was a violent but controlled explosion--and the shell was kicked
another hundred miles ahead on its journey. That was all Joyce knew
about it.

He threw the bow switch. There was a soft shock as the motor exhausted
through the forward tube, slowing their speed.
