
Corelli blinked as he felt the weight of his colleagues' eyes boring
into him. "I didn't say they were _Martian_, sir--only that they seemed
to be unearthly. And they were not the conventional saucer-shaped
things--they _acted_ like saucers skimming across the water. That's what
made me think they were genuine. And they didn't seem to be going fast
enough so that I'd expect to hear a roar like a jet-plane.

"It struck me that this might not be the way they fly, naturally, but
the way they might fly if the pilots were having trouble adjusting the
controls to a heavier atmosphere than they were used to."

Clayton tapped the tabletop with his fingers. "What about you, Marty?
Did you see three ships?"

Big Gene Marty, football star, was the least nervous. "Can't be sure
about _ships_, Doc," he rumbled. "I did see something strange
disappearing over the horizon. It--I mean they--might have been what
Tony says; but whatever it was, there were three of them. But I saw
something else, because I was looking in another direction. What I saw
first was a couple of funny-looking shapes floating down near the
ground. Didn't look like parachutists, yet they seemed big enough to be
men--or at least, small men."

"Interesting. All right, what about the rest of you? How many saw the
ships?"

       *       *       *       *       *

A chorus answered him. "I see," Clayton mused. "You all agree on the
behavior. And you all think there were three--not four--not two. Three?"

It was agreed.

Clayton rustled the pile of newspapers. "The reports in here vary. I
learn with amazement that you gentlemen seem to have missed completely
the spurts of flame that issued from the alien ships--flame which is
reported to have set a house on fire. And no one seems to have noticed
that the invaders, in descending, glided on huge black wings."

Corelli blushed a fiery crimson. "Dr. Clayton," he protested, "we aren't
making these things up for popular consumption. We're just telling you
what we actually saw--that is--what--what--we--saw looked like to us."

Clayton nodded. "Of course. That is all people were doing back in 1938
when the Martians landed in New Jersey, at the time Orson Welles
presented a radio version of H. G. Wells' 'War of the Worlds'. Or when
the 'Flying Saucer' craze first started. Or when Fantafilm put on their
big publicity stunt for the improved 3-D movie, 'The Outsiders', and
people saw the aliens over Broadway and heard them address the populace
in weird, booming tones.

"Gentlemen, I am not pleased to find students of this University
engaging in such unwanted extra-curricular activity as inventing
interplanetary scares. I don't think Washington will be amused, either."

Corelli clicked his heels. "Sir," he stated in dignified tones, "I
