unarguably excellent machining. These details were the first things that
made Farmer think Ray might not be a complete crackpot, after all. If he
hadn't been feeling just the slightest touch of seasickness, John Andrew
would have breathed a sigh of relief.

Ray polished off the somewhat rabbit-from-hatty routine by bringing out
a portable television set, connecting it to the boat's electrical
generator, and stringing an assortment of wires between it and his
invention. He would not allow Farmer very close to the latter, but to
the editor's untechnical eye it looked like a fairly ordinary radio set,
with more than enough dials and switches added to it to furnish the
dashboards of several Rolls Royces.

Ray held up a hand--purely for drama, since there was silence already.
"This is a great moment in the course of human history," he said. "You
are about to witness the first demonstration of Ray's Ray, the work of
genius which will allow mankind his first really close contact with the
last remaining frontier on his home planet--the bottom of the sea!"

Farmer looked impressed, then began to realize what some of this meant.
He caught himself, straightened out his face, and licked his lips. "You
mean you've never tried the thing before?" he protested. "How do you
know it will work?"

Ray's glance took on a touch of icy fury. The launch rocked gently in
the swell for a long, silent minute, and Farmer began to feel slightly
afraid. Was he alone, in a spot like this, with a madman? The salty
breeze turned colder.

Then Ray smiled--a smile that was surprisingly soft and sweet. John
Andrew reached two decisions: that he was safe, and that he liked the
"Judge." (One of Farmer's weaknesses, in fact, was that--though
thoroughly masculine himself--he completely distrusted women, and was
too trusting with men.)

"I could go into theories and scientific details," Ray said; "I could
explain principles of operation and the construction of the machine for
hours. But you would be bored, and wouldn't understand anyway. It is
sufficient to say that the Ray will work because--I invented it!"

Farmer caught himself nodding, and blamed the boat's motion. He shifted
uneasily on the built-in seat, and got a splinter in a vital spot. He
frowned.

Ray was bending over his machine, making motions designed to impress as
well as to make it work. "In very simple terms," he was saying, "this is
a combination of color television and super-radar. It will bring in a
perfect color picture of the ocean at whatever depth I set it for, or
will set itself automatically to present a view of the ocean floor. It
will...."

His voice trailed off. The machine hissed, snapped, and crackled. The
television set flickered, hummed, gave out a flashing dance of
surrealistic doodles, and abruptly presented a picture. It was a picture
of Milton Berle.

Ray looked mad, started to aim a kick at the screen but thought better
of it. A small wave almost made him sit down on the deck before he got
both feet planted again. He swore and started to check the wiring.

"Maybe there's something wrong inside the dingus itself," John Andrew
suggested tentatively.

Ray turned on him with a look that would have seared the Sphinx.
"There's _nothing_ wrong with the machine!" he said,
almost-but-not-quite shouting. "There's _nothing_ wrong with the
television! There's _nothing_ wrong with the wiring! There _must_ be
something wrong at the other end--where the Ray is focussed! And I
intend to find out!"

Farmer pondered the idea of a transmitter that worked under water like a
ball-point pen, broadcasting weary vaudeville routines. He scratched his
head and looked wistfully at the New England shoreline--or was that Long
Island? He wasn't sure any more....

       *       *       *       *       *

A clank and clatter brought his attention to the launch. He gawked; Ray
had thrown back a deck hatch and produced a diving suit which looked as
un-shipshape as the rest of the boat's equipment.

Ray looked it over hastily, then turned a speculative glance on Farmer.
He shook his head. "Too small for you," he murmured. "You wouldn't know
what to look for anyway; I'll have to go down myself."

Farmer changed his mind again about Ray's being cracked. "Listen." He
said the first thing that came to mind. "Didn't you say you rented this
boat for the first time today? How do you know that thing doesn't leak?"

Ray smiled again, as he climbed briskly into the suit. "I'll be all
right," he said serenely. "You just keep an eye on things here--but
don't touch anything. I'll be right back...." He settled the helmet on
his head, motioned for Farmer to help him check the connections of the
suit's self-contained oxygen supply.

John Andrew was straightening up from doing this when he saw the nonapus
for the first time. It was climbing over the rail at the stern, and
already beginning to make a puddle on the deck. Farmer froze, and gulped
wordlessly.

Behind the barred faceplate, Ray looked puzzled, then annoyed. From the
corner of his eye, Farmer could see Milton Berle still cavorting
silently on the television screen, and this seemed to add the final
touch of insanity to the scene. Farmer finally succeeded in pointing,
and Ray clumped slowly in a half-circle, just as the nonapus dropped to
the deck with a plank-shivering thump.

The scene assumed some of the aspects of a bad movie comedy. The
background was an out-of-focus blur, although Farmer was dimly conscious
of motion in it somewhere--something else breaking the surface of the
water as it emerged. In the foreground, the boat and its occupants were
sharply etched, but seemed to have gone into slow motion.
