
The Blond Terror vaulted the ropes and stood in the ring, popping his
muscles, waiting for his handmaidens to remove the five layers of
elaborately decorated robes that were draped over his super-manly body.

Boswellister cringed slightly (inwardly), speculating that the Blond
Terror really was a muscled man. All that man--nearly seven feet tall,
bronzed, developed, imperious, condescending to notice just slightly the
adulations of the women in the packed arena.

The Blond Terror stepped into the tub, carrying out his advertised boast
of being the cleanest wrestler in the ring, a boast he was unable to
prove with ring action through the exigencies of type-casting, for the
Blond Terror was the villain.

The Blond Terror muscled down into the tub. He was scrubbed, then
rinsed. He stood out onto the white fur rug and sneeringly allowed his
handmaidens to pat him dry and powder him down. They held up the large
hand mirror and allowed him to view his handsomeness while his
short-cropped, blond curls were carefully combed.

"Now." Boswellister spoke the order into the lapel receiver. On the
Ipplinger starship a communications tech slapped home a switch and the
solido-vision circle settled over the Blond Terror's head, a halo of
solid light for a complex Ipplinger signal-reaction device.

"Hail Ippling!" Boswellister shouted.

Boswellister strained forward, clutching the seat arms. It had to work!
His equation must be right! The symbol had the proper cultural
connotations. It was bound to capture the audience, put them in the
right mood of awe-struck superstitious reverence, make the revelation of
the great circle of the Ipplinger starship overhead a thing of
wonderment and devotion-focus.

The Blond Terror should now look upwards, guide the eyes of the
audience, bring them to the recognition. After all, as a Boswellister
... and according to his great grandfather, and his poppa too....

But the Blond Terror gazed appreciatively into the mirror, smiling slyly
at the audience.

The crowd roared its applause for the trick lighting effect. You could
depend on the Blond Terror. No matter how many times you'd seen his act,
he always managed to come up with something new. Now, for the opening of
the new Million Dollar Ventura Boulevard Open Air Sports Arena, the
Blond Terror had done it again.

Boswellister shouted. He pointed. He stared upwards, trying to draw the
crowd with his vehemence. But he couldn't capture one gaze, no matter
what he did.

He poked the man seated next to him, but the surly fool snarled,
"Shuddup! The Hatchet Man's goin' into his act!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Boswellister moaned. There it was, sailing in the night sky, illuminated
with soft etherealness to give the proper effect to these
superstition-ridden people. All they had to do was glance up and accord
to Ippling the superiority that was Ippling's, and they would be brought
gently, delicately into galactic contact, opening out their narrow ways
into the broad ways of the galactic universal worlds. With Boswellister
to lead them.

But he couldn't make the play. Not a head would tilt up. The TV cameras
that should be scanning the great lighted circle of the Ipplinger
starship had swung to the entrance, waiting for the Hatchet Man.

And here he came, down the aisle like a bolt of Chinese lightning. He
vaulted the ropes, leaped to the tub, overturned it and was gone back up
the aisle before the Blond Terror could retaliate. Bath water sopped the
piles of robes and made a mess out of the bearskin rug; but the ring
attendants carted everything off, removed the waterproof canvas from the
ring mat and prepared to get the match underway.

The Blond Terror paced in his corner, waving his hand mirror,
challenging the Hatchet Man to quick, bloody death. And every few
moments he'd stop to gaze admiringly into the mirror, running his hand
along the edge of the solid band of light, grabbing all the credit for
Ipplinger electronic science. He turned on cue to give the TV audience a
full-face closeup.

Boswellister cursed himself for choosing the Blond Terror. That cynical,
egocentric muscle artist was too pleased with himself to have any room
in his thoughts for proper superstitious awe, and too stupid to
recognize the superior science in back of the halo device.

"Remove the device," Boswellister ordered. There was no point in
allowing it to stay, and that band of solid light, immovably in place on
the wrestler's head, made a perfect battering ram for head-butting
mayhem.

Boswellister paid no attention to the gladiators-at-mat; he left his
seat as soon as the device was removed and walked out onto Ventura
Boulevard. He went over his cultural equation, trying to find the flaw.

In the year he had spent on the preliminary survey, he had assessed this
cultural equation to the last decimal point of surety. He had absolute
faith in these people's superstitions. He knew what to expect; but
somewhere the equation had been off. He should have chosen a quieter
