And the Angle SHO being equal to the Angle POH, or 54 Gr. 7 Min. shall
be the least Angle, in which the most refrangible Rays after two
Reflexions can emerge out of the Drops; and therefore those Rays shall
come most copiously to the Eye from the Drops in the Line OH, and strike
the Senses with the deepest violet in that Region. And by the same
Argument, the Drops in the Regions between G and H shall strike the
Sense with the intermediate Colours in the Order which their Degrees of
Refrangibility require, that is, in the Progress from G to H, or from
the inside of the Bow to the outside in this order, red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo, violet. And since these four Lines OE, OF, OG, OH,
may be situated any where in the above-mention'd conical Superficies;
what is said of the Drops and Colours in these Lines is to be understood
of the Drops and Colours every where in those Superficies.

Thus shall there be made two Bows of Colours, an interior and stronger,
by one Reflexion in the Drops, and an exterior and fainter by two; for
the Light becomes fainter by every Reflexion. And their Colours shall
lie in a contrary Order to one another, the red of both Bows bordering
upon the Space GF, which is between the Bows. The Breadth of the
interior Bow EOF measured cross the Colours shall be 1 Degr. 45 Min. and
the Breadth of the exterior GOH shall be 3 Degr. 10 Min. and the
distance between them GOF shall be 8 Gr. 15 Min. the greatest
Semi-diameter of the innermost, that is, the Angle POF being 42 Gr. 2
Min. and the least Semi-diameter of the outermost POG, being 50 Gr. 57
Min. These are the Measures of the Bows, as they would be were the Sun
but a Point; for by the Breadth of his Body, the Breadth of the Bows
will be increased, and their Distance decreased by half a Degree, and so
the breadth of the interior Iris will be 2 Degr. 15 Min. that of the
exterior 3 Degr. 40 Min. their distance 8 Degr. 25 Min. the greatest
Semi-diameter of the interior Bow 42 Degr. 17 Min. and the least of the
exterior 50 Degr. 42 Min. And such are the Dimensions of the Bows in the
Heavens found to be very nearly, when their Colours appear strong and
perfect. For once, by such means as I then had, I measured the greatest
Semi-diameter of the interior Iris about 42 Degrees, and the breadth of
the red, yellow and green in that Iris 63 or 64 Minutes, besides the
outmost faint red obscured by the brightness of the Clouds, for which we
may allow 3 or 4 Minutes more. The breadth of the blue was about 40
Minutes more besides the violet, which was so much obscured by the
brightness of the Clouds, that I could not measure its breadth. But
supposing the breadth of the blue and violet together to equal that of
the red, yellow and green together, the whole breadth of this Iris will
be about 2-1/4 Degrees, as above. The least distance between this Iris
and the exterior Iris was about 8 Degrees and 30 Minutes. The exterior
Iris was broader than the interior, but so faint, especially on the blue
side, that I could not measure its breadth distinctly. At another time
when both Bows appeared more distinct, I measured the breadth of the
interior Iris 2 Gr. 10', and the breadth of the red, yellow and green in
the exterior Iris, was to the breadth of the same Colours in the
interior as 3 to 2.

This Explication of the Rain-bow is yet farther confirmed by the known
Experiment (made by _Antonius de Dominis_ and _Des-Cartes_) of hanging
up any where in the Sun-shine a Glass Globe filled with Water, and
viewing it in such a posture, that the Rays which come from the Globe to
the Eye may contain with the Sun's Rays an Angle of either 42 or 50
Degrees. For if the Angle be about 42 or 43 Degrees, the Spectator
(suppose at O) shall see a full red Colour in that side of the Globe
opposed to the Sun as 'tis represented at F, and if that Angle become
less (suppose by depressing the Globe to E) there will appear other
Colours, yellow, green and blue successive in the same side of the
Globe. But if the Angle be made about 50 Degrees (suppose by lifting up
the Globe to G) there will appear a red Colour in that side of the Globe
towards the Sun, and if the Angle be made greater (suppose by lifting
up the Globe to H) the red will turn successively to the other Colours,
yellow, green and blue. The same thing I have tried, by letting a Globe
rest, and raising or depressing the Eye, or otherwise moving it to make
the Angle of a just magnitude.

I have heard it represented, that if the Light of a Candle be refracted
by a Prism to the Eye; when the blue Colour falls upon the Eye, the
Spectator shall see red in the Prism, and when the red falls upon the
Eye he shall see blue; and if this were certain, the Colours of the
Globe and Rain-bow ought to appear in a contrary order to what we find.
But the Colours of the Candle being very faint, the mistake seems to
arise from the difficulty of discerning what Colours fall on the Eye.
For, on the contrary, I have sometimes had occasion to observe in the
Sun's Light refracted by a Prism, that the Spectator always sees that
Colour in the Prism which falls upon his Eye. And the same I have found
true also in Candle-light. For when the Prism is moved slowly from the
Line which is drawn directly from the Candle to the Eye, the red appears
first in the Prism and then the blue, and therefore each of them is seen
when it falls upon the Eye. For the red passes over the Eye first, and
then the blue.

The Light which comes through drops of Rain by two Refractions without
any Reflexion, ought to appear strongest at the distance of about 26
Degrees from the Sun, and to decay gradually both ways as the distance
from him increases and decreases. And the same is to be understood of
Light transmitted through spherical Hail-stones. And if the Hail be a
little flatted, as it often is, the Light transmitted may grow so strong
at a little less distance than that of 26 Degrees, as to form a Halo
about the Sun or Moon; which Halo, as often as the Hail-stones are duly
figured may be colour'd, and then it must be red within by the least
refrangible Rays, and blue without by the most refrangible ones,
especially if the Hail-stones have opake Globules of Snow in their
center to intercept the Light within the Halo (as _Hugenius_ has
observ'd) and make the inside thereof more distinctly defined than it
would otherwise be. For such Hail-stones, though spherical, by
terminating the Light by the Snow, may make a Halo red within and
colourless without, and darker in the red than without, as Halos used to
be. For of those Rays which pass close by the Snow the Rubriform will be
least refracted, and so come to the Eye in the directest Lines.

The Light which passes through a drop of Rain after two Refractions, and
three or more Reflexions, is scarce strong enough to cause a sensible
Bow; but in those Cylinders of Ice by which _Hugenius_ explains the
_Parhelia_, it may perhaps be sensible.


_PROP._ X. PROB. V.

_By the discovered Properties of Light to explain the permanent Colours
of Natural Bodies._

These Colours arise from hence, that some natural Bodies reflect some
sorts of Rays, others other sorts more copiously than the rest. Minium
reflects the least refrangible or red-making Rays most copiously, and
thence appears red. Violets reflect the most refrangible most copiously,
and thence have their Colour, and so of other Bodies. Every Body
reflects the Rays of its own Colour more copiously than the rest, and
from their excess and predominance in the reflected Light has its
Colour.

_Exper._ 17. For if in the homogeneal Lights obtained by the solution of
the Problem proposed in the fourth Proposition of the first Part of this
Book, you place Bodies of several Colours, you will find, as I have
done, that every Body looks most splendid and luminous in the Light of
its own Colour. Cinnaber in the homogeneal red Light is most
resplendent, in the green Light it is manifestly less resplendent, and
in the blue Light still less. Indigo in the violet blue Light is most
resplendent, and its splendor is gradually diminish'd, as it is removed
thence by degrees through the green and yellow Light to the red. By a
Leek the green Light, and next that the blue and yellow which compound
green, are more strongly reflected than the other Colours red and
violet, and so of the rest. But to make these Experiments the more
manifest, such Bodies ought to be chosen as have the fullest and most
vivid Colours, and two of those Bodies are to be compared together.
Thus, for instance, if Cinnaber and _ultra_-marine blue, or some other
full blue be held together in the red homogeneal Light, they will both
appear red, but the Cinnaber will appear of a strongly luminous and
resplendent red, and the _ultra_-marine blue of a faint obscure and dark
red; and if they be held together in the blue homogeneal Light, they
will both appear blue, but the _ultra_-marine will appear of a strongly
luminous and resplendent blue, and the Cinnaber of a faint and dark
blue. Which puts it out of dispute that the Cinnaber reflects the red
Light much more copiously than the _ultra_-marine doth, and the
_ultra_-marine reflects the blue Light much more copiously than the
Cinnaber doth. The same Experiment may be tried successfully with red
Lead and Indigo, or with any other two colour'd Bodies, if due allowance
be made for the different strength or weakness of their Colour and
Light.

And as the reason of the Colours of natural Bodies is evident by these
Experiments, so it is farther confirmed and put past dispute by the two
first Experiments of the first Part, whereby 'twas proved in such Bodies
that the reflected Lights which differ in Colours do differ also in
degrees of Refrangibility. For thence it's certain, that some Bodies
reflect the more refrangible, others the less refrangible Rays more
copiously.

And that this is not only a true reason of these Colours, but even the
only reason, may appear farther from this Consideration, that the Colour
of homogeneal Light cannot be changed by the Reflexion of natural
Bodies.

For if Bodies by Reflexion cannot in the least change the Colour of any
one sort of Rays, they cannot appear colour'd by any other means than by
reflecting those which either are of their own Colour, or which by
mixture must produce it.

But in trying Experiments of this kind care must be had that the Light
be sufficiently homogeneal. For if Bodies be illuminated by the ordinary
prismatick Colours, they will appear neither of their own Day-light
Colours, nor of the Colour of the Light cast on them, but of some middle
Colour between both, as I have found by Experience. Thus red Lead (for
instance) illuminated with the ordinary prismatick green will not appear
either red or green, but orange or yellow, or between yellow and green,
accordingly as the green Light by which 'tis illuminated is more or less
compounded. For because red Lead appears red when illuminated with white
Light, wherein all sorts of Rays are equally mix'd, and in the green
Light all sorts of Rays are not equally mix'd, the Excess of the
yellow-making, green-making and blue-making Rays in the incident green
Light, will cause those Rays to abound so much in the reflected Light,
as to draw the Colour from red towards their Colour. And because the red
Lead reflects the red-making Rays most copiously in proportion to their
number, and next after them the orange-making and yellow-making Rays;
these Rays in the reflected Light will be more in proportion to the
Light than they were in the incident green Light, and thereby will draw
the reflected Light from green towards their Colour. And therefore the
red Lead will appear neither red nor green, but of a Colour between
both.

In transparently colour'd Liquors 'tis observable, that their Colour
uses to vary with their thickness. Thus, for instance, a red Liquor in a
conical Glass held between the Light and the Eye, looks of a pale and
dilute yellow at the bottom where 'tis thin, and a little higher where
'tis thicker grows orange, and where 'tis still thicker becomes red, and
where 'tis thickest the red is deepest and darkest. For it is to be
conceiv'd that such a Liquor stops the indigo-making and violet-making
Rays most easily, the blue-making Rays more difficultly, the
green-making Rays still more difficultly, and the red-making most
difficultly: And that if the thickness of the Liquor be only so much as
suffices to stop a competent number of the violet-making and
indigo-making Rays, without diminishing much the number of the rest, the
rest must (by _Prop._ 6. _Part_ 2.) compound a pale yellow. But if the
Liquor be so much thicker as to stop also a great number of the
blue-making Rays, and some of the green-making, the rest must compound
an orange; and where it is so thick as to stop also a great number of
the green-making and a considerable number of the yellow-making, the
rest must begin to compound a red, and this red must grow deeper and
darker as the yellow-making and orange-making Rays are more and more
stopp'd by increasing the thickness of the Liquor, so that few Rays
besides the red-making can get through.

Of this kind is an Experiment lately related to me by Mr. _Halley_, who,
in diving deep into the Sea in a diving Vessel, found in a clear
Sun-shine Day, that when he was sunk many Fathoms deep into the Water
the upper part of his Hand on which the Sun shone directly through the
Water and through a small Glass Window in the Vessel appeared of a red
Colour, like that of a Damask Rose, and the Water below and the under
part of his Hand illuminated by Light reflected from the Water below
look'd green. For thence it may be gather'd, that the Sea-Water reflects
back the violet and blue-making Rays most easily, and lets the
red-making Rays pass most freely and copiously to great Depths. For
thereby the Sun's direct Light at all great Depths, by reason of the
predominating red-making Rays, must appear red; and the greater the
Depth is, the fuller and intenser must that red be. And at such Depths
as the violet-making Rays scarce penetrate unto, the blue-making,
green-making, and yellow-making Rays being reflected from below more
copiously than the red-making ones, must compound a green.

Now, if there be two Liquors of full Colours, suppose a red and blue,
and both of them so thick as suffices to make their Colours sufficiently
full; though either Liquor be sufficiently transparent apart, yet will
you not be able to see through both together. For, if only the
red-making Rays pass through one Liquor, and only the blue-making
through the other, no Rays can pass through both. This Mr. _Hook_ tried
casually with Glass Wedges filled with red and blue Liquors, and was
surprized at the unexpected Event, the reason of it being then unknown;
which makes me trust the more to his Experiment, though I have not tried
it my self. But he that would repeat it, must take care the Liquors be
of very good and full Colours.

Now, whilst Bodies become coloured by reflecting or transmitting this or
that sort of Rays more copiously than the rest, it is to be conceived
that they stop and stifle in themselves the Rays which they do not
reflect or transmit. For, if Gold be foliated and held between your Eye
and the Light, the Light looks of a greenish blue, and therefore massy
Gold lets into its Body the blue-making Rays to be reflected to and fro
within it till they be stopp'd and stifled, whilst it reflects the
yellow-making outwards, and thereby looks yellow. And much after the
same manner that Leaf Gold is yellow by reflected, and blue by
transmitted Light, and massy Gold is yellow in all Positions of the Eye;
there are some Liquors, as the Tincture of _Lignum Nephriticum_, and
some sorts of Glass which transmit one sort of Light most copiously, and
reflect another sort, and thereby look of several Colours, according to
the Position of the Eye to the Light. But, if these Liquors or Glasses
were so thick and massy that no Light could get through them, I question
not but they would like all other opake Bodies appear of one and the
same Colour in all Positions of the Eye, though this I cannot yet affirm
by Experience. For all colour'd Bodies, so far as my Observation
reaches, may be seen through if made sufficiently thin, and therefore
are in some measure transparent, and differ only in degrees of
Transparency from tinged transparent Liquors; these Liquors, as well as
those Bodies, by a sufficient Thickness becoming opake. A transparent
Body which looks of any Colour by transmitted Light, may also look of
the same Colour by reflected Light, the Light of that Colour being
reflected by the farther Surface of the Body, or by the Air beyond it.
And then the reflected Colour will be diminished, and perhaps cease, by
making the Body very thick, and pitching it on the backside to diminish
the Reflexion of its farther Surface, so that the Light reflected from
the tinging Particles may predominate. In such Cases, the Colour of the
reflected Light will be apt to vary from that of the Light transmitted.
But whence it is that tinged Bodies and Liquors reflect some sort of
Rays, and intromit or transmit other sorts, shall be said in the next
Book. In this Proposition I content my self to have put it past dispute,
that Bodies have such Properties, and thence appear colour'd.


_PROP._ XI. PROB. VI.

_By mixing colour'd Lights to compound a beam of Light of the same
Colour and Nature with a beam of the Sun's direct Light, and therein to
experience the Truth of the foregoing Propositions._

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

Let ABC _abc_ [in _Fig._ 16.] represent a Prism, by which the Sun's
Light let into a dark Chamber through the Hole F, may be refracted
towards the Lens MN, and paint upon it at _p_, _q_, _r_, _s_, and _t_,
the usual Colours violet, blue, green, yellow, and red, and let the
diverging Rays by the Refraction of this Lens converge again towards X,
and there, by the mixture of all those their Colours, compound a white
according to what was shewn above. Then let another Prism DEG _deg_,
parallel to the former, be placed at X, to refract that white Light
upwards towards Y. Let the refracting Angles of the Prisms, and their
distances from the Lens be equal, so that the Rays which converged from
the Lens towards X, and without Refraction, would there have crossed and
diverged again, may by the Refraction of the second Prism be reduced
into Parallelism and diverge no more. For then those Rays will recompose
a beam of white Light XY. If the refracting Angle of either Prism be the
bigger, that Prism must be so much the nearer to the Lens. You will know
when the Prisms and the Lens are well set together, by observing if the
beam of Light XY, which comes out of the second Prism be perfectly white
to the very edges of the Light, and at all distances from the Prism
continue perfectly and totally white like a beam of the Sun's Light. For
till this happens, the Position of the Prisms and Lens to one another
must be corrected; and then if by the help of a long beam of Wood, as is
represented in the Figure, or by a Tube, or some other such Instrument,
made for that Purpose, they be made fast in that Situation, you may try
all the same Experiments in this compounded beam of Light XY, which have
been made in the Sun's direct Light. For this compounded beam of Light
has the same appearance, and is endow'd with all the same Properties
with a direct beam of the Sun's Light, so far as my Observation reaches.
And in trying Experiments in this beam you may by stopping any of the
Colours, _p_, _q_, _r_, _s_, and _t_, at the Lens, see how the Colours
produced in the Experiments are no other than those which the Rays had
at the Lens before they entered the Composition of this Beam: And by
consequence, that they arise not from any new Modifications of the Light
by Refractions and Reflexions, but from the various Separations and
Mixtures of the Rays originally endow'd with their colour-making
Qualities.
