
"O.K., what'll they do?" Banner said.

"They'll give us medals. That's what they'll do. For safe delivery of
one million tons of tractor fuel, you two fine specimens of manhood are
hereby presented with the Order of the Oil. And for your courageous
service in delivering two million tons of potato fertilizer, you are
also awarded the shield of--"

"Never mind," Banner said. "It could be worse. They could've saddled us
with a Bean Brain. Come on. Let's go to some bar and get sober. We're
leaving for freight duty at 1700."

                     *      *      *      *      *

The Bean Brain met them at the air lock. "Name is Arnold. Here's my
orders." Banner stared at Warcraft, Warcraft stared at Arnold.

"Get inside," said Banner.

The Bean Brain smiled, "Er ... could you sort of lead the way? I've
never been inside a ship before. If you got some kind of can, it would
save a mess. I'll probably vomit a while."

They stopped calling him Bean Brain three days later. He was still
sick, miserably spacesick, and neither Banner nor Warcraft had the
heart to keep needling him. On the fourth day he managed to get up and
around. They ate their first meal together that day. "Let's get
something straight right off the bat," Banner said. "Neither Warcraft
nor I got anything against you 'cept prejudice. That right, Warcraft?"

"Right," Warcraft said.

"In short," continued Banner, between puffs on a cigarette, "all we
know is what we've heard."

"And that's not good," said Warcraft.

"Item one," said Banner, blowing smoke at the ceiling ventilator.
"Patrol Command came up with the Bean Brain idea about six months ago.
Patrol Command, in its infinite wisdom, has never seen fit to explain
_why_ Bean Brains are sometimes assigned, evidently at random, to
small patrol vessels such as this. The orders always state that the
'passenger' will accompany pilot and co-pilot throughout the entire
trip, will obey orders, yet is equal in rank to the ship's commanding
officer. The Bean Brain has no duties aboard. This seems to make sense,
at least, since Bean Brains aren't trained for anything and can't do
anything."

"Item two," said Banner, taking his eyes off the ceiling and pointing a
finger at Arnold. "I have, or had, two good friends--both patrol
captains--who had the honor of taxiing Bean Brains around the universe.
One never came back. The other, Captain Slatkin, came back and got a
big medal for reasons he'll never talk about."

"And Slatkin liked to brag," said Warcraft, knowingly.

Arnold stood up slowly. He was a small man, but as he looked up at the
ship's pilot and co-pilot, he gave both the impression of height and
strength. "I'll tell you something, too," he said, speaking slowly as
if in pain. "I don't know why Bean Brains are assigned to ships like
this either. I've never been told. I took the job because I didn't like
what I was doing before. I've never had any real training, and this
seemed like a chance to do something that sounded like fun.

"Like I said, I've never been told anything. They tested me for a lot
of things, then gave me my orders and told me to come along. And if
you're wondering, I flunked the ESP tests, so there's nothing there.
You want to consider me dead weight? O.K., your privilege. Leave me
alone if you want to, I'll do the same. Be friendly, I'll be friendly.
Ask me to help. I'll do my best."

Then he got up and went back to his bunk.

                     *      *      *      *      *

During the next six weeks, Arnold spent most of the time in his bunk,
scanning tapes from the ship's micro-library on an overhead viewer. At
meal times he was polite, offering no further information about
himself, yet entering into any conversation that centered around such
trivia as terrestrial sports, taxes, money, liquor, food, government
agencies. By mutual, if silent, agreement, neither women nor work were
discussed.

Working in the ship's control room, sometimes together, sometimes
spelling each other, Banner and Warcraft speculated bitterly and
endlessly about their passenger. Theories to explain his presence--most
of them propounded by Warcraft--were created, torn apart, modified,
exploded, in giant sequences of effort which left both men finally
exhausted and tired of the whole business.

On the second day of the seventh week out, their ennui vanished. A ship
was picked up by the spec-spanner, and at their delight at the break in
routine, they summoned Arnold up to the cabin.

"Take a good look," said Banner, "it's an Ankorbadian ship. Probably
the first and last you'll ever see." Arnold watched as Banner's finger
tracked a slowly moving point of light across a recessed ceiling
screen.

"Yes, sir," said Warcraft, "you are looking at the representatives of
mankind's only sibling. The noble Ankorbades." Then he recited in a
