nails and broken glass at just the right velocity to be able to stop
himself without so much as scratching his glove. And he could see that
there was no ragged stuff on the spot he had selected. The slanting rays
of the sun would have made them stand out in relief.

Now he was clinging to the surface of the mountain of rock like a bug on
the side of a cliff. On a nickel-iron asteroid, he could have walked
around on the surface, using the magnetic soles of his vacuum suit. But
silicate rock is notably lacking in response to that attractive force.
No soul, maybe.

But directly and indirectly, that lack of response to magnetic forces
was the reason for St. Simon's crawling around on the surface of that
asteroid. Directly, because there was no other way he could move about
on a nonmetallic asteroid. Indirectly, because there was no way the big
space tugs could get a grip on such an asteroid, either.

The nickel-iron brutes were a dead cinch to haul off to the smelters.
All a space tug had to do was latch on to one of them with a magnetic
grapple and start hauling. There was no such simple answer for the
silicate rocks.

The nickel-iron asteroids were necessary. They supplied the building
material and the major export of the Belt cities. They averaged around
eighty to ninety per cent iron, anywhere from five to twenty per cent
nickel, and perhaps half a per cent cobalt, with smatterings of
phosphorous, sulfur, carbon, copper, and chromium. Necessary--but not
sufficient.

The silicate rocks ran only about twenty-five per cent iron--in the form
of nonmagnetic compounds. They averaged eighteen per cent silicon,
fourteen per cent magnesium, between one and one point five per cent
each of aluminum, nickel, and calcium, and good-sized dollops of sodium,
chromium, phosphorous, manganese, cobalt, potassium, and titanium.

But more important than these, as far as the immediate needs of the Belt
cities were concerned, was a big, whopping thirty-six per cent oxygen.
In the Belt cities, they had soon learned that, physically speaking, the
stuff of life was _not_ bread. And no matter how carefully oxygen is
conserved, no process is one hundred per cent efficient. There will be
leakage into space, and that which is lost must be replaced.

There is plenty of oxygen locked up in those silicates; the problem is
towing them to the processing plants where the stuff can be extracted.

Captain St. Simon's job was simple. All he had to do was sink an anchor
into the asteroid so that the space tugs could get a grip on it. Once he
had done that, the rest of the job was up to the tug crew.

He crawled across the face of the floating mountain. At the spot where
the North Pole was, he braced himself and then took a quick look around
at the _Nancy Bell_. She wasn't moving very fast, he had plenty of time.
He took a steel piton out of his tool pack, transferred it to his left
hand, and took out a hammer. Then, working carefully, he hammered the
piton into a narrow cleft in the rock. Three more of the steel spikes
were hammered into the surface, forming a rough quadrilateral around the
Pole.

"That looks good enough to me, Jules," he said when he had finished.
"Now that we have our little anchors, we can put the monster in."

Then he grabbed his safety line, and pulled himself back to the _Nancy
Bell_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The small craft had floated away from the asteroid a little, but not
much. He repositioned it after he got the rocket drill out of the
storage compartment.

"Make way for the stovepipe!" he said as he pushed the drill ahead of
him, out the door. This time, he pulled himself back to his drilling
site by means of a cable which he had attached to one of the pitons.

The setting up of the drill didn't take much time, but it was done with
a great deal of care. He set the four-foot tube in the center of the
quadrilateral formed by the pitons and braced it in position by
attaching lines to the eyes on a detachable collar that encircled the
drill. Once the drill started working, it wouldn't need bracing, but
until it did, it had to be held down.

All the time he worked, he kept his eyes on his lines and on his ship.
The planetoid was turning under him, which made the ship appear to be
circling slowly around his worksite. He had to make sure that his lines
didn't get tangled or twisted while he was working.

As he set up the bracing on the six-inch diameter drill, he sang a song
that Kipling might have been startled to recognize:

    _"To the tables down at Mory's,
    To the place where Louie dwells,
      Where it's always double drill and no canteen,
    Sit the Whiffenpoofs assembled,
    With their glasses raised on high,
      And they'll get a swig in Hell from Gunga Din."_

When the drill was firmly based on the surface of the planetoid, St.
Simon hauled his way back to his ship along his safety line. Inside, he
sat down in the control chair and backed well away from the slowly
spinning hunk of rock. Now there was only one thin pair of wires
stretching between his ship and the drill on the asteroid.

When he was a good fifty meters away, he took one last look to make sure
everything was as it should be.

"Stand by for a broadside!"

"Standing by, sir!"

"You may fire when ready, Gridley!"

"Aye, sir! Rockets away!" His forefinger descended on a button which
sent a pulse of current through the pair of wires that trailed out the
open door to the drill fifty meters away.

A flare of light appeared on the top of the drill. Almost immediately,
it developed into a tongue of rocket flame. Then a glow appeared at the
base of the drill and flame began to billow out from beneath the tube.
The drill began to sink into the surface, and the planetoid began to
move ever so slowly.

The drill was essentially a pair of opposed rockets. The upper one,
which tried to push the drill into the surface of the planetoid,
developed nearly forty per cent more thrust than the lower one. Thus,
the lower one, which was trying to push the drill _off_ the rock, was
outmatched. It had to back up, if possible. And it was certainly
possible; the exhaust flame of the lower rocket easily burrowed a hole
that the rocket could back into, while the silicate rock boiled and
vaporized in order to get out of the way.

Soon there was no sign of the drill body itself. There was only a small
volcano, spewing up gas and liquid from a hole in the rock. On the
surface of a good-sized planet, the drill would have built up a little
volcanic cone around the lip of the hole, but building a cone like that
requires enough gravity to pull the hot matter back to the edge of the
hole.

The fireworks didn't last long. The drill wasn't built to go in too
deep. A drill of that type could be built which would burrow its way
right through a small planetoid, but that was hardly necessary for
planting an anchor. Ten meters was quite enough.

Now came the hard work.

On the outside of the _Nancy Bell_, locked into place, was a
specially-treated nickel-steel eye-bolt--thirty feet long and eight
inches in diameter. There had been ten of them, just as there had been
ten drills in the storage locker. Now the last drill had been used, and
there was but one eye-bolt left. The _Nancy Bell_ would have to go back
for more supplies after this job.

The anchor bolts had a mass of four metric tons each. Maneuvering them
around, even when they were practically weightless, was no easy job.

St. Simon again matched the velocity of the _Nancy Bell_ with that of
the planetoid, which had been accelerated by the drill's action. He
positioned the ship above the hole which had been drilled into the huge
rock. Not directly above it--rocket drills had been known to show spurts
of life after they were supposed to be dead. St. Simon had timed the
drill, and it had apparently behaved as it should, but there was no need
to take chances.

"Fire brigade, stand by!"

"Fire brigade standing by, sir!"

A nozzle came out of the nose of the _Nancy Bell_ and peeped over the
rim of the freshly-drilled hole.

"Ready! Aim! Squirt!"

A jet of kerosene-like fluosilicone oil shot down the shaft. When it had
finished its work, there was little possibility that anything could
happen at the bottom. Any unburned rocket fuel would have a hard time
catching fire with that stuff soaking into it.

"Ready to lower the boom, Mr. Christian!" bellowed St. Simon.

"Aye, sir! Ready, sir!"

"Lower away!"

His fingers played rapidly over the control board.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside the ship, the lower end of the great eye-bolt was released from
its clamp, and a small piston gave it a little shove. In a long, slow,
graceful arc, it swung away from the hull, swiveling around the pivot
clamp that held the eye. The braking effect of the pivot clamp was
precisely set to stop the eye-bolt when it was at right angles to the
hull. Moving carefully, St. Simon maneuvered the ship until the far end
of the bolt was directly over the shaft. Then he nudged the _Nancy Bell_
sideways, pushing the bolt down into the planetoid. It grated a couple
of times, but between the power of the ship and the mass of the
planetoid, there was enough pressure to push it past the obstacles. The
rocket drill and the eye-bolt had been designed to work together; the
hole made by the first was only a trifle larger than the second. The
anchor settled firmly into place.

St. Simon released the clamps that held the eye-bolt to the hull of the
ship, and backed away again. As he did, a power cord unreeled, for the
eye-bolt was still connected to the vessel electrically.

Several meters away, St. Simon pushed another button. There was no
sound, but his practiced eye saw the eye of the anchor quiver. A small
explosive charge, set in the buried end of the anchor, had detonated,
expanding the far end of the bolt, wedging it firmly in the hole. At the
same time, a piston had been forced up a small shaft in the center of
the bolt, forcing a catalyst to mix with a fast-setting resin, and
extruding the mixture out through half a dozen holes in the side of the
bolt. When the stuff set, the anchor was locked securely to the sides of
the shaft and thus to the planetoid itself.

St. Simon waited for a few minutes to make sure the resin had set
completely. Then he clambered outside again and attached a heavy towing
cable to the eye of the anchor, which projected above the surface of the
asteroid. Back inside the ship again, he slowly applied power. The cable
straightened and pulled at the anchor as the _Nancy Bell_ tried to get
away from the asteroid.

"Jules, old bunion," he said as he watched the needle of the tension
gauge, "we have set her well."

"Yes, m'lud. So it would appear, m'lud."

St. Simon cut the power. "Very good, Jules. Now we shall see if the
beeper is functioning as it should." He flipped a switch that turned on
the finder pickup, then turned the selector to his own frequency band.

_Beep!_ said the radio importantly. _Beep!_

The explosion had also triggered on a small but powerful transmitter
built into the anchor. The tugs would be able to find the planetoid by
following the beeps.

"Ah, Jules! Success!"

"Yes, m'lud. Success. For the tenth time in a row, this trip. And how
many trips does this make?"

"Ah, but who's counting? Think of the money!"

"And the monotony, m'lud. To say nothing of molasses, muchness, and
other things that begin with an M."

"Quite so, Jules; quite so. Well, let's detach the towing cable and be
on our way."

"Whither, m'lud, Vesta?"

"I rather thought Pallas this time, old thimble."

"Still, m'lud, Vesta--"

"Pallas, Jules."

"Vesta?"

"Hum, hi, ho," said Captain St. Simon thoughtfully. "Pallas?"
