
He arranged his tie.

"Come in," General Shorter said.

The agitation of the man in the doorway was announced by the paleness of
his face.

"Come in, David," General Shorter said, rising politely from the writing
desk. "Be seated, please."

"General, we've had a ... a very unfortunate thing happen on the shift."

The general sank back into his chair. Light from the desk lamp framed
his expressionless and immobile face, half in light, half in shadow. He
fingered the straight-edge on the desk top.

"Sit down, David, and then tell me about it."

Shift-Captain Arnold moved uncertainly.

"Sit down, sit down," General Shorter repeated impatiently.

Captain Arnold seated himself on the edge of the chair.

"One of the men," he said, "just committed suicide. He was in charge of
the air changing monitor this shift. He went outside without a suit."

The general blinked as though to remove an irritation from his eye. His
hand lay still and hard upon the straight-edge. "What was his name?" he
asked in a voice that was vaguely puzzled.

"Schuster. Sergeant Schuster, sir."

"Yes, I remember him," the general said. "He came to us about a week
before the lift. I think he was from Colorado. He had very broad
shoulders. Short and broad. Neat appearing. Uniform always in good
order."

General Shorter ran his thumb and forefinger up the bridge of his nose
and then, with a very small sigh, placed his palm over his eyes.

"Draw up the report," he said. "Was there a final message?" The question
was uttered without hesitation and was followed by a moment of silence.

"No, sir."

General Shorter's breath was audible.

"Please feel free to smoke, David."

"Thank you, sir, I don't smoke."

"No, of course not. I'd forgotten." General Shorter half turned and
placed his hands on the desk. He stood under their pressure. "What would
you say to a brandy?"

"I should return to duty, sir."

"A few minutes more," the general said. "The brandy is good." He moved
into the shadow and sorted bottles at his tiny cupboard. "Here." He held
the glass to the light. Amber liquid flowed softly and the general
handed across the half-filled glass. "Sit back," he said. "I'll join
you."

Glass in hand, the general stood with his back to the light. He seemed
surrounded by cold fire, and the glass sparkled as he lifted it. He
sipped. "Try it, it's good."

"It's very good, sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment neither spoke. Then the general said, "This isn't my first
command, you know. I've seen men die. I've had to take chances with them
occasionally. You could say, I suppose, that I ordered some men to their
deaths. But still, the men came aboard knowing the risks. In the final
sense, they, not I, made the decision. I never sent a--"

The sentence ended as the glass slipped and fell. "I'm sorry," he said,
looking down at the sparkling fragments at his feet. The dark
liquid--the light gave it a reddish cast--puddled and flowed and its
aroma filled the room. "No, no. Let it be, David. I'll get it later."

The general went to the cupboard and poured into a new glass. Again he
was light and shadow. The spilled liquid approached the shadow and was
devoured in it as though it had never been, but still the aroma stood on
the air.

The general said: "Imagine, if you can, David, that Earth were attacked,
and the attack destroyed many of the military installations. After you
struck back, David, what would you do next?"

"I don't know, sir. I'm not a strategist, I'm afraid."

"What about your cities? The millions of people trapped without
supplies--over-running the countryside, looting, plundering in search of
food. Carrying pestilence and disease and terror. What would you do,
David?"

"Well, I guess I'd try to organize some relief organization or
something."

"But David. Anything you diverted to care for these people would limit
your ability to fight back, wouldn't it? They would be cluttering up all
your transportation, frustrating effective retaliation. Your second move
would be to take the bombs which destroy people and not property and ...
use them on your own cities."

Captain Arnold drained his glass. "That would be...." He did not finish.

"Insane, David? No. Rational. Field Commanders must be realists. The job
comes first. In this case, the job of defeating the enemy.... But what
does that have to do with us? Nothing, eh? You're right. Sometimes I
like to talk, and I suppose that's one of my privileges. I'm not the
idealist I used to be, I guess. I remember when I was your age. I saw
things differently than I do now. What used to seem important no longer
does. Each stage of development has its unique biological imperatives: a
child, a youth, a mature man, look out on the world from a body held in
focus to different chemistries. But the job remains." General Shorter
held up his glass. "Cheers." He drained it.

Again there was silence.

"David, do you think I'm in much trouble?"

"I'm afraid so, General. The Committee is due to arrive tomorrow."

"I know," the general said. "This suicide isn't going to help us.
Tomorrow. Is it that soon? I thought ... yes, I guess it is tomorrow....
Well, we've been here long enough to lose our immunity, so we'll all
catch colds."

Captain Arnold stood. "I better get started on my report."

"Poor Sergeant Schuster," General Shorter said. "If anyone's to blame,
it must be me."

"He obeyed the orders."

"What did you say?"

"I said he obeyed the orders, sir."

"Of course he obeyed the orders," the general said. "What else could he
have done?"

