He nodded.

Slowly he worked his way toward the table, the men-at-arms in the
meantime keeping up an infernal howling for help. The Earl was
careful to keep out of reach of the point of De Conde's sword, and the
men-at-arms were nothing loath to emulate their master's example.

Just as he reached his goal, a dozen more men burst into the room, and
emboldened by this reinforcement, one of the men engaging De Conde came
too close. As he jerked his blade from the fellow's throat, Norman of
Torn felt a firm, warm hand slipped into his from behind, and his sword
swung with a resounding blow against the lamp.

As darkness enveloped the chamber, Joan de Tany led him through
the little door, which he immediately closed and bolted as she had
instructed.

"This way," she whispered, again slipping her hand into his and, in
silence, she led him through several dim chambers, and finally stopped
before a blank wall in a great oak-panelled room.

Here the girl felt with swift fingers the edge of the molding. More
and more rapidly she moved as the sound of hurrying footsteps resounded
through the castle.

"What is wrong?" asked Norman of Torn, noticing her increasing
perturbation.

"Mon Dieu!" she cried. "Can I be wrong! Surely this is the room. Oh, my
friend, that I should have brought you to all this by my willfulness and
vanity; and now when I might save you, my wits leave me and I forget the
way."

"Do not worry about me," laughed the Devil of Torn. "Methought that it
was I who was trying to save you, and may heaven forgive me else,
for surely, that be my only excuse for running away from a handful of
swords. I could not take chances when thou wert at stake, Joan," he
added more gravely.

The sound of pursuit was now quite close, in fact the reflection from
flickering torches could be seen in nearby chambers.

At last the girl, with a little cry of "stupid," seized De Conde and
rushed him to the far side of the room.

"Here it is," she whispered joyously, "here it has been all the time."
Running her fingers along the molding until she found a little hidden
spring, she pushed it, and one of the great panels swung slowly in,
revealing the yawning mouth of a black opening behind.

Quickly the girl entered, pulling De Conde after her, and as the panel
swung quietly into place, the Earl of Buckingham with a dozen men
entered the apartment.

"The devil take them," cried De Fulm. "Where can they have gone? Surely
we were right behind them."

"It is passing strange, My Lord," replied one of the men. "Let us try
the floor above, and the towers; for of a surety they have not come this
way." And the party retraced its steps, leaving the apartment empty.

Behind the panel, the girl stood shrinking close to De Conde, her hand
still in his.

"Where now?" he asked. "Or do we stay hidden here like frightened chicks
until the war is over and the Baron returns to let us out of this musty
hole?"

"Wait," she answered, "until I quiet my nerves a little. I am all
unstrung." He felt her body tremble as it pressed against his.

With the spirit of protection strong within him, what wonder that his
arm fell about her shoulder as though to say, fear not, for I be brave
and powerful; naught can harm you while I am here.

Presently she reached her hands up to his face, made brave to do it by
the sheltering darkness.

"Roger," she whispered, her tongue halting over the familiar name.
"I thought that they had killed you, and all for me, for my foolish
stubbornness. Canst forgive me?"

"Forgive?" he asked, smiling to himself. "Forgive being given an
opportunity to fight? There be nothing to forgive, Joan, unless it be
that I should ask forgiveness for protecting thee so poorly."

"Do not say that," she commanded. "Never was such bravery or such
swordsmanship in all the world before; never such a man."

He did not answer. His mind was a chaos of conflicting thoughts. The
feel of her hands as they had lingered momentarily, and with a vague
caress upon his cheek, and the pressure of her body as she leaned
against him sent the hot blood coursing through his veins. He was
puzzled, for he had not dreamed that friendship was so sweet. That she
did not shrink from his encircling arms should have told him much, but
Norman of Torn was slow to realize that a woman might look upon him with
love. Nor had he a thought of any other sentiment toward her than that
of friend and protector.

And then there came to him as in a vision another fair and beautiful
face--Bertrade de Montfort's--and Norman of Torn was still more puzzled;
for at heart he was clean, and love of loyalty was strong within him.
Love of women was a new thing to him, and, robbed as he had been all his
starved life of the affection and kindly fellowship, of either men or
women, it is little to be wondered at that he was easily impressionable
and responsive to the feeling his strong personality had awakened in two
of England's fairest daughters.

But with the vision of that other face, there came to him a faint
realization that mayhap it was a stronger power than either friendship
or fear which caused that lithe, warm body to cling so tightly to him.
That the responsibility for the critical stage their young acquaintance
had so quickly reached was not his had never for a moment entered his
head. To him, the fault was all his; and perhaps it was this quality of
chivalry that was the finest of the many noble characteristics of his
sterling character. So his next words were typical of the man; and did
Joan de Tany love him, or did she not, she learned that night to respect
and trust him as she respected and trusted few men of her acquaintance.

"My Lady," said Norman of Torn, "we have been through much, and we are
as little children in a dark attic, and so if I have presumed upon our
acquaintance," and he lowered his arm from about her shoulder, "I ask
you to forgive it for I scarce know what to do, from weakness and from
the pain of the blow upon my head."

Joan de Tany drew slowly away from him, and without reply, took his hand
and led him forward through a dark, cold corridor.

"We must go carefully now," she said at last, "for there be stairs
near."

He held her hand pressed very tightly in his, tighter perhaps than
conditions required, but she let it lie there as she led him forward,
very slowly down a flight of rough stone steps.

Norman of Torn wondered if she were angry with him and then, being new
at love, he blundered.

"Joan de Tany," he said.

"Yes, Roger de Conde; what would you?"

"You be silent, and I fear that you be angry with me. Tell me that you
forgive what I have done, an it offended you. I have so few friends," he
added sadly, "that I cannot afford to lose such as you."

"You will never lose the friendship of Joan de Tany," she answered. "You
have won her respect and--and--" But she could not say it and so she
trailed off lamely--"and undying gratitude."

But Norman of Torn knew the word that she would have spoken had he dared
to let her. He did not, for there was always the vision of Bertrade de
Montfort before him; and now another vision arose that would effectually
have sealed his lips had not the other--he saw the Outlaw of Torn
dangling by his neck from a wooden gibbet.

Before, he had only feared that Joan de Tany loved him, now he knew it,
and while he marvelled that so wondrous a creature could feel love for
him, again he blamed himself, and felt sorrow for them both; for he did
not return her love nor could he imagine a love strong enough to survive
the knowledge that it was possessed by the Devil of Torn.

Presently they reached the bottom of the stairway, and Joan de Tany
led him, gropingly, across what seemed, from their echoing footsteps, a
large chamber. The air was chill and dank, smelling of mold, and no
ray of light penetrated this subterranean vault, and no sound broke the
stillness.

"This be the castle's crypt," whispered Joan; "and they do say that
strange happenings occur here in the still watches of the night, and
that when the castle sleeps, the castle's dead rise from their coffins
and shake their dry bones.

"Sh! What was that?" as a rustling noise broke upon their ears close
upon their right; and then there came a distinct moan, and Joan de Tany
fled to the refuge of Norman of Torn's arms.

"There is nothing to fear, Joan," reassured Norman of Torn. "Dead men
wield not swords, nor do they move, or moan. The wind, I think, and rats
are our only companions here."

"I am afraid," she whispered. "If you can make a light, I am sure
you will find an old lamp here in the crypt, and then will it be less
fearsome. As a child I visited this castle often, and in search of
adventure, we passed through these corridors an hundred times, but
always by day and with lights."

Norman of Torn did as she bid, and finding the lamp, lighted it. The
chamber was quite empty save for the coffins in their niches, and some
effigies in marble set at intervals about the walls.

"Not such a fearsome place after all," he said, laughing lightly.

"No place would seem fearsome now," she answered simply, "were there a
light to show me that the brave face of Roger de Conde were by my side."

"Hush, child," replied the outlaw. "You know not what you say. When you
know me better, you will be sorry for your words, for Roger de Conde is
not what you think him. So say no more of praise until we be out of this
hole, and you safe in your father's halls."

The fright of the noises in the dark chamber had but served to again
bring the girl's face close to his so that he felt her hot, sweet breath
upon his cheek, and thus another link was forged to bind him to her.

With the aid of the lamp, they made more rapid progress, and in a few
moments, reached a low door at the end of the arched passageway.

"This is the doorway which opens upon the ravine below the castle. We
have passed beneath the walls and the moat. What may we do now, Roger,
without horses?"

"Let us get out of this place, and as far away as possible under the
cover of darkness, and I doubt not I may find a way to bring you to your
father's castle," replied Norman of Torn.

Putting out the light, lest it should attract the notice of the watch
upon the castle walls, Norman of Torn pushed open the little door and
stepped forth into the fresh night air.

The ravine was so overgrown with tangled vines and wildwood that, had
there ever been a pathway, it was now completely obliterated; and it
was with difficulty that the man forced his way through the entangling
creepers and tendrils. The girl stumbled after him and twice fell before
they had taken a score of steps.

"I fear I am not strong enough," she said finally. "The way is much more
difficult than I had thought."

So Norman of Torn lifted her in his strong arms, and stumbled on
through the darkness and the shrubbery down the center of the ravine. It
required the better part of an hour to traverse the little distance to
the roadway; and all the time her head nestled upon his shoulder and her
hair brushed his cheek. Once when she lifted her head to speak to him,
he bent toward her, and in the darkness, by chance, his lips brushed
hers. He felt her little form tremble in his arms, and a faint sigh
breathed from her lips.

They were upon the highroad now, but he did not put her down. A mist
was before his eyes, and he could have crushed her to him and smothered
those warm lips with his own. Slowly, his face inclined toward hers,
closer and closer his iron muscles pressed her to him, and then, clear
cut and distinct before his eyes, he saw the corpse of the Outlaw of
Torn swinging by the neck from the arm of a wooden gibbet, and beside it
knelt a woman gowned in rich cloth of gold and many jewels. Her face
was averted and her arms were outstretched toward the dangling form that
swung and twisted from the grim, gaunt arm. Her figure was racked with
choking sobs of horror-stricken grief. Presently she staggered to her
feet and turned away, burying her face in her hands; but he saw her
features for an instant then--the woman who openly and alone mourned the
dead Outlaw of Torn was Bertrade de Montfort.

Slowly his arms relaxed, and gently and reverently he lowered Joan
de Tany to the ground. In that instant Norman of Torn had learned the
difference between friendship and love, and love and passion.

The moon was shining brightly upon them, and the girl turned, wide-eyed
and wondering, toward him. She had felt the wild call of love and she
could not understand his seeming coldness now, for she had seen no
vision beyond a life of happiness within those strong arms.

"Joan," he said, "I would but now have wronged thee. Forgive me. Forget
what has passed between us until I can come to you in my rightful
colors, when the spell of the moonlight and adventure be no longer upon
us, and then,"--he paused--"and then I shall tell you who I be and you
shall say if you still care to call me friend--no more than that shall I
ask."

He had not the heart to tell her that he loved only Bertrade de
Montfort, but it had been a thousand times better had he done so.

She was about to reply when a dozen armed men sprang from the
surrounding shadows, calling upon them to surrender. The moonlight
falling upon the leader revealed a great giant of a fellow with an
enormous, bristling mustache--it was Shandy.

Norman of Torn lowered his raised sword.

"It is I, Shandy," he said. "Keep a still tongue in thy head until I
speak with thee apart. Wait here, My Lady Joan; these be friends."

Drawing Shandy to one side, he learned that the faithful fellow had
become alarmed at his chief's continued absence, and had set out with
a small party to search for him. They had come upon the riderless Sir
Mortimer grazing by the roadside, and a short distance beyond, had
discovered evidences of the conflict at the cross-roads. There they had
found Norman of Torn's helmet, confirming their worst fears. A peasant
in a nearby hut had told them of the encounter, and had set them upon
the road taken by the Earl and his prisoners.

"And here we be, My Lord," concluded the great fellow.

"How many are you?" asked the outlaw.

"Fifty, all told, with those who lie farther back in the bushes."

"Give us horses, and let two of the men ride behind us," said the chief.
"And, Shandy, let not the lady know that she rides this night with the
Outlaw of Torn."

"Yes, My Lord."

They were soon mounted, and clattering down the road, back toward the
castle of Richard de Tany.

Joan de Tany looked in silent wonder upon this grim force that sprang
out of the shadows of the night to do the bidding of Roger de Conde, a
gentleman of France.

There was something familiar in the great bulk of Red Shandy; where had
she seen that mighty frame before? And now she looked closely at the
figure of Roger de Conde. Yes, somewhere else had she seen these two men
together; but where and when?

And then the strangeness of another incident came to her mind. Roger de
Conde spoke no English, and yet she had plainly heard English words upon
this man's lips as he addressed the red giant.

Norman of Torn had recovered his helmet from one of his men who had
picked it up at the crossroads, and now he rode in silence with lowered
visor, as was his custom.

There was something sinister now in his appearance, and as the moonlight
touched the hard, cruel faces of the grim and silent men who rode behind
him, a little shudder crept over the frame of Joan de Tany.

Shortly before daylight they reached the castle of Richard de Tany, and
a great shout went up from the watch as Norman of Torn cried:

"Open! Open for My Lady Joan."

Together they rode into the courtyard, where all was bustle and
excitement. A dozen voices asked a dozen questions only to cry out still
others without waiting for replies.

Richard de Tany with his family and Mary de Stutevill were still fully
clothed, having not lain down during the whole night. They fairly fell
upon Joan and Roger de Conde in their joyous welcome and relief.

"Come, come," said the Baron, "let us go within. You must be fair
famished for good food and drink."

"I will ride, My Lord," replied Norman of Torn. "I have a little matter
of business with my friend, the Earl of Buckingham. Business which I
fear will not wait."

Joan de Tany looked on in silence. Nor did she urge him to remain, as he
raised her hand to his lips in farewell. So Norman of Torn rode out of
the courtyard; and as his men fell in behind him under the first rays of
the drawing day, the daughter of De Tany watched them through the gate,
and a great light broke upon her, for what she saw was the same as she
had seen a few days since when she had turned in her saddle to watch
the retreating forms of the cut-throats of Torn as they rode on after
halting her father's party.




CHAPTER XIV

Some hours later, fifty men followed Norman of Torn on foot through the
ravine below the castle where John de Fulm, Earl of Buckingham, had his
headquarters; while nearly a thousand more lurked in the woods before
the grim pile.

Under cover of the tangled shrubbery, they crawled unseen to the little
door through which Joan de Tany had led him the night before. Following
the corridors and vaults beneath the castle, they came to the stone
stairway, and mounted to the passage which led to the false panel that
had given the two fugitives egress.

Slipping the spring lock, Norman of Torn entered the apartment
followed closely by his henchmen. On they went, through apartment after
apartment, but no sign of the Earl or his servitors rewarded their
search, and it was soon apparent that the castle was deserted.

As they came forth into the courtyard, they descried an old man basking
in the sun, upon a bench. The sight of them nearly caused the old fellow
to die of fright, for to see fifty armed men issue from the untenanted
halls was well reckoned to blanch even a braver cheek.

When Norman of Torn questioned him, he learned that De Fulm had ridden
out early in the day bound for Dover, where Prince Edward then was. The
outlaw knew it would be futile to pursue him, but yet, so fierce was his
anger against this man, that he ordered his band to mount, and spurring
to their head, he marched through Middlesex, and crossing the Thames
above London, entered Surrey late the same afternoon.
