
Somebody, they discovered, was picking the brains of the scientists
there.

Not the brains of the people working with the telepathy machine.

And not the brains of the people working on the several other
Earth-limited projects at Yucca Flats.

They'd been reading the minds of some of the scientists working on the
new and highly classified non-rocket space drive.

In other words, the Yucca Flats plant was infested with a telepathic
spy. And how do you go about finding a telepath? Malone sighed. Spies
that got information in any of the usual ways were tough enough to
locate. A telepathic spy was a lot tougher proposition.

Well, one thing about Andrew J. Burris--he had an answer for everything.
Malone thought of what his chief had said: "It takes a thief to catch a
thief. And if the Westinghouse machine won't locate a telepathic spy, I
know what will."

"What?" Malone had asked.

"It's simple," Burris had said. "Another telepath. There has to be one
around somewhere. Westinghouse _did_ have one, after all, and the
Russians _still_ have one. Malone, that's your job: go out and find me a
telepath."

Burris had an answer for everything, all right, Malone thought. But he
couldn't see where the answer did him very much good. After all, if it
takes a telepath to catch a telepath, how do you catch the telepath
you're going to use to catch the first telepath?

[Illustration]

Malone ran that through his mind again, and then gave it up. It sounded
as if it should have made sense, somehow, but it just didn't, and that
was all there was to that.

He dropped his cigarette to the ground and mashed it out with the toe
of his shoe. Then he looked up.

Out there, over the water, was the Jefferson Memorial. It stood, white
in the floodlights, beautiful and untouchable in the darkness. Malone
stared at it. What would Thomas Jefferson have done in a crisis like
this?

Jefferson, he told himself without much conviction, would have been just
as confused as he was.

But he'd have had to find a telepath, Malone thought. Malone determined
that he would do likewise. If Thomas Jefferson could do it, the least
he, Malone, could do was to give it a good try.

There was only one little problem:

_Where_, Malone thought, _do I start looking?_




II


Early the next morning, Malone awoke on a plane, heading across the
continent toward Nevada. He had gone home to sleep, and he'd had to wake
up to get on the plane, and now here he was, waking up again. It seemed,
somehow, like a vicious circle.

The engines hummed gently as they pushed the big ship through the middle
stratosphere's thinly distributed molecules. Malone looked out at the
purple-dark sky and set himself to think out his problem again.

He was still mulling things over when the ship lowered its landing gear
and rolled to a stop on the big field near Yucca Flats. Malone sighed
and climbed slowly out of his seat. There was a car waiting for him at
the airfield, though, and that seemed to presage a smooth time; Malone
remembered calling Dr. O'Connor the night before, and congratulated
himself on his foresight.

Unfortunately, when he reached the main gate of the high double fence
that surrounded the more than ninety square miles of United States
Laboratories, he found out that entrance into that sanctum sanctorum of
Security wasn't as easy as he'd imagined--not even for an FBI man. His
credentials were checked with the kind of minute care Malone had always
thought people reserved for disputed art masterpieces, and it was with a
great show of reluctance that the Special Security guards passed him
inside as far as the office of the Chief Security Officer.

There, the Chief Security Officer himself, a man who could have doubled
for Torquemada, eyed Malone with ill-concealed suspicion while he called
Burris at FBI headquarters back in Washington.

Burris identified Malone on the video screen and the Chief Security
Officer, looking faintly disappointed, stamped the agent's pass and
thanked the FBI chief. Malone had the run of the place.

Then he had to find a courier jeep. The Westinghouse division, it
seemed, was a good two miles away.

As Malone knew perfectly well, the main portion of the entire Yucca
Flats area was devoted solely to research on the new space drive which
was expected to make the rocket as obsolete as the blunderbuss--at least
as far as space travel was concerned. Not, Malone thought uneasily, that
the blunderbuss had ever been used for space travel, but--

He got off the subject hurriedly. The jeep whizzed by buildings, most of
them devoted to aspects of the non-rocket drive. The other projects
based at Yucca Flats had to share what space was left--and that
included, of course, the Westinghouse research project.

It turned out to be a single, rather small white building with a fence
around it. The fence bothered Malone a little, but there was no need to
worry; this time he was introduced at once into Dr. O'Connor's office.
It was paneled in wallpaper manufactured to look like pine, and the
telepathy expert sat behind a large black desk bigger than any Malone
had ever seen in the FBI offices. There wasn't a scrap of paper on the
desk; its surface was smooth and shiny, and behind it the nearly
transparent Dr. Thomas O'Connor was close to invisible.

He looked, in person, just about the same as he'd looked on the FBI
tapes. Malone closed the door of the office behind him, looked for a
chair and didn't find one. In Dr. O'Connor's office, it was perfectly
obvious, Dr. O'Connor sat down. You stood, and were uncomfortable.

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone took off his hat. He reached across the desk to shake hands with
the telepathy expert, and Dr. O'Connor gave him a limp and fragile paw.
"Thanks for giving me a little time," Malone said. "I really appreciate
it." He smiled across the desk. His feet were already beginning to hurt.

"Not at all," Dr. O'Connor said, returning the smile with one of his own
special quick-frozen brand. "I realize how important FBI work is to all
of us, Mr. Malone. What can I do to help you?"

Malone shifted his feet. "I'm afraid I wasn't very specific on the phone
last night," he said. "It wasn't anything I wanted to discuss over a
line that might have been tapped. You see, I'm on the telepathy case."

Dr. O'Connor's eyes widened the merest trifle. "I see," he said. "Well,
I'll certainly do everything I can to help you."

"Fine," Malone said. "Let's get right down to business, then. The first
thing I want to ask you about is this detector of yours. I understand
it's too big to carry around--but how about making a smaller model?"

"Smaller?" Dr. O'Connor permitted himself a ghostly chuckle. "I'm afraid
that isn't possible, Mr. Malone. I would be happy to let you have a
small model of the machine if we had one available--more than happy. I
would like to see such a machine myself, as a matter of fact.
Unfortunately, Mr. Malone--"

"There just isn't one, right?" Malone said.

"Correct," Dr. O'Connor said. "And there are a few other factors. In the
first place, the person being analyzed has to be in a specially shielded
room, such as is used in encephalographic analysis. Otherwise, the
mental activity of the other persons around him would interfere with the
analysis." He frowned a little. "I wish that we knew a bit more about
psionic machines. The trouble with the present device, frankly, is that
it is partly psionic and partly electronic, and we can't be entirely
sure where one part leaves off and the other begins. Very trying. Very
trying indeed."

"I'll bet it is," Malone said sympathetically, wishing he understood
what Dr. O'Connor was talking about.

The telepathy expert sighed. "However," he said, "we keep working at
it." Then he looked at Malone expectantly.

Malone shrugged. "Well, if I can't carry the thing around, I guess
that's that," he said. "But here's the next question: Do you happen to
know the maximum range of a telepath? I mean: How far away can he get
from another person and still read his mind?"

Dr. O'Connor frowned again. "We don't have definite information on that,
I'm afraid," he said. "Poor little Charlie was rather difficult to work
with. He was mentally incapable of co-operating in any way, you see."

"Little Charlie?"

"Charles O'Neill was the name of the telepath we worked with," Dr.
O'Connor explained.

"I remember," Malone said. The name had been on one of the tapes, but he
just hadn't associated "Charles O'Neill" with "Little Charlie." He felt
as if he'd been caught with his homework undone. "How did you manage to
find him, anyway?" he said. Maybe, if he knew how Westinghouse had found
their imbecile-telepath, he'd have some kind of clue that would enable
him to find one, too. Anyhow, it was worth a try.

"It wasn't difficult in Charlie's case," Dr. O'Connor said. He smiled.
"The child babbled all the time, you see."

"You mean he talked about being a telepath?"

Dr. O'Connor shook his head impatiently. "No," he said. "Not at all. I
mean that he babbled. Literally. Here: I've got a sample recording in my
files." He got up from his chair and went to the tall gray filing
cabinet that hid in a far corner of the pine-paneled room. From a drawer
he extracted a spool of common audio tape, and returned to his desk.

"I'm sorry we didn't get full video on this," he said, "but we didn't
feel it was necessary." He opened a panel in the upper surface of the
desk, and slipped the spool in. "If you like, there are other tapes--"

"Maybe later," Malone said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. O'Connor nodded and pressed the playback switch at the side of the
great desk. For a second the room was silent.

Then there was the hiss of empty tape, and a brisk masculine voice that
overrode it:

"Westinghouse Laboratories," it said, "sixteen April nineteen-seventy.
Dr. Walker speaking. The voice you are about to hear belongs to Charles
O'Neill: chronological age fourteen years, three months; mental age,
approximately five years. Further data on this case will be found in the
file _O'Neill_."

There was a slight pause, filled with more tape hiss.

Then the voice began.

"... push the switch for record ... in the park last Wednesday ... and
perhaps a different set of ... poor kid never makes any sense in ...
trees and leaves all sunny with the ... electronic components of the
reducing stage might be ... not as predictable when others are around
but ... to go with Sally some night in the...."

It was a childish, alto voice, gabbling in a monotone. A phrase would be
spoken, the voice would hesitate for just an instant, and then another,
totally disconnected phrase would come. The enunciation and
pronunciation would vary from phrase to phrase, but the tone remained
essentially the same, drained of all emotional content.

"... in receiving psychocerebral impulses there isn't any ... nonsense
and nothing but nonsense all the ... tomorrow or maybe Saturday with the
girl ... tube might be replaceable only if ... something ought to be
done for the ... Saturday would be a good time for ... work on the
schematics tonight if...."

There was a click as the tape was turned off, and Dr. O'Connor looked
up.

"It doesn't make much sense," Malone said. "But the kid sure has a hell
of a vocabulary for an imbecile."

"Vocabulary?" Dr. O'Connor said softly.

"That's right," Malone said. "Where'd an imbecile get words like
'psychocerebral'? I don't think I know what that means, myself."

"Ah," Dr. O'Connor said. "But that's not _his_ vocabulary, you see. What
Charlie is doing is simply repeating the thoughts of those around him.
He jumps from mind to mind, simply repeating whatever he receives." His
face assumed the expression of a man remembering a bad taste in his
mouth. "That's how we found him out, Mr. Malone," he said. "It's rather
startling to look at a blithering idiot and have him suddenly repeat the
very thought that's in your mind."

Malone nodded unhappily. It didn't seem as if O'Connor's information was
going to be a lot of help as far as catching a telepath was concerned.
An imbecile, apparently, would give himself away if he were a telepath.
But nobody else seemed to be likely to do that. And imbeciles didn't
look like very good material for catching spies with.

Then he brightened. "Is it possible that the spy we're looking for
really isn't a spy?"

"Eh?"

"I mean, suppose he's an imbecile, too? I doubt whether an imbecile
would really be a spy, if you see what I mean."

Dr. O'Connor appeared to consider the notion. After a little while he
said: "It is, I suppose, possible. But the readings on the machine don't
give us the same timing as they did in Charlie's case--or even the same
sort of timing."

"I don't quite follow you," Malone said. Truthfully, he felt about three
miles behind. But perhaps everything would clear up soon. He hoped so.
On top of everything else, his feet were now hurting a lot more.

"Perhaps if I describe one of the tests we ran," Dr. O'Connor said,
"things will be somewhat clearer." He leaned back in his chair. Malone
shifted his feet again and transferred his hat from his right hand to
his left hand.

"We put one of our test subjects in the insulated room," Dr. O'Connor
said, "and connected him to the detector. He was to read from a book--a
book that was not too common. This was, of course, to obviate the chance
that some other person nearby might be reading it, or might have read it
in the past. We picked 'The Blood is the Death,' by Hieronymus
Melanchthon, which, as you may know, is a very rare book indeed."

"Sure," Malone said. He had never heard of the book, but he was, after
all, willing to take Dr. O'Connor's word for it.

The telepathy expert went on: "Our test subject read it carefully,
scanning rather than skimming. Cameras recorded the movements of his
eyes in order for us to tell just what he was reading at any given
moment, in order to correlate what was going on in his mind with the
reactions of the machine's indicators, if you follow me."

Malone nodded helplessly.

"At the same time," Dr. O'Connor continued blithely, "we had Charlie in
a nearby room, recording his babblings. Every so often, he would come
out with quotations from 'The Blood is the Death,' and these quotations
corresponded exactly with what our test subject was reading at the time,
and also corresponded with the abnormal fluctuations of the detector."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. O'Connor paused. Something, Malone realized, was expected of him. He
thought of several responses and chose one. "I see," he said.

"But the important thing here," Dr. O'Connor said, "is the timing. You
see, Charlie was incapable of continued concentration. He could not keep
his mind focused on another mind for very long, before he hopped to
still another. The actual amount of time concentrated on any given mind
at any single given period varied from a minimum of one point three
seconds to a maximum of two point six. The timing samples, when plotted
graphically over a period of several months, formed a skewed bell curve
with a mode at two point oh seconds."

"Ah," Malone said, wondering if a skewed bell curve was the same thing
as a belled skew curve, and if not, why not?

"It was, in fact," Dr. O'Connor continued relentlessly, "a sudden
variation in those timings which convinced us that there was another
telepath somewhere in the vicinity. We were conducting a second set of
reading experiments, in precisely the same manner as the first set, and,
for the first part of the experiment, our figures were substantially the
same. But--" He stopped.

"Yes?" Malone said, shifting his feet and trying to take some weight off
his left foot by standing on his right leg. Then he stood on his left
leg. It didn't seem to do any good.

"I should explain," Dr. O'Connor said, "that we were conducting this
series with a new set of test subjects: some of the scientists here at
Yucca Flats. We wanted to see if the intelligence quotients of the
subjects affected the time of contact which Charlie was able to
maintain. Naturally, we picked the men here with the highest IQ's, the
two men we have who are in the top echelon of the creative genius
class." He cleared his throat. "I did not include myself, of course,
since I wished to remain an impartial observer, as much as possible."

"Of course," Malone said without surprise.

"The other two geniuses," Dr. O'Connor said, "happen to be connected
with the project known as Project Isle--an operation whose function I
neither know, nor care to know, anything at all about."

Malone nodded. Project Isle was the non-rocket spaceship. Classified.
Top Secret. Ultra-Secret. And, he thought, just about anything else you
could think of.

"At first," Dr. O'Connor was saying, "our detector recorded the time
periods of ... ah mental invasion as being the same as before. Then, one
day, anomalies began to appear. The detector showed that the minds of
our subjects were being held for as long as two or three minutes. But
the phrases repeated by Charlie during these periods showed that his own
contact time remained the same; that is, they fell within the same
skewed bell curve as before, and the mode remained constant if nothing
but the phrase length were recorded."

"Hm-m-m," Malone said, feeling that he ought to be saying something.

Dr. O'Connor didn't notice him. "At first we thought of errors in the
detector machine," he went on. "That worried us not somewhat, since our
understanding of the detector is definitely limited at this time. We do
feel that it would be possible to replace some of the electronic
components with appropriate symbolization like that already used in the
purely psionic sections, but we have, as yet, been unable to determine
exactly which electronic components must be replaced by what symbolic
components."

Malone nodded, silently this time. He had the sudden feeling that Dr.
O'Connor's flow of words had broken itself up into a vast sea of
alphabet soup, and that he, Malone, was occupied in drowning in it.

"However," Dr. O'Connor said, breaking what was left of Malone's train
of thought, "young Charlie died soon thereafter, and we decided to go on
checking the machine. It was during this period that we found someone
else reading the minds of our test subjects--sometimes for a few
seconds, sometimes for several minutes."

"Aha," Malone said. Things were beginning to make sense again. _Someone
else._ That, of course, was the spy.

"I found," Dr. O'Connor said, "on interrogating the subjects more
closely, that they were, in effect, thinking on two levels. They were
reading the book mechanically, noting the words and sense, but simply
shuttling the material directly into their memories without actually
thinking about it. The actual thinking portions of their minds were
concentrating on aspects of Project Isle."

       *       *       *       *       *

"In other words," Malone said, "someone was spying on them for
information about Project Isle?"

"Precisely," Dr. O'Connor said with a frosty, teacher-to-student smile.
"And whoever it was had a much higher concentration time than Charlie
had ever attained. He seems to be able to retain contact as long as he
can find useful information flowing in the mind being read."

"Wait a minute," Malone said. "Wait a minute. If this spy is so clever,
how come he didn't read _your_ mind?"

"It is very likely that he has," O'Connor said. "What does that have to
do with it?"

"Well," Malone said, "if he knows you and your group are working on
telepathy and can detect what he's doing, why didn't he just hold off on
the minds of those geniuses when they were being tested in your
machine?"

Dr. O'Connor frowned. "I'm afraid that I can't be sure," he said, and it
was clear from his tone that, if Dr. Thomas O'Connor wasn't sure, no one
in the entire world was, had been, or ever would be. "I do have a
theory, however," he said, brightening up a trifle.

Malone waited patiently.

"He must know our limitations," Dr. O'Connor said at last. "He must be
perfectly well aware that there's not a single thing we can _do_ about
him. He must know that we can neither find nor stop him. Why should he
worry? He can afford to ignore us--or even bait us. We're helpless, and
he knows it."

That, Malone thought, was about the most cheerless thought he had heard
in some time.

"You mentioned that you had an insulated room," the FBI agent said
after a while. "Couldn't you let your men think in there?"

Dr. O'Connor sighed. "The room is shielded against magnetic fields and
electromagnetic radiation. It is perfectly transparent to psionic
phenomena, just as it is to gravitational fields."

"Oh," Malone said. He realized rapidly that his question had been a
little silly to begin with, since the insulated room had been the place
where all the tests had been conducted in the first place. "I don't want
to take up too much of your time, doctor," he said after a pause, "but
there are a couple of other questions."

"Go right ahead," Dr. O'Connor said. "I'm sure I'll be able to help
you."

Malone thought of mentioning how little help the doctor had been to
date, but decided against it. Why antagonize a perfectly good scientist
without any reason? Instead, he selected his first question, and asked
it. "Have you got any idea how we might lay our hands on another
telepath? Preferably one that's not an imbecile, of course."

Dr. O Connor's expression changed from patient wisdom to irritation. "I
wish we could, Mr. Malone. I wish we could. We certainly need one here
to help us with our work--and I'm sure that _your_ work is important,
too. But I'm afraid we have no ideas at all about finding another
telepath. Finding little Charlie was purely fortuitous--purely, Mr.
Malone, fortuitous."

"Ah," Malone said. "Sure. Of course." He thought rapidly and discovered
that he couldn't come up with one more question. As a matter of fact,
he'd asked a couple of questions already, and he could barely remember
the answers. "Well," he said, "I guess that's about it, then, doctor. If
you come across anything else, be sure and let me know."

He leaned across the desk, extending a hand. "And thanks for your time,"
he added.

Dr. O'Connor stood up and shook his hand. "No trouble, I assure you," he
said. "And I'll certainly give you all the information I can."

Malone turned and walked out. Surprisingly, he discovered that his feet
and legs still worked. He had thought they'd turned to stone in the
office long before.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was on the plane back to Washington that Malone got his first inkling
of an idea.

The only telepath that the Westinghouse boys had been able to turn up
was Charles O'Neill, the youthful imbecile.

All right, then. Suppose there were another one like him. Imbeciles
weren't very difficult to locate. Most of them would be in institutions,
and the others would certainly be on record. It might be possible to
find someone, anyway, who could be handled and used as a tool to find a
telepathic spy.

And--happy thought!--maybe one of them would turn out to be a
high-grade imbecile, or even a moron.

[Illustration]

Even if they only turned up another imbecile, he thought wearily, at
least Dr. O'Connor would have something to work with.

He reported back to Burris when he arrived in Washington, told him about
the interview with Dr. O'Connor, and explained what had come to seem a
rather feeble brainstorm.

"It doesn't seem too productive," Burris said, with a shade of
disappointment in his voice, "but we'll try it."

At that, it was a better verdict than Malone had hoped for. He had
nothing to do but wait, while orders went out to field agents all over
the United States, and quietly, but efficiently, the FBI went to work.
Agents probed and pried and poked their noses into the files and data
sheets of every mental institution in the fifty states--as far, at any
rate, as they were able.

It was not an easy job. The inalienable right of a physician to refuse
to disclose confidences respecting a patient applied even to idiots,
imbeciles, and morons. Not even the FBI could open the private files of
a licensed and registered psychiatrist.

But the field agents did the best they could and, considering the
circumstances, their best was pretty good.

Malone, meanwhile, put in two weeks sitting glumly at his Washington
desk and checking reports as they arrived. They were uniformly
depressing. The United States of America contained more subnormal minds
than Malone cared to think about. There seemed to be enough of them to
explain the results of any election you were unhappy over.
Unfortunately, subnormal was all you could call them. Not one of them
appeared to possess any abnormal psionic abilities whatever.

There were a couple who were reputed to be poltergeists--but in neither
case was there a single shred of evidence to substantiate the claim.

At the end of the second week, Malone was just about convinced that his
idea had been a total washout. A full fortnight had been spent on
digging up imbeciles, while the spy at Yucca Flats had been going right
on his merry way, scooping information out of the men at Project Isle as
though he were scooping beans out of a pot. And, very likely, laughing
himself silly at the feeble efforts of the FBI.

Who could he be?

_Anyone_, Malone told himself unhappily. _Anyone at all._ He could be
the janitor that swept out the buildings, one of the guards at the gate,
one of the minor technicians on another project, or even some old
