"Say--Cole, is that any ship you ever heard of before? _I don't think
that's just a pirate!_"

"Not a pirate--what then?"

"How'd he get inside our detector screens so fast? Watch--he'll either
leave, or come after us--" The T-247 had settled inside the lock now,
and the great metal door closed after it. The whole patrol ship had been
swallowed by a giant. Kendall was sketching swiftly on a notebook,
watching the vast ship closely, putting down a record of its lines, and
formation. He glanced up at it, and then down for a few more lines, and
up at it--

The stranger ship abruptly dwindled. It dwindled with incredible speed,
rushing off along the line of sight at an impossible velocity, and
abruptly clicking out of sight, like an image on a movie-film that has
been cut, and repaired after the scene that showed the final
disappearance.

"Cole--Cole--did you get that? Did you see--do you understand what
happened?" Kendall was excitedly shouting now.

"He missed us," Cole sighed. "It's a wonder--hanging out here in space,
with the protector of the T-247's fields gone."

"No, no, you asteroid--that's not it. _He went off faster than light
itself!_"

"Eh--what? Faster than _light_? That can't be done--"

"He did it, I know he did. That's how he got inside our screens. He came
inside faster than the warning message could relay back the information.
Didn't you see him accelerate to an impossible speed in an impossible
time? Didn't you see how he just vanished as he exceeded the speed of
light, and stopped reflecting it? _That ship was no ship of this solar
system!_"

"Where did he come from then?"

"God only knows, but it's a long, long way off."




II


The IP-M-122 picked them up. The M-122 got out there two days later, in
response to the calls the T-247 had sent out. As soon as she got within
ten million miles of the little tender, she began getting Cole's
signals, and within twelve hours had reached the tiny thing, located it,
and picked it up.

Captain Jim Warren was in command, one of the old school commanders of
the IP. He listened to Kendall's report, listened to Cole's tale--and
radioed back a report of his own. Space pirates in a large ship had
attacked the T-247, he said, and carried it away. He advised a close
watch. On Pluto, his investigations disclosed nothing more than the fact
that three mines had been raided, all platinum supplies taken, and the
records and machinery removed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The M-122 was a fifty-man patrol cruiser, and Warren felt sure he could
handle the menace alone, and hung around for over two weeks looking for
it. He saw nothing, and no further reports came of attack. Again and
again, Kendall tried to convince him this ship he was hunting was no
mere space pirate, and again and again Warren grunted, and went on his
way. He would not send in any report Kendall made out, because to do so
would add his endorsement to that report. He would not take Kendall
back, though that was well within his authority.

In fact, it was a full month before Kendall again set foot on any of the
Minor Planets, and then it was Mars, the base of the M-122. Kendall and
Cole took passage immediately on an IP supply ship, and landed in New
York six days later. At once, Kendall headed for Commander McLaurin's
office. Buck Kendall, lieutenant of the IP, found he would have to make
regular application to see McLaurin through a dozen intermediate
officers.

By this time, Kendall was savagely determined to see McLaurin himself,
and see him in the least possible time. Cole, too, was beginning to
believe in Kendall's assertion of the stranger ship's extra-systemic
origin. As yet neither could understand the strange actions of the
machine, its attack on the Pluto mines, and the capture and theft of a
patrol ship.

"There is," said Kendall angrily, "just one way to see McLaurin and see
him quick. And, by God, I'm going to. Will you resign with me, Cole?
I'll see him within a week then, I'll bet."

For a minute, Cole hesitated. Then he shook hands with his friends.
"Today!" And that day it was. They resigned, together. Immediately, Buck
Kendall got the machinery in motion for an interview, working now from
the outside, pulling the strings with the weight of a hundred million
dollar fortune. Even the IP officers had to pay a bit of attention when
Bernard Kendall, multi-millionaire began talking and demanding things.
Within a week, Kendall _did_ see McLaurin.

At that time, McLaurin was fifty-three years old, his crisp hair still
black as space, with scarcely a touch of the gray that appears in his
more recent photographs. He stood six feet tall, a broad-shouldered,
powerful man, his face grave with lines of intelligence and character.
There was also a permanent narrowing of the eyes, from years under the
blazing sun of space. But most of all, while those years in space had
narrowed and set his eyes, they had not narrowed and set his mind. An
infinitely finer character than old Jim Warren, his experience in space
had taught him always to expect the unexpected, to understand the
incomprehensible as being part of the unknown and incalculable
properties of space and the worlds that swam in it. Besides the fine
technical education he had started with, he had acquired a liberal
education in mankind. When Buck Kendall, straight and powerful, came
into his office with Cole, he recognized in him a character that would
drive steadily and straight for its goal. Also, he recognized behind the
millionaire that had succeeded in pulling wires enough to see him, the
scientist who had had more than one paper published "in an amateur way."

"Dr. Bernard Kendall?" he asked, rising.

"Yes, sir. Late Buck Kendall, lieutenant of the IP. I quit and got Cole
here to quit with me, so we could see you."

"Unusual tactics. I've had several men join up to get an interview with
me." McLaurin smiled.

"Yes, I can imagine that, but we had to see you in a hurry. A hidebound
old rapscallion by the name of Jim Warren picked us up out by Pluto,
floating around in a six-man tender. We made some reports to him, but he
wouldn't believe, and he wouldn't send them through--so we had to send
ourselves through. Sir, this system is about to be attacked by some
extra-systemic race. The IP-T-247 was so attacked, her crew killed off,
and the ship itself carried away."

"I got the report Captain Jim Warren sent through, stating it was a gang
of space pirates. Now what makes you believe otherwise?"

"That ship that attacked us, attacked with a neutron gun, a gun that
shot neutrons through the hull of our ship as easily as protons pass
through open space. Those neutrons killed off four of the crew, and
spared us only because we happened to be behind the water tanks. Masses
of hydrogen will stop neutrons, so we lived, and escaped in the tender.
The little tender, lightless, escaped their observation, and we were
picked up. Now, when the 247 had been picked up, and locked into their
ship, that ship started accelerating. It accelerated so fast along my
line of sight that it just dwindled, and--vanished. It didn't vanish in
distance, it vanished _because it exceeded the speed of light_."

"Isn't that impossible?"

"Not at all. It can be done--if you can find some way of escaping from
this space to do it. Now if you could cut across through a higher
dimension, your _projection_ in this dimension might easily exceed the
speed of light. For instance, if I could cut directly through the Earth,
at a speed of one thousand miles an hour, my projection on the surface
would go twelve thousand miles while I was going eight. Similar, if you
could cut _through_ the four dimensional space instead of following its
surface, you'd attain a speed greater than light."

"Might it not still be a space pirate? That's a lot easier to believe,
even allowing your statement that he exceeded the speed of light."

"If you invented a neutron gun which could kill through tungsten walls
without injuring anything within, a system of accelerating a ship that
didn't affect the inhabitants of that ship, and a means of exceeding the
speed of light, all within a few months of each other, would you become
a pirate? I wouldn't, and I don't think any one else would. A pirate is
a man who seeks adventure and relief from work. Given a means of
exceeding the speed of light, I'd get all the adventure I wanted
investigating other planets. If I didn't have a cent before, I'd have
relief from work by selling it for a few hundred millions--and I'd sell
it mighty easily too, for an invention like that is worth an
incalculable sum. Tie to that the value of compensated acceleration, and
no man's going to turn pirate. He can make more millions selling his
inventions than he can make thousands turning pirate with them. So who'd
turn pirate?"

"Right." McLaurin nodded. "I see your point. Now before I'd accept your
statements _in re_ the 'speed of light' thing, I'd want opinions from
some IP physicists."

"Then let's have a conference, because something's got to be done soon.
I don't know why we haven't heard further from that fellow."

"Privately--we have," McLaurin said in a slightly worried tone. "He was
detected by the instruments of every IP observatory I suspect. We got
the reports but didn't know what to make of them. They indicated so many
funny things, they were sent in as accidental misreadings of the
instruments. But since _all_ the observatories reported them, similar
misreadings, at about the same times, that is with variations of only a
few hours, we thought something must have been up. The only thing was
the phenomena were reported progressively from Pluto to Neptune, clear
across the solar system, in a definite progression, but at a velocity of
crossing that didn't tie in with any conceivable force. They crossed
faster than the velocity of light. That ship must have spent about half
an hour off each planet before passing on to the next. And, accepting
your faster-than-light explanation, we can understand it."

"Then I think you have proof."

"If we have, what would you do about it?"

"Get to work on those 'misreadings' of the instruments for one thing,
and for a second, and more important, line every IP ship with paraffin
blocks six inches thick."

"Paraffin--why?"

"The easiest form of hydrogen to get. You can't use solid hydrogen,
because that melts too easily. Water can be turned into steam too
easily, and requires more work. Paraffin is a solid that's largely
hydrogen. That's what they've always used on neutrons since they
discovered them. Confine your paraffin between tungsten walls, and
you'll stop the secondary protons as well as the neutrons."

"Hmmm--I suppose so. How about seeing those physicists?"

"I'd like to see them today, sir. The sooner you get started on this
work, the better it will be for the IP."

"Having seen me, will you join up in the IP again?" asked McLaurin.

"No, sir, I don't think I will. I have another field you know, in which
I may be more useful. Cole here's a better technician than fighter--and
a darned good fighter, too--and I think that an inexperienced
space-captain is a lot less useful than a second-rate physicist at work
in a laboratory. If we hope to get anywhere, or for that matter, I
suspect, stay anywhere, we'll have to do a lot of research pretty
promptly."

"What's your explanation of that ship?"

"One of two things: an inventor of some other system trying out his
latest toy, or an expedition sent out by a planetary government for
exploration. I favor the latter for two reasons: that ship was _big_. No
inventor would build a thing that size, requiring a crew of several
hundred men to try out his invention. A government would build just
about that if they wanted to send out an expedition. If it were an
inventor, he'd be interested in meeting other people, to see what they
had in the way of science, and probably he'd want to do it in a
peaceable way. That fellow wasn't interested in peace, by any means. So
I think it's a government ship, and an unfriendly government. They sent
that ship out either for scientific research, for trade research and
exploration, or for acquisitive exploration. If they were out for
scientific research, they'd proceed as would the inventor, to establish
friendly communication. If they were out for trade, the same would
apply. If they were out for acquisitive exploration, they'd investigate
the planets, the sun, the people, only to the extent of learning how
best to overcome them. They'd want to get a sample of our people, and a
sample of our weapons. They'd want samples of our machinery, our
literature and our technology. That's exactly what that ship got.

"Somebody, somewhere out there in space, either doesn't like their home,
or wants more home. They've been out looking for one. I'll bet they sent
out hundreds of expeditions to thousands of nearby stars, gradually
going further and further, seeking a planetary system. This is probably
the one and only one they found. It's a good one too. It has planets at
all temperatures, of all sizes. It is a fairly compact one, it has a
stable sun that will last far longer than any race can hope to."

"Hmm--how can there be good and bad planetary systems?" asked McLaurin.
"I'd never thought of that."

Kendall laughed. "Mighty easy. How'd you like to live on a planet of a
Cepheid Variable? Pleasant situation, with the radiation flaring up and
down. How'd you like to live on a planet of Antares? That blasted sun
is so big, to have a comfortable planet you'd have to be at least ten
billion miles out. Then if you had an interplanetary commerce, you'd
have to struggle with orbits tens of billions of miles across instead of
mere millions. Further, you'd have a sun so blasted big, it would take
an impossible amount of energy to lift the ship up from one planet to
another. If your trip was, say, twenty billions of miles to the next
planet, you'd be fighting a gravity as bad as the solar gravity at Earth
here all the way--no decline with a little distance like that."

"H-m-m-m--quite true. Then I should say that Mira would take the prize.
It's a red giant, and it's an irregular variable. The sunlight there
would be as unstable as the weather in New England. It's almost as big
as Antares, and it won't hold still. Now that _would_ make a bad
planetary system."

"It would!" Kendall laughed. But as we know--he laughed too soon, and he
shouldn't have used the conditional. He should have said, "It does!"




III


Gresth Gkae, Commander of Expeditionary Force 93, of the Planet Sthor,
was returning homeward with joyful mind. In the lock of his great ship,
lay the T-247. In her cargo holds lay various items of machinery, mining
supplies, foods, and records. And in her log books lay the records of
many readings on the nine larger planets of a highly satisfactory
planetary system.

Gresth Gkae had spent no less than three ultra-wearing years going from
one sun to another in a definitely mapped out section of space. He had
investigated only eleven stars in that time, eleven stars, progressively
further from the titanic red-flaming sun he knew as "the" sun. He knew
it as "the" sun, and had several other appellations for it. Mira was
so-named by Earthmen because it was indeed a "wonder" star, in Latin,
mirare means "to wonder." Irregularly, and for no apparent reason it
would change its rate of radiation. So far as those inhabitants of Sthor
and her sister world Asthor knew, there was no reason. It just did it.
Perhaps with malicious intent to be annoying. If so, it was
exceptionally successful. Sthor and Asthor experienced, periodically, a
young ice age. When Mira decided to take a rest, Sthor and Asthor froze
up, from the poles most of the way to the equators. Then Mira would
stretch herself a little, move about restlessly and Sthor and Asthor
would become uninhabitably hot, anywhere within twenty degrees of the
equator.

Those Sthorian people had evolved in a way that made the conditions
endurable for savage or uncivilized people, but when a scientific
civilization with a well-ordered mode of existence tried to establish
itself, Mira was all sorts of a nuisance.

Gresth Gkae was a peculiar individual to human ways of thinking. He
stood some seven feet tall, on his strange, double-kneed legs and his
four toed feet. His body was covered with little, short feather-like
things that moved now with a volition of their own. They were moving
very slowly and regularly. The space-ship was heated to a comfortable
temperature, and the little fans were helping to cool Gresth Gkae. Had
it been cold, every little feather would have lain down close against
its neighbors, forming an admirable, wind-proof and cold-proof blanket.

Nature, on Sthor, had original ideas of arrangement too. Sthorians
possessed two eyes--one directly above the other, in the center of their
faces. The face was so long, and narrow, it resembled a blunt hatchet,
with the two eyes on the edge. To counter-balance this vertical
arrangement of the eyes, the nostrils had been separated some four
inches, with one on each of the sloping cheeks. His ears were little
pink-flesh cups on short, muscular stems. His mouth was narrow, and
small, but armed with quite solid teeth adapted to his diet, a diet
consisting of almost anything any creature had ever considered edible.
Like most successful forms of intelligent life, Gresth Gkae was
omnivorous. An intelligent form of life is necessarily adaptable, and
adaptation meant being able to eat what was at hand.

One of his eyes, the upper one, was fully twice the size of the lower
one. This was his telescopic eye. The lower, or microscopic eye was
adapted to work for which a human being would have required a low power
microscope, the upper eye possessed a more normal power of vision,
_plus_ considerable telescopic powers.

Gresth Gkae was using it now to look ahead in the blank of space to
where gigantic Mira appeared. On his screens now, Mira appeared deep
violet, for he was approaching at a speed greater than that of light,
and even this projected light of Mira was badly distorted.

"The distance is half a light-year now, sir," reported the navigation
officer.

"Reduce the speed, then, to normal velocity for these ranges. What
reserve of fuel have we?"

"Less than one thousand pounds. We will barely be able to stop. We were
too free in the use of our weapons, I fear," replied the Chief
Technician.

"Well, what would you? We needed those things in our reports. Besides,
we could extract fuel from that ore we took on at Planet Nine of Phahlo.
It is merely that I wish speed in the return."

"As we all do. How soon do you believe the Council will proceed against
the new system?"

"It will be fully a year, I fear. They must gather the expeditions
together, and re-equip the ships. It will be a long time before all will
have come in."

"Could they not send fast ships after them to recall them?"

"Could they have traced us as we wove our way from Thart to Karst to
Raloork to Phahlo? It would be impossible."

       *       *       *       *       *

Steadily the great ship had been boring on her way. Mira had been a disc
for nearly two days, gigantic, two-hundred-and-fifty-million-mile Mira
took a great deal of dwarfing by distance to lose her disc. Even at the
Twin Planets, eight thousand two hundred and fifty millions of miles
out, Mira covered half the sky, it seemed, red and angry. Sometimes,
though, to the disgust of the Sthorians it was just red-faced and lazy.
Then Sthor froze.

"Grih is in a descendant stage," said the navigation officer presently.
"Sthor will be cold when we arrive."

"It will warm quickly enough with our news!" Gresth laughed. "A
system--a delightful system--discovered. A system of many close-grouped
planets. Why think--from one side of that system to the other is less of
a distance than from Ansthat, our first planet's orbit, to Insthor's
orbit! That sun, as we know, is steady and warm. All will be well, when
we have eliminated that rather peculiar race. Odd, that they should, in
some ways, be so nearly like us! Nearly Sthorian in build. I would not
have expected it. Though they did have some amazing peculiarities!
Imagine--two eyes just alike, and in a horizontal row. And that flat
face. They looked as though they had suffered some accident that smashed
the front of the face in. And also the peculiar beak-like projection.
Why should a race ever develop so amazing a projection in so peculiar
and exposed a position? It sticks out inviting attack and injury. Right
in the middle of the face. And to make it worse, there is the
air-channel, and the only air channel. Why, one minor injury to the
throat would be certain to damage that passage beyond repair, and bring
death. Yet such relatively unimportant things as ears, and eyes are
doubled. Surely you would expect that so important a member as the
air-passage would be doubled for safety.
