
"Siamese twins," Dave was shouting. "A contemporary marvel of science,
ladies and gentlemen--and here we have ..."

Charley stepped forward as Ned and Ed stepped back into the shadows
again.

"... Charley de Milo! Ladies and gentlemen, the world-wide fame of this
brave and talented boy is stupendous! His feats of skill will amaze you!
Watch him thread a needle! Watch him comb his hair! And all for one thin
quarter, ladies and gentlemen, only the fourth part--"

The electronic band choked on Sousa, coughed and began again with
Kabalevsky. Charley watched the audience below, staring up at him,
hundreds of faces. He heard their gasp as he flexed his shoulders and
turned. He grinned down, taking a second longer than usual, and then
stepped back, still grinning.

"Charley de Milo, the Armless Wonder!" Dave said. "And many more sights
inside, ladies and gentlemen, sights to amaze you, sights to chill your
very blood, sights ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

One-thirty, and the last show over. The rocket had come down for the
night; all over the midway lights were blinking off and silence was
creeping, like a stain, over the ground. Professor Lightning was sitting
on his bunk, in the small tent he shared with Erma the Fish Girl. Erma
was out drinking with Dave Lungs and some of the others, and only the
professor and Charley de Milo were in the room. Charley was sitting on
Erma's bunk, looking resigned.

"Well, if you still want to talk to me," he said, "now's your chance.
O.K.?"

"I certainly want to talk to you," Professor Lightning said firmly. "I
want to tell you of the most important moment of your life."

Charley tried to think of something to say to this, but there wasn't
anything. He shifted on the bunk, scratched at his nose with his left
foot, and grinned spastically. "Sure," he said at random. "And, by the
way, I'm sorry about before, professor. But the show was going on,
and--"

"The show," Professor Lightning said, in tones of the utmost contempt.
"Forget about the show--now, and tomorrow, and forever."

"But--"

"No words," Professor Lightning said, raising a hand delicately.
"Please. Allow me to tell you of my invention."

Charley sighed and lay back on the bed. "Invention, professor?" he said.
"You mean sort of a machine?"

For some reason, Professor Lightning looked irritated. "It's not a
machine," he said flatly. Then he sighed and his tone changed. "Charley,
my boy," he said, "do you remember what I was telling you before? About
how the world has entered a new Age of Science? How new inventions, new
discoveries, are coming along every day?"

"Well, sure," Charley said. "The papers talk about it every once in a
while. You know, I see the papers, or the Chicago _American_, anyhow. My
mother sends it to me. She likes the columns."

"Why," Professor Lightning went on, as if he hadn't been listening at
all, "right here in Wrout's Carnival Shows, we have things that just
didn't exist ten or fifteen years ago. The electronic band. The Forever
bulb."

"That's right," Charley put in. "And look at Joe Wicks. Why, he can do
tricks with all those new things they got on cars, tricks nobody ever
did before or even thought about in the old days."

"And more fundamental discoveries," the professor said. "Chadwick's Law
of Dimensionality, Dvedkin and the Ontological Mean ... oh, I keep up
with the literature. No matter what's happened to me, I keep up with the
literature."

Charley sighed, very softly so as not to injure the professor's
feelings. But he did hope the old man wasn't going to start on all those
stories about his lost career again. Charley knew--everybody in the
Wrout show did--that Professor Lightning had been a real professor once,
at some college or other. Biology, or Biological Physics, or something
else--he'd taught classes about it, and done research. And then there
had been something about a girl, a student the professor had got himself
involved with. Though it was pretty hard to imagine the professor,
white-haired and thin the way he was now, chasing after a girl.

He'd been fired, or something, and he'd drifted for a while and then got
himself an act and come with a Carnival. Charley knew the whole story.
He didn't want to hear it again.

But the professor said: "I'm as good as I ever was--better than I ever
was, my boy. I've been keeping up, doing experiments. I've been quiet
about it."

Everybody, Charley thought, knew about Professor Lightning and his
experiments. If they kept the old man happy, kept him contented and
doing shows, why not? After all, the old guy didn't drink or anything
really serious; if he wanted to play around with test tubes and even
Bunsen burners, people figured, why, let him.

But Professor Lightning thought nobody knew. Well, he had been a real
professor once, which is to say a square. Some people never really
adjusted to carny life--where everybody knows everything.

Charley figured maybe it was better to act surprised. "Really?" he said.
"Experiments?"

Professor Lightning looked pleased, which satisfied Charley. "I've been
on the track of something big," he said. He seemed to be talking more to
himself than to Charley. "Something new," he said. "And at last ... at
last, my boy, I've found it. I'll be famous, Charley, famous--and so
will you!"

"That's nice," Charley said politely. Then he blinked. "But what do you
mean," he added, "me?"

"I want you to help me," the professor said. He leaned forward, and in
the dim light of the tent's single lamp, his eyes glittered. "I want you
to come with me."

"Come with you?" Charley said, and swallowed hard. He'd never thought,
the way some did, that the old man was crazy. But it did look as if he'd
slipped a couple of cogs for sure and for real. "Where?" Charley said.

"Washington," the professor said instantly. "New York. London, Paris.
Rome. The world, Charley. The world that's going to do us homage."

Charley shifted a little in the bed. "Look, professor," he said, "I've
got a job, right here in the carny. I couldn't leave here. So suppose we
just--"

"Your job?" the professor said. "Your job's gone, my boy. Wait. Let me
tell you what I've discovered. Let me tell you what has
happened--happened to you, my boy. To you, and to me."

Charley sat upright, slowly. "Well," he said, "all right, professor."

Professor Lightning beamed, and his eyes glittered brighter and
brighter. "Limb regeneration," he said, and his voice was as soft and
quiet as if he'd been talking about the most beautiful woman in the
world. "Limb regeneration."

       *       *       *       *       *

Charley waited a long minute before he admitted to himself that he
didn't have the faintest idea what the professor was talking about.
"What?" he said at last.

Professor Lightning shook his head slightly. "Charley," he said softly,
"you're an Armless Wonder. That's right, isn't it?"

"Sure it is, professor," Charley said. "You know that. I was born that
way. Made a pretty good thing out of it, too."

"Well," Professor Lightning said, "you don't have to be one. Can you
realize that?"

Charley nodded slowly. "Sure I don't," he said. "Only it's pretty good
money, you know? And there's no sense in sitting around back home and
feeling sorry for myself, is there? I mean, this way I can make money
and have a job and--"

"No," Professor Lightning said emphatically.

Charley blinked. "No?" he said.
