The break came when Clancey called at the house and found it empty,
deserted. He traced them to a new neighborhood where they had rented a
house with a peaceful, walled garden. They were not pleased to see him,
but Clancey was a psychologist of sorts himself and a working agreement
was arrived at whereby he and Warwick could drop in frequently as
friends and quietly observe Timmy, chatting with him when they could
win his confidence and submitting him to whatever tests they could
adequately disguise. But under pain of permanent excommunication from
the Douglas menage they were not to discuss him with outsiders in such
a way as to either identify him or draw attention to him. Timmy was to
be allowed to set his own pace under their obliquely-watching eyes.
He was not to become a subject for newspaper comment, for the speculation
of strangers, or for the heated discussion of learned gentlemen calling
each other liars in six syllables. For Timmy was something new under
the sun.

Two years of observation gave Clancey and Warwick an impressive file of
notes on him, and they were prone to sit after office hours with it on
the desk between them, giving it morose glances. They were not happy.
Sometimes, as now, they concluded an evening visit by sitting in
Clancey's or Warwick's car parked outside the Douglas fence, holding an
impromptu post-mortem on an intellectual corpse that had come to life
in complete defiance of all the rules. They didn't notice the stealthy
movement of one of the fence-boards, nor the small form that snaked
through the shadows of concealing shrubbery until it was near the open
window of the car.

"Take word-association, Clancey. I had a few minutes with him this
evening before you got here, so I started him on a 'game' where we took
turns in saying a word and trying to guess what the other would reply.
I believe he thought I was rather a simpleton and needed humoring.
Anyway, I tried him with 'home' and got a delayed response. It's
happened before. Apparently the concept of home is tied to some deeper
disturbance." There was a slight, uneasy movement from the listening
figure. "Well, linking home and family, on my next turn I shot 'mother'
at him. There was an immediate flash of confusion in his eyes and again
a delayed response before he blurted 'Mom.' Something else had been on
the tip of his tongue, but he choked it back and selected what seemed
to him a more suitable reply.

"Now, we both know from two years' systematic observation that Helen is
as well-balanced a mother as you're likely to find. I'm quite sure she
has no unsuspected bad habits or traits that are leaving sensitive spots
in Timmy's mind, making him flinch at the association, nor is there some
long-standing or unresolved conflict in their relations. Yet 'home' and
'mother' both invoke blocks that inhibit response until consciously
overcome, or invoke images that he wishes to conceal lest they betray a
secret. I doubt very much whether anything that happened in his first
four years could have left a deep impression on the completely imbecilic
mind he is _assumed_ to have had then. That leaves the past two years--"

       *       *       *       *       *

    _(Confirmation) Game/not game.... Should data have predicted
    test? (Indecision) Possibly ... review later. So much to learn
    ... confusion inevitable. Next time respond "mother--three"
    (laughter) Invalid frame of reference--impossible work
    with/discard._

       *       *       *       *       *

"Something else interests me there, Phil. You suggest he selected,
deliberately, what seemed an appropriate response to 'mother.' Did you
take the next logical step and try 'father?'"

"Yes."

"And did he anticipate it?"

"I'm sure he did. I see what you mean ... fairly sharp reasoning for a
six-year-old supposed to be mentally retarded. When I shot 'father' at
him he came back promptly with 'male-Douglas' almost like one word."

"Got the sex and identity right. What's wrong with that?"

"There's nothing 'wrong' or 'right' about it. I was hoping for some clue
as to how his mind works. Maybe I got it, but I don't know what to do
with it. I didn't expect a calmly objective cataloguing of the old man
as a 'male-Douglas.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

    _(Surprise) Where is error? Semantics? Sociology? Colloquial
    nuance? (Decision) Reject further word-games._

       *       *       *       *       *

"If that's a clue, Phil, you can have it." Clancey hauled a notebook
from his pocket and held it up. "Open this thing anywhere--anywhere at
all. It'll open at an unanswered question. At the age of roughly three
and one-half, a congenital idiot suddenly displays flashes of alert
intelligence. For forty-two months that child was content to sit on his
fanny and vegetate. Never crawled, never spoke, never played, seldom
even focused his eyes. Then one day his mother sees him study some
alphabet blocks with every appearance of curiosity. Awareness! For the
first time!

"Later, he suddenly reaches out his hand and piles the blocks in
a neat stack. Purposeful activity and perfect muscular control! No
trial-and-error, no baby hesitation with hand poised--just a sudden
assured, controlled action. Mama leaps for joy, junior relapses into
idiocy, and no one--including me--really believes mama when she says it
happened. This sort of thing goes on for several months--brief, erratic
flashes of extraordinary intelligence, considering the subject. Then, a
child who has never spoken a single word says clearly and politely,
'I want that one, Helen,' and a child who has never crawled puts his
feet under him and stands up steady as a rock. You tell me, Phil--how
did he do it?"

"Don't look to me for an answer. I'm only a lousy fifth-rate psychology
teacher, as of the day you brought Timmy into my life. And the curse of
Freud be on you for _that_ kindly act of professional assassination. The
answer is obvious, of course ... Timmy didn't and couldn't do what we've
seen him do with our own wide-open, innocent eyes. We are the victims of
a cunning hoax."

       *       *       *       *       *

    _(Amusement) Difficult to experiment unobserved. Action too
    precipitate/no choice. (Affection/laughter) "The world is so
    people." (Chill) Danger! Madness!_

       *       *       *       *       *

"How does any child learn to speak?"

[Illustration]

"Mainly by hearing others. Maybe Timmy learned the same way. Maybe he
listened, absorbing the meaning and sound of words, trying them out
in the silence of his otherwise vacant little noggin. Maybe his mind
awakened gradually to the realization that it was a prisoner in a
paralyzed organ, strait-jacketed by blocks or short circuits. Maybe he
spent his forty-two months of vegetating driving against those blocks
until he partially broke them down and could speak. Maybe."

"And without ever having shaped his lips or tongue to intelligent
sounds, he speaks fluently at the first try?"

"Why not? Any kid that will start out by addressing its parents chummily
as 'Helen' and 'Jerry' and act naively surprised at the reaction,
obviously has rules of its own."

They ruminated in silence for a moment.

"It's too easy to talk vaguely about blocks and short circuits, Clancey.
How do you account for his completely erratic progress? Totally
unpredictable, with alternating periods of complete idiocy and high
intelligence?"

"Not totally unpredictable."

"Oh?"

"At least three things suggest a pattern. One is that his relapses,
though erratic, are becoming ever shorter in duration and more widely
separated."

"Yes, they are infrequent now and quickly ended."

"The second is that his grasp of the social pattern in which he
lives--his environment, in all its subtleties--is constantly improving."

"Right again. At the age of six he can in many ways match a bright lad
twice his age. Not in the subtleties, though--I disagree there. You can
give him a simple or even a not-so-simple explanation of something he
hears on the radio, dealing with it as a general theme in sociology,
and he seems to grasp the broad outline with little difficulty, but in
trivial matters of social behavior and human relations he's frequently
uncertain, as likely as not to pull a howling bloomer. Seems unusually
baffled and exasperated by some of the social mores he runs into, such
as the many tabu subjects for conversation, or taking your clothes off
whenever or wherever you feel inclined to. Poor Helen. She tries to
explain and he keeps doggedly after her with ruthless logic, obviously
trying hard to understand, and ... you know ... it's surprising how few
really sound, logical reasons there are for half the accepted
conventions that rule our lives.

"He's pinned me down several times to the conclusion that a certain
convention exists solely because people can't be trusted to behave
rationally without restraining rules. It's rather a dismaying conclusion
when it's dragged out in the open like that, and it seems to horrify
him. An ordinary kid learns by experience and accepts the rules with
sporadic rebellion, but our boy acts as if they were beyond
comprehension. And I think they are ... to him.

"The first crime drama he happened to see on TV turned him white as
a sheet, and when he stuck his nose out the gate a few days later and
watched some neighborhood kids playing cowboys and Indians with cap
pistols, he was sick on the grass. Explaining the 'glamour' of the early
west made it worse. He drew back from me as though I were contagious.
I had the feeling that he _pitied_ me. I wonder, sometimes, whether he
makes any real sense at all out of what is said to him. He's very slow
to interpret the shades of expression possible in voice and face. I feel
that potentially he has an exceptional mind, but the great difficulty is
communication."

"Like pulling his leg. It's too easy to be fun."

"Exactly, unless the little so-and-so is pulling ours, which I sometimes
suspect." Phil winced a little and rubbed his hand across his forehead.
"Getting a headache. Well, what's this third item you had in mind?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I can't pin it down, but I have a feeling there's a fairly obvious
physical factor linking the periods of relapse."

"Physical tiredness?"

"No ... the contrary, perhaps. At the start he got himself overtired
pretty often, as though he overestimated his endurance, but it didn't
seem to do him any harm. But if he awakens early or unexpectedly, there
may be an appreciable delay before he orients himself. Then he comes to
with a snap."

"Shock? Confusion of any sort?"

"Confusion, certainly. He didn't last five minutes when they tried
him in school, you remember. Howled for his dog, then sat on the floor
and dribbled. The confusion of being chucked into a group of noisy,
aggressive six-year-olds was too much for him. You remember he recovered
completely--almost instantly--when his mother packed him out of the
school."

"That reminds me of something else. I think that dog is some sort of a
symbol to him. Perhaps it has somehow become associated with security.
Try this for size: his mind is struggling to free itself from its strait
jacket; the dog captures his attention at a critical moment; the mother
screams when he speaks, frightening him, but the dog comes reassuringly
to his arms and subsequently--or did _he_ see it as a consequence?--his
parents make much of him. In other words, at the start of his rational
life the dog is a friendly element and the parents a frightening one.
The details of the association drop soon enough from his conscious
memory, but not from his subconscious. When the dog is with him, he
feels secure. When they are separated--it was not allowed into school
with him, of course--his symbol is gone and he panics, much as an
ordinary child panics if it loses its mother in a crowd."

"Slick, but not convincing. It touches on another peculiarity, however
... the way he wants that hound with him always, no matter where. Sleeps
with it on his bed, eats with it by his chair, even takes it to the
bathroom--by-the-by, he acquired the dog and bowel-control at the same
time, if you recall--but does he _like_ the dog? He never pets it to
speak of. Plays with it sometimes in a clumsy, disinterested sort of
way, but it's not the classic boy-dog relationship. If the dog is merely
a symbol, as you suggest--"

"I didn't say 'merely' a symbol. If I'm right, an association as strong
as this one could be devilish awkward and even dangerous, hooked to a
hair-trigger mind like his. What if something happens to the dog before
his dependence or whatever can be broken? Dogs get run over, you know,
and even their normal life span is short. Maybe we ought to try to break
it up ... damn this headache."

       *       *       *       *       *

    _(Regret/Despondency) Degraded to pain ... static/thick tongue.
    (Resignation) Delay, delay, delay ... break conversation. Time
    wrong._

       *       *       *       *       *

"You been bothered with headaches lately?"

"Off and on--nasty sort of twinges. If I trusted myself with a
carpenter, I'd let you give me a check-up. Well, let's cut this short.
What I was going to say ... let's see ... oh, since Timmy seldom pays
any attention to the dog, why does the dog stick to him like a shadow?"

Clancey grunted.

"That dog's no fool, stupid as he is. Clumsy, homely, and half-witted
enough to sit on a tack for five minutes before he howled--I've seen
him do just about that--he knows when he needs a protector. If it
weren't for Timmy, the hound would have been destroyed long ago as
an act of mercy. Helen and Jerry are resigned to him, of course, for
Timmy's sake, but have you noticed that the dog reacts much the same
as Timmy if they get separated? Casts about at once for a way to
rejoin him, and the longer he's delayed the more he panics. Maybe it's
a two-way switch--maybe Timmy and his dog are indispensable symbols to
each other!"

"You dream up any more lulus like that, you keep them to yourself.
Psychopathic dogs I draw the line at. Clancey, there is only one
conclusion to be drawn from these here solemn deliberations. Throw out
the textbooks and roll with the punches."

"Amen."


