_Niccola_ was very well equipped, radar-wise. She'd been a type G8 Survey
ship, and on her last stay in port she'd been rebuilt especially to hunt
for and make contact with Plumies. Since the discovery of their
existence, that was the most urgent business of the Space Survey. It
might well be the most important business of the human race--on which its
survival or destruction would depend. Other remodeled ships had gone out
before the _Niccola_, and others would follow until the problem was
solved. Meanwhile the _Niccola's_ twenty-four rocket tubes and
stepped-up drive and computer-type radar system equipped her for
Plumie-hunting as well as any human ship could be. Still, if she'd been
lured deep into the home system of the Plumies, the prospects were not
good.

       *       *       *       *       *

The new setup began its operation, instantly the last contact closed. The
three-dimensional map served as a matrix to control it. The
information-beam projector swung and flung out its bundle of
oscillations. It swung and flashed, and swung and flashed. It had to
examine every relatively nearby object for a constitution of silicon
bronze and a rounded shape. The nearest objects had to be examined first.
Speed was essential. But three-dimensional scanning takes time, even at
some hundreds of pulses per minute.

Nevertheless, the information came in. No other silicon-bronze object
within a quarter-million miles. Within half a million. A million. A
million and a half. Two million ...

Baird called the navigation room.

"Looks like a single Plumie ship, sir," he reported. "At least there's
one ship which is nearest by a very long way."

"_Hah!_" grunted the skipper. "_Then we'll pay him a visit. Keep an open
line, Mr. Baird!_" His voice changed. "_Mr. Taine! Report here at once to
plan tactics!_"

Baird shook his head, to himself. The _Niccola's_ orders were to make
contact without discovery, if such a thing were possible. The ideal would
be a Plumie ship or the Plumie civilization itself, located and subject
to complete and overwhelming envelopment by human ships--before the
Plumies knew they'd been discovered. And this would be the human ideal
because humans have always had to consider that a stranger might be
hostile, until he'd proven otherwise.

Such a viewpoint would not be optimism, but caution. Yet caution was
necessary. It was because the Survey brass felt the need to prepare for
every unfavorable eventuality that Taine had been chosen as weapons
officer of the _Niccola_. His choice had been deliberate, because he was
a xenophobe. He had been a problem personality all his life. He had a
seemingly congenital fear and hatred of strangers--which in mild cases is
common enough, but Taine could not be cured without a complete breakdown
of personality. He could not serve on a ship with a multiracial crew,
because he was invincibly suspicious of and hostile to all but his own
small breed. Yet he seemed ideal for weapons officer on the _Niccola_,
provided he never commanded the ship. Because _if_ the Plumies were
hostile, a well-adjusted, normal man would never think as much like them
as a Taine. He was capable of the kind of thinking Plumies might
practice, if they were xenophobes themselves.

But to Baird, so extreme a precaution as a known psychopathic condition
in an officer was less than wholly justified. It was by no means certain
that the Plumies would instinctively be hostile. Suspicious, yes.
Cautious, certainly. But the only fact known about the Plumie
civilization came from the cairns and silicon-bronze inscribed tablets
they'd left on oxygen-type worlds over a twelve-hundred-light-year range
in space, and the only thing to be deduced about the Plumies themselves
came from the decorative, formalized symbols like feathery plumes which
were found on all their bronze tablets. The name "Plumies" came from that
symbol.

Now, though, Taine was called to the navigation room to confer on
tactics. The _Niccola_ swerved and drove toward the object Baird
identified as a Plumie ship. This was at 05 hours 10 minutes ship time.
The human ship had a definite velocity sunward, of course. The Plumie
ship had been concealed by the meteor swarm of a totally unknown comet.
It was an excellent way to avoid observation. On the other hand, the
_Niccola_ had been mapping, which was bound to attract attention. Now
each ship knew of the other's existence. Since the _Niccola_ had been
detected, she had to carry out orders and attempt a contact to gather
information.

       *       *       *       *       *

Baird verified that the _Niccola's_ course was exact for interception at
her full-drive speed. He said in a flat voice:

"I wonder how the Plumies will interpret this change of course? They know
we're aware they're not a meteorite. But charging at them without even
trying to communicate could look ominous. We could be stupid, or too
arrogant to think of anything but a fight." He pressed the skipper's call
and said evenly: "Sir, I request permission to attempt to communicate
with the Plumie ship. We're ordered to try to make friends if we know
we've been spotted."

Taine had evidently just reached the navigation room. His voice snapped
from the speaker:

"_I advise against that, sir! No use letting them guess our level of
technology!_"

Baird said coldly:

"They've a good idea already. We beamed them for data."

There was silence, with only the very faint humming sound which was
natural in the ship in motion. It would be deadly to the nerves if there
were absolute silence. The skipper grumbled:

"_Requests and advice! Dammit! Mr. Baird, you might wait for orders! But
I was about to ask you to try to make contact through signals. Do so._"

His speaker clicked off. Baird said:

"It's in our laps. Diane. And yet we have to follow orders. Send the
first roll."

Diane had a tape threaded into a transmitter. It began to unroll through
a pickup head. She put on headphones. The tape began to transmit toward
the Plumie. Back at base it had been reasoned that a pattern of
clickings, plainly artificial and plainly stating facts known to both
races, would be the most reasonable way to attempt to open contact. The
tape sent a series of cardinal numbers--one to five. Then an addition
table, from one plus one to five plus five. Then a multiplication table
up to five times five. It was not startlingly intellectual information to
be sent out in tiny clicks ranging up and down the radio spectrum. But it
was orders.

Baird sat with compressed lips. Diane listened for a repetition of any of
the transmitted signals, sent back by the Plumie. The speakers about the
radar room murmured the orders given through all the ship. Radar had to
be informed of all orders and activity, so it could check their results
outside the ship. So Baird heard the orders for the engine room to be
sealed up and the duty-force to get into pressure suits, in case the
_Niccola_ fought and was hulled. Damage-control parties reported
themselves on post, in suits, with equipment ready. Then Taine's voice
snapped: "_Rocket crews, arm even-numbered rockets with chemical
explosive warheads. Leave odd-numbered rockets armed with atomics. Report
back!_"

Diane strained her ears for possible re-transmission of the _Niccola's_
signals, which would indicate the Plumie's willingness to try
conversation. But she suddenly raised her hand and pointed to the
radar-graph instrument. It repeated the positioning of dots which were
stray meteoric matter in the space between worlds in this system. What
had been a spot--the Plumie ship--was now a line of dots. Baird pressed
the button.

"Radar reporting!" he said curtly. "The Plumie ship is heading for us.
I'll have relative velocity in ten seconds."

He heard the skipper swear. Ten seconds later the Doppler measurement
became possible. It said the Plumie plunged toward the _Niccola_ at miles
per second. In half a minute it was tens of miles per second. There was
no re-transmission of signals. The Plumie ship had found itself
discovered. Apparently it considered itself attacked. It flung itself
into a headlong dash for the _Niccola_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Time passed--interminable time. The sun flared and flamed and writhed in
emptiness. The great gas-giant planet rolled through space in splendid
state, its moonlets spinning gracefully about its bulk. The
oxygen-atmosphere planet to sunward was visible only as a crescent, but
the mottlings on its lighted part changed as it revolved--seas and
islands and continents receiving the sunlight as it turned. Meteor
swarms, so dense in appearance on a radar screen, yet so tenuous in
reality, floated in their appointed orbits with a seeming vast leisure.

The feel of slowness was actually the result of distance. Men have always
acted upon things close by. Battles have always been fought within
eye-range, anyhow. But it was actually 06 hours 35 minutes ship time
before the two spacecraft sighted each other--more than two hours after
they plunged toward a rendezvous.

The Plumie ship was a bright golden dot, at first. It decelerated
swiftly. In minutes it was a rounded, end-on disk. Then it swerved
lightly and presented an elliptical broadside to the _Niccola_. The
_Niccola_ was in full deceleration too, by then. The two ships came very
nearly to a stop with relation to each other when they were hardly twenty
miles apart--which meant great daring on both sides.

Baird heard the skipper grumbling:

"_Damned cocky!_" He roared suddenly: "_Mr. Baird! How've you made out in
communicating with them?_"

"Not at all, sir," said Baird grimly. "They don't reply."

He knew from Diane's expression that there was no sound in the headphones
except the frying noise all main-sequence stars give out, and the
infrequent thumping noises that come from gas-giant planets' lower
atmospheres, and the Jansky-radiation hiss which comes from everywhere.

The skipper swore. The Plumie ship lay broadside to, less than a score of
miles away. It shone in the sunlight. It acted with extraordinary
confidence. It was as if it dared the _Niccola_ to open fire.

Taine's voice came out of a speaker, harsh and angry:

"_Even-numbered tubes prepare to fire on command._"

Nothing happened. The two ships floated sunward together, neither
approaching nor retreating. But with every second, the need for action of
some sort increased.

"_Mr. Baird!_" barked the skipper. "_This is ridiculous! There must be
some way to communicate! We can't sit here glaring at each other forever!
Raise them! Get some sort of acknowledgment!_"

"I'm trying," said Baird bitterly, "according to orders!"
