hundred and fifty pounds. He was a rugged biped with something saurian
in his ancestry; for his skin was scaled, and bony plates grew into a
low crown upon his long skull. His arms and legs were heavy and bowed,
with joints obscured by thick muscles and loose skin. Mayne was struck
by the fancy that the Kappan's color, a blend of brown and olive, was
that of a small dragon who had achieved a good suntan. A yellow kilt was
his main article of attire, although he wore a few decorations of
polished bone.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the Terrans stepped forward. He wore a semimilitary uniform.

"I suppose you're Louis Mayne?" he asked.

"Right," answered Mayne. "You would be Captain Voorhis, of the
_Gemsbok_?"

[Illustration]

"Check. This here is Eemakh. He's more or less chief of the village, or
tribe, or whatever you wanna call it."

Mayne found his gaze sinking into catlike slits of jet in a pair of huge
orange eyes shaded by massive brow ridges. The native made some
statement in a clicking language that had a harsh, choppy rhythm.

"He welcomes you to Kappa," Haruhiku interpreted. "He hopes the gods
will not be displeased."

"What a warm welcome!" commented Mayne. "Have you been getting along
that well, Captain Voorhis?"

"Just about," said the spacer. "One of my boys knows a few words. Rest
of the time, we make signs. I gotta admit they ain't been too
unfriendly."

"But they _have_ seized your ship?"

"You're damn' right! That insurance guy they sent out don't see it that
way though."

"Where is this representative of the Belt Insurance Company?" asked
Mayne.

"Melin? His ship landed over on the other side of the village, about
half a mile. He oughta be along soon. Must've seen you land."

Mayne wondered whether it were necessary to await the arrival of the
insurance adjustor before asking any questions. To cover his hesitation,
he turned to take his first good look at the hull of the _Gemsbok_.

"What do they think they're doing?" he demanded, staring.

The _Gemsbok_ was--or had been--an ungraceful, thick starship on the
verge of aging into scrap. Towering here between the village and the
huge, bluish-green leaves of the Kappan forest, she was in the process
of being transformed into a planet-bound object of a certain weird
grace.

A framework was being constructed about the hull by a swarm of natives.
They had reached halfway up the ship, which served as a central column.
Much of the exterior appeared to be a network of strangely curved
sections of wood that had been given a high polish. Mayne suspected the
greenish highlights were reflections of the forest color.

"Bone," said Voorhis succinctly. "They collect it from things they catch
in the sea. Main supports of timber, of course, built to fit the hull."

"The fish here grow very large," put in Haruhiku. "If you could call
them fish, that is. I once saw them butchering what looked more like a
dinosaur."

Mayne realized that the bone framework formed a sort of curtain wall. At
the lower levels, some of the natives seemed to be experimenting with a
coating of wet leaves which they were molding to the wall.

"They've soaked them in something they boil out of fish parts," his
pilot explained. "Like the village roofs. When it dries, it's pretty
hard, even waterproof. The stink never dries out."

"But what do they have in their bony little brains?" asked Mayne. "Just
what is that mess supposed to be?"

"A temple, believe it or not," answered Voorhis. "They tell me I set her
down on land sacred to the great god Meeg!"

Mayne looked at Haruhiku.

"Oh, come on, now! I came all the way from--" He stopped as he noticed
the pilot's grave expression. "Oh! That sort of thing _could_ be
serious, I guess."

He imagined he had seen the chief, Eemakh, come alert at the mention of
the local god. Mayne sighed. It was going to be a long day.

He was saved for the time being by a hail from the direction of the
village. A procession was approaching along the set of ruts between
Mayne and the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

The place of honor appeared to be occupied by a two-wheeled cart of
crude but massive design. Upon it rode a Kappan driver, two Kappans with
spears and the look of official guards, and a Terran with a death-grip
upon the side railing. A brace of truculent beasts of frighteningly
saurian mien shuffled ponderously along in the loose harness. From time
to time, one or the other would stumble over a turn in his rut and emit
a menacing rumble as if he suspected his team mate of causing the
misstep.

Before and behind this conveyance marched a guard of honor of Kappan
warriors. The rear contingent kept close to the cart, but the advance
party had opened a noticeable gap between themselves and the hulking
team.

The procession halted, the soldier in charge raised his spear in salute
to Eemakh, and the shaken Terran was assisted to dismount. He introduced
himself to Mayne as Robert Melin.

"Let's go over to the hut they made for us an' sit down," suggested
Voorhis.

Melin, a tall, gloomy blond whose civilian suit seemed a trifle formal
for the surroundings, acceded gratefully. He mopped the dust from his
long face and watched the cart being turned around.
