to her feet and staggered to the kitchen door.

"Barneeey," she bawled, "you all right?"

The column of weird-colored flame had quickly died and only a few
flickering pieces of wood from the cauldron fire burned in scattered
spots about the yard. Of the cauldron, there wasn't a sign.

"Barney," she cried anxiously, "where are you?"

"Here I am, Miz Thompson." Barney's blackened face peered around the
corner of the tractor shed. "You O.K., Miz Thompson?"

"What in thunderation happened?" Hetty called out. "You try to build a
fire with dynamite for kindling?"

Shaken but otherwise unharmed, Barney painfully limped over to the
ranch house porch.

"Don't ask me what happened, m'am," he said. "I just poured that milk
into the slop pot and then put the lid back on and walked off. I heered
this big '_whoosh_' and turned around in time to see the lid fly off
and the kettle begin to tip into the fire and then there was one
helluva blast. It knocked me clean under the tractor shed." He fumbled
in his pocket for a cigarette and shakily lighted it.

Hetty peered out over the yard and then looking up, gasped. Perched
like a rakish derby hat on the arm of the towering pump windmill was
the slop cauldron. "Well I'll be...." Hetty Thompson said.

"You sure you didn't pour gas on that fire to make it burn faster,
Barney Hatfield?" she barked at the handy man.

"No siree," Barney declaimed loudly, "there weren't no gas anywhere
near that fire. Only thing I poured out was that there bad milk." He
paused and scratched his head. "Reckon that funny milk coulda done
that, Miz Thompson? There ain't no gas made what'll blow up nor burn so
funny as that did."

Hetty snorted. "Whoever heard of milk blowing up, you old idiot?" A
look of doubt spread. "You put all that milk in there?"

"No'm, just the one bucket." Barney pointed to the other pail beside
the kitchen door, now half-empty and standing in a pool of liquid
sloshed out by the blast wave. Hetty studied the milk pail for a minute
and then resolutely picked it up and walked out into the yard.

"Only one way to find out," she said. "Get me a tin can, Barney."

She poured about two tablespoons of the milk into the bottom of the can
while Barney collected a small pile of kindling. Removing the milk pail
to a safe distance, Hetty lighted the little pile of kindling, set the
tin can atop the burning wood and scooted several yards away to join
Barney who had been watching from afar. In less than a minute a booming
_whoosh_ sent a miniature column of purple, gaseous flame spouting
from the can. "Well whadda you know about that?" Hetty exclaimed
wonderingly.

The can had flown off the fire a few feet but didn't explode. Hetty
went back to the milk pail and collecting less than a teaspoon full in
the water dipper, walked to the fire. Standing as far back as she could
and still reach over the flames, she carefully sprinkled a few drops of
the liquid directly into the fire and then jumped back. Miniature balls
of purple flame erupted from the fire before she could move. Pieces of
flaming kindling flew in all directions and one slammed Barney across
the back of the neck and sent a shower of sparks down his back.

The handy man let out a yowl of pain and leaped for the watering trough
beside the corral, smoke trailing behind him. Hetty thoughtfully
surveyed the scene of her experiment from beneath raised eyebrows. Then
she grunted with satisfaction, picked up the remaining milk in the pail
and went back to the ranch house. Barney climbed drippingly from the
horse trough.

The kitchen was a mess. Splattered eggs were over everything and broken
glass, crockery and plaster covered the floor, table and counters. Only
one egg remained unbroken. That was the golden egg. Hetty picked it up
and shook it. There was a faint sensation of something moving inside
the tough, metallic-looking shell. It shook almost as a normal egg
might, but not quite. Hetty set the strange object on a shelf and
turned to the task of cleaning up.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Johnny Culpepper, the ranch's other full-time hand and Hetty's
assistant manager, drove the pickup into the yard just before noon. He
parked in the shade of the huge cottonwood tree beside the house and
bounced out with an armload of mail and newspapers. Inside the kitchen
door, he dumped the mail on the sideboard and started to toss his hat
on a wall hook when he noticed the condition of the room. Hetty was
dishing out fragrant, warmed-over stew into three lunch dishes on the
table. She had cleaned up the worst of the mess and changed into a
fresh shirt and jeans. Her iron-gray hair was pulled back in a
still-damp knot at the back after a hasty scrubbing to get out the
gooey mixture of eggs and plaster.

"Holy smoke, Hetty," Johnny said. "What happened here? Your pressure
kettle blow up?" His eyes widened when he saw the lid of the slop
cauldron still embedded in the wall over the stove. His gaze tracked
back and took in the shattered window.

"Had an accident," Hetty said matter-of-factly, putting the last dishes
on the table. "Tell you about it when we eat. Now you go wash up and
call Barney. I want you to put some new glass in that window this
afternoon and get that danged lid outta the wall."

Curious and puzzled, Johnny washed at the kitchen sink and then walked
to the door to shout for Barney. On the other side of the yard, Barney
released the pump windmill clutch. While Johnny watched from the porch,
the weight of the heavy slop cauldron slowly turned the big windmill
and as the arm adorned by the kettle rotated downward, the cast-iron
pot slipped off and fell to the hard-packed ground with a booming
clang.

"Well, for the luvva Pete," Johnny said in amazement. "Hey, Barney,
time to eat. C'mon in."

Barney trudged across the yard and limped into the kitchen to wash.
They sat down to the table. "Now just what have you two been up to,"
Johnny demanded as they attacked the food-laden dishes.

Between mouthfuls, the two older people gave him a rundown on the
morning's mishaps. The more Johnny heard, the wilder it sounded. Johnny
had been a part of the Circle T since he was ten years old. That was
the year Hetty jerked him out of the hands of a Carson City policeman
who had been in the process of hauling the ragged and dirty youngster
to the station house for swiping a box of cookies from a grocery store.
Johnny's mother was dead and his father, once the town's best mechanic,
had turned into the town's best drunk.

During the times his father slept one off, either in the shack the man
and boy occupied at the edge of town, or in the local lockup, Johnny
ran wild.

Hetty took the boy to the ranch for two reasons. Mainly it was the
empty ache in her heart since the death of Big Jim Thompson a year
earlier following a ranch tractor accident that had crushed his chest.
The other was her well-hidden disappointment that she had been
childless. Hetty's bluff, weathered features would never admit to
loneliness or heartache. Beneath the surface, all the warmth and love
she had went out to the scared but belligerent youngster. But she never
let much affection show through until Johnny had become part of her
life. Johnny's father died the following winter after pneumonia brought
on by a night of lying drunk in the cold shack during a blizzard. It
was accepted without legal formality around the county that Johnny
automatically became Hetty's boy.

She cuffed and comforted him into a gawky-happy adolescence, pushed him
through high school and then, at eighteen, sent him off to the
University of California at Davis to learn what the pundits of the
United States Department of Agriculture had to say about animal
husbandry and ranch management.

                     *      *      *      *      *

When Hetty and Barney had finished their recitation, Johnny wore a look
of frank disbelief. "If I didn't know you two better, I'd say you both
been belting the bourbon bottle while I was gone. But this I've got to
see."

They finished lunch and, after Hetty stacked the dishes in the sink,
trooped out to the porch where Johnny went through the same examination
of the milk. Again, a little fire was built in the open safety of the
yard and a few drops of the liquid used to produce the same
technicolored, combustive effects.

"Well, what do you know," Johnny exclaimed, "a four hundred octane
Guernsey cow!"

Johnny kicked out the fire and carried the milk pail to the tractor
shed. He parked the milk on a workbench and gathered up an armful of
tools to repair the blast-torn kitchen. He started to leave but when
the milk bucket caught his eye, he unloaded the tools and fished around
under the workbench for an empty five-gallon gasoline can. He poured
the remaining milk into the closed gasoline can and replaced the cap.
Then he took his tools and a pane of glass from an overhead rack and
headed for the house.

Hetty came into the kitchen as he was prying at the cauldron lid in the
wall.

"You're going to make a worse mess before you're through," she said,
"so I'll just let you finish and then clean up the whole mess
afterwards. I got other things to do anyway."

She jammed a man's old felt hat on her head and left the house. Barney
was unloading the last of the supplies Johnny had brought from Carson
in the truck. Hetty shielded her eyes against the metallic glare of the
afternoon sun. "Gettin' pretty dry, Barney. Throw some salt blocks in
the pickup and I'll run them down to the south pasture and see if the
pumps need to be turned on.

"And you might get that wind pump going in case we get a little breeze
later this afternoon. But in any case, better run the yard pump for an
hour or so and get some water up into the tank. I'll be back as soon as
I take a ride through the pasture. I want to see how that Angus
yearling is coming that I picked out for house beef."

A few minutes later, Hetty in the pickup disappeared behind a hot swirl
of yellow dust. Barney ambled to the cool pump house beneath the
towering windmill. An electric motor, powered either from the REA line
or from direct current stored in a bank of wet cell batteries, bulked
large in the small shed. To the left, a small, gasoline-driven
generator supplied standby power if no wind was blowing to turn the
arm-driven generator or if the lines happened to be down, as was often
the case in the winter.

Barney threw the switch to start the pump motor. Nothing happened. He
reached for the light switch to test the single bulb hanging from a
cord to the ceiling. Same nothing. Muttering darkly to himself, he
changed the pump engine leads to DC current and closed the switch to
the battery bank. The engine squeaked and whined slowly but when Barney
threw in the clutch to drive the pump, it stopped and just hummed
faintly. Then he opened the AC fuse box.

Johnny had freed the cauldron lid and was knocking out bits of broken
glass from the kitchen window frame before putting in the new glass
when Barney limped into the room.

"That pot busted the pump house 'lectric line, Johnny, when it went
sailing," he said. "Miz Thompson wants to pump up some water and on top
of that, the batteries are down. You got time to fix the line?"

Johnny paused and surveyed the kitchen. "I'm going to be working here
for another hour anyway so Hetty can clean up when she gets back. Why
don't you fire up the gasoline kicker for now and I'll fix the line
when I get through here," he said.

"O.K.," Barney nodded and turned to leave. "Oh, forgot to ask you. Miz
Thompson tell you about the egg?"

"What egg?" Johnny asked.

"The gold one."

Johnny grinned. "Sure, and I saw the goose when I came in. And you're
Jack and the windmill is your beanstalk. Go climb it, Barney and cut
out the fairy tales."

"Naw, Johnny," Barney protested, "I ain't kidding. Miz Thompson got a
gold egg from the hens this morning. At least, it looks kinda like gold
but she says it ain't. See, here it is." He reached into the cupboard
where Hetty had placed the odd egg. He walked over and handed it to
Johnny who was sitting on the sink drain counter to work on the
shattered window.

The younger man turned the egg over in his hand. "It sure feels funny.
Wonder what the inside looks like?" He banged the egg gently against
the edge of the drain board. When it didn't crack, he slammed it
harder, but then realizing that if it did break suddenly, it would
squish onto the floor, he put the egg on the counter and tapped it with
