"You think I'm going to shoot Ravenhurst, maybe? Don't be an idiot." I
started climbing into my vac suit.

"Just a minute, please, Mr. Oak," said a voice from a hidden speaker.
It was Ravenhurst, and he actually sounded apologetic. "You mustn't
blame Mr. Feller; those are my standing orders, and I failed to tell
Mr. Feller to make an exception in your case. The error was mine."

"I know," I said. "I wasn't blaming Mr. Feller. I wasn't even talking
to him. I was addressing you."

"I believe you. Mr. Feller, our guest has gone to all the trouble of
having a suit made with a space under the arm for that gun; I see no
reason to make him remove it." A pause. "Again, Mr. Oak, I apologize.
I really want you to take this job."

I was already taking off the vac suit again.

"But," Ravenhurst continued smoothly, "if I fail to live up to your
ideas of courtesy again, I hope you'll forgive me in advance. I'm
sometimes very forgetful, and I don't like it when a man threatens to
leave my employ twice in the space of fifteen minutes."

"I'm not in your employ yet, Ravenhurst," I said. "If I accept the
job, I won't threaten to quit again unless I mean to carry it through,
and it would take a lot more than common discourtesy to make me do
that. On the other hand, your brand of discourtesy is a shade above
the common."

"I thank you for that, at least," said Ravenhurst. "Show him to my
office, Mr. Feller."

The blond young man nodded wordlessly and led me from the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Walking under low-gee conditions is like nothing else in this
universe. I don't mean trotting around on Luna; one-sixth gee is
practically homelike in comparison. And zero gee is so devoid of
orientation that it gives the sensation of falling endlessly until you
get used to it. But a planetoid is in a different class altogether.

Remember that dream--almost everybody's had it--where you're suddenly
able to fly? It isn't flying exactly; it's a sort of swimming in the
air. Like being underwater, except that the medium around you isn't so
dense and viscous, and you can breathe. Remember? Well, that's the
feeling you get on a low-gee planetoid.

Your arms don't tend to hang at your sides, as they do on Earth or
Luna, because the muscular tension tends to hold them out, just as it
does in zero-gee, but there is still a definite sensation of
up-and-down. If you push yourself off the floor, you tend to float in
a long, slow, graceful arc, provided you don't push too hard. Magnetic
soles are practically a must.

I followed the blond Mr. Feller down a series of long corridors which
had been painted a pale green, which gave me the feeling that I was
underwater. There were doors spaced at intervals along the corridor
walls. Occasionally one of them would open and a busy looking man
would cross the corridor, open another door, and disappear. From
behind the doors, I could hear the drum of distant sounds.

We finally ended up in front of what looked like the only wooden door
in the place. When you're carving an office and residence out of a
nickel-iron planetoid, importing wood from Earth is a purely luxury
matter.

There was no name plate on that mahogany-red door; there didn't need
to be.

Feller touched a thin-lined circle in the door jamb.

"You don't knock?" I asked with mock seriousness.

"No," said Feller, with a straight face. "I have to signal. Knocking
wouldn't do any good. That's just wood veneer over a three-inch-thick
steel slab."

The door opened and I stepped inside.

I have never seen a room quite like it. The furniture was all that
same mahogany--a huge desk, nineteenth century baroque, with carved
and curlicued legs; two chairs carved the same, with padded seats of
maroon leather; and a chair behind the desk that might have doubled as
a bishop's throne, with even fancier carving. Off to one side was a
long couch upholstered in a lighter maroon. The wall-to-wall carpeting
was a rich Burgundy, with a pile deep enough to run a reaper through.
The walls were paneled with mahogany and hung with a couple of huge
tapestries done in maroon, purple, and red. A bookcase along one wall
was filled with books, every one of which had been rebound in maroon
leather.

It was like walking into a cask of old claret. Or old blood.

The man sitting behind the desk looked as though he'd been built to be
the lightest spot in an analogous color scheme. His suit was mauve
with purple piping, and his wide, square, saggy face was florid. On
his nose and cheeks, tiny lines of purple tracing made darker areas in
his skin. His hair was a medium brown, but it was clipped so short
that the scalp showed faintly through, and amid all that overwhelming
background, even the hair looked vaguely violet.

"Come in, Mr. Oak," said Shalimar Ravenhurst.

I walked toward him across the Burgundy carpet while the blond young
man discreetly closed the door behind me, leaving us alone. I didn't
blame him. I was wearing a yellow union suit, and I hate to think what
I must have looked like in that room.

I sat down in one of the chairs facing the desk after giving a brief
shake to a thick-fingered, well-manicured, slightly oily hand.

He opened a crystal decanter that stood on one end of the desk. "Have
some Madeira, Mr. Oak? Or would you like something else? I never drink
spirits at this time of night."

I fought down an impulse to ask for a shot of redeye. "The Madeira
will be fine, Mr. Ravenhurst."

He poured and handed me a stemmed glass nearly brimming with the wine.
I joined him in an appreciative sip, then waited while he made up his
mind to talk.

He leaned across the desk, looking at me with his small, dark eyes. He
had an expression on his face that looked as if it were trying to
sneer and leer at the same time but couldn't get much beyond the
smirk stage.

"Mr. Oak, I have investigated you thoroughly--as thoroughly as it can
be done, at least. My attorneys say that your reputation is A-one;
that you get things done and rarely disappoint a client."

He paused as if waiting for a comment. I gave him nothing.

After a moment, he went on. "I hope that's true, Mr. Oak, because I'm
going to have to trust you." He leaned back in his chair again, his
eyes still on me. "Men very rarely like me, Mr. Oak. I am not a
likable man. I do not pretend to be. That's not my function." He said
it as if he had said it many times before, believed it, and wished it
wasn't so.

"I do not ask that you like me," he continued. "I only ask that you be
loyal to my interests for the duration of this assignment." Another
pause. "I have been assured by others that this will be so. I would
like your assurance."

"If I take the assignment, Mr. Ravenhurst," I told him, "I'll be
working for _you_. I can be bought, but once I'm bought I stay bought.

"Now, what seems to be your trouble?"

He frowned. "Well, now, let's get one thing settled: Are you working
for me, or not?"

"I won't know that until I find out what the job is."

His frown deepened. "Now, see here; this is very confidential work.
What happens if I tell you and you decide not to work for me?"

I sighed. "Ravenhurst, right now, you're paying me to listen to you.
Even if I don't take your job, I'm going to bill you for expenses and
time to come all the way out here. So, as far as listening is
concerned, I'm working for you now. If I don't like the job, I'll
still forget everything I'm told. All right?"

He didn't like it, but he had no choice. "All right," he said. He
polished off his glass of Madeira and refilled it. My own glass was
still nearly full.

"Mr. Oak," he began, "I have two problems. One is minor, the other
major. But I have attempted to blow the minor problem up out of
proportion, so that all the people here at Raven's Rest think that it
is the only problem. They think that I brought you out here for that
reason alone.

"But all that is merely cover-up for the real problem."

"Which is?" I prompted.

He leaned forward again. Apparently, it was the only exercise he ever
got. "You're aware that Viking Spacecraft is one of the corporations
under the management of Ravenhurst Holdings?"

I nodded. Viking Spacecraft built some of the biggest and best
spacecraft in the System. It held most of Ceres--all of it, in fact,
except the Government Reservation. It had moved out to the asteroids a
long time back, after the big mining concerns began cutting up the
smaller asteroids for metal. The raw materials are easier to come by
out here than they are on Earth, and it's a devil of a lot easier to
build spacecraft under low-gee conditions than it is under the pull of
Earth or Luna or Mars.

"Do you know anything about the experimental robotic ships being built
on Eros?" Ravenhurst asked.

"Not much," I admitted. "I've heard about them, but I don't know any
of the details." That wasn't quite true, but I've found it doesn't pay
to tell everybody everything you know.

"The engineering details aren't necessary," Ravenhurst said. "Besides,
I don't know them, myself. The point is that Viking is trying to build
a ship that will be as easy to operate as a flitterboat--a one-man
cargo vessel. Perhaps even a completely automatic job for cargo, and
just use a one-man crew for the passenger vessels. Imagine how that
would cut the cost of transportation in the Solar System! Imagine how
it would open up high-speed cargo transfer if an automatic vessel
could accelerate at twenty or twenty-five gees to turnover!"

I'll give Ravenhurst this: He had a light in his eyes that showed a
real excitement about the prospect he was discussing, and it wasn't
due entirely to the money he might make.

"Sounds fine," I said. "What seems to be the trouble?"

His face darkened half a shade. "The company police suspect sabotage,
Mr. Oak."

"How? What kind?"

[Illustration]

"They don't know. Viking has built six ships of that type--the McGuire
class, the engineers call it. Each one has been slightly different
than the one before, of course, as they ironed out the bugs in their
operation. But each one has been a failure. Not one of them would pass
the test for space-worthiness."

"Not a failure of the drive or the ordinary mechanisms of the ship, I
take it?"

Ravenhurst sniffed. "Of course not. The brain. The ships became, as
you might say, _non compos mentis_. As a matter of fact, when the last
one simply tried to burrow into the surface of Eros by reversing its
drive, one of the roboticists said that a coroner's jury would have
returned a verdict of 'suicide while of unsound mind' if there were
inquests held for spaceships."

"That doesn't make much sense," I said.

"No. It doesn't. It isn't sensible. Those ships' brains shouldn't have
behaved that way. Robot brains don't go mad unless they're given
instructions to do so--conflicting orders, erroneous information, that
sort of thing. Or, unless they have actual physical defects in the
brains themselves."

"The brains can handle the job of flying a ship all right, though?" I
asked. "I mean, they have the capacity for it?"

"Certainly. They're the same type that's used to control the
automobile traffic on the Eastern Seaboard Highway Network of North
America. If they can control the movement of millions of cars, there's
