breath. "What an effort. The energy barrier, you know. Frightfully hard
to make the jump." He broke off sharply, staring out the window. "Dear
me! Are we going _east_?"

"I'm afraid so, friend."

"Oh, dear. I wanted _Florida_."

"Well, you seem to have drifted through into the wrong airplane," said
Pete. "Why Florida?"

The Grdznth looked at him reproachfully. "The Wives, of course. The
climate is so much better, and they mustn't be disturbed, you know."

"Of course," said Pete. "In their condition. I'd forgotten."

"And I'm told that things have been somewhat unpleasant in the East just
now," said the Grdznth.

Pete thought of Tommy, red-faced and frantic, beating off hordes of
indignant citizens. "So I hear," he said. "How many more of you are
coming through?"

"Oh, not many, not many at all. Only the Wives--half a million or
so--and their spouses, of course." The creature clicked his talons
nervously. "We haven't much more time, you know. Only a few more weeks,
a few months at the most. If we couldn't have stopped over here, I just
don't know _what_ we'd have done."

"Think nothing of it," said Pete indulgently. "It's been great having
you."

The passengers within earshot stiffened, glaring at Pete. The fat lady
was whispering indignantly to her seat companion. Junior had half
emerged from his mother's collar; he was busy sticking out his tongue at
the Grdznth.

The creature shifted uneasily. "Really, I think--perhaps Florida would
be better."

"Going to try it again right now? Don't rush off," said Pete.

"Oh, I don't mean to rush. It's been lovely, but--" Already the Grdznth
was beginning to fade out.

"Try four miles down and a thousand miles southeast," said Pete.

The creature gave him a toothy smile, nodded once, and grew more
indistinct. In another five seconds the seat was quite empty. Pete
leaned back, grinning to himself as the angry rumble rose around him
like a wave. He was a Public Relations man to the core--but right now he
was off duty. He chuckled to himself, and the passengers avoided him
like the plague all the way to New Philly.

But as he walked down the gangway to hail a cab, he wasn't smiling so
much. He was wondering just how high Tommy was hanging him, this time.

       *       *       *       *       *

The lobby of the Public Relations Bureau was swarming like an upturned
anthill when Pete disembarked from the taxi. He could almost smell the
desperate tension of the place. He fought his way past scurrying clerks
and preoccupied poll-takers toward the executive elevators in the rear.

On the newly finished seventeenth floor, he found Tommy Heinz pacing the
corridor like an expectant young father. Tommy had lost weight since
Pete had last seen him. His ruddy face was paler, his hair thin and
ragged as though chunks had been torn out from time to time. He saw Pete
step off the elevator, and ran forward with open arms. "I thought you'd
never get here!" he groaned. "When you didn't call, I was afraid you'd
let me down."

"Me?" said Pete. "I'd never let down a pal."

The sarcasm didn't dent Tommy. He led Pete through the ante-room into
the plush director's office, bouncing about excitedly, his words
tumbling out like a waterfall. He looked as though one gentle shove
might send him yodeling down Market Street in his underdrawers. "Hold
it," said Pete. "Relax, I'm not going to leave for a while yet. Your
girl screamed something about a senator as we came in. Did you hear
her?"

Tommy gave a violent start. "Senator! Oh, dear." He flipped a desk
switch. "What senator is that?"

"Senator Stokes," the girl said wearily. "He had an appointment. He's
ready to have you fired."

"All I need now is a senator," Tommy said. "What does he want?"

"Guess," said the girl.

"Oh. That's what I was afraid of. Can you keep him there?"

"Don't worry about that," said the girl. "He's growing roots. They swept
around him last night, and dusted him off this morning. His appointment
was for _yesterday_, remember?"

"Remember! Of course I remember. Senator Stokes--something about a riot
in Boston." He started to flip the switch, then added, "See if you can
get Charlie down here with his giz."

He turned back to Pete with a frantic light in his eye. "Good old Pete.
Just in time. Just. Eleventh-hour reprieve. Have a drink, have a
cigar--do you want my job? It's yours. Just speak up."

