
"Of course, now and then you will find one of the old hands who will
accept the Psi Corps, so long as it isn't jammed down his throat. Just
pray that you have somebody like that aboard your new ship, although I
must admit, it isn't very likely."

       *       *       *       *       *

"All right, all right," the commander growled with irritation.
"But--with your permission, sir--I still think my particular method of
assignment is a lousy approach and I don't like it. I still think it
will make for very bad discipline."

"Whether you like it or not, commander, that is the way it will have to
be accomplished. We are simply recognizing a real situation for what it
is, and compromising with it."

"But couldn't this change in command personnel be postponed until--"

"If it could be postponed," the captain replied acidly, "you may rest
assured we would not be employing disagreeable--and somewhat
questionable--devices to speed it up. Unfortunately, our outlying
detectors have identified the approach of a fleet of starships. They can
only be reinforcements for the aliens, about equal to what they already
have here, and they will arrive in two years. If those two forces can
join each other, there will be no need to worry further about discipline
among the humans. There will shortly be no humans left. So we are
preparing a full-scale assault against those aliens now within our
system in the very near future. And we simply must have all tactical
combat devices commanded by men with extra-rational mental abilities in
order to deal with them effectively."

"Effectively?" the commander snorted. "Thirty-two per cent effective,
according to the figures they gave us in the Psi school."

"That is considerably better than twelve per cent, which is the
statistical likelihood of survival in combat without it," the captain
retorted.

Nervously, the commander scratched the back of his thin neck, grimmaced
and nodded.

"The first and most important problem for you is to gain the confidence
of your crew. They will be worse than useless to you without it, and it
will be a very difficult job, even with all the advice and help our men
can give you. And you will have to be careful--don't forget what I said
about assassinations. The way we are going about it, that you find so
disagreeable, should minimize that danger, but you can't ever tell what
will happen."

He held up his hand to forestall a comment from the other and continued
on. "There are conditions for everything, commander. Men react according
to certain patterns, given the proper circumstances. It is
characteristic of the sort of men you will encounter on your new ship
that they are unlikely to take the initiative in such matters, partly
from their early training and partly from their association with a CO
who pretty well dominated them. However, they will readily condone it if
somebody else does take the initiative in their behalf. Particularly, if
that man has some official authority over them, and there is always
somebody like that. They will not only condone the action, they will
positively be happy about it, because it will tend to bolster their
sense of security--such as it is. You know the sort of thing--father
hunger. Somebody to take care of them the way their old CO did."

The captain sighed. "So you see, commander, you are going into a
double-edged situation. Everything in it that can accrue to your
advantage, could also get you promptly killed."

"I see. First I fight with my men," the commander said bitterly. "And if
I win that battle, I will be permitted to fight the aliens with a
thirty-two per cent possibility of living through the first encounter of
that."

"It's always been that way to some extent," the captain replied
sympathetically, "in every command situation since the world began. Only
right now is a little worse than anyone can remember."

       *       *       *       *       *

The commander departed. But about a month later, ensuing circumstances
brought one Lieutenant Maise to the same office building. He was not, of
course, ushered into the august presence of the captain, who was seeing
more important people than lieutenants that day.

Maise had been there for several hours every day for the previous three,
and he went immediately to the desk of the Special Reports Officer. The
SR Officer was a lieutenant also, a combination of psychologist and
writer, whose business it was to make sure that Special Reports on
morale matters were presented in the properly dramatic fashion so that
that indefinable aura of reality, customarily omitted from official
historical documents, could be included. The Evaluation Division, back
on Earth, was very fussy about that "aura."

"Ah, good afternoon sir," the SR Officer greeted him. "Glad to see you
again."

Maise nodded curtly and took a seat beside the desk.

"I think we are pretty well finished now--"

"We better be," Maise interrupted. "My ship is pulling out in four
hours."

"Right on the button, eh?" said the SR Officer. He fumbled in a desk
drawer and withdrew a bulky folder, from which he extracted a smaller
manuscript, and handed it to Maise. "I think you will find it complete
and suitably expressive, now, sir."

Maise scowled as he accepted the document. "It makes no difference to
me. I didn't want to get involved with the report in the first place."

"I know," the SR Officer nodded agreeably. "But don't worry. Nobody is
going to prefer any charges against anybody in any case. What they want
back on Earth is all the information they can get on morale problems, so
that they can more effectively implement their planning. You know how it
is."

"How would _I_ know?"

The SR Officer snapped, "I can understand your sentiments, but don't
blame me. Remember, I'm just a lieutenant, and I just work here in
Morale."

"Sure," Maise said, cracking a grin on his stiff lips. "Sorry. I know it
isn't your fault."

He opened the report, and commenced reading.

       *       *       *       *       *

TITLE:

     SPECIAL CONFIDENTIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL REPORT, prepared in
     collaboration with Lieutenant E. G. von Wald, Special Reports
     Officer, Mars XLV Base.

TO:

     COMMANDING OFFICER
     Psychological Study and Evaluation District
     Central Command Authority
     Unified Human Defense Forces

FROM:

