
Wang was beginning to realize that the thing was a spaceship, not an
airship. By this time, he could see the thing more clearly. He had never
actually seen a spacecraft, but he'd seen enough of them on television
to know what they looked like. This one didn't look like a standard type
at all, and it didn't behave like one, but it looked and behaved even
less like an airship, and Wang knew enough to be aware that he did not
necessarily know every type of spaceship ever built.

In shape, it resembled the old rocket-propelled jobs that had been used
for the first probings into space more than a century before, rather
than the fat ovoids he was used to. But there were no signs of rocket
exhausts, and yet the ship was very obviously slowing, so it must have
an inertia drive.

It was coming in much lower now, on a line north of him, headed almost
due east. He urged the mare forward in order to try to keep up with the
craft, although it was obviously traveling at several hundred miles an
hour--hardly a horse's pace.

Still, it was slowing rapidly very rapidly. Maybe ...

He kept the mare moving.

The strange ship skimmed along the treetops in the distance and
disappeared from sight. Then there was a thunderous crash, a tearing of
wood and foliage, and a grinding, plowing sound.

For a few seconds afterward, there was silence. Then there came a soft
rumble, as of water beginning to boil in some huge but distant samovar.
It seemed to go on and on and on.

And there was a bluish, fluctuating glow on the horizon.

_Radioactivity?_ Wang wondered. Surely not an atomic-powered ship
without safety cutoffs in this day and age. Still, there was always the
possibility that the cutoffs had failed.

He pulled out his radiophone and thumbed the call button again.

This time there was no delay. "Yes?"

"How are the radiation detectors behaving there, Grandfather?"

"One moment. I shall see." There was a silence. Then: "No unusual
activity, young Wang. Why?"

Wang told him. Then he asked: "Did you get hold of the air transport
authorities?"

"Yes. They have no missing aircraft, but they're checking with the space
fields. The way you describe it, the thing must be a spaceship of some
kind."

"I think so too. I wish I had a radiation detector here, though. I'd
like to know whether that thing is hot or not. It's only a couple of
miles away--maybe a little more--and if that blue glow is ionization
caused by radiation, it's much too close for comfort."

"I think any source that strong would register on our detectors here,
young Wang," said the old man in his dry voice. "However, I agree that
it might not be the pinnacle of wisdom to approach the source too
closely."

"Clear your mind of worry, Grandfather," Wang said. "I accept your words
of wisdom and will go no nearer. Meanwhile, you had best put in a call
to Central Headquarters Fire Control. There's going to be a blaze if I'm
any judge unless they get here fast with plenty of fire equipment."

"I'll see to it," said his grandfather, cutting off.

The bluish glow in the sky had quite died away by now, and the distant
rumbling was fading, too. And, oddly enough, there was not much smoke in
the distance. There was a small cloud of gray vapor that rose,
streamer-like, from where the glow had been, but even that was
dissipated fairly rapidly in the chill breeze. Quite obviously there
would be no fire. After several more minutes of watching, he was sure of
it. There couldn't have been much heat produced in the explosion--if it
could really be called an explosion.

Then Wang saw something moving in the trees between himself and the spot
where the ship had come down. He couldn't see quite what it was, there
in the dimness under the hanging, grasslike red strands from the trees,
but it looked like someone crawling.

"Halloo, there!" he called out. "Are you hurt?"

There was no answer. Perhaps whoever it was did not understand Russian.
Wang's command of English wasn't too good, but he called out in that
language.

Still there was no answer. Whoever it was had crawled out of sight.

Then he realized it couldn't be anyone crawling. No one could even have
run the distance between himself and the ship in the time since it had
hit, much less crawled.

He frowned. A wolf, then? Possibly. They weren't too common, but there
were still some of them around.

He unholstered the heavy pistol at his side.

And as he slid the barrel free, he became the first human being ever to
see the Nipe.

For an instant, as the Nipe came out from behind a tree fifteen feet
away, Wang Kulichenko froze as he saw those four baleful violet eyes
glaring at him from the snouted head. Then he jerked up his pistol to
fire.

He was much too late. His reflexes were too slow by far. The Nipe
launched himself across the intervening space in a blur of speed that
would have made a leopard seem slow. Two of the alien's hands slapped
aside the weapon with a violence that broke the man's wrist, while
other hands slammed at the human's skull.

Wang Kulichenko hardly had time to be surprised before he died.




_[3]_


The Nipe stood quietly for a moment, looking down at the thing he had
killed. His stomachs churned with disgust. He ignored the fading
hoofbeats of the slave-animal from which he had knocked the thing that
lay on the ground with a crushed skull. The slave-animal was
unintelligent and unimportant.

This was--had been--the intelligent one.

But so slow! So incredibly slow! And so weak and soft!

It seemed impossible that such a poorly equipped beast could have
survived long enough on any world to become the dominant life-form.

Then again, perhaps it was not the dominant form. Perhaps it was merely
a higher form of slave-animal. He would have to do more investigating.

He picked up the weapon the thing had been carrying and examined it
carefully. The mechanism was unfamiliar, but a glance at the muzzle told
him it was a projectile weapon of some sort. The spiraling grooves in
the barrel were obviously intended to impart a spin to the projectile,
to give it gyroscopic stability while in flight.

He tossed the weapon aside. Now there was a certain compassion in his
thoughts as he looked again at the dead thing. It must surely have
thought it was faced with a wild animal, the Nipe decided. Surely no
being would carry a weapon for use against members of its own or
another intelligent species.

He examined the rest of the equipment on the thing. There was very
little further information. The fabric in which it wrapped itself was
crude, but ingeniously put together, and its presence indicated that the
being needed some sort of protection against the temperature. It
appeared to have a thermal insulating quality. Evidently the creature
was used to a warmer climate. That served as additional information to
help substantiate his observation from space that the areas farther
south were the ones containing the major centers of population. The tilt
of this planet on its axis would tend to give the weather a cyclic
variation, but it appeared that the areas around the poles remained
fairly cold even when the incidence of radiation from the primary was at
maximum.

It would have been good, he decided, if he had stopped the slave-animal.
There had been more equipment on the thing's back which would have given
him more information upon which to base a judgment as to the level of
civilization of the dead being. That, however, was no longer
practicable, so he dismissed the thought from his mind.

The next question was, what should he do with the body?

Should he dispose of it properly, as one should with a validly slain
foe?

It didn't seem that he could do anything else, and yet his stomachs
wanted to rebel at the thought. After all, it wasn't as if the thing
were really a proper being. It was astonishing to find another
intelligent race; none had ever been found before, although the
existence of such had been postulated. There were certain criteria that
must be met by any such beings, however.

It must have manipulatory organs, such as this being very obviously did
have--organs very much like his own. But there were only two, which
argued that the being lacked dexterity. The organs for walking were
encased in protective clothing too stiff to allow them to be used as
manipulators.

He ripped off one of the boots and looked at the exposed foot. The thumb
was not opposed. Obviously such an organ was not much good for
manipulation.

He pried open the eating orifice and inspected it carefully. Ah! The
creature was omnivorous, judging by its teeth. There were both rending
and grinding teeth. That certainly argued for intelligence, since it
showed that the being could behave in a gentlemanly fashion. Still, it
was not conclusive.

If they _were_ intelligent, it was most certainly necessary for him to
show that he was also civilized and a gentleman. On the other hand, the
slowness and lack of strength of this particular specimen argued that
the species was of a lower order than the Nipe, which made the question
even more puzzling.

In the end, the question was rendered unnecessary for the time being,
since the problem was taken out of his hands.

A sound came from the ground a few yards away. It was an insistent
buzzing. Cautiously, the Nipe approached the thing.

_Buzz-buzz! Buzz-buzz-buzzzzzz!_

It was an instrument of some kind. He recognized it as the device that
he had seen the dead being speak into while he, himself, had been
watching from the concealment of the undergrowth, trying to decide
whether or not to approach. The device was obviously a communicator of
some kind, and someone at the other end was trying to make contact.

If it were not answered, whoever was calling would certainly deduce that
something had gone wrong at this end. And, of course, there was no way
for it to be answered.

It would be necessary, then, to leave the body here for others of its
kind to find. Doubtless they would dispose of it properly.

He would have to leave quickly. It was necessary that he find one of
their centers of production or supply, and he would have to do it alone,
with only the equipment he had on him. The utter destruction of his ship
had left him seriously hampered.

He began moving, staying in the protection of the trees. He had no way
of knowing whether investigators would come by air or on the
slave-animals, and there was no point in taking chances.

His sense of ethics still bothered him. It was not at all civilized to
leave a body at the mercy of lesser animals or monocells in that
fashion. What kind of monster would they think he was?

Still, there was no help for it. If they caught him, they might think
him a lower animal and shoot him. He would not have put an onus like
that upon them.

He moved on.




_[4]_


Government City was something of a paradox. It was the largest capital
city, in terms of population, that had ever been built on Earth, and
yet, again in terms of population, it was nowhere near as large as Tokyo
or London. The solution to the paradox lies in discovering that the term
"population" is used in two different senses, thus exposing the logical
fallacy of the undistributed middle. If, in referring to London or
Tokyo, the term "population" is restricted to those and only those who
are actively engaged in the various phases of actual government--as it
is when referring to Government City--the apparent paradox resolves
itself.

Built on the slagged-down remains of New York's Manhattan Island, which
had been destroyed by a sun bomb during the Holocaust nearly a century
before, Government City occupied all but the upper three miles of the
island, and the population consisted almost entirely of men and women
engaged, either directly or indirectly, in the business of governing a
planet. There were no shopping centers and no entertainment areas. The
small personal flyer, almost the same size as the old gasoline-driven
automobile, could, because of its inertia drive, move with the
three-dimensional ability of a hummingbird, so the rivers that cut the
island off from the mainland were no barrier. The shopping and
entertainment centers of Brooklyn, Queens, and Jersey were only five
minutes away, even through the thickest, slowest-moving traffic. It was
the personal flyer, not the clumsy airplane, that had really eliminated
distance along with national boundaries.

The majority of the government officers' homes were off the island, too,
but this commuting did not cause any great fluctuation of the island's
population. A city that governs a planet must operate at full capacity
twenty-four hours a day, and there was a "rush hour" every three hours
as the staggered six-hour shifts changed.

Physically the planet still revolved about the sun; politically, Earth
revolved around Government City.

In one of the towering buildings a group of men sat comfortably in a
medium-sized room, watching a screen that, because of the
three-dimensional quality and the color fidelity of the scene it showed,
might have been a window, except that the angle was wrong. They were
looking down from an apparent height of forty feet on a clearing in a
paper-tree forest in Siberia.

The clearing was not a natural one. The trees had been splintered,
uprooted, and pushed away from the center of the long, elliptical area.
The center of the area was apparently empty.

One of the men, whose fingers were touching a control panel in the arm
of his chair, said: "That is where the ship made its crash landing. As
you can see from the relatively light damage, it was moving at no great
speed when it hit. From the little information we have--mostly from a
momentary radar recording made when the incoming vessel was picked up
for a few seconds by the instruments of Transpolar Airways, when it
crossed the path of one of their freight orbits--it is estimated that
the craft was decelerating at between fifteen and seventeen gravities.
The rate of change of acceleration in centimeters per second cubed is
unknown, but obviously so small as to be negligible.

"This picture was taken by the fire prevention flyers that came in
response to an urgent call by the assistant of the forest ranger who was
in charge of this section."

"There was no fire?" asked one of the other men, looking closely at the
image.

"None," said the speaker. "We can't yet say what actually happened to
the ship. We have only a couple of hints. One of our weather observers,
orbiting at four hundred miles, picked up a tremendous flash of hard
ultraviolet radiation in the area around the three thousand Angstrom
band. There must have been quite a bit of shorter wavelength radiation,
but the Earth's atmosphere would filter most of it out.

"A recording of the radiophone discussion between the ranger and his
assistant is the only other description we have. The ranger described a
bluish glow over the site. Part of that may have been due to actual
blue light given off by the--well, call it 'burning'; that word will do
for now. But some of the blue glow was almost certainly due to
ionization of the air by the hard ultraviolet. Look at this next
picture."

The scene remained the same, and yet there was a definite change.

"This was taken three days later. If you'll notice, the normal rust-red
of the foliage has darkened to a purplish brown in the area around the
crash site. Now a Martian paper-tree, even in the mutated form, is quite
resistant to U-V, since it evolved under the thin atmosphere of Mars,
which gives much less protection from ultraviolet radiation than Earth's
does. Nevertheless, those trees have a bad case of sunburn."

"And no heat," said a third man. "Wow."

"Oh, there was some heat, but not anywhere near what you'd expect. The
nearer trees were rather dry, as though they'd been baked, but only at
the surface, and the temperature probably didn't rise much above
one-fifty centigrade."

"How about X rays?" asked still another man. "Anything shorter than a
hundred Angstroms detected?"

"No. If there was any radiation that hard, there was no detector close
enough to measure it. We doubt, frankly, whether there was any."
