"Victoria's boy dying? Here? Oh, the poor thing! And Madrena's back on
Chargon ... the election. Oh, yes, of course. I'll get right over to the
hospital!"

Stetson signed off, broke the contact.

_The High Commissioner's wife yet!_ he thought. Then, because he had to
do it, he walled off his sorrow, got to work.

At the medical center, the oval creche containing Orne hung from ceiling
hooks in a private room. There were humming sounds in the dim, watery
greenness of the room, rhythmic chuggings, sighings. Occasionally, a
door opened almost soundlessly, and a white-clad figure would check the
graph tapes on the creche's meters.

Orne was lingering. He became the major conversation piece at the
internes' coffee breaks: "That agent who was hurt on Heleb, he's still
with us. Man, they must build those guys different from the rest of
us!... Yeah! Understand he's got only about an eighth of his insides ...
liver, kidneys, stomach--all gone.... Lay you odds he doesn't last out
the month.... Look what old sure-thing McTavish wants to bet on!"

On the morning of his eighty-eighth day in the creche, the day nurse
came into Orne's room, lifted the inspection hood, looked down at him.
The day nurse was a tall, lean-faced professional who had learned to
meet miracles and failures with equal lack of expression. However, this
routine with the dying I-A operative had lulled her into a state of
psychological unpreparedness. _Any day now, poor guy_, she thought. And
she gasped as she opened his sole remaining eye, said:

"Did they clobber those dames on Heleb?"

"Yes, sir!" she blurted. "They really did, sir!"

"Good!"

Orne closed his eye. His breathing deepened.

The nurse rang frantically for the doctors.

It had been an indeterminate period in a blank fog for Orne, then a time
of pain and the gradual realization that he was in a creche. Had to be.
He could remember his sudden exposure on Heleb, the explosion--then
nothing. Good old creche. It made him feel safe now, shielded from all
danger.

Orne began to show minute but steady signs of improvement. In another
month, the doctors ventured an intestinal graft that gave him a new
spurt of energy. Two months later, they replaced missing eye and
fingers, restored his scalp line, worked artistic surgery on his burn
scars.

Fourteen months, eleven days, five hours and two minutes after he had
been picked up "as good as dead," Orne walked out of the hospital under
his own power, accompanied by a strangely silent Umbo Stetson.

Under the dark blue I-A field cape, Orne's coverall uniform fitted his
once muscular frame like a deflated bag. But the pixie light had
returned to his eyes--even to the eye he had received from a nameless
and long dead donor. Except for the loss of weight, he looked to be the
same Lewis Orne. If he was different--beyond the "spare parts"--it was
something he only suspected, something that made the idea, "twice-born,"
not a joke.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside the hospital, clouds obscured Marak's green sun. It was
midmorning. A cold spring wind bent the pile lawn, tugged fitfully at
the border plantings of exotic flowers around the hospital's landing
pad.

Orne paused on the steps above the pad, breathed deeply of the chill
air. "Beautiful day," he said.

Stetson reached out a hand to help Orne down the steps, hesitated, put
the hand back in his pocket. Beneath the section chief's look of weary
superciliousness there was a note of anxiety. His big features were set
in a frown. The drooping eyelids failed to conceal a sharp, measuring
stare.

Orne glanced at the sky to the southwest. "The flitter ought to be here
any minute." A gust of wind tugged at his cape. He staggered, caught his
balance. "I _feel_ good."

"You look like something left over from a funeral," growled Stetson.

"Sure--my funeral," said Orne. He grinned. "Anyway, I was getting tired
of that walk-around-type morgue. All my nurses were married."

"I'd almost stake my life that I could trust you," muttered Stetson.

Orne looked at him. "No, no, Stet ... stake _my_ life. I'm used to it."

Stetson shook his head. "No, dammit! I trust you, but you deserve a
peaceful convalescence. We've no right to saddle you with--"

"Stet?" Orne's voice was low, amused.

"Huh?" Stetson looked up.

"Let's save the noble act for someone who doesn't know you," said Orne.
"You've a job for me. O.K. You've made the gesture for your conscience."

Stetson produced a wolfish grin. "All right. So we're desperate, and we
haven't much time. In a nutshell, since you're going to be a house guest
at the Bullones'--we suspect Ipscott Bullone of being the head of a
conspiracy to take over the government."

"What do you mean--_take over the government_?" demanded Orne. "The
Galactic High Commissioner _is_ the government--subject to the
Constitution and the Assemblymen who elected him."

"We've a situation that could explode into another Rim War, and we think
he's at the heart of it," said Stetson. "We've eighty-one touchy
planets, all of them old-line steadies that have been in the League for
years. And on every one of them we have reason to believe there's a clan
of traitors sworn to overthrow the League. Even on your home
planet--Chargon."

"You want me to go home for my convalescence?" asked Orne. "Haven't been
there since I was seventeen. I'm not sure that--"

"No, dammit! We want you as the Bullones' house guest! And speaking of
that, would you mind explaining how they were chosen to ride herd on
you?"

"There's an odd thing," said Orne. "All those gags in the I-A about old
Upshook Ipscott Bullone ... and then I find that his wife went to school
with my mother."

"Have you met Himself?"

"He brought his wife to the hospital a couple of times."

Again, Stetson looked to the southwest, then back to Orne. A pensive
look came over his face. "Every schoolkid knows how the Nathians and the
Marakian League fought it out in the Rim War--how the old civilization
fell apart--and it all seems kind of distant," he said.

"Five hundred standard years," said Orne.

"And maybe no farther away than yesterday," murmured Stetson. He cleared
his throat.

       *       *       *       *       *

And Orne wondered why Stetson was moving so cautiously. _Something deep
troubling him._ A sudden thought struck Orne. He said: "You spoke of
trust. Has this conspiracy involved the I-A?"

"We think so," said Stetson. "About a year ago, an R&R archeological
team was nosing around some ruins on Dabih. The place was all but
