of the corporals in your office. That right?"

"Yes, sir," Winfree said. "Peggy and I have set the wedding for
twenty-three December, the day before Potlatch. We'd be delighted
should your duties allow you to attend, Major."

"I'll be there," Major Dampfer promised. "And as a little gift from the
Bureau of Seasonal Gratuities, Winfree, I order you to move out on your
new campaign that same day: twenty-three December." He raised a
gauntleted hand. "No, Captain! Don't protest that you'll be needed here.
Your work is strategy, not tactics. Your plans can be implemented by
your staff while you're off on your honeymoon."

"Whatever you say, sir," Winfree said.

"I'd be further gratified," the Major continued, "if you'd hold the
ceremony right here in your Headquarters Building. We of the BSG must
establish some traditions, Winfree; the other Services have a
century-and-a-half's lead on us in that field. So, if the lovely
corporal approves, we'll make yours a proper military wedding."

"All this is very good of you, sir," Captain Winfree said. "I'm certain
Peggy will be pleased."

"Good!" Major Dampfer said. "I'll handle all the details. Winfree,
you've got the quality we used to know as Old-Fashioned Intestinal
Fortitude, back in the day when a spade was called a spade and no
apologies about it. We need more men like you in the Bureau." He snapped
a salute. "Carry on, Captain; and Happy Potlatch!"

"A Very Happy Potlatch to you, sir!" Winfree said, tossing back the
salute. "And a Merry Xmas!"

Captain Winfree walked to the big window in the outer office to watch
Major Dampfer driven off in his sergeant-chauffeured, scarlet-and-green
BSG Rolls limousine. Then he about-faced without warning to glare at his
little command, the eight non-coms, the twenty-seven Other Ranks, the
four young lieutenants. They all sat silent, watching him as though
waiting for confirmation of an unpleasant rumor. Not a file-cabinet
stood open, not a typewriter was moving. "Listen, you people," Winfree
growled, pointing his swagger-stick like a weapon, not sparing even
Corporal Peggy MacHenery his anger; "We've got a Potlatch Day coming up,
the biggest ever. Now get on the ball, dammit! I don't want to see one
of you stopping for breath again till Xmas Day." The lieutenants and
sergeants flushed; the girl privates jumped their fingers onto
typewriter keys. "Corporal MacHenery," Winfree said, "bring your notepad
to my office."

       *       *       *       *       *

Peggy MacHenery, Corporal, Bureau of Seasonal Gratuities, followed her
commanding officer and husband-designate into his office. "Close the
door, Corporal," Winfree said. Peggy did so, and took her chair next to
his desk, the pad open on her knee and her fountain pen at the ready.
"No dictation," Captain Winfree said. "Please forgive me for taking
valuable official time for a personal matter, Corporal; especially
after that little display of tyranny I just put on out there. Peggy,
Major Dampfer has ordered us to hold our wedding here at District
Headquarters. He'll bring in a transport loaded with BSG brass, fly in a
band to give us a send-off with pibrochs and marches and double-flams;
and he'll probably set up an arch of sabers for us to parade through. Do
you mind all this very much, Peggy?"

       *       *       *       *       *

She snapped her notepad shut. "Daddy will be furious," she said.

"Your dad is already so worked up about your marrying me, a BSG-man,
that a little extra anger won't even show," Winfree said. "I'm convinced
that he's teaching me fencing only in hopes I'll have a fatal accident."

"Nonsense!" Peggy said. She tossed her notebook on the desk and stood to
take Winfree's hand. "Don't make Daddy out a monster, Wes. About the
other thing, the military wedding, I don't care. I'd marry you in a
beer-barrel, if you wanted it that way."

Captain Winfree took the girl's free hand. "Peggy," he said, "you're the
greatest! Now the good news. Major Dampfer has approved my plans for
instituting Birthday Gratuity Quotas in this District. Aren't you glad
for me?"

"Glad?" Peggy demanded, pulling away. "Wes, do you think the consumers
of this District will put up with another invasion of their pocketbooks,
let alone their private sentiments?"

"Peggy, if you're going to gripe every time the Bureau raises the quotas
a notch," Winfree said, "you don't belong in that uniform you're
wearing."

"Want me to take it off?" Peggy challenged, reaching for the top button
of her blouse.

"No, dammit!" Winfree said. "But if you're going to discuss the
propriety of every decision I make, please have the grace to wait till
we're outside District Headquarters to do it."

"Yes, sir; thank you, sir," Peggy said. She saluted. "Is there anything
more you want to chew me out about, sir?"

Winfree saluted back, then growled at himself for the reflex. "Woman,"
he said, "once we're married I want to see your request for discharge
lying here on my desk. How the devil can an officer run an organization
when one of the enlisted personnel, the corporal he's in love with,
persists in subordination?"

"I can't quit," Peggy said. "We'll need my salary, Wes, if only to pay
off our BSG quotas. What with buying Xmas presents, gifts for Mom's Day
and Pop's Day, and sending Birthday Gratuities to every name on our
combined Nearest-and-Dearest lists, we'll be living on rice and soybeans
till you make Light Colonel. Quit? Wes, if you expect to eat regular
after we're married, you'd best put me in for sergeant's stripes."

"Please, Peggy," Winfree asked. "We'll discuss this all tonight, off
duty, if I survive your father's swordplay. For now, please let letters
out to all District wholesalers, telling them of the Birthday Quotas and
the new dating procedures. Have one of the lieutenants open the _secret_
files for you--it's all under 'Operation Nativity.' You can get at it
right away."

"Very well, Captain, sir," Peggy said. "Happy Potlatch, sir." She
about-faced and marched out, banging the office door behind her.

"Happy Potlatch be damned!" Captain Winfree said, flinging his
swagger-stick toward the calendar.

       *       *       *       *       *

The MacHenery home was all gables and pinnacles and spooled
