Congress?"

"I think that is the popular conception," the reporter said in a
patronizing tone.

"Then think again, young man. Analyze the composition of the Senate and
House, and break down the key committee appointments by sexes. You will
find three-fourths of these posts held by women, and the balance are
held by men whose wives are members of the top-level Humanist Party
movement. I say to you that our whole nation is dominated by a handful
of female fanatics to whom intellectual integrity is unknown."

"What are your indictments? Please enumerate--"

"I will, I will," Long shouted, ignoring the microphone before him.
"Without consideration of our national prestige the Humanist Party has
emasculated our influence as a world power with its pacifistic actions.
On the domestic front, the Party has initiated a program of so-called
Internal Security, a cradle-to-the-grave pampering that amounts to the
most vicious State-Socialism the world has seen since the fall of Soviet
Russia. We are fast becoming slaves to the soft, gutless bureaucracy in
Washington that feeds us, wipes our noses, encourages excessive breeding
and enforces its fantastic policies by use of goon squads!"

"Goon squads?" The young reporter lost his smile. "You had better
clarify that, Dr. Long. I wouldn't want to join you in a libel action."

"Keep quoting me," Long snarled. "I said goon squads, and I meant just
that. Once I belonged to a scholarly fraternity of political scientists
who were critical of our government. Of some eighteen members, I am the
only one left in public life. The rest have all disappeared, and I have
no doubt that my previous silence on these matters is all that has saved
me. But the time for discretion is past. If we are to save our
independence and democratic freedoms the time for action is now! I say
to you--"

       *       *       *       *       *

It made more than the headlines of the college campus at Mentioch. The
news-wire services picked it up, and Dr. Long's radical views made pages
two and three all over the nation.

Emily Bogarth, head of Internal Security, raged at her assistant,
bald-headed Terman Donlup. "Must I read about these things in the papers
to keep up on subversive activity?"

"But the man's record shows complete stability," Donlup defended. "He
simply blew up without any warning at all. The Dean of Women at
Mentioch tells me that Dr. Long has never had a word of criticism from
his department head. I suppose we had better remove him from his
position at once, eh?"

Madame Secretary Bogarth shook her head. "That's not enough. This calls
for liquidation. I want a special squad on this one." She began writing
names on a sheet of paper, names of some of the most effective
unscrupulous yet faithful operators in the party's top echelon.

She handed it to Donlup. "This man is dangerous. He could force us into
open control of the press and higher education. Get these people here
not later than tomorrow. We can't waste time."

"Yes, Madame Secretary," Donlup saluted with a full bow and went to
work.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following afternoon Emily Bogarth faced the squad with its
brilliant, green-eyed leader. She told them their mission and then
dismissed all but one. "I'm sorry to hand this one to you. I know what a
promising career you had before you. But this man is deadly to our
purpose. Believe me, I am not wasting your special aptitudes."

"If it's for the good of the Party--"

"Dr. Hubert Long is a lighted fuse," Emily Bogarth said, her cold eyes
hard on her operator, "that could blow the Humanist movement sky-high. I
want you to snuff out that fuse." She squeezed a forefinger against her
spatulate thumb.

The operator nodded and the green eyes flashed with the same fanatic
spark that electrified American politics at the turn of the 21st century
and launched the Humanist Party into its 30-year tenure of power.

       *       *       *       *       *

At first only a shocked, embarrassed silence greeted Dr. Long on the
campus of Mentioch University, but as the press notices of his
utterances grew in volume so did his prestige.
