a button on his desk. "Prepare a standard 2-A contract for Dr.
Jac Kennon's signature. And attach two riders, a full P-P-yes, no
exceptions--and a security-leak contingency, Form 287-C. Yes--that's
right--that one. And strike out all provisions of Article Twelve which
conflict with the Peeper Laws. Yes. Now--and finish it as soon as you
can." He touched another button. "Well, that's that," he said. "I hope
you'll enjoy being a member of our group."

"I think I shall," Kennon said. "You know, sir, I would have waived part
of that last demand if you had cared to argue."

"I know it," Alexander said. "But what concessions I could have wrung
from you would be relatively unimportant beside the fact that you would
be unhappy about them later. What little I could have won here, I'd lose
elsewhere. And since I want you, I'd prefer to have you satisfied."

"I see," Kennon said. Actually he didn't see at all. He looked curiously
at the entrepreneur. Alexander couldn't be as easy as he seemed.
Objectivity and dispassionate weighing and balancing were nice traits
and very helpful ones, but in the bear pit of galactic business they
wouldn't keep their owner alive for five minutes. The interworld trade
sharks would have skinned him long ago and divided the stripped carcass
of his company between them.

But Outworld was a "respected" company. The exchange reports said
so--which made Alexander a different breed of cat entirely. Still, his
surface was perfect--polished and impenetrable as a duralloy turret on
one of the latest Brotherhood battleships. Kennon regretted he wasn't a
sensitive. It would be nice to know what Alexander really was.

"Tell me, sir," Kennon asked. "What are the real reasons that make you
think I'm the man you want?"

"And you're the young man who's so insistent on a personal privacy
rider," Alexander chuckled. "However, there's no harm telling you. There
are several reasons.

"You're from a culture whose name is a byword for moral integrity. That
makes you a good risk so far as your ethics are concerned. In addition
you're the product of one of the finest educational systems in the
galaxy-and you have proven your intelligence to my satisfaction. You
also showed me that you weren't a spineless 'yes man.' And finally, you
have a spirit of adventure. Not one in a million of your people would do
what you have done. What more could an entrepreneur ask of a prospective
employee?"

Kennon sighed and gave up. Alexander wasn't going to reveal a thing.

"All I hope," Alexander continued affably, "is that you'll find Outworld
Enterprises as attractive as did your predecessor Dr. Williamson. He was
with us until he died last month--better than a hundred years."

"Died rather young, didn't he?"

"Not exactly, he was nearly four hundred when he joined us. My
grandfather was essentially conservative. He liked older men, and Old
Doc was one of his choices--a good one, too. He was worth every credit
we paid him."

"I'll try to do as well," Kennon said, "but I'd like to warn you that I
have no intention of staying as long as he did. I want to build a clinic
and I figure sixty thousand is about enough to get started."

"When will you veterinarians ever learn to be organization men?"
Alexander asked. "You're as independent as tomcats."

Kennon grinned. "It's a breed characteristic, I guess."

Alexander shrugged. "Perhaps you'll change your mind after you've worked
for us."

"Possibly, but I doubt it."

"Tell me that five years from now," Alexander said--"Ah--here are
the contracts." He smiled at the trim secretary who entered the room
carrying a stack of papers.

"The riders are as you asked, sir," the girl said.

"Good. Now, Doctor, if you please."

"You don't mind if I check them?" Kennon asked.

"Not at all. And when you're through, just leave them on the
desk--except for your copy, of course." Alexander scrawled his signature
on the bottom of each contract. "Don't disturb me. I'll be in contact
with you. Leave your whereabouts with your hotel." He turned to the
papers in front of him, and then looked up for the last time. "Just one
more thing," he said. "You impress me as a cautious man. It would be
just as well if you carried your caution with you when you leave this
room."

Kennon nodded, and Alexander turned back to his work.



CHAPTER III

"I'd never have guessed yesterday that I'd be here today," Kennon said
as he looked down at the yellow waters of the Xantline Sea flashing to
the rear of the airboat at a steady thousand kilometers per hour as they
sped westward in the middle traffic level. The water, some ten thousand
meters below, had been completely empty for hours as the craft hurtled
through the equatorial air.

"We have to move fast to stay ahead of our ulcers," Alexander said
with a wry smile. "Besides, I wanted to get away from the Albertsville
offices for awhile."

"Three hours' notice," Kennon said. "That's almost too fast."

"You had nothing to keep you in the city, and neither did I--at least
nothing important. There are plenty of females where we are going and
I need you on Flora--not in Albertsville. Besides I can get you there
faster than if you waited for a company transport."

"Judging from those empty sea lanes below, Flora must be an
out-of-the-way place," Kennon said.

"It is. It's out of the trade lanes. Most of the commercial traffic is
in the southern hemisphere. The northern hemisphere is practically
all water. Except for Flora and the Otpens there isn't a land area for
nearly three thousand kilometers in any direction, and since the company
owns Flora and the surrounding island groups there's no reason for
shipping to come there. We have our own supply vessels, a Discovery
Charter, and a desire for privacy.--Ah! It won't be long now. There's
the Otpens!" Alexander pointed at a smudge on the horizon that quickly
resolved into an irregular chain of tiny islets that slipped below them.
Kennon got a glimpse of gray concrete on one of the larger islands, a
smudge of green trees, and white beaches against which the yellow waters
dashed in smothers of foam.

"Rugged-looking place," he murmured.

"Most of them are deserted. Two support search and warning stations and
automatic interceptors to protect our property. Look!--there's Flora."
Alexander gestured at the land mass that appeared below.

Flora was a great green oval two hundred kilometers long and about a
hundred wide.

"Pretty, isn't it?" Alexander said as they sped over the low range
of hills and the single gaunt volcano filling the eastward end of
the island and swept over a broad green valley dotted with fields
and orchards interspersed at intervals by red-roofed structures whose
purpose was obvious.

"Our farms," Alexander said redundantly. The airboat crossed a
fair-sized river. "That's the Styx," Alexander said. "Grandfather named
it. He was a classicist in his way--spent a lot of his time reading
books most people never heard of. Things like the Iliad and Gone with
the Wind. The mountains he called the Apennines, and that volcano's
Mount Olympus. The marshland to the north is called the Pontine
Marshes--our main road is the Camino Real." Alexander grinned. "There's
a lot of Earth on Flora. You'll find it in every name. Grandfather
was an Earthman and he used to get nostalgic for the homeworld.
Well--there's Alexandria coming up. We've just about reached the end of
the line."

Kennon stared down at the huge gray-green citadel resting on a small
hill in the center of an open plain. It was a Class II Fortalice built
on the efficient star-shaped plan of half a millennium ago--an ugly
spiky pile of durilium, squat and massive with defensive shields and
weapons which could still withstand hours of assault by the most modern
forces.

"Why did he build a thing like that?" Kennon asked.

"Alexandria?--well, we had trouble with the natives when we first came,
and Grandfather had a synthesizer and tapes for a Fortalice in his
ship. So he built it. It serves the dual purpose of base and house. It's
mostly house now, but it's still capable of being defended."

"And those outbuildings?"

"They're part of your job."

The airboat braked sharply and settled with a smooth, sickeningly
swift rush that left Kennon gasping--feeling that his stomach was still
floating above him in the middle level. He never had become accustomed
to an arbutus landing characteristics. Spacers were slower and steadier.
The ship landed gently on a pitted concrete slab near the massive
radiation shields of the barricaded entranceway to the fortress.
Projectors in polished dually turrets swivelled to point their ugly
noses at them. It gave Kennon a queasy feeling. He never liked to trust
his future to automatic machinery. If the analyzers failed to decode the
ship's I.D. properly, Kennon, Alexander, the ship, and a fair slice of
surrounding territory would become an incandescent mass of dissociated
atoms.

"Grandfather was a good builder," Alexander, said proudly. "Those
projectors have been mounted nearly four hundred years and they're still
as good as the day they were installed."

"I can see that," Kennon said uncomfortably. "You ought to dismantle
them. They're enough to give a man the weebies."

Alexander chuckled. "Oh--they're safe. The firing mechanism's safetied.
But we keep them in operating condition. You never can tell when they'll
come in handy."

"I knew Kardon was primitive, but I didn't think it was that bad. What's
the trouble?"

"None--right now," Alexander said obliquely, "and since we've shown we
can handle ourselves there probably won't be any more."

"You must raise some pretty valuable stock if the competition tried to
rustle them in the face of that armament."

"We do." Alexander said. "Now if you'll follow me"--the entrepreneur
opened the cabin door letting in a blast of heat and a flood of yellow
sunlight.

"Great Arthur Fleming!" Kennon exploded. "This place is a furnace!"

"It's hot out here on the strip," Alexander admitted, "but its cool
enough inside. Besides, you'll get used to this quickly enough--and
the nights are wonderful. The evening rains cool things off. Well--come
along." He began walking toward the arched entrance to the great
building some hundred meters away. Kennon followed looking around
curiously. So this was to be his home for the next five years? It didn't
look particularly inviting. There was a forbidding air about the place
that was in stark contrast to its pleasant surroundings.

They were only a few meters from the archway when a stir of movement
came from its shadow--the first life Kennon had seen since they
descended from the ship. In this furnace heat even the air was quiet.
Two women came out of the darkness, moving with quiet graceful steps
across the blistering hot concrete. They were naked except for a
loincloth, halter, and sandals and so nearly identical in form and
feature that Kennon took them to be twins. Their skins were burned a
deep brown that glistened in the yellow sun light.

Kennon shrugged. It was none of his business how his employer ran his
household or what his servants wore or didn't wear. Santos was a planet
of nudists, and certainly this hot sun was fully as brilliant as the one
which warmed that tropical planet In fact, he could see some virtue in
wearing as little as possible. Already he was perspiring.

The two women walked past them toward the airboat. Kennon turned to
look at them and noticed with surprise that they weren't human. The long
tails curled below their spinal bases were adequate denials of human
ancestry.

"Humanoids!" he gasped. "For a moment I thought-"

"Gave you a start-eh?" Alexander chuckled. "It always does when a
stranger sees a Lani for the first time. Well--now you've seen some of
the livestock what do you think of them?"

"I think you should have hired a medic."

Alexander shook his head. "No--it wouldn't be reason able or legal.
You're the man for the job."

"But I've no experience with humanoid types. We didn't cover that phase
in our studies--and from their appearance they'd qualify as humans
anywhere if it weren't for those tails!"

"They're far more similar than you think," Alexander said. "It just goes
to show what parallel evolution can do. But there are differences."

"I never knew that there was indigenous humanoid life on Kardon," Kennon
continued. "The manual says nothing about it."

"Naturally. They're indigenous only to this area."




"That's impossible. Species as highly organized as that simply don't
originate on isolated islands."

"This was a subcontinent once," Alexander said. "Most of it has been
inundated. Less than a quarter of a million years ago there was over a
hundred times the land area in this region than exists today. Then the
ocean rose. Now all that's left is the mid continent plateau and a few
mountain tops. You noted, I suppose, that this is mature topography
except for that range of hills to the east. The whole land area at the
time of flooding was virtually a peneplain. A rise of a few hundred feet
in the ocean level was all that was needed to drown most of the land."

"I see. Yes, it's possible that life could have developed here under
those conditions. A peneplain topography argues permanence for hundreds
of millions of years."

"You have studied geology?" Alexander asked curiously. "Only as part of
my cultural base," Kennon said. "Merely a casual acquaintance."

"We think the Lani were survivors of that catastrophe--and with their
primitive culture they were unable to reach the other land masses,"
Alexander shrugged. "At any rate they never established themselves
anywhere else."

"How did you happen to come here?"

"I was born here," Alexander said. "My grandfather discovered this world
better than four hundred years ago. He picked this area because it all
could be comfortably included in Discovery Rights. It wasn't until years
afterward that he realized the ecological peculiarities of this region."

"He certainly capitalized on them."

"There was plenty of opportunity. The plants and animals here are
different from others in this world. Like Australia in reverse."

Kennon looked blank, and Alexander chuckled. "Australia was a
subcontinent on Earth," he explained. "Its ecology, however, was
exceedingly primitive when compared with the rest of the planet. Flora's
on the contrary, was--and is--exceedingly advanced when compared with
other native life forms on Kardon."

"Your grandfather stumbled on a real bonanza," Kennon said.

"For which I'm grateful," Alexander grinned. "It's made me the biggest
operator in this sector of the galaxy. For practical purposes I own an
independent nation. There's about a thousand humans here, and nearly six
thousand Lani. We're increasing the Lani now, since we found they have
commercial possibilities. Up to thirty years ago we merely used them for
labor."

Kennon didn't speculate on what Alexander meant. He knew. For practical
purposes, his employer was a slave trader--or would have been if the
natives were human. As it was, the analogy was so close that it wasn't
funny.

They entered the fortress, passed through a decontamination chamber that
would have done credit to an exploration ship, and emerged dressed in
tunics and sandals that were far more appropriate and comfortable in
this tropical climate.

"That's one of Old Doc's ideas," Alexander said, gesturing at the door
from which they had emerged. "He was a hound for sanitation and he
infected us with the habit." He turned and led the way down an arched
corridor that opened into a huge circular room studded with iris doors.

Kennon sucked his breath in with a low gasp of amazement. The room was
a gem of exquisite beauty. The parquet floor was inlaid with rare
hardwoods from a hundred different worlds. Parthian marble veneer
covered with lacy Van tapestries from Santos formed the walls. Delicate
ceramics, sculpture, and bronzes reflected the art of a score of
different civilizations. A circular pool, festooned with lacelike
Halsite ferns, stood in the center of the room, surrounding a polished
black granite pedestal on which stood an exquisite bronze of four Lani
females industriously and eternally pouring golden water from vases held
in their shapely hands. "Beautiful," Kennon said softly.

"We like it," Alexander said.

"We?"

"Oh yes--I forgot to tell you about the Family," Alexander said grimly.
"I run Outworld, and own fifty per cent of it. The Family owns the other
fifty. There are eight of them--the finest collection of parasites
in the entire galaxy. At the moment they can't block me since I also
control my cousin Douglas's shares. But when Douglas comes of age they
will be troublesome. Therefore I defer to them. I don't want to build a
united opposition. Usually I can get one or more of them to vote with
me on critical deals, but I always have to pay for their support."
Alexander's voice was bitter as he touched the dilate button on the iris
door beside him. "You'll have to meet them tonight. There's five of them
here now."

"That isn't in the contract," Kennon said. He was appalled at Alexander.
Civilized people didn't speak of others that way, even to intimates.

"It can't be helped. You must meet them. It's part of the job."
Alexander's voice was grim. "Mother, Cousin Anne, Douglas, and Eloise
like to play lord of the manor. Cousin Harold doesn't care--for which
you should be grateful."

The door dilated, and Alexander ushered Kennon into the room. The Lani
sitting on the couch opposite the door leaped to her feet, her mouth
opening in an O of surprise. Her soft snow-white hair, creamy skin, and
bright china blue eyes were a startling contrast to her black loincloth
and halter. Kennon stared appreciatively.

Her effect on Alexander, however, was entirely different. His face
darkened. "You!" he snapped. "What are you doing here?"

"Serving, sir," the Lani said.

"On whose authority?"

"Man Douglas, sir."

Alexander groaned. "You see," he said, turning to Kennon. "We
need someone here with a little sense. Like I was telling you, the
Family'd"--he stopped abruptly and turned back to the Lani. "Your name
and pedigree," he demanded.

"Silver Dawn, sir--out of White Magic--platinum experimental
type--strain four."

"I thought so. How long have you been inhouse?"

"Almost a month, sir."

"You're terminated. Report to Goldie and tell her that Man Alexander
wants you sent back to your group."

The Lani's eyes widened. "Man Alexander!--You?"

Alexander nodded.

"Gosh!" she breathed. "The big boss!"

"Get moving," Alexander snapped, "and tell Goldie to report to me in my
