
"Where's your decorum?" Jerry growled.

Ruskin giggled. "Boy, she's quite a dame, all right. I think they ought
to get the Secret Service to guard her. She really fills out a size 10,
don't she?"

"Ruskin," Jerry said, "you have a low mind. For a week, this town has
been acting like the _39 Steps_, and all you can think about is dames.
What's the matter with you? Where will you be when the big mushroom
cloud comes?"

"With Greta, I hope," Ruskin sighed. "What a way to get radioactive."

They split off a few blocks later, and Jerry walked until he came to the
Red Tape Bar & Grill, a favorite hangout of the local journalists. There
were three other newsmen at the bar, and they gave him snickering
greetings. He took a small table in the rear and ate his meal in sullen
silence.

It wasn't the newsmen's jibes that bothered him; it was the certainty
that something of major importance was happening in the capitol. There
had been hourly conferences at the White House, flying visits by State
Department officials, mysterious conferences involving members of the
Science Commission. So far, the byword had been secrecy. They knew that
Senator Spocker, chairman of the Congressional Science Committee, had
been involved in every meeting, but Senator Spocker was unavailable. His
secretary, however, was a little more obliging ...

Jerry looked up from his coffee and blinked when he saw who was coming
through the door of the Bar & Grill. So did every other patron, but for
different reasons. Greta Johnson had that effect upon men. Even the
confining effect of a mannishly-tailored suit didn't hide her
outrageously feminine qualities.

She walked straight to his table, and he stood up.

"They told me you might be here," she said, breathing hard. "I just
wanted to thank you for last night."

"Look, Greta--"

_Wham!_ Her hand, small and delicate, felt like a slab of lead when it
slammed into his cheek. She left a bruise five fingers wide, and then
turned and stalked out.

       *       *       *       *       *

He ran after her, the restaurant proprietor shouting about the unpaid
bill. It took a rapid dog-trot to reach her side.

"Greta, listen!" he panted. "You don't understand about last night. It
wasn't the way that lousy columnist said--"

She stopped in her tracks.

"I wouldn't have minded so much if you'd gotten me drunk. But to _use_
me, just to get a story--"

"But I'm a _reporter_, damn it. It's my job. I'd do it again if I
thought you knew anything."

She was pouting now. "Well, how do you suppose I feel, knowing you're
only interested in me because of the Senator? Anyway, I'll probably lose
my job, and then you won't have _any_ use for me."

"Good-bye, Greta," Jerry said sadly.

"What?"

"Good-bye. I suppose you won't want to see me any more."

"Did I say that?"

"It just won't be any use. We'll always have this thing between us."

She looked at him for a moment, and then touched his bruised cheek with
a tender, motherly gesture.

"Your poor face," she murmured, and then sighed. "Oh, well. I guess
there's no use fighting it. Maybe if I _did_ tell you what I know, we
could act _human_ again."

"Greta!"

"But if you print one _word_ of it, Jerry Bridges, I'll never speak to
you again!"

"Honey," Jerry said, taking her arm, "you can trust me like a brother."

"That's _not_ the idea," Greta said stiffly.

In a secluded booth at the rear of a restaurant unfrequented by newsmen,
Greta leaned forward and said:

"At first, they thought it was another sputnik."

"_Who_ did?"

"The State Department, silly. They got reports from the observatories
about another sputnik being launched by the Russians. Only the Russians
denied it. Then there were joint meetings, and nobody could figure out
_what_ the damn thing was."

"Wait a minute," Jerry said dizzily. "You mean to tell me there's
another of those metal moons up there?"

"But it's not a moon. That's the big point. It's a spaceship."
