"Yes, yes, of course, General class by all means," Fromer said hurriedly.
"You see, it's hardly even an emergency. We--"

"Just what is the nature of the trouble, Captain?"

"Why, uh, well it seems that we were doing a preliminary landing procedure
check, and ..."

"Yes, go on."

"Why, er, it seems that we can't get the door open."

It was Hansen's turn to be taken aback. "You're pulling my leg, sir."

"I most certainly am not," Captain Fromer said emphatically.

"You really mean that you can't open the door?"

"I'm afraid so. Something's wrong with the mechanism. Our technical staff
has never encountered a problem like this, and they advise me that any
attempt at repair might possibly result in the opposite situation."

"You mean not being able to get the door closed?"

"Precisely. In other words, we can't land."

"I see. Then I'm afraid there's nothing I can do except advise Sector
Headquarters to send an emergency repair crew."

Captain Fromer sighed. "I'm afraid so, too. How long will it take for a
message to get there with your transmitting equipment?"

"Two days, Captain. At a guess, there'll be a ship alongside within the
week. You'll be maintaining your present position, I assume?"

"Oh, we'll be here, all right," Fromer said bitterly. Then he cut contact.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the single occupant of a large asteroid with nothing but time and
boredom on his hands, Hansen was enjoying the whole situation immensely. He
allowed himself the luxury of several dozen fantasies in which his name was
mentioned prominently in galaxy-wide reports of the episode. He imagined
that Captain Fromer was also creating vivid accounts--of quite another
sort--that would soon be amusing several hundred billion news-hungry
citizens of the Federation.

When the repair ship arrived, it came, to Hansen's astonishment, to the
asteroid, and not alongside Fromer's ship. He soon found out that there was
someone else who shared the Captain's embarrassment.

"I'm Bullard," said a tall, thin, mournful man. "Mind if I sit?"

"Help yourself," Hansen waved a hand toward the meager accommodations. He
had no idea why a Senior Engineer was being so deferential, but he enjoyed
the feeling of power.

"You're probably wondering about a lot of things," Bullard began sadly.
"Frankly, we don't have any ideas about how we can fix Captain Fromer's
door." He waited to let that sink in. Then he continued: "It took us three
days back at the base to find out that when these ships were built, almost
five hundred years ago, nobody bothered to include detail drawings of the
door mechanism."

"But why? You certainly know how to build--"

"We know how to build Star Class ships, sure. We've built a few in the
past century or two. There's never been need for replacement, really.
These ships are designed to last forever. The original fleet was
conceived to fill the System's needs for a full thousand years."

"But the doors on the few ships that have been built. How--"

"The ship's we've built were exact duplicates of Captain Fromer's
ship--except for the door." Bullard's long face radiated despair. "No
one ever questioned why the door mechanism wasn't included in the
original plans. We simply designed another type--a different type--of
door."

"Well, you certainly can find out how this particular door works, can't
you?"

"I hope so," Bullard said, wringing his hands. "But we have a couple of
other problems. Number one, Captain Fromer has an extremely important
passenger aboard. None other than His Exalted Excellency, R'thagna Bar.
He is--or was--on his way home after concluding a treaty of friendship
with the President of the Federation."

Hansen managed a whistle.

"Furthermore," Bullard continued, "His Excellency _has to be home soon_ to
get there in time for the mating season. This occurs once in a lifetime,
I'm told, and this is his only chance to continue the ancestral rule--"

"Wait a minute," Hansen said. "Are you trying to say that you can't solve a
simple problem like getting him home and getting him out of the ship? You
can always cut it in two, can't you?"

"These ships were made to last forever," Bullard explained. "The hull is,
of course, pseudo-met, but, not the kind of pseudo-met used for other
applications. In short, about the only way you'll get in that ship is to
vaporize it."

"But can't you simply disassemble the door mechanism? My God, how
complicated can it be?"

"We're going to try to do just that," Bullard said without a trace of
confidence. "As far as the complication goes, let me say just this: it's
full of moving parts."

"What are you getting at?" Hansen asked.

"Just this. These ships are perfect mechanisms. There is hardly anything in
them that could be called a moving part. Now a door has to open and close.
Sure, we devised a simple, safe way to do it a few hundred years after the
original fleet was built. The men who designed the original door mechanism
felt, perhaps, that it was incongruous to include it in the first place.
Maybe that is why they threw away the plans. God knows, it is incongruous.
Look! Here's a photo we took of one in a ship back at base."

Hansen scanned the photograph. It was a meaningless jumble. He handed it
back. "Well, make yourself at home. I'm afraid that the only thing I can
help with will be radio communication to Captain Fromer's ship."

"Good enough," Bullard said. "I'm expecting someone else tomorrow. After
you bring him down, feel free to drop over and see me anytime."

       *       *       *       *       *

