breaking point, because Val didn't lie unless she was so exhausted she
didn't know what she was doing. She had been just as much inflamed by
the idea of coming to Mars to help in the search for uranium as I was.
We knew the pay was poor, but we had felt it a sort of obligation,
something we could do as individuals to keep the industries of
radioactives-starved Earth going. And we'd always had a roving foot,
both of us.

No, we had decided together to come to Mars--the way we decided together
on everything. Now she was turning against me.

       *       *       *       *       *

I tried to jolly her. "Buck up, kid," I said. I didn't dare turn up her
oxy pressure any higher, but it was obvious she couldn't keep going. She
was almost sleep-walking now.

We pressed on over the barren terrain. The geiger kept up a fairly
steady click-pattern, but never broke into that sudden explosive tumult
that meant we had found pay-dirt. I started to feel tired myself,
terribly tired. I longed to lie down on the soft, spongy Martian sand
and bury myself.

I looked at Val. She was dragging along with her eyes half-shut. I felt
almost guilty for having dragged her out to Mars, until I recalled that
I hadn't. In fact, she had come up with the idea before I did. I wished
there was some way of turning the weary, bedraggled girl at my side back
into the Val who had so enthusiastically suggested we join the Geigs.

Twelve steps later, I decided this was about as far as we could go.

I stopped, slipped out of the geiger harness, and lowered myself
ponderously to the ground. "What'samatter, Ron?" Val asked sleepily.
"Something wrong?"

"No, baby," I said, putting out a hand and taking hers. "I think we
ought to rest a little before we go any further. It's been a long, hard
day."

It didn't take much to persuade her. She slid down beside me, curled up,
and in a moment she was fast asleep, sprawled out on the sands.

_Poor kid_, I thought. Maybe we shouldn't have come to Mars after all.
But, I reminded myself, _someone_ had to do the job.

A second thought appeared, but I squelched it:

Why the hell me?

I looked down at Valerie's sleeping form, and thought of our warm,
comfortable little home on Earth. It wasn't much, but people in love
don't need very fancy surroundings.

I watched her, sleeping peacefully, a wayward lock of her soft blonde
hair trailing down over one eyebrow, and it seemed hard to believe that
we'd exchanged Earth and all it held for us for the raw, untamed
struggle that was Mars. But I knew I'd do it again, if I had the chance.
It's because we wanted to keep what we had. Heroes? Hell, no. We just
liked our comforts, and wanted to keep them. Which took a little work.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Time to get moving._ But then Val stirred and rolled over in her sleep,
and I didn't have the heart to wake her. I sat there, holding her,
staring out over the desert, watching the wind whip the sand up into
weird shapes.

The Geig Corps preferred married couples, working in teams. That's what
had finally decided it for us--we were a good team. We had no ties on
Earth that couldn't be broken without much difficulty. So we
volunteered.

_And here we are._ Heroes. The wind blasted a mass of sand into my face,
and I felt it tinkle against the oxymask.

I glanced at the suit-chronometer. Getting late. I decided once again to
wake Val. But she was tired. And I was tired too, tired from our
wearying journey across the empty desert.

I started to shake Val. But I never finished. It would be _so_ nice just
to lean back and nuzzle up to her, down in the sand. So nice. I yawned,
and stretched back.

       *       *       *       *       *

I awoke with a sudden startled shiver, and realized angrily I had let
myself doze off. "Come on, Val," I said savagely, and started to rise to
my feet.

I couldn't.

I looked down. I was neatly bound in thin, tough, plastic tangle-cord,
swathed from chin to boot-bottoms, my arms imprisoned, my feet caught.
And tangle-cord is about as easy to get out of as a spider's web is for
a trapped fly.

It wasn't Martians that had done it. There weren't any Martians, hadn't
been for a million years. It was some Earthman who had bound us.

I rolled my eyes toward Val, and saw that she was similarly trussed in
the sticky stuff. The tangle-cord was still fresh, giving off a faint,
repugnant odor like that of drying fish. It had been spun on us only a
short time ago, I realized.

"Ron--"

"Don't try to move, baby. This stuff can break your neck if you twist it
