"I remember," she said, "when I was between three and four years old,
sitting one day in my high chair at the table, and twisting one foot
under the little step of the chair. The next morning I felt lame; but
nobody could tell what was the matter. At last, the doctors found out
that the trouble all came from that twist. It had gone too far to be
cured. Before I had this boot, I could only walk with a crutch."


CARE OF THE SPINE.

Because the spine is made of little bones with cushions between them, it
bends easily, and children sometimes bend it more than they ought.

If you lean over your book or your writing or any other work, the
elastic cushions may get so pressed on the inner edge that they do not
easily spring back into shape. In this way, you may grow
round-shouldered or hump-backed.

This bending over, also cramps the lungs, so that they do not have all
the room they need for breathing. While you are young, your bones are
easily bent. One shoulder or one hip gets higher than the other, if you
stand unevenly. This is more serious, because you are growing, and you
may grow crooked before you know it.

Now that you know how soft your bones are, and how easily they bend, you
will surely be careful to sit and stand erect. Do not twist your legs,
or arms, or shoulders; for you want to grow into straight and graceful
men and women, instead of being round-shouldered, or hump-backed, or
lame, all your lives.

When people are old, their bones contain more lime, and, therefore,
break more easily.

You should be kindly helpful to old people, so that they may not fall,
and possibly break their bones.


CARE OF THE FEET.

Healthy children are always out-growing their shoes, and sometimes
faster than they wear them out. Tight shoes cause corns and in-growing
nails and other sore places on the feet. All of these are very hard to
get rid of. No one should wear a shoe that pinches or hurts the foot.


OUGHT A BOY TO USE TOBACCO?

Perhaps some boy will say: "Grown people are always telling us, 'this
will do for men, but it is not good for boys.'"

Tobacco is not good for men; but there is a very good reason why it is
worse for boys.

If you were going to build a house, would it be wise for you to put into
the stone-work of the cellar something that would make it less strong?

Something into the brick-work or the mortar, the wood-work or the nails,
the walls or the chimneys, that would make them weak and tottering,
instead of strong and steady?

It would he had enough if you should repair your house with poor
materials; but surely it must be built in the first place with the best
you can get.

You will soon learn that boys and girls are building their bodies, day
after day, until at last they reach full size.

Afterward, they must be repaired as fast as they wear out.

It would be foolish to build any part in a way to make it weaker than
need be.

Wise doctors have said that the boy who uses tobacco while he is
growing, makes every part of his body less strong than it otherwise
would be. Even his bones will not grow so well.

Boys who smoke can not become such large, fine-looking men as they would
if they did not smoke.

Cigarettes are small, but they are very poisonous. Chewing tobacco is a
worse and more filthy habit even than smoking. The frequent spitting it
causes is disgusting to others and hurts the health of the chewer.
Tobacco in any form is a great enemy to youth. It stunts the growth,
hurts the mind, and cripples in every way the boy or girl who uses it.

Not that it does all this to every youth who smokes, but it is always
true that no boy of seven to fourteen can begin to smoke or chew and
have so fine a body and mind when he is twenty-one years old as he would
have had if he had never used tobacco. If you want to be strong and well
men and women, do not use tobacco in any form.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. What two kinds of joints have you?

          2. Describe each kind.

          3. Find as many of each kind as you can.

          4. How are the joints kept moist?

          5. How many bones are there in your whole body?

          6. Count the bones in your hand.

          7. Of how many bones is your spine made?

          8. Why could you not use it so well if it were all
          in one piece?

          9. What is the use of the little cushions between
          the bones of the spine?

          10. How many ribs have you?

          11. Where are they?

          12. Where are the shoulder-blades?

          13. Where are the collar-bones?

          14. What are bones made of?

          15. How can we show this?

          16. What is the difference between the bones of
          children and the bones of old people?

          17. Why do children's bones bend easily?

          18. Tell the story of the lame lady.

          19. What does this story teach you?

          20. What happens if you lean over your desk or
          work?

          21. How will this position injure your lungs?

          22. What other bones may be injured by wrong
          positions?

          23. Why do old people's bones break easily?

          24. How should the feet be cared for?

          25. How does tobacco affect the bones?

          26. What do doctors say of its use?

          27. What is said about cigarettes?

          28. What about chewing tobacco?

          29. To whom is tobacco a great enemy? Why?

          30. What is always true of its use by youth?




CHAPTER II.

MUSCLES.


[Illustration: W]HAT makes the limbs move?

You have to take hold of the door to move it back and forth; but you
need not take hold of your arm to move that.

What makes it move?

Sometimes a door or gate is made to shut itself, if you leave it open.

This can be done by means of a wide rubber strap, one end of which is
fastened to the frame of the door near the hinge, and the other end to
the door, out near its edge.

When we push open the door, the rubber strap is stretched; but as soon
as we have passed through, the strap tightens, draws the door back, and
shuts it.

If you stretch out your right arm, and clasp the upper part tightly with
your left hand, then work the elbow joint strongly back and forth, you
can feel something under your hand draw up, and then lengthen out again,
each time you bend the joint.

What you feel, is a muscle (m[)u]s'sl), and it works your joints very
much as the rubber strap works the hinge of the door.

One end of the muscle is fastened to the bone just below the elbow
joint; and the other end, higher up above the joint.

When it tightens, or contracts, as we say, it bends the joint. When the
arm is straightened, the muscle returns to its first shape.

There is another muscle on the outside of the arm which stretches when
this one shortens, and so helps the working of the joint.

Every joint has two or more muscles of its own to work it.

Think how many there must be in our fingers!

If we should undertake to count all the muscles that move our whole
bodies, it would need more counting than some of you could do.


TENDONS.

You can see muscles on the dinner table; for they are only lean meat.

[Illustration: _Tendons of the hand._]

They are fastened to the bones by strong cords, called tendons
(t[)e]n'd[)o]nz). These tendons can be seen in the leg of a chicken or
turkey. They sometimes hold the meat so firmly that it is hard for you
to get it off. When you next try to pick a "drum-stick," remember that
you are eating the strong muscles by which the chicken or turkey moved
his legs as he walked about the yard. The parts that have the most work
to do, need the strongest muscles.

Did you ever see the swallows flying about the eaves of a barn?

Do they have very stout legs? No! They have very small legs and feet,
because they do not need to walk. They need to fly.

The muscles that move the wings are fastened to the breast. These breast
muscles of the swallow must be large and strong.


EXERCISE OF THE MUSCLES.

People who work hard with any part of the body make the muscles of that
part very strong.

The blacksmith has big, strong muscles in his arms because he uses them
so much.

You are using your muscles every day, and this helps them to grow.

Once I saw a little girl who had been very sick. She had to lie in bed
for many weeks. Before her sickness she had plenty of stout muscles in
her arms and legs and was running about the house from morning till
night, carrying her big doll in her arms.

After her sickness, she could hardly walk ten steps, and would rather
sit and look at her playthings than try to lift them. She had to make
new muscles as fast as possible.

Running, coasting, games of ball, and all brisk play and work, help to
make strong muscles.

Idle habits make weak muscles. So idleness is an enemy to the muscles.

There is another enemy to the muscles about which I must tell you.


WHAT ALCOHOL WILL DO TO THE MUSCLES.

Muscles are lean meat. Fat meat could not work your joints for you as
the muscles do. Alcohol often changes a part of the muscles to fat, and
so takes away a part of their strength. In this way, people often grow
very fleshy from drinking beer, because it contains alcohol, as you will
soon learn. But they can not work any better on account of having this
fat. They are not really any stronger for it.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. How are the joints moved?

          2. Where are the muscles in your arms, which help
          you to move your elbows?

          3. Show why joints must have muscles.

          4. What do we call the muscles of the lower
          animals?

          5. What fasten the muscles to the bones?

          6. Why do chickens and turkeys need strong muscles
          in their legs?

          7. Why do swallows need strong breast muscles?

          8. What makes the muscles of the blacksmith's arm
          so strong?

          9. What will make your muscles strong?

          10. What will make them weak?

          11. What does alcohol often do to the muscles?

          12. Can fatty muscles work well?

          13. Why does not drinking beer make one stronger?




CHAPTER III.

NERVES.


[Illustration: H]OW do the muscles know when to move?

You have all seen the telegraph wires, by which messages are sent from
one town to another, all over the country.

You are too young to understand how this is done, but you each have
something inside of you, by which you are sending messages almost every
minute while you are awake.

We will try to learn a little about its wonderful way of working.

In your head is your brain. It is the part of you which thinks.

As you would be very badly off if you could not think, the brain is your
most precious part, and you have a strong box made of bone to keep it
in.

[Illustration: _Diagram of the nervous system._]

We will call the brain the central telegraph office. Little white cords,
called nerves, connect the brain with the rest of the body.

A large cord called the spinal cord, lies safely in a bony case made by
the spine, and many nerves branch off from this.

If you put your finger on a hot stove, in an instant a message goes on
the nerve telegraph to the brain. It tells that wise thinking part that
your finger will burn, if it stays on the stove.

In another instant, the brain sends back a message to the muscles that
move that finger, saying: "Contract quickly, bend the joint, and take
that poor finger away so that it will not be burned."

You can hardly believe that there was time for all this sending of
messages; for as soon as you felt the hot stove, you pulled your finger
away. But you really could not have pulled it away, unless the brain had
