Potassium, Phosphate of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437
of water were placed on the discs of six leaves, which were observed
during three days; but no effect was produced. The partial drying up of
the fluid on the disc slightly drew together the tentacles on it, as
often occurs in experiments of this kind. The leaves on the third day
appeared quite healthy.

Potassium, Citrate of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water, left on the discs of six leaves for three days, and the
immersion of three leaves for 9 hrs., each in 30 minims of a solution
of one part to 875 of water, did not produce the least effect.

Potassium, Oxalate of.--Half-minims were placed on different occasions
on the discs of seventeen leaves; and the results perplexed me much, as
they still do. Inflection supervened very slowly. After 24 hrs. four
leaves out of the seventeen were well inflected, together with the
blades of two; six were slightly affected, and seven not at all. Three
leaves of one lot were observed for five days, and all died; but in
another lot of six, all excepting one looked healthy after four days.
Three leaves were immersed during 9 hrs., each in 30 minims of a
solution of one part to 875 of water, and were not in the least
affected; but they ought to have been observed for a longer time.

Potassium, Chloride of. Neither half-minims of a solution of one part
to 437 of water; left on the discs of six leaves for three days, nor
the immersion of three leaves during 25 hrs., in 30 minims of a
solution of one part to 875 of water, produced the least effect. The
immersed leaves were then treated with carbonate of ammonia, as
described under nitrate of potash, and with the same result.

Potassium, Iodide of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of seven leaves. In 30 m. one leaf had
the blade inflected; after some hours three leaves had most of their
submarginal tentacles moderately inflected; the remaining three being
very slightly affected. Hardly any of these leaves had their outer
tentacles inflected.  After 21 hrs. all re-expanded, excepting two
which still had a few submarginal tentacles inflected. Three leaves
were next [page 181] immersed for 8 hrs. 40 m., each in 30 minims of a
solution of one part to 875 of water, and were not in the least
affected. I do not know what to conclude from this conflicting
evidence; but it is clear that the iodide of potassium does not
generally produce any marked effect.

Potassium, Bromide of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of
water were placed on the discs of six leaves; after 22 hrs. one had its
blade and many tentacles inflected, but I suspect that an insect might
have alighted on it and then escaped; the five other leaves were in no
way affected. I tested three of these leaves with bits of meat, and
after 24 hrs. they became splendidly inflected. Three leaves were also
immersed for 21 hrs. in 30 minims of a solution of one part to 875 of
water; but they were not at all affected, excepting that the glands
looked rather pale.

Lithium, Acetate of.--Four leaves were immersed together in a vessel
containing 120 minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water; so
that each received, if the leaves absorbed equally, 1/16 of a grain.
After 24 hrs. there was no inflection. I then added, for the sake of
testing the leaves, some strong solution (viz. 1 gr. to 20 oz., or one
part to 8750 of water) of phosphate of ammonia, and all four became in
30 m. closely inflected.

Lithium, Nitrate of.--Four leaves were immersed, as in the last case,
in 120 minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water; after 1 h. 30
m. all four were a little, and after 24 hrs.  greatly, inflected. I
then diluted the solution with some water, but they still remained
somewhat inflected on the third day.

Caesium, Chloride of.--Four leaves were immersed, as above, in 120
minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water. After 1 hr. 5 m. the
glands were darkened; after 4 hrs. 20 m. there was a trace of
inflection; after 6 hrs. 40 m. two leaves were greatly, but not
closely, and the other two considerably inflected. After 22 hrs. the
inflection was extremely great, and two had their blades inflected. I
then transferred the leaves into water, and in 46 hrs. from their first
immersion they were almost re-expanded.

Rubidium, Chloride of.--Four leaves which were immersed, as above, in
120 minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water, were not acted on
in 22 hrs. I then added some of the strong solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.)
of phosphate of ammonia, and in 30 m. all were immensely inflected.

Silver, Nitrate of.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety [page 182]
minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water; so that each
received, as before, 1/16 of a grain. After 5 m. slight inflection, and
after 11 m. very strong inflection, the glands becoming excessively
black; after 40 m. all the tentacles were closely inflected. After 6
hrs. the leaves were taken out of the solution, washed, and placed in
water; but next morning they were evidently dead.

Calcium, Acetate of.--Four leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; after 24 hrs. none of the
tentacles were inflected, excepting a few where the blade joined the
petiole; and this may have been caused by the absorption of the salt by
the cut-off end of the petiole. I then added some of the solution (1
gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of ammonia, but this to my surprise excited
only slight inflection, even after 24 hrs. Hence it would appear that
the acetate had rendered the leaves torpid.

Calcium, Nitrate of.--Four leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water, but were not affected in 24 hrs.
I then added some of the solution of phosphate of ammonia (1 gr. to 20
oz.), but this caused only very slight inflection after 24 hrs. A fresh
leaf was next put into a mixed solution of the above strengths of the
nitrate of calcium and phosphate of ammonia, and it became closely
inflected in between 5 m. and 10 m.  Half-minims of a solution of one
part of the nitrate of calcium to 218 of water were dropped on the
discs of three leaves, but produced no effect.

Magnesium, Acetate, Nitrate, and Chloride of.--Four leaves were
immersed in 120 minims of solutions, of one part to 437 of water, of
each of these three salts; after 6 hrs. there was no inflection; but
after 22 hrs. one of the leaves in the acetate was rather more
inflected than generally occurs from an immersion for this length of
time in water. Some of the solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of
ammonia was then added to the three solutions. The leaves in the
acetate mixed with the phosphate underwent some inflection; and this
was well pronounced after 24 hrs. Those in the mixed nitrate were
decidedly inflected in 4 hrs. 30 m., but the degree of inflection did
not afterwards much increase; whereas the four leaves in the mixed
chloride were greatly inflected in a few minutes, and after 4 hrs. had
almost every tentacle closely inflected. We thus see that the acetate
and nitrate of magnesium injure the leaves, or at least prevent the
subsequent action of phosphate of ammonia; whereas the chloride has no
such tendency.  [page 183]

Magnesium, Sulphate of.--Half-minims of a solution of one part to 218
of water were placed on the discs of ten leaves, and produced no
effect.

Barium, Acetate of.--Four leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water, and after 22 hrs. there was no
inflection, but the glands were blackened. The leaves were then placed
in a solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of ammonia, which caused
after 26 hrs. only a little inflection in two of the leaves.

Barium, Nitrate of.--Four leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; and after 22 hrs. there was no
more than that slight degree of inflection, which often follows from an
immersion of this length in pure water. I then added some of the same
solution of phosphate of ammonia, and after 30 m. one leaf was greatly
inflected, two others moderately, and the fourth not at all. The leaves
remained in this state for 24 hrs.

Strontium, Acetate of.--Four leaves, immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water, were not affected in 22 hrs. They
were then placed in some of the same solution of phosphate of ammonia,
and in 25 m. two of them were greatly inflected; after 8 hrs. the third
leaf was considerably inflected, and the fourth exhibited a trace of
inflection. They were in the same state next morning.

Strontium, Nitrate of.--Five leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; after 22 hrs. there was some
slight inflection, but not more than sometimes occurs with leaves in
water. They were then placed in the same solution of phosphate of
ammonia; after 8 hrs. three of them were moderately inflected, as were
all five after 24 hrs.; but not one was closely inflected. It appears
that the nitrate of strontium renders the leaves half torpid.

Cadmium, Chloride of.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; after 5 hrs. 20 m. slight
inflection occurred, which increased during the next three hours. After
24 hrs. all three leaves had their tentacles well inflected, and
remained so for an additional 24 hrs.; glands not discoloured.

Mercury, Perchloride of.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims
of a solution of one part to 437 of water; after 22 m. there was some
slight inflection, which in 48 m. became well pronounced; the glands
were now blackened. After 5 hrs. 35 m. all the tentacles closely
inflected; after 24 hrs. still [page 184] inflected and discoloured.
The leaves were then removed and left for two days in water; but they
never re-expanded, being evidently dead.

Zinc, Chloride of.--Three leaves immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water were not affected in 25 hrs. 30
m.

Aluminium, Chloride of.--Four leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; after 7 hrs. 45 m. no inflection;
after 24 hrs. one leaf rather closely, the second moderately, the third
and fourth hardly at all, inflected. The evidence is doubtful, but I
think some power in slowly causing inflection must be attributed to
this salt. These leaves were then placed in the solution (1 gr. to 20
oz.) of phosphate of ammonia, and after 7 hrs. 30 m. the three, which
had been but little affected by the chloride, became rather closely
inflected.

Aluminium, Nitrate of.--Four leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; after 7 hrs. 45 m. there was only
a trace of inflection; after 24 hrs. one leaf was moderately inflected.
The evidence is here again doubtful, as in the case of the chloride of
aluminium. The leaves were then transferred to the same solution, as
before, of phosphate of ammonia; this produced hardly any effect in 7
hrs. 30 m.; but after 25 hrs. one leaf was pretty closely inflected,
the three others very slightly, perhaps not more so than from water.

Aluminium and Potassium, Sulphate of (common alum).--Half-minims of a
solution of the usual strength were placed on the discs of nine leaves,
but produced no effect.

Gold, Chloride of.--Seven leaves were immersed in so much of a solution
of one part to 437 of water that each received 30 minims, containing
1/16 of a grain, or 4.048 mg., of the chloride. There was some
inflection in 8 m., which became extreme in 45 m. In 3 hrs. the
surrounding fluid was coloured purple, and the glands were blackened.
After 6 hrs. the leaves were transferred to water; next morning they
were found discoloured and evidently killed.  The secretion decomposes
the chloride very readily; the glands themselves becoming coated with
the thinnest layer of metallic gold, and particles float about on the
surface of the surrounding fluid.

Lead, Chloride of.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water. After 23 hrs. there was not a
trace of inflection; the glands were not blackened, and the leaves did
not appear injured. They were then trans- [page 185] ferred to the
solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of ammonia, and after 24 hrs.
two of them were somewhat, the third very little, inflected; and they
thus remained for another 24 hrs.

Tin, Chloride of.--Four leaves were immersed in 120 minims of a
solution of about one part (all not being dissolved) to 437 of water.
After 4 hrs. no effect; after 6 hrs. 30 m. all four leaves had their
submarginal tentacles inflected; after 22 hrs. every single tentacle
and the blades were closely inflected. The surrounding fluid was now
coloured pink. The leaves were washed and transferred to water, but
next morning were evidently dead. This chloride is a deadly poison, but
acts slowly.

Antimony, Tartrate of.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of
a solution of one part to 437 of water. After 8 hrs. 30 m. there was
slight inflection; after 24 hrs. two of the leaves were closely, and
the third moderately, inflected; glands not much darkened. The leaves
were washed and placed in water, but they remained in the same state
for 48 additional hours. This salt is probably poisonous, but acts
slowly.

Arsenious Acid.--A solution of one part to 437 of water; three leaves
were immersed in ninety minims; in 25 m. considerable inflection; in 1
h. great inflection; glands not discoloured. After 6 hrs. the leaves
were transferred to water; next morning they looked fresh, but after
four days were pale-coloured, had not re-expanded, and were evidently
dead.

Iron, Chloride of.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; in 8 hrs. no inflection; but
after 24 hrs. considerable inflection; glands blackened; fluid coloured
yellow, with floating flocculent particles of oxide of iron. The leaves
were then placed in water; after 48 hrs. they had re-expanded a very
little, but I think were killed; glands excessively black.

Chromic Acid.--One part to 437 of water; three leaves were immersed in
ninety minims; in 30 m. some, and in 1 hr. considerable, inflection;
after 2 hrs. all the tentacles closely inflected, with the glands
discoloured. Placed in water, next day leaves quite discoloured and
evidently killed.

Manganese, Chloride of.--Three leaves immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; after 22 hrs. no more inflection
than often occurs in water; glands not blackened. The leaves were then
placed in the usual solution of phosphate of ammonia, but no inflection
was caused even after 48 hrs.

Copper, Chloride of.--Three leaves immersed in ninety minims [page 186]
of a solution of one part to 437 of water; after 2 hrs. some
inflection; after 3 hrs. 45 m.  tentacles closely inflected, with the
glands blackened. After 22 hrs. still closely inflected, and the leaves
flaccid. Placed in pure water, next day evidently dead. A rapid
poison.

Nickel, Chloride of.--Three leaves immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; in 25 m. considerable inflection,
and in 3 hrs. all the tentacles closely inflected.  After 22 hrs. still
closely inflected; most of the glands, but not all, blackened. The
leaves were then placed in water; after 24 hrs. remained inflected;
were somewhat discoloured, with the glands and tentacles dingy red.
Probably killed.

Cobalt, Chloride of.--Three leaves immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; after 23 hrs. there was not a
trace of inflection, and the glands were not more blackened than often
occurs after an equally long immersion in water.

Platinum, Chloride of.--Three leaves immersed in ninety minims of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; in 6 m. some inflection, which
became immense after 48 m. After 3 hrs. the glands were rather pale.
After 24 hrs. all the tentacles still closely inflected; glands
colourless; remained in same state for four days; leaves evidently
killed.]

Concluding Remarks on the Action of the foregoing Salts.--Of the
fifty-one salts and metallic acids which were tried, twenty-five caused
the tentacles to be inflected, and twenty-six had no such effect, two
rather doubtful cases occurring in each series. In the table at the
head of this discussion, the salts are arranged according to their
chemical affinities; but their action on Drosera does not seem to be
thus governed. The nature of the base is far more important, as far as
can be judged from the few experiments here given, than that of the
acid; and this is the conclusion at which physiologists have arrived
with respect to animals. We see this fact illustrated in all the nine
salts of soda causing inflection, and in not being poisonous except
when given in large doses; whereas seven of [page 187] the
corresponding salts of potash do not cause inflection, and some of them
are poisonous.  Two of them, however, viz. the oxalate and iodide of
potash, slowly induced a slight and rather doubtful amount of
inflection. This difference between the two series is interesting, as
Dr. Burdon Sanderson informs me that sodium salts may be introduced in
large doses into the circulation of mammals without any injurious
effects; whilst small doses of potassium salts cause death by suddenly
arresting the movements of the heart. An excellent instance of the
different action of the two series is presented by the phosphate of
soda quickly causing vigorous inflection, whilst phosphate of potash is
quite inefficient. The great power of the former is probably due to the
presence of phosphorus, as in the cases of phosphate of lime and of
ammonia. Hence we may infer that Drosera cannot obtain phosphorus from
the phosphate of potash. This is remarkable, as I hear from Dr. Burdon
Sanderson that phosphate of potash is certainly decomposed within the
bodies of animals. Most of the salts of soda act very rapidly; the
iodide acting slowest. The oxalate, nitrate, and citrate seem to have a
special tendency to cause the blade of the leaf to be inflected. The
glands of the disc, after absorbing the citrate, transmit hardly any
motor impulse to the outer tentacles; and in this character the citrate
of soda resembles the citrate of ammonia, or a decoction of
grass-leaves; these three fluids all acting chiefly on the blade.

It seems opposed to the rule of the preponderant influence of the base
that the nitrate of lithium causes moderately rapid inflection, whereas
the acetate causes none; but this metal is closely allied to sodium
[page 188] and potassium,* which act so differently; therefore we might
expect that its action would be intermediate. We see, also, that
caesium causes inflection, and rubidium does not; and these two metals
are allied to sodium and potassium. Most of the earthy salts are
inoperative. Two salts of calcium, four of magnesium, two of barium,
and two of strontium, did not cause any inflection, and thus follow the
rule of the preponderant power of the base. Of three salts of
aluminium, one did not act, a second showed a trace of action, and the
third acted slowly and doubtfully, so that their effects are nearly
alike.

Of the salts and acids of ordinary metals, seventeen were tried, and
only four, namely those of zinc, lead, manganese, and cobalt, failed to
cause inflection. The salts of cadmium, tin, antimony, and iron, act
slowly; and the three latter seem more or less poisonous. The salts of
silver, mercury, gold, copper, nickel, and platinum, chromic and
arsenious acids, cause great inflection with extreme quickness, and are
deadly poisons. It is surprising, judging from animals, that lead and
barium should not be poisonous. Most of the poisonous salts make the
glands black, but chloride of platinum made them very pale. I shall
have occasion, in the next chapter, to add a few remarks on the
different effects of phosphate of ammonia on leaves previously immersed
in various solutions.

                            ACIDS.

I will first give, as in the case of the salts, a list of the
twenty-four acids which were tried, divided into two series, according
as they cause or do not cause

* Miller's 'Elements of Chemistry,' 3rd edit. pp. 337, 448.  [page 189]
inflection. After describing the experiments, a few concluding remarks
will be added.

ACIDS, MUCH DILUTED, WHICH CAUSE INFLECTION.

1. Nitric, strong inflection; poisonous.  2. Hydrochloric, moderate and
slow inflection; not poisonous.  3. Hydriodic, strong inflection;
poisonous.  4. Iodic, strong inflection; poisonous.  5. Sulphuric,
strong inflection; somewhat poisonous.  6. Phosphoric, strong
inflection; poisonous.  7. Boracic; moderate and rather slow
inflection; not poisonous.  8. Formic, very slight inflection; not
poisonous.  9. Acetic, strong and rapid inflection; poisonous.  10.
Propionic, strong but not very rapid inflection; poisonous.  11. Oleic,
quick inflection; very poisonous.  12. Carbolic, very slow inflection;
poisonous.  13. Lactic, slow and moderate inflection; poisonous.  14.
Oxalic, moderately quick inflection; very poisonous.  15. Malic, very
slow but considerable inflection; not poisonous.  16. Benzoic, rapid
inflection; very poisonous.  17. Succinic, moderately quick inflection:
moderately poisonous.  18. Hippuric, rather slow inflection;
poisonous.  19. Hydrocyanic, rather rapid inflection; very poisonous.

ACIDS, DILUTED TO THE SAME DEGREE, WHICH DO NOT CAUSE INFLECTION.

1. Gallic; not poisonous.  2. Tannic; not poisonous.  3. Tartaric; not
poisonous.  4. Citric; not poisonous.  5. Uric; (?) not poisonous.

Nitric Acid.--Four leaves were placed, each in thirty minims of one
part by weight of the acid to 437 of water, so that each received 1/16
of a grain, or 4.048 mg. This strength was chosen for this and most of
the following experiments, as it is the same [page 190] as that of most
of the foregoing saline solutions. In 2 hrs. 30 m. some of the leaves
were considerably, and in 6 hrs. 30 m. all were immensely, inflected,
as were their blades. The surrounding fluid was slightly coloured pink,
which always shows that the leaves have been injured. They were then
left in water for three days; but they remained inflected and were
evidently killed. Most of the glands had become colourless. Two leaves
were then immersed, each in thirty minims of one part to 1000 of water;
in a few hours there was some inflection; and after 24 hrs. both leaves
had almost all their tentacles and blades inflected; they were left in
water for three days, and one partially re-expanded and recovered. Two
leaves were next immersed, each in thirty minims of one part to 2000 of
water; this produced very little effect, except that most of the
tentacles close to the summit of the petiole were inflected, as if the
acid had been absorbed by the cut-off end.

Hydrochloric Acid.--One part to 437 of water; four leaves were immersed
as before, each in thirty minims. After 6 hrs. only one leaf was
considerably inflected. After 8 hrs. 15 m. one had its tentacles and
blade well inflected; the other three were moderately inflected, and
the blade of one slightly. The surrounding fluid was not coloured at
all pink. After 25 hrs. three of these four leaves began to re-expand,
but their glands were of a pink instead of a red colour; after two more
days they fully re-expanded; but the fourth leaf remained inflected,
and seemed much injured or killed, with its glands white. Four leaves
were then treated, each with thirty minims of one part to 875 of water;
after 21 hrs. they were moderately inflected; and on being transferred
to water, fully re-expanded in two days, and seemed quite healthy.

Hydriodic Acid.--One to 437 of water; three leaves were immersed as
before, each in thirty minims. After 45 m. the glands were discoloured,
and the surrounding fluid became pinkish, but there was no inflection.
After 5 hrs. all the tentacles were closely inflected; and an immense
amount of mucus was secreted, so that the fluid could be drawn out into
long ropes.  The leaves were then placed in water, but never
re-expanded, and were evidently killed. Four leaves were next immersed
in one part to 875 of water; the action was now slower, but after 22
hrs. all four leaves were closely inflected, and were affected in other
respects as above described. These leaves did not re-expand, though
left for four days in water. This acid acts far more powerfully than
hydrochloric, and is poisonous.

Iodic Acid.--One to 437 of water; three leaves were immersed, [page
191] each in thirty minims; after 3 hrs. strong inflection; after 4
hrs. glands dark brown; after 8 hrs. 30 m. close inflection, and the
leaves had become flaccid; surrounding fluid not coloured pink. These
leaves were then placed in water, and next day were evidently dead.

Sulphuric Acid.--One to 437 of water; four leaves were immersed, each
in thirty minims; after 4 hrs. great inflection; after 6 hrs.
surrounding fluid just tinged pink; they were then placed in water, and
after 46 hrs. two of them were still closely inflected, two beginning
to re-expand; many of the glands colourless. This acid is not so
poisonous as hydriodic or iodic acids.

Phosphoric Acid.--One to 437 of water; three leaves were immersed
together in ninety minims; after 5 hrs. 30 m. some inflection, and some
glands colourless; after 8 hrs. all the tentacles closely inflected,
and many glands colourless; surrounding fluid pink. Left in water for
two days and a half, remained in the same state and appeared dead.

Boracic Acid.--One to 437 of water; four leaves were immersed together
in 120 minims; after 6 hrs. very slight inflection; after 8 hrs. 15 m.
two were considerably inflected, the other two slightly. After 24 hrs.
one leaf was rather closely inflected, the second less closely, the
third and fourth moderately. The leaves were washed and put into water;
after 24 hrs. they were almost fully re-expanded and looked healthy.
This acid agrees closely with hydrochloric acid of the same strength in
its power of causing inflection, and in not being poisonous.

Formic Acid.--Four leaves were immersed together in 120 minims of one
part to 437 of water; after 40 m. slight, and after 6 hrs. 30 m. very
moderate inflection; after 22 hrs. only a little more inflection than
often occurs in water. Two of the leaves were then washed and placed in
a solution (1 gr. to 20 oz.) of phosphate of ammonia; after 24 hrs.
they were considerably inflected, with the contents of their cells
aggregated, showing that the phosphate had acted, though not to the
full and ordinary degree.

Acetic Acid.--Four leaves were immersed together in 120 minims of one
part to 437 of water.  In 1 hr. 20 m. the tentacles of all four and the
blades of two were greatly inflected. After 8 hrs. the leaves had
become flaccid, but still remained closely inflected, the surrounding
fluid being coloured pink. They were then washed and placed in water;
next morning they were still inflected and of a very dark red colour,
but with their glands colourless. After another day they were
dingy-coloured, and [page 192] evidently dead. This acid is far more
powerful than formic, and is highly poisonous.  Half-minim drops of a
stronger mixture (viz. one part by measure to 320 of water) were placed
on the discs of five leaves; none of the exterior tentacles, only those
on the borders of the disc which actually absorbed the acid, became
inflected. Probably the dose was too strong and paralysed the leaves,
for drops of a weaker mixture caused much inflection; nevertheless the
leaves all died after two days.

Propionic Acid.--Three leaves were immersed in ninety minims of a
mixture of one part to 437 of water; in 1 hr. 50 m. there was no
inflection; but after 3 hrs. 40 m. one leaf was greatly inflected, and
the other two slightly. The inflection continued to increase, so that
in 8 hrs. all three leaves were closely inflected. Next morning, after
20 hrs., most of the glands were very pale, but some few were almost
black. No mucus had been secreted, and the surrounding fluid was only
just perceptibly tinted of a pale pink. After 46 hrs. the leaves became
slightly flaccid and were evidently killed, as was afterwards proved to
be the case by keeping them in water. The protoplasm in the closely
inflected tentacles was not in the least aggregated, but towards their
bases it was collected in little brownish masses at the bottoms of the
cells. This protoplasm was dead, for on leaving the leaf in a solution
of carbonate of ammonia, no aggregation ensued. Propionic acid is
highly poisonous to Drosera, like its ally acetic acid, but induces
inflection at a much slower rate.

Oleic Acid (given me by Prof. Frankland).--Three leaves were immersed
in this acid; some inflection was almost immediately caused, which
increased slightly, but then ceased, and the leaves seemed killed. Next
morning they were rather shrivelled, and many of the glands had fallen
off the tentacles. Drops of this acid were placed on the discs of four
leaves; in 40 m.  all the tentacles were greatly inflected, excepting
the extreme marginal ones; and many of these after 3 hrs. became
inflected. I was led to try this acid from supposing that it was
present (which does not seem to be the case)* in olive oil, the action
of which is anomalous.  Thus drops of this oil placed on the disc do
not cause the outer tentacles to be inflected; yet when minute drops
were added to the secretion surrounding the glands of the outer
tentacles, these were occasionally, but by no means always, inflected.
Two leaves were also immersed in this oil, and there

* See articles on Glycerine and Oleic Acid in Watts' 'Dict. of
Chemistry.' [page 193]

was no inflection for about 12 hrs.; but after 23 hrs. almost all the
tentacles were inflected.  Three leaves were likewise immersed in
unboiled linseed oil, and soon became somewhat, and in 3 hrs. greatly,
inflected. After 1 hr. the secretion round the glands was coloured
pink. I infer from this latter fact that the power of linseed oil to
cause inflection cannot be attributed to the albumin which it is said
to contain.

Carbolic Acid.--Two leaves were immersed in sixty minims of a solution
of 1 gr. to 437 of water; in 7 hrs. one was slightly, and in 24 hrs.
both were closely, inflected, with a surprising amount of mucus
secreted. These leaves were washed and left for two days in water; they
remained inflected; most of their glands became pale, and they seemed
dead. This acid is poisonous, but does not act nearly so rapidly or
powerfully as might have been expected from its known destructive power
on the lowest organisms. Half-minims of the same solution were placed
on the discs of three leaves; after 24 hrs. no inflection of the outer
tentacles ensued, and when bits of meat were given them, they became
fairly well inflected. Again half-minims of a stronger solution, of one
part to 218 of water, were placed on the discs of three leaves; no
inflection of the outer tentacles ensued; bits of meat were then given
as before; one leaf alone became well inflected, the discal glands of
the other two appearing much injured and dry. We thus see that the
glands of the discs, after absorbing this acid, rarely transmit any
motor impulse to the outer tentacles; though these, when their own
glands absorb the acid, are strongly acted on.

