Wayne felt Sherri nudge him, and turned to nod. He knew what she was
thinking. This was where he came in; it was a job that called for a
specialist, a trained mountaineer--such as Captain Peter Wayne. He
frowned and turned his attention back to the man on the platform.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We made all the readings we could," Jervis continued. "Then we headed
back to our temporary base."

His face looked troubled. "When we got back, every man at the base was
dead."

Silence in the room. Complete, utter, deafening silence.

"There were only nine of us in the ship," Jervis said. He was obviously
still greatly affected by whatever had taken place on Fomalhaut V. "With
seven of us dead, that left only Bellows and myself. We couldn't find
out what had killed them. They were lying scattered over the valley
floor for several yards around the ship. They looked as though they had
suddenly dropped dead at whatever they were doing."

Peter Wayne made use of his extra few inches of height to glance around
the briefing room. He saw row on row of tense faces--faces that
reflected the same emotions he was feeling. Space exploration was
something still new and mostly unknown, and even the experienced men of
IES still knew fear occasionally. The galaxy was a big place; unknown
terrors lurked on planets unimaginably distant. Every now and then,
something like this would come up--something to give you pause, before
you ventured into space again.

"We couldn't find out what had killed them," Jervis said again. "They
were lying scattered every which way, with no clues at all." The small
man's fingers were trembling from relived fright. "Bellows and I were
pretty scared, I'll have to admit. We couldn't find a sign of what had
killed the men--they'd just--just _died_."

There was a quiver in his voice. It was obvious he could never take the
story lightly, no matter how many times he had to tell it.

Wayne heard Private Manetti mutter, "There's always a price for D-N
beryllium."

"The Scout Ship hadn't been molested," Jervis went on. "I went inside
and checked it over. It was untouched, undisturbed in every way. I
checked the control panel, the cabins, everything. All unbothered. The
ship was empty and dead. And--outside--

"When I came out, Bellows was dead too." He took a deep breath. "I'm
afraid I panicked then. I locked myself inside the ship, set the
autocontrols, and headed back to Earth at top velocity. I set the ship
in an orbit around the moon and notified headquarters. I was quarantined
immediately, of course, to make sure I wasn't carrying anything. The
medics checked me over carefully. I wasn't and am not now carrying any
virus or bacteria unknown to Terrestrial medicine.

"Since I'm the only one who knows exactly where this valley is, the
general has asked me to guide the _Lord Nelson_ to the exact spot.
Actually, it could be found eventually with the D-N beryllium as a
guide. But the _Mavis_ was in orbit around Fomalhaut V for two weeks
before we found the D-N beryllium deposit, and the Service feels that we
shouldn't waste any time."

The lieutenant sat down, and General Scarborough resumed his place on
the platform.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's the situation," Scarborough said bluntly. "You know the setup,
now--and I think some of you see how your specialities are going to fit
into the operation. As Lieutenant Jervis pointed out, we don't know what
killed the crew of the _Mavis_; therefore, we are going to take every
possible precaution. As far as we know, there are no inimical life forms
on Fomalhaut V--but it's possible that there are things we don't know
about, such as airborne viruses that kill in a very short time. If so,
then Lieutenant Jervis is immune to the virus and is not a transmitter
or carrier of it.

"However, to guard against such a possibility, no one will leave the
_Lord Nelson_, once it has landed, without wearing a spacesuit. The air
is breathable, but we're taking no chances. Also, no one will go out
alone; scouting parties will always be in pairs, with wide open
communication with the ship. And at no time will more than ten percent
of the ship's company be outside at any one time."

Wayne made a rough mental computation. _The_ Lord Nelson _holds sixty.
That means no more than six out at any single time. They really must be
worried._

"Aside from those orders, which were decided on by the Service Command,
you'll be under the direct orders of Colonel Nels Petersen. Colonel
Petersen."

Petersen was a tall, hard-faced man with a touch of gray at his temples.
He stepped forward and stared intently at the assembled crew.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Our job is to make the preliminary preparations for getting D-N
beryllium out of the crust of Fomalhaut V. We're supposed to stay alive
while we do it. Therefore, our secondary job is to find out what it was
that killed the scouting expedition of the _Mavis_. There are sixty of
us going aboard the _Lord Nelson_ tomorrow, and I'd like to have sixty
aboard when we come back. Got that?"

He leaned forward, stretched upward on his toes, and smiled
mechanically. "Fine. Now, you all know your jobs, but we're going to
have to work together as a team. We're going to have to correlate our
work so that we'll know what we're doing. So don't think we won't have
anything to do during the two weeks it will take us to get to Fomalhaut
V. We're going to work it as though it were a shakedown cruise. If
anyone doesn't work out, he'll be replaced, even if we have to turn
around and come back to Earth. On a planet which has wiped out a whole
scouting expedition, we can't afford to have any slip-ups. And that
means we can't afford to have anyone aboard who doesn't know what he's
doing or doesn't care. Is that clear?"

It was.

"All right," said the colonel. "Let's go out and get acquainted with the
_Lord Nelson_."

       *       *       *       *       *

The briefing session broke up well past midnight, and the group that
shortly would become the crew of the _Lord Nelson_ filtered out of the
building and into the cool spring air. Each man had a fairly good idea
of his job and each man knew the dangers involved. No one had backed
out.

"What d'ye think of it, Pete?" Sherri James asked, as they left
together. "Sounds pretty mean."

"I wish we knew what the answers were beforehand," Wayne said. He
glanced down at Sherri. The moon was full, and its rays glinted brightly
off her golden hair. "It's a risky deal, as Petersen said. Nine men go
out, and eight die--of what? Just dead, that's all."

"It's the way the game goes," Sherri said. "You knew that when you
joined the corps." They turned down the main road of the IES compound
and headed for the snack bar.

Wayne nodded. "I know, kid. It's a job, and it has to be done. But
nobody likes to walk into an empty planet like that knowing that eight
of the last nine guys who did didn't come back."

He put his arm around her and they entered the snack bar that way. Most
of the other crew-members were there already; Wayne sensed the
heightening tenseness on their faces.

"Two nuclear fizzes," he said to the pfc at the bar. "With all the
trimmings."

"What's the matter, Captain?" said a balding, potbellied major a few
stools down, who was nursing a beer. "How come the soft drinks tonight,
Wayne?"

Peter grinned. "I'm in training, Major Osborne. Gotta kill the evil
green horde from Rigel Seven, and I don't dare drink anything stronger
than sarsaparilla."

"How about the amazon, then?" Osborne said, gesturing at Sherri. "Her
too?"

"Me too," Sherri said.

Osborne stared at his beer. "You two must be in Scarborough's new
project, then." He squinted at Peter, who nodded almost imperceptibly.

"You'll need luck," Osborne said.

"No we won't," Wayne said. "Not luck. We'll need more than just luck to
pull us through."

The nuclear fizzes arrived. He began to sip it quietly. A few more
members of the crew entered the snack bar. Their faces were drawn
tensely.

He guzzled the drink and looked up at Sherri, who was sucking down the
last of the soda. "Let's get going, Lieutenant James. The noncoms are
coming, and we don't want them to make nasty remarks about us."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Lord Nelson_ blasted off the next evening, after a frenzied day of
hurried preparations. The crew of sixty filed solemnly aboard, Colonel
Petersen last, and the great hatch swung closed.

There was the usual routine loudspeaker-business while everyone quickly
and efficiently strapped into his acceleration cradle, and then the ship
leaped skyward. It climbed rapidly, broke free of Earth's grasp, and,
out past the moon, abruptly winked out of normal space into overdrive.
It would spend the next two weeks in hyperspace, short-cutting across
the galaxy to Fomalhaut V.

It was a busy two weeks for everyone involved. Captain Peter Wayne, as a
central part of the team, spent much of his time planning his attack.
His job would be the actual climbing of the mountain where the
double-nucleus beryllium was located. It wasn't going to be an easy job;
the terrain was rough, the wind, according to Jervis, whipped ragingly
through the hills, and the jagged peaks thrust into the air like the
