
"The big man is a tender of cattle, Supreme; and he owes his
peculiar aptitude to the fact that his parents, for twenty
generations back, were engaged in similar work. The same may be said
for the younger of the two women; she is small, but we owe much of
the excellence of our crops to her energy and skill.

"As for the other woman," indicating Rolla, "she is a soil-tester,
and very expert. Her studies and experiments have greatly improved
our product. The same may be said in lesser degree of the youth, who
is engaged in similar work."

"Then," coolly commented the Sanusian whose eyes and ears Billie
enjoyed; "then your line of action is clear enough. You will see to
it that the big man marries the sturdy young girl, of course; their
offspring should give us a generation of rare outdoor ability.
Similarly the young man and the older woman, despite their
difference in ages, shall marry for the sake of improving the breed
of soil-testers."

"Quite so, Supreme. There is one slight difficulty, however, such as
caused me to summon you."

"Name the difficulty."

The Sanusian hesitated only a trifle with her reply: "It is,
Supreme, that the big man and the older woman have seen fit to fall
in love with one another, while the same is true of the youth and
the girl."

"This should not have been allowed!"

"I admit it, Supreme; my force has somehow overlooked their case,
heretofore. What is your will?"

The commandant answered instantly: "Put an immediate end to their
desires!"

"It shall be done!"

At that moment there was a stir on the ground. In fact, this was the
instant when Corrus began his vehement outcry against the tyranny of
"They." The two in the air came closer; whereupon Billie discovered
that Supreme did not understand the language of the humans below.
[Footnote: The humans did not realize this fact, however; they
assumed that "They" always understood.] Yet the herdsman's tones
were unmistakably angry.

"You will descend," commented Supreme evenly, "and warn the big man
not to repeat such outbreaks."

Immediately Supreme's lieutenant darted down, and was lost to view.
The commandant glanced interestedly here and there about the
landscape, returning her gaze to Corrus just as the man stopped in
mid-speech. Billie was no less astonished than the doctor to see the
herdsman's expression change as it did; one second it was that of
righteous indignation, the next, of the most abject subservience.

Nevertheless, Billie could see no cause whatever for it; neither did
she hear anything. The other flier remained out of sight. All that
the architect could guess was that the operator had "got the drop"
on Corrus in some manner which was clear only to those involved.
Badly puzzled, Billie watched the four humans hurry away, their
manner all but slinking.

A moment later still another aircraft came up, and its operator
reported. As before, Billie could make out not a single detail of
the occupant herself. She, too, wanted the commandant's personal
attention; and shortly Billie was looking down upon a scene which
she had good reason to remember all the rest of her life.

In the middle of a large field, where some light green plant was
just beginning to sprout, a group of about a dozen humans was at
work cultivating. Billie had time to note that they were doing the
work in the most primitive fashion, employing the rudest of tools,
all quite in keeping with their bare heads and limbs and their
skin-clad bodies. About half were women.

Slightly at one side, however, stood a man who was not so busy. To
put it plainly, he was loafing, with the handle of his improvised
mattock supporting his weight. Clearly the two up in the air were
concerned only with him.

"He has been warned three times, Supreme," said the one who had
reported the case.

"Three? Then make an example of him!"

"It shall be done, Supreme!"

The lieutenant disappeared. Again the commandant glanced at this,
that, and the other thing before concentrating upon what happened
below. Then Billie saw the man straighten up suddenly in his tracks,
and with remarkable speed, considering his former laziness, he
whirled about, dodged, and clapped a hand upon his thigh.

Next second he raised an exultant cry. Billie could not understand
what he said; but she noted that the others in the group echoed the
man's exultation, and started to crowd toward him, shouting and
gesticulating in savage delight. Then something else happened so
sudden and so dreadful that the woman who was watching from the
earth was turned almost sick.

Like a flash Supreme dropped, headlong, toward the group of humans.
In two seconds the distance was covered, and in the last fifth of a
second Billie saw the key to the whole mystery.

In that last instant the man who before had seemed of ordinary size,
was magnified to the dimensions of a colossus. Instead of being
under six feet, he appeared to be near a hundred yards in height;
but Billie scarcely realized this till later, it all happened so
quickly. There was an outcry from the group, and then the
commandant's aircraft crashed into the man's HAND; a hand so huge
that the very wrinkles in its skin were like so many gulleys; even
in that final flash Billie saw all this.

Simultaneously with the landing there was a loud pop, while Billie's
senses reeled with the stunning suddenness of the impact. Next
second the machine had darted to a safe distance, and Billie could
see the man gnawing frantically at the back of his hand. Too late;
his hand went stiff, and his arm twitched spasmodically. The fellow
made a step or two forward, then swayed where he stood, his whole
body rigid and strained. An expression of the utmost terror was upon
his face; he could not utter a sound, although his companions
shrieked in horror. Another second and the man fell flat, twitching
convulsively; and in a moment or two it was all over. He was dead!

And then the truth burst upon the watcher. In fact, it seemed to
come to all four at the same time, probably by reason of their
mental connections. Neither of them could claim that he or she had
previously guessed a tenth of its whole, ghastly nature.

The "cane" which Smith had seen had not been cane at all; it had
been grass. The "beetle" in the stream had not been the giant thing
he had visualized it; neither had that fish been the size he had
thought.

Van Emmon's "gold mine" had not been a pit in any sense of the word;
it had been the inside of the blossom of a very simple, poppy-like
flower. The "nuggets" had been not mineral, but pollen. As for the
incredible thing which Van Emmon had seen on the ground; that living
statue; that head without a body--the body had been buried out of
sight beneath the soil; and the man had been an ordinary human,
being punished in this manner for misconduct.

Instead of being aircraft built in imitation of insects, the
machines had been constructed by nature herself, and there had been
nothing unusual in their size. No; they were the real thing,
differing only slightly from what might have been found anywhere
upon the earth.

In short, it had all been simply a matter of view-point. The supreme
creature of Sanus was, not the human, but the bee. A poisonous bee,
superior to every other form of Sanusian life! What was more--

"The damned things are not only supreme; THE HUMANS ARE THEIR
SLAVES!"






VI





Impossible, But--

The four looked at each other blankly. Not that either was at a loss
for words; each was ready to burst. But the thing was so utterly
beyond their wildest conceptions, so tremendously different in every
way, it left them all a little unwilling to commit themselves.

"Well," said Smith finally, "as I said in the first place, I can't
see how any other than the human form became supreme. As I
understand biology--"

"What gets me," interrupted Van Emmon; "what gets me is, WHY the
humans have allowed such an infernal thing to happen!"

Billie smiled somewhat sardonically. "I thought," she remarked,
cuttingly, "that you were always in sympathy with the upper dog, Mr.
Van Emmon!"

"I am!" hotly. Then, with the memory of what he had just seen
rushing back upon him: "I mean, I was until I saw--saw that--" He
stopped, flushing deeply; and before he could collect himself Smith
had broken in again:

"I just happened to remember, doc; didn't you say that the
Venusians, in those books of yours, say that Sanus is ruled by the
workers?"

"Just what I was wondering about," from Van Emmon. "The humans seem
to do all the work, and the bees the bossing!"

The doctor expected this. "The Venusians had our viewpoint--the
viewpoint of people on the earth, when they said that the workers
rule. We consider the bee as a great worker, don't we? 'As busy as a
bee,' you know. None of the so-called lower animals show greater
industry."

"You don't mean to say," demanded Smith, "that these Sanusian bees
owe their position to the fact that they are, or were, such great
workers?"

Before the doctor could reply, Van Emmon broke in. It seemed as
though his mind refused to get past this particular point. "Now, why
the dickens have the humans allowed the bees to dominate them? Why?"

"We'll have to go at this a little more systematically," remarked
Kinney, "if we want to understand the situation."

"In the first place, suppose we note a thing or two about conditions
as we find them here on the earth. We, the humans, are accustomed to
rank ourselves far above the rest. It is taken for granted.

"Now, note this: the human supremacy was not always taken for
granted." He paused to let it sink in. "Not always. There was a time
in prehistoric days when man ranked no higher than others. I feel
sure of this," he insisted, seeing that Smith was opposed to the
idea; "and I think I know just what occurred to make man supreme."

"What?" from Billie.

"Never mind now. I rather imagine we shall learn more on this score
as we go on with our work.

"At any rate, we may be sure of this: whatever it was that caused
man to become supreme on the earth, that condition is lacking on
Sanus!"

Van Emmon did not agree to this. "The condition may be there, doc,
but there is some other factor which overbalances it; a factor such
as is--well, more favorable to the bees."

The doctor looked around the circle. "What do you think? 'A factor
more favorable to the bees.' Shall we let it go at that?" There was
no remark, even from Smith; and the doctor went an:

"Coming back to the bees, then, we note that they are remarkable for
several points of great value. First, as we have seen, they are very
industrious by nature. Second, all bees possess wings and on that
count alone they are far superior to humans.

"Third--and to me, the most important--the bees possess a remarkable
combination of community life and specialization. Of course, when
you come to analyze these two points, you see that they really
belong to one another. The bees we know, for instance, are either
queens, whose only function is to fertilize the eggs; or workers,
who are unsexed females, and whose sole occupations are the
collecting of honey, the building of hives, and the care of the
young.

"Now," speaking carefully, "apparently these Sanusian bees have
developed something that is not unknown to certain forms of earth's
insect life. I mean, a soldier type. A kind of bee which specializes
on fighting!"

Van Emmon was listening closely, yet he had got another idea:
"Perhaps this soldier type is simply the plain worker bee, all gone
to sting! It may be that these bees have given up labor altogether!"

"Still," muttered Smith, under his breath, "all this doesn't solve
the real problem. Why aren't the HUMANS supreme?" For once he became
emphatic. "That's what gets me! Why aren't the humans the rulers,
doc?" Kinney waited until he felt sure the others were depending
upon him. "Smith, the humans on Sanus are not supreme now because
they were NEVER supreme."

Smith looked blank. "I don't get that."

"Don't you? Look here: you'll admit that success begets success,
won't you?"

"Success begets success? Sure! 'Nothing succeeds like success.'"

"Well, isn't that merely another way of saying that the
consciousness of superiority will lead to further conquests? We
humans are thoroughly conscious of our supremacy; if we weren't we'd
never attempt the things we do!"

Van Emmon saw the point. "In other words, the humans on the earth
never began to show their superiority until something--something
big, happened to demonstrate their ability!"

"Exactly!" cried Kinney. "Our prehistoric ancestors would never have
handed down such a tremendous ambition to you and me if they, at
that time, had not been able to point to some definite feat and say,
'That proves I'm a bigger man than a horse,' for example."

"Of course," reflected Billie, aloud; "of course, there were other
factors."

"Yes; but they don't alter the case. Originally the human was only
slightly different from the apes he associated with. There was
perhaps only one slight point of superiority; today there are
millions of such points. Man is infinitely superior, now, and it's
all because he was slightly superior, then."

"Suppose we grant that," remarked the geologist. "What then? Does
that explain why the bees have made good on Sanus?"

"To a large degree. Some time in the past the Sanusian bee
discovered that he possessed a certain power which enabled him to
force his will upon other creatures. This power was his poisonous
sting. He found that, when he got his fellows together and formed a
swarm, they could attack any animal in such large numbers as to make
it helpless."

"Any creature?"

"Yes; even reptiles, scales or no scales. They'd attack the eyes."

"But that doesn't explain how the bees ever began to make humans
work for them," objected Van Emmon.

The doctor thought for a few minutes. "Let's see. Suppose we assume
that a certain human once happened to be in the neighborhood of a
hive, just when it was attacked by a drove of ants. Ants are great
lovers of honey, you know. Suppose the man stepped among the ants
and was bitten. Naturally he would trample them to death, and smash
with his hands all that he couldn't trample. Now, what's to prevent
the bees from seeing how easily the man had dealt with the ants? A
man would be far more efficient, destroying ants, than a bee; just
as a horse is more efficient, dragging a load, than a man. And yet
we know that the horse was domesticated, here on the earth, simply
because the humans saw his possibilities; the horse could do a
certain thing more efficiently than a human.

"You notice," the doctor went on, with great care, "that everything
I've assumed is natural enough: the combination of an ant attack and
the man's approach, occurring at the same time. Suppose we add a
third factor: that the bees, even while fighting the ants, also
started to attack the man; but that he chanced to turn his attention
to the ants FIRST. So that the bees let him alone!

"We know what remarkable things bees are, when it comes to telling
one another what they know. Is there any reason why such an
experience--all natural enough--shouldn't demonstrate to them that
they, by merely threatening a man, could compel him to kill ants for
them?"

Billie was dubious for a moment; then agreed that the man, also,
might notice that the bees failed to sting him as long as he
continued to destroy their other enemies. If so, it was quite
conceivable that, bit by bit, the bees had found other and more
positive ways of securing the aid of men through threatening to
sting. "Even to cultivating flowers for their benefit," she
conceded. "It's quite possible."

Smith had been thinking of something else. "I always understood that
a bee's stinging apparatus is good for only one attack. Doesn't it
always remain behind after stinging?"

"Yes," from the doctor, quietly. "That is true. The sting has tiny
barbs on its tip, and these cause it to remain in the wound. The
sting is actually torn away from the bee when it flies away. It
never grows another. That is why, in fact, the bee never stings
except as a last resort, when it thinks it's a question of
self-defense."

"Just what I thought!" chuckled Smith. "A bee is helpless without
its sting! If so, how can you account for anything like a soldier
bee?"

The doctor returned his gaze with perfect equanimity. He looked at
Van Emmon and Billie; they, too, seemed to think that the engineer
had found a real flaw in Kinney's reasoning. The doctor dropped his
eyes, and searched his mind thoroughly for the best words. He
removed his bracelets while he was thinking; the others did the
same. All four got to their feet and stretched, silently but
thoroughly. Not until they were ready to quit the study did the
doctor make reply.

"Smith, I don't need to remind you that it's the little things that
count. It's too old a saying. In this case it happens to be the
greatest truth we have found today.

"Smith"--speaking with the utmost care--"what we have just said
about the bee's sting is all true; but only with regard to the bees
on the earth. It is only on the earth, so far as we know positively,
that the bee is averse to stinging, for fear of losing his sting.

"There is only one way to account for the soldier bee. Its sting has
no barbs!"

"No barbs?"

"Why not? If the poison is virulent enough, the barbs wouldn't be
necessary, would they? Friends, the Sanusian bee is the supreme
creature on its planet; it is superior to all the other insects, all
the birds, all the animals; and its supremacy is due solely and
entirely to the fact that there are no barbs on its sting!"






VII

THE MISSING FACTOR





By the time the four once more got together in the doctor's study,
each had had a chance to consider the Sanusian situation pretty
thoroughly. All but Billie were convinced that the humans were
deserving people, whose position was all the more regrettable
because due, so far as could be seen, the insignificant little
detail of the barbless sting.

Were these people doomed forever to live their lives for the sake of
insects? Were they always to remain, primitive and uncultured, in
ignorance of the things that civilization is built upon, obeying the
orders of creatures who were content to eat, reproduce, and die? For
that is all that bees know!

Perhaps it was for the best. Possibly Rolla and her friends were
better off as they were. It might have been that a wise Providence,
seeing how woefully the human animal had missed its privileges on
other worlds, had decided to make man secondary on Sanus. Was that
the reason for it all?

All but Billie scouted the idea. To them the affair was a ghastly
perversion of what Nature intended. Van Emmon stated the case in a
manner which showed how strongly he felt about it.

"Those folks will never get anywhere if the bees can help it!" he
charged." We've got to lend a hand, here, and see that they get a
chance!"

Smith said that, so far as he was concerned, the bees might all be
consigned to hell. "I'm not going to have anything to do with the
agent I had, any more!" he declared. "I'm going to get in touch with
that chap, Dulnop. What is he like, doc?"

Kinney told him, and then Van Emmon asked for details of the
herdsman, Corrus. "No more bees in my young life, either. From now
