
"What Golden Goddess?"

"The Golden Goddess whose symbol led him here. He does not know what it
is. He stole it by murdering one of our own messengers for it. He did
not _know_ at all; he only heard the tales that some relate about her.
They are false tales."

"Did he tell you how he got it?"

"He was boasting to me, trying to get me to tell what I knew about her
dwelling-place. I would not, that is why he hurt me."

"Why did you come back, whatever-your-name?"

"My name is Nokomee, and I came back to tell you something you need to
know. Leave these others, and you will live! Stay with them, you will be
slain with them. We do not allow such as he to come among us, golden
girl or no."

"I cannot leave my comrades because of danger. What kind of man do you
think me?"

"I do not care! I can only tell you. This is a secret place, where we
remain hidden from the men of earth. I know what happens to those who
stray upon our secrets! Go, and think no more to pry into treasure tales
of this mountain land. It is not for such as you. Go, before it is too
late. I cannot hold back the death from you."

I laughed. I thought of the Koreans who had deserted, of their talk
about the fires at night, of demons and haunted mountains ahead.

"We came a long way on the track of Barto's tale of treasure from which
he brought the golden girl. It will take more than words to frighten us
away."

"Do not laugh! I try to save you from something even worse than death
that can come to you. I want to return to you the favor that you did me.
If you do not listen to me, how can I help you?" Her voice took on a
plaintive, charming note; she smiled a half-smile of complete witchery.

A high, keening cry came suddenly from the slopes above us, and she
raised on her toes as if to spring away.

"They come, my friends! I must leave you. I can only tell you to stay
close by your fire at night. I cannot say what fate will strike you. I
cannot help you. Go back, friend who would live, go back!"


She turned and sprang lightly up the slope toward the sound of the cry,
half human, half beast-like, that she had called "her friends." It had
sounded to me like the cry of a wolf, or a cat-man, anything but human.
But people can make odd sounds, and imitate beasts. Still it had been an
eerie sound that gave me a foreboding, added to her warning words. What
kind of people were these, who wore leather and jewels and used bows
that might have come off an Assyrian wall painting?

Came a tumult above, the high clear blast of some horn, a dozen eerie
cries hardly human--a rush and a pounding in the earth as though a party
had ridden off on heavy, full-size horses. No Manchurian pony ever made
such a sound on soft ground!

Polter and Noldi came back about an hour later. I had dragged the big
Barto into a tent and made him comfortable. He was snoring peacefully.
Polter squatted down beside me, folding his long form like a jackknife.

"That thing _was_ a ship, Keele," he said. There was a husky excitement,
repressed but still obvious about him. I grunted.

"It landed among some big timber on the south end of the mountain. We
got pretty close, enough to see the sides of the thing. Men busy around
it, we couldn't get too close, afraid they'd see us."

I started, a pulse of unreasoning fear, of terrific interest, ran
through me. I asked in a voice I couldn't keep calm, "What kind of men,
Hank? I saw reports of such ships in the papers, no one got close enough
to see _that_ much. Newspapers called them illusions!"

"They're not our kind of men; they are something very different. I don't
know just how to tell you, besides I couldn't be sure. But they seem to
be a people--" He stopped. "I'd rather you'd see it yourself. You
wouldn't believe me."

Noldi came out of the tent where Barto was still snoring. He came over
and squatted across the fire, eyeing me strangely.

"What happened to the big jerk, Carl?" he asked, a little tremor of
anger in his voice.

"I've got to tell you fellows we're in trouble," I began. I did not
believe that the girl's people would ignore Jake's attack upon her.

Hank looked at the slender man from New York's East Side. "What's the
matter with Barto?"

"S'got a bruise on his jaw the size of a goose-egg. Like a mule kicked
him. Scratched up quite a bit. I just wondered. He's unconscious, too; I
couldn't wake him up."

"We may be in for it," I went on. "When I got back to camp, Hank had a
girl. He'd thrown her down, was struggling with her. I had to put him
asleep to stop it. Didn't want trouble with her people."

Noldi glanced at the torn place in the soft sod where the scuffle had
taken place. I had unconsciously nodded toward it. He got up, walked
over, picked something out of the grass.

"Some girl, wearing this kind of stuff!"

He handed the glittering bauble to Polter. It was a necklace of
emeralds, with a pendant of gold in which was set a big blue stone that
I couldn't recognize, maybe a diamond, maybe something else. It looked
almighty valuable, each stone was as big as a man's thumbnail. It had
snapped, lain there unnoticed by either of us.


Noldi looked at me a little venomously.

"Looks as if you were a little premature, letting her go. We should have
found out where she gets this kind of sparkle first!"

"Seemed the safest thing to do. We are only four, how could we handle
her friends?"

"Bah, they wouldn't have known where she was. We could have kept her
till we were good and ready to let her go."

I stood up, took out my pipe and filled it.

"What about this ship you saw, and the people around it. That's
important, not this girl and her jewelry."

"We couldn't see much except that it was a ship and that it landed in
the trees where it couldn't be seen from the sky. It's pretty big, and
there are men moving around it. That's all."

"That's plenty! If we run into them, there is no knowing what they'll
do. That ship was never built on this planet."

Noldi didn't smile or laugh. He just looked at me. Serious, puzzled, and
a little scared.

"You think it's a space ship, eh, Keele?"

I nodded.

"What else could it be?"

"What's it doin' out here in no man's land?" Polter asked. "You'd think
strangers like that would land near a city, try to make some kind of
official contact."

"If you were landing on a strange world, would you land near a city?" I
asked.

Polter laughed.

"I guess you hit it. They don't know whether they'd be welcome or not.
Scared, eh?"

"Just careful, I'd say. We don't know anything about them. But ships
like that have been reported off and on for hundreds of years. Don't be
surprised if you never see a trace of it again, and if no one else but
me ever believes you when you mention it. I don't think we'll have to
worry about the flying saucer."

"What the hell do they want, then?" Noldi didn't know what I meant,
exactly.

"Nobody knows, Frans. Nobody ever saw them as close as you just did
today."

       *       *       *

Watching Jake Barto next morning, I saw that the little image in his
hand pointed right across the center of that cloud-topping mountain.
That meant we had to go around it, for we were not equipped for such
climbing, nor would there have been any sense in it. Jake figured on
circling to the left, and I was glad, for I for one wanted no parts of
that disk ship that Polter and Noldi had seen in the other direction.
Jake ignored me. He was unpredictable!

It was a long mountain, and we traveled along one side, toward the
north, figuring on crossing to the east wherever a pass appeared. After
a time a faint trail showed, and we followed it. It drew us higher,
until we were moving perilously along a ledge of rock, with precipitous
walls above and a sharp drop below. Higher and higher, above the
tree-line now, the path went on, and there were signs of travel along it
that worried me.

Polter was in the lead, and as we rounded a shoulder of rock, gave a cry
of wonder. We hurried after, to see the trail breaking over a low crest
of the mountain, and leading now downward. This shoulder of rock
outthrust here marked the place where the trail we were following
crossed the ridge of the mountain crest at its lowest point. But it also
marked something else, which was what had caused Polter's cry.

A line of dust across the trail and along the near-bare rocks stirred
and lifted and fell fitfully, as if the air was barred passage by some
invisible wall, and there were the skeletons of birds that had flung
themselves against the invisible wall and died, falling there. There was
the skeleton of a goat half across the trail; and at one side, what had
once been a man! All these dead--and the bones could be seen here and
there along the far line of the dust--had gone so far and no farther.
Polter had stopped fearfully ten feet from the clearly marked line--and
I for one had no desire to add my skeleton to the others.

For a few minutes none of us had anything to say, then reason reasserted
itself, and I pressed past Polter, knowing that the thing was an
illusion born of coincidence and wind currents. Some baffling current of
wind around the mountain formed here a wall of air cleavage, and the
skeletons were merely coincidence. I pushed up to the strange line of
lifting and falling dust, a little roll showing the magic of invisible
force, and pressed on, as if to cross.

Behind me a cry gave me pause. I turned, looking for that cry's source,
for it seemed to me the cry was the girl I had rescued from Barto. That
saved me, for the little horse behind me pressed on across the strange
line--and faltered, gave a horse-scream of terror, fell dead before me.

We stopped, terror of the unknown in our breasts, wondering--afraid to
put the wonder into words. We did not look at each other or discuss the
thing, we just accepted it, and stared dumbly at it like animals. I
tossed a rock across the body of the now quite motionless pack animal,
the rock reached the wall beneath which my animal lay dead--slowed,
curved sharply to the ground, did not roll, but lay as if imprisoned in
invisible jelly!

There was a wall of invisible and deadly force there, and there was no
known explanation for it!

I growled at Barto, all the suspicion and distrust that had been
building up in me toward him in my voice.

"What does your golden girl tell you now, Jake?"


Jake surprised me. He walked ahead toward that frightening manifestation
of the unknown, holding the little statuette before him like a sword,
his ugly face rapt in some listening beyond me. As the little statue
crossed the line, he sang out:

"Listen, Goddess of the Golden forces, listen and heed! We come from
afar to pay our worship, to give to you our devotion, and we are met
with this wall of death! Is that the way you greet your friends?"

Jake waved the statuette in a circular motion, then crossed the circle
twice with the waving gold. He stood there, his crossed eyes darting
here and there along the line of force, and after a long minute, after a
time that seemed filled with a distant chuckling, like thunder too far
off to be heard clearly--the lift and fall of the dust on the baffled
wind stopped, the strict line of the wind's stoppage began to disappear,
the line of demarcation was gone!

Jake reached out an arm, feeling cautiously for the invisible wall, and
after a minute, his face lightened from its habitual gloom, he stepped
across the line, and did not stagger and fall as had the horse. The wall
was gone! Jake turned, said calmly:

"Come on, our friends have decided to let us in."

My mind in a whirl at the unexpected display of knowledge beyond me, of
forces beyond the power of any rifle bullet to overcome, of strange
hidden things here--I stepped across the line, keeping close to the
tracks left by Jake's big feet. Polter and Noldi followed and the horses
plodded after. We trudged on, but not the same. We were afraid, and we
were conscious of a vast ignorance, of a fear that we did not belong
here, that the only wise thing for us to do was to turn back and give up
this Jake Barto and his cross eyes and his mumbo jumbo statue to his own
doom.

At least that's the way I felt, but something stronger than curiosity
drew me on. I wanted to know why I was so drawn when reason kept
demanding I give up this quest. I wanted to know why a golden statue
pointed always to one point on the horizon, and why that wall of force
had obeyed Jake's injunction to go away. Or was I unable to think,
really? Was I shocked out of my ability to reason and act on my reason's
dictates?

Ahead, as the trail dipped low, a vast panorama of valley and hill and
hollow, of eerie rocky spires, lay outspread. Here and there were
cultivated fields, and figures at work on the fields. In the distance
shone a stream. It flowed meandering into a wide lake. There were two
villages, not clear in the haze. At the distant lake, some kind of
larger structure lifted tall towers, shining with prismatic glitter, a
city of strange appearance.

We had crossed a barrier, and we had entered a land of the living--but
it was unclear before us. The drifting mountain mists, the sun-glitter
and the haze of noon kept the scene from striking through to our brains
with its true significance. For there was an eerie _difference_ about
the scene; it was not a land below us such as any of us had ever seen.
I felt that and yet I could not think clearly about it. We moved along
like zombies, not thinking--just accepting the unusual and the unknown
as casually as if we were travelers who could not be astounded. But
inside, my mind was busily turning the significance and the meaning of
this wall of force. I had heard of such walls before--upon Shasta in
California, and in Tibet, and in ancient times in Ireland, and there
were other instances of a similar wall in the past, and in the present
in other places. But what it could really mean, that was what I did not
know.

After crossing that invisible barrier, things began to happen in a
sequence, of a strangeness and with a rapidity such that I was unable to
analyze or to rationalize. From there on I was like a man on a
tightrope, hounded by invisible tormentors trying to shake me off. I had
not time to wonder whether it was true that spirits existed. What I did
think was that some of these Korean primitives had a Devil Doctor who
surpassed all others in trickiness, and was amusing himself at our
expense. But I did not _think_ it, I _clung_ to the idea to save my
reason from tottering over the brink.

The first thing after the wall that could not exist but did--after we
had passed on over the ridge and half way down the mountain side--was a
gully along the mountain side, up which Barto turned. I assumed he was
still following the pointing of the magnetic statuette, but I was
vaguely conscious that none of us were _really_ conscious--were under a
kind of spell in which our actions and our thoughts were
predetermined--inevitable! I knew it, but I could not shake it off, nor
put my finger on any reason why I should shake it off and call a halt to
the strange, wordless, silent following of Jake and his eerie talisman.


The faint trail led along the bottom of the gully, and after twenty
minutes of downward progress, led into a dark overhang of rock, the sky
hardly visible where the rocks almost met overhead. Down the semi-cavern
we went; still silent, zombie-like; and I felt ever more strongly the
compulsion that made us so move and so unable to do otherwise.

Jake was striding rapidly now, his dark ugly face aflame with weird
eagerness, my own heart pounding with alarm at the strangeness and the
irrationality of the whole proceeding. He held the statuette out
stiffly, it seemed fairly to leap in his hands, as if tugging with an
ecstatic longing to reach the dark place ahead. The rocks closed
completely overhead; the dimness changed to stygian darkness. I got out
my flashlight, sent the beam ahead. But Jake was pressing on through the
darkness, directly in the center of the trail.

Quite suddenly the cavern turned, opened ahead, wider and wider--and
before us lay a room of jeweled splendor, the temple of some
forgotten--_or was it forgotten?_--cult of worship.

The golden statue in the center of the big round chamber drew our eyes
from the splendor of the peculiarly decorated walls, from the strange
crystal pillar on the tall dais at the far wall, from the weird
assemblages of crystals and metals that had an eerie resemblance to
machines--to a science entirely unknown to modern men. All these details
of that chamber I remember now, looking back, but then--my attention and
that of the others was entirely drawn to the beauty of the tall, golden
woman who stood in frozen metallic wonder at the center of the forgotten
crypt.

Jake, his ugly face in a transport, had fallen to his knees, was
crawling forward to the statue abjectly, mouthing phrases of worship
and self-abnegation. Close on his heels came Polter and Noldi, eyes
rapt, movements mechanical. I stopped, some last remnant of sense
remaining in my head, and by a strong effort of will held my limbs
motionless.

As Jake reached the statue, the little golden replica of the life-sized
woman of gold seemed to leap out of his reaching hands, and clung
against the metallic waist of the golden woman as a lodestone to the
mother lode.

Even as Barto's hands touched the statue, he slumped, lay there
outstretched, his fingertips touching the metal hem of the golden skirt;
and whether he was unconscious from unsupportable ecstasy or for what
mad reason, I did not know, but I did not _want_ to know.

Undeterred by Jake's condition, the two men following in his steps also
reached out hands to touch the golden metal--and fell flat on their
faces beside Jake Barto, unconscious, or dead!

I stood, numb and with a terrific compulsion running through my nerves,
which I resisted with all my will. I drew my eyes from the strangely
pleasant magnetic lure of the metal woman with an effort and examined
that strange chamber.

The walls were covered with a crystalline glittering substance, like
molten glass sprayed on and allowed to harden. Behind this glasseous
protective surface, paintings and carvings spread a fantasy of strange
form and color, but the light was too dim to make much of it, except
that it was alien to my experience, and exceedingly well done, speaking
of a culture second to none.

Beyond the central form of the strange golden statue, was the dais which
I had noticed at once, and now my eyes picked out the fact that on it
was also a glasseous protective sheath about a form--another statue, I
thought.


Thoughtfully I prowled along the rim of the room, examining the wall
frescoes foot by foot, seeing on them a strange depiction of semi-human
forms, of crab-men and crab-women, of snake-men and snake-women, of men
half-goat and half-man, of creatures hardly human with great jaws that
looked like rock-cutters, with hands like moles on short powerful arms,
fish people with finned legs and arms, their hands engaged in catching
great fish and placing them in nets, a nightmare of weird half-human
shapes that gradually brought to me a message that I could not accept.

If that rock painting was telling a true story and not some allegorical
fantasy--these people who had built this place had been a race who knew
the secrets of life so intimately they could manipulate the unborn child
into shapes intended to give it powers and physical attributes fitting
it for amphibious life, for the underground boring life of a mole, for
the tending of flocks in the goat-legged men--the whole gamut of these
monstrous diversions from the normal human seemed to me
designed--purposely--to build a race which, like ants, has a shape
