hope--another survivor, and of necessity a mobile one. Someone to shout
and wave, to climb a tree, to find an open space and build a fire, to
light a flare, to do something--anything--that would attract the
patrol's attention. Andy Larson wasn't afraid of dying. He felt no
panic, no agonies of conscience, remorse or bitterness at the apparent
inevitability of the prospect before him. But if he was not destined to
die he needed a miracle or the assistance of that almost impossible--but
only almost--survivor. And instead of praying for the miracle, he
listened with all the hearing power at his command for the sound of
human life. That would be miracle enough, and he didn't intend to stop
listening until he couldn't any more.

Not that he didn't pray at all; back home in New Jersey, while not
considered a pillar of the church, Andy Larson was known as a good,
practicing Lutheran. But it was doubtful if the Lutherans, or any other
sect for that matter, had sent missionaries this high into the heavens
yet; the misbegotten flight he had been on had been only the fourth to
reach this strange little planet of Abernathy since its discovery by the
good professor back in '92. So Andy was no longer a practicing Lutheran,
if practicing meant going to church. But he had prayed more than once
during the long outward journey. And he was praying now, while his ears
strained for sounds and his eyes strained for movement; praying for
himself, yes, but even more for his wife, and for someone he had never
seen.

He couldn't help being afraid for Elsie; he had been gone from home
almost seven months, and she had been rocked with morning sickness for
the last three weeks before he left, moaning over her saltines and
begging him not to go even though she knew he couldn't and would not
back out. She was afraid of the unknown he was going into, and he was
afraid of the unknown that awaited her--it was the first time for both
unknowns for both of them.

In a little while he could stop straining his eyes. Greenish dusk was
slipping into night. Soon his ears would have to do all the work. The
thought of night-prowling creatures disturbed him somewhat; no-one knew
for sure yet what, if anything, lived in these thick, isolated jungles.
Paralyzed as he was, he was fair game--his choice of words in the
thought brought a grimacing smile to his face. He tried once again--was
it the thousandth time yet?--to move his arms, his legs, his hands, a
finger, a toe. Earlier, he had thought he was moving the big toe on his
left foot, but he couldn't raise his head to see past the twisted bulk
of metal that lay across him, the toe had nothing to rub upon to give it
feeling, and there was absolutely no feeling between it and his head to
give it any meaning anyhow. But it would have been a nice feeling just
to know it was still there.

He gave up the attempt when sweat beaded out on his forehead and went
back to listening and praying. He was tempted to pray for the miracle
now, for blackness blotted out even the pitiful remains of the ship, and
the whine of the patrol had muted to a singing hum in the distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The night turned cold and damp, but Andy Larson, in his sheathing of
paralysis, didn't feel it. The loneliness was on him, the awesome
loneliness of having to wait for death alone, with no warm hand to hold
on to until the parting. He still felt no great fear or bitterness. Only
the loneliness, and sadness. He would never know his son, or daughter,
would never know that it loved him, that he was the biggest thing in its
life. And it--that was ugly; he would call it "he"; if he had a choice a
son it would be--he, his son, would never know his father, or how much
his father wanted to love him. And Elsie--how lonely it would be for
her. Her time must be getting close now, and she would be frightened.
The doctor hadn't told her what he had told him--that she was too
slight, definitely not built for child-bearing. But she knew. And she
would be brave, but frightened and alone.

The hours of night trudged by. The few stars that peeped through the
trees were no help in telling the time, and Andy had lost interest in it
anyhow. It was night, it had been night for what seemed like years,
the blackness around him proclaimed it would be night still for many
more years. He dozed off and on, at times waking with a start, thinking
he had heard something. For a few minutes he would listen intently,
feverishly. But when nothing reached his ears but the little night
sounds he had become accustomed to, he would sink back into the lethargy
that weighed upon his eyelids.

