The lieutenant started out of the door. Sergeant Bellews followed at
leisure. He painstakingly avoided ever walking the regulation two paces
behind a commissioned officer. Either he walked side by side, chatting,
or he walked alone. Wise officers let him get away with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reaching the open air a good twenty yards behind the lieutenant, he
cocked an approving eye at a police-up unit at work on the lawn outside.
Only a couple of weeks before, that unit had been in a bad way. It
stopped and shivered when it encountered an unfamiliar object.

But now it rolled across the grass from one path-edge to another. When
it reached the second path it stopped, briskly moved itself its own
width sidewise, and rolled back. On the way it competently manicured the
lawn. It picked up leaves, retrieved a stray cigarette-butt, and snapped
up a scrap of paper blown from somewhere. Its tactile units touched a
new-planted shrub. It delicately circled the shrub and went on upon its
proper course.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once, where the grass grew taller than elsewhere, it stopped and
whirred, trimming the growth back to regulation height. Then it went on
about its business as before.

Sergeant Bellews felt a warm sensation. That was a good machine that had
been in a bad way and he'd brought it back to normal, happy operation.
The sergeant was pleased.

The lieutenant turned into the Communications building. Sergeant Bellews
followed at leisure. A jeep went past him--one of the special jeeps
being developed at this particular installation--and its driver was
talking to someone in the back seat, but the jeep matter-of-factly
turned out to avoid Sergeant Bellews. He glowed. He'd activated it.
Another good machine, gathering sound experience day by day.

He went into the room where Betsy stood--the communicator which, alone
among receiving devices in the whole world, picked up the enigmatic
broadcasts consistently. Betsy was a standard Mark IV communicator, now
carefully isolated from any aerial. She was surrounded by recording
devices for vision and sound, and by the most sensitive and complicated
instruments yet devised for the detection of short-wave radiation.
Nothing had yet been detected reaching Betsy, but something must. No
machine could originate what Betsy had been exhibiting on her screen and
emitting from her speakers.

Sergeant Bellews tensed instantly. Betsy's standby light quivered
hysterically from bright to dim and back again. The rate of quivering
was fast. It was very nearly a sine-wave modulation of the light--and
when a Mahon-modified machine goes into sine-wave flicker, it is the
same as Cheyne-Stokes breathing in a human.

He plunged forward. He jerked open Betsy's adjustment-cover and fairly
yelped his dismay. He reached in and swiftly completed corrective
changes of amplification and scanning voltages. He balanced a capacity
bridge. He soothed a saw-tooth resonator. He seemed to know by sheer
intuition what was needed to be done.

After a moment or two the standby lamp wavered slowly from
near-extinction to half-brightness, and then to full brightness and
back again. It was completely unrhythmic and very close to normal.

"Who done this?" demanded the sergeant furiously. "He had Betsy close to
fatigue collapse! He'd ought to be court-martialed!"

He was too angry to notice the three civilians in the room with the
colonel and the lieutenant who'd summoned him. The young officer looked
uncomfortable, but the colonel said authoritatively:

"Never mind that, Sergeant. Your Betsy was receiving something. It
wasn't clear. You had not reported, as ordered, so an attempt was made
to clarify the signals."

"Okay, Colonel!" said Sergeant Bellews bitterly. "You got the right to
spoil machines! But if you want them to work right you got to treat 'em
right!"

"Just so," said the colonel. "Meanwhile--this is Doctor Howell, Doctor
Graves, and Doctor Lecky. Sergeant Bellews, gentlemen. Sergeant, these
are not MDs. They've been sent by the Pentagon to work on Betsy."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Betsy don't need workin' on!" said Sergeant Bellews belligerently.
"She's a good, reliable, experienced machine! If she's handled right,
she'll do better work than any machine I know!"

"Granted," said the colonel. "She's doing work now that no other machine
seems able to do--drawing scrambled broadcasts from somewhere that can
only be guessed at. They've been unscrambled and these gentlemen have
come to get the data on Betsy. I'm sure you'll cooperate."

"What kinda data do they want?" demanded Bellews. "I can answer most
questions about Betsy!"

"Which," the colonel told him, "is why I sent for you. These gentlemen
have the top scientific brains in the country, Sergeant. Answer their
questions about Betsy and I think some very high brass will be grateful.

"By the way, it is ordered that from now on no one is to refer to Betsy
or any work on these broadcasts, over any type of electronic
communication. No telephone, no communicator, no teletype, no radio, no
form of communication except _viva voce_. And that means you talking to
somebody else, Sergeant, with no microphone around. Understand? And from
now on you will not talk about anything at all except to these gentlemen
and to me."

Sergeant Bellews said incredulously:

"Suppose I got to talk to somebody in the Rehab Shop. Do I signal with
my ears and fingers?"

"You don't talk," said the colonel flatly. "Not at all."

Sergeant Bellews shook his head sadly. He regarded the colonel with such
reproach that the colonel stiffened. But Sergeant Bellews had a gift for
machinery. He had what amounted to genius for handling Mahon-modified
devices. So long as no more competent men turned up, he was apt to get
away with more than average.

The colonel frowned and went out of the room. The tall young lieutenant
followed him faithfully. The sergeant regarded the three scientists with
the suspicious air he displayed to everyone not connected with Mahon
units in some fashion.

"Well?" he said with marked reserve. "What can I tell you first?"

Lecky was the smallest of the three scientists. He said ingratiatingly,
with the faintest possible accent in his speech:

"The nicest thing you could do for us, Sergeant, would be to show us
that this--Betsy, is it?--with other machines before her, has developed
a contagious machine insanity. It would frighten me to learn that
machines can go mad, but I would prefer it to other explanations for the
messages she gives."

"Betsy can't go crazy," said Bellews with finality. "She's
Mahon-controlled, but she hasn't got what it takes to go crazy. A Mahon
unit fixes a machine so it can loaf and be a permanent dynamic system
that can keep acquired habits of operatin'. It can take trainin'. It can
get to be experienced. It can learn the tricks of its trade, so to
speak. But it can't go crazy!"

"Too bad!" said Lecky. He added persuasively: "But a machine can lie,
Sergeant? Would that be possible?"

Sergeant Bellews snorted in denial.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The broadcasts," said Lecky mildly, "claim a remarkable reason for
certainty about an extremely grave danger which is almost upon the
world. If it's the truth, Sergeant, it is appalling. If it is a lie, it
may be more appalling. The Joint Chiefs of Staff take it very seriously,
in any case. They--"

"I got cold shivers," said Sergeant Bellews with irony. "I'm all wrought
up. Huh! The big brass gets the yellin' yollups every so often anyhow.
Listen to them, and nothin' happens except it's top priority top secret
extra crash emergency! What do you want to know about Betsy?"

There was a sudden squealing sound from the communicator on which all
the extra recording devices were focussed. Betsy's screen lighted up.
Peculiarly curved patterns appeared on it. They shifted and changed.
Noises came from her speaker. They were completely unearthly. Now they
were shrill past belief, and then they were chopped into very small bits
of sound, and again they were deepest bass, when each separate note
seemed to last for seconds.

"You might," said Lecky calmly, "tell us from where your Betsy gets the
signal she reports in this fashion."

There were whirrings as recorders trained upon Betsy captured every
flickering of her screen and every peeping noise or deep-toned rumble.
The screen-pattern changed with the sound, but it was not linked to it.
It was a completely abnormal reception. It was uncanny. It was somehow
horrible because so completely remote from any sort of human
communication in the year 1972.

The three scientists watched with worried eyes. A communicator, even
with a Mahon unit in it, could not originate a pattern like this! And
this was not conceivably a distortion of anything transmitted in any
normal manner in the United States of America, or the Union of Compubs,
or any of the precariously surviving small nations not associated with
either colossus.

"This is a repeat broadcast!" said one of the three men suddenly. It was
Howell, the heavy-set man. "I remember it. I saw it projected--like
this, and then unscrambled. I think it's the one where the social
system's described--so we can have practice at trying to understand.
Remember?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lecky said, as if the matter had been thrashed out often before:

"I do not believe what it says, Howell! You know that I do not believe
it! I will not accept the theory that this broadcast comes from the
future!"

The broadcast stopped. It stopped dead. Betsy's screen went blank. Her
wildly fluctuating standby light slowed gradually to a nearly normal
rate of flicker.

"That's not a theory," said Howell dourly. "It's a statement in the
broadcast. We saw the first transmission of this from the tape at the
Pentagon. Then we saw it with the high-pitched parts slowed down and the
deep-bass stuff speeded up. Then it was a human voice giving data on the
scanning pattern and then rather drearily repeating that history said
that intertemporal communication began with broadcasts sent back from
2180 to 1972. It said the establishment of two-way communication was
very difficult and read from a script about social history, to give us
practice in unscrambling it. It's not a theory to say the stuff
originates in the future. It's a statement."

"Then it is a lie," said Lecky, very earnestly. "Truly, Howell, it is a
lie!"

"Then where does the broadcast come from?" demanded Howell. "Some say
it's a Compub trick. But if they were true they'd hide it for use to
produce chaos in a sneak attack. The only other theory--"
