may have to do just that.

"You can start right now. Go down and get hold of the news boys and
tell them that the announcement of my running mate will be made as soon
as this demonstration is over.

"Tell them you can't give them any information other than that, but give
them the impression that you already know. Since you _don't_ know, don't
try to guess; that way you won't let any cats out of the wrong bags. But
you _do_ know that he's a fine man, and you're pleased as all hell that
I made such a good choice. Got that?"

Horvin grinned. "Got it. You pick the man; I'll build the image." He
went out the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the door had closed, Governor Spanding said: "So it's going to be
Fisher, is it?"

"You know too much, Harry," said Senator Cannon, grinning. "Remind me to
appoint you ambassador to Patagonia after Inauguration Day."

"If I lose the election at home, I may take you up on it. But why
Matthew Fisher?"

"He's a good man, Harry."

"Hell yes, he is," the governor said. "Tops. I've seen his record as
State Attorney General and as Lieutenant Governor. And when Governor
Dinsmore died three years ago, Fisher did a fine job filling out his
last year. But--"

"But he couldn't get re-elected two years ago," Senator Cannon said. "He
couldn't keep the governor's office, in spite of the great job he'd
done."

"That's right. He's just not a politician, Jim. He doesn't have the ...
the personality, the flash, whatever it is that it takes to get a man
elected by the people. I've got it; you sure as hell have it; Fisher
doesn't."

"That's why I've got Horvin working for us," said Senator Cannon.
"Whether I need him or not may be a point of argument. Whether Matthew
Fisher needs him or not is a rhetorical question."

Governor Spanding lit a cigarette in silence while he stared at the
quasi-riot that was still coming to the screen from Convention Hall.
Then he said: "You've been thinking of Matt Fisher all along, then."

"Not Patagonia," said the senator. "Tibet."

"I'll shut up if you want me to, Jim."

"No. Go ahead."

"All right. Jim, I trust your judgment. I've got no designs on the Vice
Presidency myself, and you know it. I like to feel that, if I had, you'd
give me a crack at it. No, don't answer that, Jim; just let me talk.

"What I'm trying to say is that there are a lot of good men in the party
who'd make fine VP's; men who've given their all to get you the
nomination, and who'll work even harder to see that you're elected. Why
pass them up in favor of a virtual unknown like Matt Fisher?"

Senator Cannon didn't say anything. He knew that Spanding didn't want an
answer yet.

"The trouble with Fisher," Spanding went on, "is that he ... well, he's
too autocratic. He pulls decisions out of midair. He--" Spanding paused,
apparently searching for a way to express himself. Senator Cannon said
nothing; he waited expectantly.

"Take a look at the Bossard Decision," Spanding said. "Fisher was
Attorney General for his state at the time.

"Bossard was the Mayor of Waynesville--twelve thousand and something
population, I forget now. Fisher didn't even know Bossard. But when the
big graft scandal came up there in Waynesville, Fisher wouldn't
prosecute. He didn't actually refuse, but he hemmed and hawed around for
five months before he really started the State's machinery to moving. By
that time, Bossard had managed to get enough influence behind him so
that he could beat the rap.

"When the case came to trial in the State Supreme Court, Matt Fisher
told the Court that it was apparent that Mayor Bossard was the victim of
the local district attorney and the chief of police of Waynesville. In
spite of the evidence against him, Bossard was acquitted." Spanding took
a breath to say something more, but Senator James Cannon interrupted
him.

"Not 'acquitted', Harry. 'Exonerated'. Bossard never even should have
come to trial," the senator said. "He was a popular, buddy-buddy sort of
guy who managed to get himself involved as an unwitting figurehead.
Bossard simply wasn't--and isn't--very bright. But he was a friendly,
outgoing, warm sort of man who was able to get elected through the
auspices of the local city machine. Remember Jimmy Walker?"

Spanding nodded. "Yes, but--"

"Same thing," Cannon cut in. "Bossard was innocent, as far as any
criminal intent was concerned, but he was too easy on his so-called
friends. He--"

"Oh, _crud_, Jim!" the governor interrupted vehemently. "That's the same
whitewash that Matthew Fisher gave him! The evidence would have
convicted Bossard if Fisher hadn't given him time to cover up!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator James Cannon suddenly became angry. He jammed his own cigarette
butt into the ash tray, turned toward Spanding, and snapped: "Harry,
just for the sake of argument, let's suppose that Bossard wasn't
actually guilty. Let's suppose that the Constitution of the United
States is really true--that a man isn't guilty until he's proven guilty.

"Just _suppose_"--his voice and expression became suddenly acid--"that
Bossard was _not_ guilty. Try that, huh? Pretend, somewhere in your own
little mind, that a mere accusation--no matter what the
evidence--doesn't prove anything! Let's just make a little game between
the two of us that the ideal of Equality Under the Law means what it
says. Want to play?"

"Well, yes, but--"

"O.K.," Cannon went on angrily. "O.K. Then let's suppose that Bossard
really _was_ stupid. He could have been framed easily, couldn't he? He
could have been set up as a patsy, couldn't he? _Couldn't he?_"

"Well, sure, but--"

"Sure! Then go on and suppose that the prosecuting attorney had sense
enough to see that Bossard _had_ been framed. Suppose further that the
prosecutor was enough of a human being to know that Bossard either had
to be convicted or completely exonerated. What would he do?"

Governor Spanding carefully put his cigarette into the nearest ash tray.
"If that were the case, I'd _completely_ exonerate him. I wouldn't leave
it hanging. Matt Fisher didn't do anything but make sure that Bossard
couldn't be legally convicted; he didn't prove that Bossard was
innocent."

"And what was the result, as far as Bossard was concerned?" the senator
asked.

Spanding looked around at the senator, staring Cannon straight in the
face. "The result was that Bossard was left hanging, Jim. If I go along
with you and assume that Bossard was innocent, then Fisher fouled up
just as badly as he would have if he'd fluffed the prosecution of a
guilty man. Either a man is guilty, or he's innocent. If, according to
your theory, the prosecutor knows he's innocent, then he should
exonerate the innocent man! If not, he should do his best to convict!"

"He should?" snapped Cannon. "He _should_? Harry, you're letting your
idealism run away with you! If Bossard were guilty, he should have been
convicted--sure! But if he were innocent, should he be exonerated?
Should he be allowed to run again for office? Should the people be
allowed to think that he was lily-white? Should they be allowed to
re-elect a nitwit who'd do the same thing again because he was too
stupid to see that he was being used?

"No!" He didn't let the governor time to speak; he went on: "Matthew
Fisher set it up perfectly. He exonerated Bossard enough to allow the
ex-mayor to continue in private life without any question. _But_--there
remained just enough question to keep him out of public office for the
rest of his life. Was that wrong, Harry? Was it?"

Spanding looked blankly at the senator for a moment, then his expression
slowly changed to one of grudging admiration. "Well ... if you put it
that way ... yeah. I mean, no; it wasn't wrong. It was the only way to
play it." He dropped his cigarette into a nearby ash tray. "O.K., Jim;
you win. I'll back Fisher all the way."

"Thanks, Harry," Cannon said. "Now, if we--"

Congressman Matson came back into the room, saying, "I got 'em, Jim.
Five or ten minutes, they'll be here. Which one of 'em is it going to
be?"

"Matt Fisher, if we can come to an agreement," Cannon said, watching
Matson's face closely.

Matson chewed at his cigar for a moment, then nodded. "He'll do. Not
much political personality, but, hell, he's only running for Veep. We
can get him through." He took the cigar out of his mouth. "How do you
want to run it?"

"I'll talk to Fisher in my bedroom. You and Harry hold the others in
here with the usual chitchat. Tell 'em I'm thinking over the choice of
my running mate, but don't tell 'em I've made up my mind yet. If Matt
Fisher doesn't want it, we can tell the others that Matt and I were
simply talking over the possibilities. I don't want anyone to think he's
second choice. Got it?"

Matson nodded. "Whatever you say, Jim."

       *       *       *       *       *

That year, late August was a real blisterer along the eastern coast of
the United States. The great megalopolis that sprawled from Boston to
Baltimore in utter scorn of state boundaries sweltered in the kind of
atmosphere that is usually only found in the pressing rooms of large
tailor shops. Consolidated Edison, New York's Own Power Company, was
