handed Dasinger his cabin key.

"Thanks." Dasinger took the suitcase from the crane, unlocked and opened
it. He brought out a pair of plastic handcuffs, aware that Miss Mines
stood behind him making an intent scrutiny of what could be seen of the
suitcase's contents. He didn't blame her for feeling curious; she was
looking at a variety of devices which might have delighted the eyes of
both a professional burglar and military spy. She offered no comment.

Neither did Dasinger. He hauled Liu Taunus over on his back, fastened
handcuffs about the Fleetman's wrists, then rolled him over on his face
again. He did the same for Calat, hung the suitcase back in the crane,
slung a leg across the crane's saddle and settled into it.

Miss Mines remarked, "I'd look their cabin over pretty closely for guns
and so on before leaving them there."

"I intend to. By the way, has Dr. Egavine mentioned how close we are to
our destination?" Dasinger maneuvered the crane over to Taunus, lowered
a beam to the small of the Fleetman's back and hoisted him up
carefully, arms, head and legs dangling.

The blond girl checked her watch. "He didn't tell me exactly," she said,
"but there's what seems to be a terraprox in the G2 system ahead. If
that's it, we'll get there in around five hours depending on what
subspace conditions in the system are. Dr. Egavine's due up here in
thirty minutes to give me the final figures." She paused, added
curiously, "Don't you know yourself just where we're going?"

"No," Dasinger said. "I'm financing the trip. The doctor is the man with
the maps and other pertinent information."

"I thought you were partners."

"We are. Dr. Egavine is taciturn about some things. I'll bring him back
here with me as soon as I have these two locked away." Dasinger finished
picking up Calat, swung the crane slowly towards the door, the
unconscious Fleetmen suspended ahead of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Egavine stood at the open door to his stateroom as Dasinger came
walking back up the passage from the crew quarters and the storage.
Quist, the doctor's manservant, peered out of the stateroom behind him.

"What in heaven's name were you doing with those two men?" Egavine
inquired, twitching his eyebrows disapprovingly up and down. The doctor
was a tall, thin man in his forties, dressed habitually in undertaker
black, with bony features and intense dark eyes. He added, "They
appeared to be unconscious ... and fettered!"

"They were both," Dasinger admitted. "I've confined them to their
cabin."

"Why?"

"We had a little slugfest in the control section a few minutes ago. One
of the boys was beating around on our pilot, so I laid him out, and she
laid out the other one when he tried to get into the act with a knife.
She says the original dispute was a Fleet matter ... in other words,
none of our business. However, I don't know. There's something decidedly
fishy about the situation."

"In what way?" Egavine asked.

Dasinger said, "I checked over the crew quarters for weapons just now
and found something which suggests that Willata's Fleet is much more
interested in what we're doing out here than we thought."

Egavine looked startled, peered quickly along the passage to the control
section. "I feel," he said, lowering his voice, "that we should continue
this discussion behind closed doors...."

"All right." Quist, a bandy-legged, wiry little man with a large bulb
of a nose and close-set, small eyes, moved back from the door. Dasinger
went inside. Egavine pulled the door shut behind them and drew a chair
out from the cabin table. Dasinger sat down opposite him.

"What did you find?" Dr. Egavine asked.

Dasinger said, "You know Miss Mines is supposed to be the only Fleet
member on board who speaks the Federation's translingue. However, there
was a listening device attached to the inside of the cabin communicator
in the crew quarters. Its settings show that the Willata Fleet people
have bugged each of the Mooncat's other cabins, and also--which I think
is an interesting point--the control section. Have you and Quist
discussed our project in any detail since coming aboard?"

"I believe we did, on several occasions," Egavine said hesitantly.

"Then we'd better assume Taunus and Calat knew that we're looking for
the wreck of the Dosey Asteroids raider, and ..."

Egavine put a cautioning finger to his lips. "Should we...?"

"Oh, no harm in talking now," Dasinger assured him. "I pulled the
instrument out and dropped it in my cabin. Actually, the thing needn't
be too serious if we stay on guard. But of course we shouldn't go back
to the Fleet station after we have the stuff. Gadgetry of that kind
suggests bad intentions ... also a rather sophisticated level of
criminality for an I-Fleet. We'll return directly to the Hub. We might
have to go on short rations for a few weeks, but we'll make it. And
we'll keep those two so-called crew members locked up."

The doctor cleared his throat. "Miss Mines ..."

"She doesn't appear to be personally involved in any piratical schemes,"
Dasinger said. "Otherwise they wouldn't have bugged her cabin and the
control rooms. If we dangle a few star hyacinths before her eyes, she
should be willing to fly us back. If she balks, I think I can handle the
Mooncat well enough to get us there."

Dr. Egavine tugged pensively at his ear lobe. "I see." His hand moved on
toward his right coat lapel. "What do you think of ..."

"Mind watching this for a moment, doctor?" Dasinger interrupted. He
nodded at his own hand lying on the table before him.

"Watch...?" Egavine began questioningly. Then his eyes went wide with
alarm.

Dasinger's hand had turned suddenly sideways from the wrist, turned up
again. There was a small gun in the hand now, its stubby muzzle
pointing up steadily at Egavine's chest.

"Dasinger! What does ..."

"Neat trick, eh?" Dasinger commented. "Sleeve gun. Now keep quiet and
hold everything just as it is. If you move or Quist over there moves
before I tell you to, you've had it, doctor!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He reached across the table with his left hand, slipped it beneath
Egavine's right coat lapel, tugged sharply at something in there, and
brought out a flat black pouch with a tiny spray needle projecting from
it. He dropped the pouch in his pocket, said, "Keep your seat, doctor,"
stood up and went over to Quist. Quist darted an anxious glance at his
employer, and made a whimpering sound in his throat.

"You're not getting hurt," Dasinger told him. "Just put your hands on
top of your head and stand still. Now let's take a look at the thing you
started to pull from your pocket a moment ago ... Electric stunsap, eh?
That wasn't very nice of you, Quist! Let's see what else--

"Good Lord, Egavine," he announced presently, "your boy's a regular
armory! Two blasters, a pencil-beam, a knife, and the sap ... All right,
Quist. Go over and sit down with the doctor." He watched the little man
move dejectedly to the table, then fitted the assorted lethal devices
carefully into one of his coat pockets, brought the pouch he had taken
from Egavine out of the other pocket.

"Now, doctor," he said, "let's talk. I'm unhappy about this. I
discovered you were carrying this thing around before we left Mezmiali,
and I had a sample of its contents analyzed. I was told it's a hypnotic
with an almost instantaneous effect both at skin contact and when
inhaled. Care to comment?"

"I do indeed!" Egavine said frigidly. "I have no intention of denying
that the instrument is a hypnotic spray. As you know, I dislike guns and
similar weapons, and we are engaged in a matter in which the need to
defend myself against a personal attack might arise. Your assumption,
however, that I intended to employ the spray on you just now is simply
ridiculous!"

"I might be chuckling myself," Dasinger said, "if Quist hadn't had the
sap halfway out of his pocket as soon as you reached for your lapel. If
I'd ducked from the spray, I'd have backed into the sap, right? There's
a little too much at stake here, doctor. You may be telling the truth,
but just in case you're nourishing unfriendly ideas--and that's what it
looks like to me--I'm taking a few precautions."

Dr. Egavine stared at him, his mouth set in a thin, bitter line. Then
he asked, "What kind of precautions?"

Dasinger said, "I'll keep the hypnotic and Quist's bag of dirty tricks
until we land. You might need those things on the planet but you don't
need them on shipboard. You and I'll go up to the control section now to
give Miss Mines her final flight directions. After that, you and Quist
stay in this cabin with the door locked until the ship has set down. I
don't want to have anything else to worry about while we're making the
approach. If my suspicions turn out to be unjustified, I'll apologize
... after we're all safely back in the Hub."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What was your partner looking so sour about?" Duomart Mines inquired a
little later, her eyes on the flight screens. "Have a quarrel with him?"

Dasinger, standing in the entry to the little control cabin across from
her, shrugged his shoulders.

"Not exactly," he said. "Egavine tried to use a hypno spray on me."

"Hypno spray?" the young woman asked.

"A chemical which induces an instantaneous hypnotic trance in people.
Leaves them wide open to suggestion. Medical hypnotists make a lot of
use of it. So do criminals."

She turned away from the control console to look at him. "Why would your
partner want to hypnotize you?"

"I don't know," Dasinger said. "He hasn't admitted that he intended to
do it."

"Is he a criminal?"

"I wouldn't say he isn't," Dasinger observed judiciously, "but I
couldn't prove it."

Duomart puckered her lips, staring at him thoughtfully. "What about
yourself?" she asked.

"No, Miss Mines, I have a very high regard for the law. I'm a simple
businessman."

"A simple businessman who flies his own cruiser four weeks out from the
Hub into I-Fleet territory?"

"That's the kind of business I'm in," Dasinger explained. "I own a
charter ship company."

"I see," she said. "Well, you two make an odd pair of partners...."

"I suppose we do. Incidentally, has there been any occasion when you and
Dr. Egavine--or you and Dr. Egavine and his servant--were alone
somewhere in the ship together? For example, except when we came up here
to give you further flight instructions, did he ever enter the control
room?"

She shook her blond head. "No. Those are the only times I've seen him."

"Certain of that?" he asked.

Duomart nodded without hesitation. "Quite certain!"

Dasinger took an ointment tube from his pocket, removed its cap,
squeezed a drop of black, oily substance out on a fingertip. "Mind
rolling up your sleeve a moment?" he asked. "Just above the elbow...."

