malicious gloating.

The gardens swarmed with brilliantly trapped black men and women.
Among them moved red and white females serving their every want.  The
places of the outer world and the temples of the therns had been robbed
of their princesses and goddesses that the blacks might have their
slaves.

Through this scene we moved toward the temple.  At the main entrance we
were halted by a cordon of armed guards.  Xodar spoke a few words to an
officer who came forward to question us.  Together they entered the
temple, where they remained for some time.

When they returned it was to announce that Issus desired to look upon
the daughter of Matai Shang, and the strange creature from another
world who had been a Prince of Helium.

Slowly we moved through endless corridors of unthinkable beauty;
through magnificent apartments, and noble halls.  At length we were
halted in a spacious chamber in the centre of the temple.  One of the
officers who had accompanied us advanced to a large door in the further
end of the chamber.  Here he must have made some sort of signal for
immediately the door opened and another richly trapped courtier emerged.

We were then led up to the door, where we were directed to get down on
our hands and knees with our backs toward the room we were to enter.
The doors were swung open and after being cautioned not to turn our
heads under penalty of instant death we were commanded to back into the
presence of Issus.

Never have I been in so humiliating a position in my life, and only my
love for Dejah Thoris and the hope which still clung to me that I might
again see her kept me from rising to face the goddess of the First Born
and go down to my death like a gentleman, facing my foes and with their
blood mingling with mine.

After we had crawled in this disgusting fashion for a matter of a
couple of hundred feet we were halted by our escort.

"Let them rise," said a voice behind us; a thin, wavering voice, yet
one that had evidently been accustomed to command for many years.

"Rise," said our escort, "but do not face toward Issus."

"The woman pleases me," said the thin, wavering voice again after a few
moments of silence.  "She shall serve me the allotted time.  The man
you may return to the Isle of Shador which lies against the northern
shore of the Sea of Omean.  Let the woman turn and look upon Issus,
knowing that those of the lower orders who gaze upon the holy vision of
her radiant face survive the blinding glory but a single year."

I watched Phaidor from the corner of my eye.  She paled to a ghastly
hue.  Slowly, very slowly she turned, as though drawn by some invisible
yet irresistible force.  She was standing quite close to me, so close
that her bare arm touched mine as she finally faced Issus, Goddess of
Life Eternal.

I could not see the girl's face as her eyes rested for the first time
on the Supreme Deity of Mars, but felt the shudder that ran through her
in the trembling flesh of the arm that touched mine.

"It must be dazzling loveliness indeed," thought I, "to cause such
emotion in the breast of so radiant a beauty as Phaidor, daughter of
Matai Shang."

"Let the woman remain.  Remove the man.  Go."  Thus spoke Issus, and
the heavy hand of the officer fell upon my shoulder.  In accordance
with his instructions I dropped to my hands and knees once more and
crawled from the Presence.  It had been my first audience with deity,
but I am free to confess that I was not greatly impressed--other than
with the ridiculous figure I cut scrambling about on my marrow bones.

Once without the chamber the doors closed behind us and I was bid to
rise.  Xodar joined me and together we slowly retraced our steps toward
the gardens.

"You spared my life when you easily might have taken it," he said after
we had proceeded some little way in silence, "and I would aid you if I
might.  I can help to make your life here more bearable, but your fate
is inevitable.  You may never hope to return to the outer world."

"What will be my fate?" I asked.

"That will depend largely upon Issus.  So long as she does not send for
you and reveal her face to you, you may live on for years in as mild a
form of bondage as I can arrange for you."

"Why should she send for me?" I asked.

"The men of the lower orders she often uses for various purposes of
amusement.  Such a fighter as you, for example, would render fine sport
in the monthly rites of the temple.  There are men pitted against men,
and against beasts for the edification of Issus and the replenishment
of her larder."

"She eats human flesh?" I asked.  Not in horror, however, for since my
recently acquired knowledge of the Holy Therns I was prepared for
anything in this still less accessible heaven, where all was evidently
dictated by a single omnipotence; where ages of narrow fanaticism and
self-worship had eradicated all the broader humanitarian instincts that
the race might once have possessed.

They were a people drunk with power and success, looking upon the other
inhabitants of Mars as we look upon the beasts of the field and the
forest.  Why then should they not eat of the flesh of the lower orders
whose lives and characters they no more understood than do we the
inmost thoughts and sensibilities of the cattle we slaughter for our
earthly tables.

"She eats only the flesh of the best bred of the Holy Therns and the
red Barsoomians.  The flesh of the others goes to our boards.  The
animals are eaten by the slaves.  She also eats other dainties."

I did not understand then that there lay any special significance in
his reference to other dainties.  I thought the limit of ghoulishness
already had been reached in the recitation of Issus' menu.  I still had
much to learn as to the depths of cruelty and bestiality to which
omnipotence may drag its possessor.

We had about reached the last of the many chambers and corridors which
led to the gardens when an officer overtook us.

"Issus would look again upon this man," he said.  "The girl has told
her that he is of wondrous beauty and of such prowess that alone he
slew seven of the First Born, and with his bare hands took Xodar
captive, binding him with his own harness."

Xodar looked uncomfortable.  Evidently he did not relish the thought
that Issus had learned of his inglorious defeat.

Without a word he turned and we followed the officer once again to the
closed doors before the audience chamber of Issus, Goddess of Life
Eternal.

Here the ceremony of entrance was repeated.  Again Issus bid me rise.
For several minutes all was silent as the tomb.  The eyes of deity were
appraising me.

Presently the thin wavering voice broke the stillness, repeating in a
singsong drone the words which for countless ages had sealed the doom
of numberless victims.

"Let the man turn and look upon Issus, knowing that those of the lower
orders who gaze upon the holy vision of her radiant face survive the
blinding glory but a single year."

I turned as I had been bid, expecting such a treat as only the
revealment of divine glory to mortal eyes might produce.  What I saw
was a solid phalanx of armed men between myself and a dais supporting a
great bench of carved sorapus wood.  On this bench, or throne, squatted
a female black.  She was evidently very old.  Not a hair remained upon
her wrinkled skull.  With the exception of two yellow fangs she was
entirely toothless.  On either side of her thin, hawk-like nose her
eyes burned from the depths of horribly sunken sockets.  The skin of
her face was seamed and creased with a million deepcut furrows.  Her
body was as wrinkled as her face, and as repulsive.

Emaciated arms and legs attached to a torso which seemed to be mostly
distorted abdomen completed the "holy vision of her radiant beauty."

Surrounding her were a number of female slaves, among them Phaidor,
white and trembling.

"This is the man who slew seven of the First Born and, bare-handed,
bound Dator Xodar with his own harness?" asked Issus.

"Most glorious vision of divine loveliness, it is," replied the officer
who stood at my side.

"Produce Dator Xodar," she commanded.

Xodar was brought from the adjoining room.

Issus glared at him, a baleful light in her hideous eyes.

"And such as you are a Dator of the First Born?" she squealed.  "For
the disgrace you have brought upon the Immortal Race you shall be
degraded to a rank below the lowest.  No longer be you a Dator, but for
evermore a slave of slaves, to fetch and carry for the lower orders
that serve in the gardens of Issus.  Remove his harness.  Cowards and
slaves wear no trappings."

Xodar stood stiffly erect.  Not a muscle twitched, nor a tremor shook
his giant frame as a soldier of the guard roughly stripped his gorgeous
trappings from him.

"Begone," screamed the infuriated little old woman.  "Begone, but
instead of the light of the gardens of Issus let you serve as a slave
of this slave who conquered you in the prison on the Isle of Shador in
the Sea of Omean.  Take him away out of the sight of my divine eyes."

Slowly and with high held head the proud Xodar turned and stalked from
the chamber.  Issus rose and turned to leave the room by another exit.

Turning to me, she said: "You shall be returned to Shador for the
present.  Later Issus will see the manner of your fighting.  Go." Then
she disappeared, followed by her retinue.  Only Phaidor lagged behind,
and as I started to follow my guard toward the gardens, the girl came
running after me.

"Oh, do not leave me in this terrible place," she begged.  "Forgive the
things I said to you, my Prince.  I did not mean them.  Only take me
away with you.  Let me share your imprisonment on Shador." Her words
were an almost incoherent volley of thoughts, so rapidly she spoke.
"You did not understand the honour that I did you.  Among the therns
there is no marriage or giving in marriage, as among the lower orders
of the outer world.  We might have lived together for ever in love and
happiness.  We have both looked upon Issus and in a year we die.  Let
us live that year at least together in what measure of joy remains for
the doomed."

"If it was difficult for me to understand you, Phaidor," I replied,
"can you not understand that possibly it is equally difficult for you
to understand the motives, the customs and the social laws that guide
me?  I do not wish to hurt you, nor to seem to undervalue the honour
which you have done me, but the thing you desire may not be.
Regardless of the foolish belief of the peoples of the outer world, or
of Holy Thern, or ebon First Born, I am not dead.  While I live my
heart beats for but one woman--the incomparable Dejah Thoris, Princess
of Helium.  When death overtakes me my heart shall have ceased to beat;
but what comes after that I know not.  And in that I am as wise as
Matai Shang, Master of Life and Death upon Barsoom; or Issus, Goddess
of Life Eternal."

Phaidor stood looking at me intently for a moment.  No anger showed in
her eyes this time, only a pathetic expression of hopeless sorrow.

"I do not understand," she said, and turning walked slowly in the
direction of the door through which Issus and her retinue had passed.
A moment later she had passed from my sight.




CHAPTER X

THE PRISON ISLE OF SHADOR


In the outer gardens to which the guard now escorted me, I found Xodar
surrounded by a crowd of noble blacks.  They were reviling and cursing
him.  The men slapped his face.  The women spat upon him.

When I appeared they turned their attentions toward me.

"Ah," cried one, "so this is the creature who overcame the great Xodar
bare-handed.  Let us see how it was done."

"Let him bind Thurid," suggested a beautiful woman, laughing.  "Thurid
is a noble Dator.  Let Thurid show the dog what it means to face a real
man."

"Yes, Thurid!  Thurid!" cried a dozen voices.

"Here he is now," exclaimed another, and turning in the direction
indicated I saw a huge black weighed down with resplendent ornaments
and arms advancing with noble and gallant bearing toward us.

"What now?" he cried.  "What would you of Thurid?"

Quickly a dozen voices explained.

Thurid turned toward Xodar, his eyes narrowing to two nasty slits.

"Calot!" he hissed.  "Ever did I think you carried the heart of a sorak
in your putrid breast.  Often have you bested me in the secret councils
of Issus, but now in the field of war where men are truly gauged your
scabby heart hath revealed its sores to all the world.  Calot, I spurn
you with my foot," and with the words he turned to kick Xodar.

My blood was up.  For minutes it had been boiling at the cowardly
treatment they had been according this once powerful comrade because he
had fallen from the favour of Issus.  I had no love for Xodar, but I
cannot stand the sight of cowardly injustice and persecution without
seeing red as through a haze of bloody mist, and doing things on the
impulse of the moment that I presume I never should do after mature
deliberation.

I was standing close beside Xodar as Thurid swung his foot for the
cowardly kick.  The degraded Dator stood erect and motionless as a
carven image.  He was prepared to take whatever his former comrades had
to offer in the way of insults and reproaches, and take them in manly
silence and stoicism.

But as Thurid's foot swung so did mine, and I caught him a painful blow
upon the shin bone that saved Xodar from this added ignominy.

For a moment there was tense silence, then Thurid, with a roar of rage
sprang for my throat; just as Xodar had upon the deck of the cruiser.
The results were identical.  I ducked beneath his outstretched arms,
and as he lunged past me planted a terrific right on the side of his
jaw.

The big fellow spun around like a top, his knees gave beneath him and
he crumpled to the ground at my feet.

The blacks gazed in astonishment, first at the still form of the proud
Dator lying there in the ruby dust of the pathway, then at me as though
they could not believe that such a thing could be.

"You asked me to bind Thurid," I cried; "behold!"  And then I stooped
beside the prostrate form, tore the harness from it, and bound the
fellow's arms and legs securely.

"As you have done to Xodar, now do you likewise to Thurid.  Take him
before Issus, bound in his own harness, that she may see with her own
eyes that there be one among you now who is greater than the First
Born."

"Who are you?" whispered the woman who had first suggested that I
attempt to bind Thurid.

"I am a citizen of two worlds; Captain John Carter of Virginia, Prince
of the House of Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium.  Take this man to your
goddess, as I have said, and tell her, too, that as I have done to
Xodar and Thurid, so also can I do to the mightiest of her Dators.
With naked hands, with long-sword or with short-sword, I challenge the
flower of her fighting-men to combat."

"Come," said the officer who was guarding me back to Shador; "my orders
are imperative; there is to be no delay.  Xodar, come you also."

There was little of disrespect in the tone that the man used in
