"I reckon we none of us had much choice in the matter," returned Jack,
with a sigh.

"Glory! Dar's dat moon again!" cried Wash, suddenly.

"No; it's the earth in sight," returned his youthful companion. "The
mist is being dissipated, just as the professor said. Let's go out and
look about."

"We done wanter be mighty careful walkin' on dis ice," admonished the
darkey. "It jest as slippery as it kin be."

Which was true enough, as Jack found the moment he stepped down upon
the shelf from the flying machine frame. Where the ice had melted and
then its surface had congealed again, it was as smooth as a mirror.
The reflected light from the huge globe that now began to traverse the
small arc of their heaven gave them plenty of light. They could see
down into the green depths of the crevasse, but not far along the shelf
on which the _Snowbird_ rested, in either the one direction or the
other.

"Whar you goin', Massa Jack?" demanded Wash, as the boy started away
from the flying machine toward the nearest wall of rock that shut in
the glacier. "I want to see what lies beyond that turn," replied the
youth. "Perhaps we may learn something to our advantage by exploring
a bit."

Washington White followed him very cautiously. Before he came to the
turn himself, Jack had rounded it. The next moment the darkey was
startled by a yell from Jack.

"Fo' de goodness gracious gollyation sakes!" bawled Wash. "What done
gone an' disturbed de continuity ob your sagastuations? Yo' done
frighten me inter a conniption fit if yo' hollers dat way."

Here he rounded the turn himself and almost bumped into Jack. Even the
darkey's volubility was stilled at the sight before them.

A great part of the wall of the crevasse--the wall which they had hoped
to climb, had broken off and fallen into the gulf. A wide crack, or
gully, was opened in this side of the chasm, leading in an easy slope
to the surface of the glacier.

Although their attempt to reach the surface had been foiled, here was
a way which the sun, melting the ice and causing a great avalanche,
had made for them. It was plain that all could easily mount to the top
by this sloping gulch.

Jack dashed back to announce the discovery and Wash came after him,
intent upon seeing that Buttsy was carried, in his well wrapped-up
coop, out of the crevasse. The youth awoke his friends instantly and
in ten minutes all had taken a look at the way of escape and
preparations were at once made for departure from the flying machine.

Everybody save the professor was laden with stores or instruments, or
extra clothing and blankets, as they filed away from the crippled
_Snowbird_. The two youthful inventors and builders of the flying
machine bade good-bye to her with full hearts. It was not a certainty
that they could recover the flying machine, and Jack and Mark felt
pretty bad about it.

The first thought of all, however, was centered in standing once more
upon the surface of the glacier. The fact that the upper part of the
ice field might move at any time, and the crevasse be closed while
they were held in it, had troubled them all.

In half an hour, however, all that danger was past. Other perils might
immediately face them; but the chance of being snapped between the
jaws of ice was no more to be feared.

The golden ball of the earth, around which the island in the air was
following its orbit, gave them plenty of light as yet, for the sun was
still in such a position that its light was reflected from the earth
upon the fast-traveling island in the sky.

The party, shaking with cold now, for the night was really arctic in
temperature, made for the nearest morainial deposit where trees grew,
under the shelter of the cliff which rose so high above the face of
the glacier. As the river of ice had pushed its way downward during
the past ages, it had scraped earth and stones from the walls of its
bed, and this deposit, falling on the ice, had given root to trees and
shrubs, while grass had sprung up and birds had doubtless nested there.

"They are like the oases in the desert," Mark said.

"They will afford us shelter and firewood," the professor added.

And in short order they were encamped in a clump of fir trees with a
huge fire of dry branches burning before them, its warmth diffused
over the whole party.

This grove of sturdy trees was backed close against the base of the
cliff, and the rocky wall was sheer, mounting at least eight hundred
feet above their heads.

"I suppose no life could exist higher than this cliff, eh, Professor?"
Jack Darrow asked, as they became comfortable in the fire's warmth and
threw back their fur wraps.

"I am not sure of that, Jack," returned the scientist. "From our
experience in the _Snowbird_, since the eruption that threw us off into
space, and while on the higher levels of air, we cannot doubt that at a
thousand feet above this ice, at least, animal life would become
extinct."

"I reckon there isn't much animal life left in these parts now, at any
rate," Andy Sudds said. "I don't see what we're going to do if something
doesn't turn up for food. We're going to be on short commons."

Wash had set his "bird cage," as the oil man called the Shanghai's
coop, within the warmth of the fire, and the rooster evidently felt
the grateful glow of the flames. He had been picking up some corn that
Wash flung him, grain by grain. Now he suddenly stopped, raised his
head, and uttered a loud and apparently frightened squawk.

"What dat?" demanded the darkey, his eyes rolling. "Buttsy hear
sumpin'--he suah do."

"What do you reckon he hears?" queried Jack, idly.

"I dunno dat. But he's some disturbed--yo' kin see it's so," returned
Washington, nervously. "Does yo' hear anything yit?"

"You think he can smell out an enemy, do you?" chuckled Jack.

"He done gotter great head, Buttsy has," declared the black man. "If
dere is anyt'ing prowlin' aroun' permiscuous like, he's de boy to hear
'em--yes, sah!" "By the same token it was a flock of geese that saved
Rome," Mark said.

Wash had his back to the thick clump of firs. Jack was facing him.
Suddenly the boy, raising his eyes to look across the fire at the
darkey, beheld a huge black object rise out of the brush directly in
Washington's rear.

One glance told Jack what the creature was. There was no mistaking the
gleaming eyes, the pointed, slobbering muzzle, and the hairy, yellowish
breast of the gigantic Kodiak bear as it poised its huge body over the
unconscious darkey.

Like a ghost the bear had crept to the camp of the explorers and was
now on the eve of an attack, totally unheralded!




CHAPTER XX

THE HEROISM OF THE SHANGHAI ROOSTER


Jack Darrow was the only person in the group around the campfire who
at first saw the huge bear. And he was so startled that for a breath
he did not know what it was best to do. To shriek out in alarm would
neither save the darkey nor frighten off the bear.

The Shanghai rooster settled down with a half-stifled squawk in the
bottom of his coop. Without doubt the bird saw the bear and realized
that his life was in peril.

"What de matter wid yo'?" demanded Washington, rolling his eyes and
beginning to look scared himself.

Jack's mouth was dry and he had to wet his lips before he could as
much as whisper. Only a few seconds had elapsed since the bear rose
into view behind the darkey; but it seemed to Jack as though an eternity
had passed.

His whispered words were for the old hunter, whom he knew was always
alert.

"Andy! Your rifle!"

The brown claw of the old hunter was never far from the grip of his
gun when he lay before a campfire. Jack saw the hand clamp upon the
weapon even before Sudds rolled over.

"What's up, Jack?" he whispered.

"Behind Wash--quick!"

No need to tell the hunter to be quick. He was on his knees and the
gun was at his shoulder in the twinkling of an eye.

"Come here, Wash--quick!" ejaculated Jack, with sudden inspiration,
and the darkey, used to obeying orders without question, scrambled up
and started toward the boy.

With a roar that brought every other person save the old hunter to his
feet, the huge bear swung both front paws to grab the negro. Wash
escaped the embrace by the breadth of a hair.

Bang! spoke Andy Sudds' rifle.

"Gollyation! I'se done shot!" bawled the darkey, and sprang into Jack's
arms.

The boy hung on to him or perhaps Wash would still be running, he was
so scared. Nor were the other members of the party much less startled.

But Andy Sudds was as steady as a rock. His first ball had hit the
huge beast in the breast, but the latter had plunged forward after the
escaping darkey as the ball struck him. Therefore the wound was too
high up to do serious damage.

A grizzly, or Kodiak, bear has never yet been settled by a single
shot--unless the bullet entering the beast's carcass was explosive.
With a mighty roar the bear plunged forward, right through the fire,
scattering it far and wide and aiming directly for the place from which
the rifle ball had come. It had stung him, and he was after the old
hunter on the instant.

He half fell over the coop which contained the Shanghai rooster.
Irritable as he could be, the bear delayed long enough to strike at
this coop. He smashed one end of it flat, but the Shanghai miraculously
escaped injury.

The bird had undoubtedly been disturbed and frightened by the secret
approach of Bruin; but once free, the feathered creature felt his
dignity disturbed, and finding himself free of the coop, he flew with
a loud squawk at the charging bear.

Andy had pumped two more bullets after his first one. Both had found
their billet in the body of the bear; but neither had struck a vital
spot. The scattering fire, as the beast plowed through the embers,
drove the rest of the party out of range in a hurry. Jack dragged Wash
to one side; but the darkey yelled:

"Gollyation! I wanter save Buttsy! Oh, lawsy-massy! Dat Shanghai suahly
is a reckless bird!"

In the flaring light of the flames the rooster was seen to pounce upon
the shoulders of the huge bear as the latter came down to "all-fours"
and dived at the old hunter. Andy sprang back, collided with a
tree-trunk, and went head over heels. In an instant the bear would
have been upon him and one stroke of his sabre-like claws would have
finished Andy Sudds.

But the rooster certainly did delay the bear's charge. The brute struck
at his feathered tormentor with first one fore paw, and then the other.
He failed to dislodge his enemy by such means.

And then a big ember behind him snapped and a part of the flaming
branch fell upon the ground just where Bruin put his hind paw upon it.
Plowing through the blaze in a hurry was one thing--_this_ was an
entirely different proposition.

Bruin uttered a roar of pain and turned to bite at the stung paw. As
he swung his huge body about, the blood now spouting from his jaws--for
one of the bullets had punctured a lung--Andy came into position again,
with the muzzle of his rifle less than ten feet from the hairy side.

Bang!

An answering roar of rage and pain followed the shot. The beast tried
to whirl again, but fell instead. The rooster fled, squawking, into
the bush.

The huge bear struggled on the ground for some moments before anybody
dared approach. It was Wash who first dashed in and planted a foot
upon the dead beast's neck.

"See wot dat Shanghai done?" he cried. "Wot you gotter say now ter
Christopher Columbus Amerigo Vespucci George Washington Abraham Lincoln
Ulysses Grant Garibaldi Thomas Edison Guglielmo Marconi Butts?"

"I got to take off my hat to the rooster," Andy Sudds said, quietly.
"If it hadn't been for him that bear would have had me as sure as
shootin'!"

"Butts is a hero--no doubt of that," gasped Jack Darrow, when he could
get his breath.

The others--even Professor Henderson--were greatly excited by the
incident and delighted by its outcome. Here was fresh meat in abundance,
to say nothing of a fine blanket-robe, if they could take the time to
stretch and "work" the hide. Andy promised to do that the next day if
they would camp where they were long enough.

Meanwhile the bear was skinned and certain steaks cut off for immediate
consumption, while the bulk of the carcass was cached under some blocks
of ice on the glacier. Andy was for smoking some strips of meat over
the rebuilt fire.

"You see, Professor, it's so hot in the daytime here, and so cold at
night, that pemmican is about the only kind of meat that will
keep--unless it's canned. We'll eat what we can of the fresh bear
steaks; but these strips will be all right smoked a long time after
the fresh meat has become too strong for anything but a buzzard," quoth
the hunter.




CHAPTER XXI

MARK ON GUARD


After the hearty supper, and the excitement of the bear-killing, they
were all more or less ready for bed. The professor figured that the
sun would not appear again to the Crusoes on this island in the air
for quite fourteen hours. They all ought to get sufficient sleep before
that time. The havoc wrought by the rays of the torrid sun upon the
glacier had been apparent as they came over it to this fringe of trees
at the base of the cliff. It might be necessary for them to move quickly
from the ice to save their lives.

"We can afford to spend some hours in rest, and will start with bodies
refreshed, at least. Now we will divide the watches," suggested the
scientist.

But the others would not hear of the professor going on guard. Andy
declared for the first watch, for he had to 'tend his "jerked" bear
meat. And following him the die fell to Mark. The old hunter awoke the
youth some four hours after the camp had become quiet for the night.

The earth was then hanging low on their horizon, while the moon was
climbing up from the east, the reflected light of both orbs flooding
the surface of the ice-field.

Mark came out of his warm nest yawning like a good fellow, and the old
hunter said to him:

"Take that axe yonder and cut some wood for the fire. Keep up a good
blaze and that will keep us comfortable as well as keep you awake. I
don't want you to go to sleep, Mark."

"Who's going to sleep?" cried Mark, much abused.

But he had to confess to himself that he _was_ mighty drowsy when
he had finished cutting up the wood a little way from the camp. He
took a turn or two, replenished the fire, and then backed up against
a sheltering tree-bole and blinked at the dancing flames.
