voices of other minds. Words swirling in giddy patterns he couldn't
understand.

Shortly thereafter, Cully discovered why he still lived, breathed: a
suit. A yellow, plastic, water-tight suit, with an orange-on-black
shield on the left breast pocket, and a clear bubble-helmet. He felt
weight on his back and examined it: two air tanks and their regulator, a
radio, and ... the box.

Suit, tanks, regulator; radio, black water, box; sand, sea, stillness.

Cully considered his world. It was small; it was conceivable; it was
incomplete.

_Where is it?_

"Where is what?" He knew he had a voice--a means of communication
between others of his kind, using low-frequency heat waves caused by
agitation of air molecules. Why couldn't he make it work?

Words. Thousands of them, at his beck and call. What were they? What did
they mean? He shifted uncomfortably in the tight yellow suit, searching
the near horizon for ...

_Where is it?_

       *       *       *       *       *

A vague calling came from beyond the black sea curtain. Objectively,
because he could do nothing to stop them, he watched his feet pick up,
move forward, put down; pick up, move forward, put down. Funny. He had
the feeling, the concept, that this action held meaning. It was supposed
to cause some reaction, accomplish an act. He wondered at the regular
movement of his legs. One of them hurt. A hurt is a sensation of pain,
caused by over-loading sensory-units in the body; a hurt is bad, because
it indicates something is wrong.

Something certainly was wrong. Something stirred in Cully's mind. He
stopped and sat down on the sandy sea bottom, gracefully, like a ballet
dancer. He examined his foot. There was a tiny hole in the yellow
plastic fabric, and a thin string of red-black was oozing out. Blood. He
knew.

He was bleeding. He could do nothing about it. He got up and resumed
walking.

_Where is it?_

Cully lifted his head in annoyance at the sharp thought.

"Go away," he said in a low, pleading voice. The sound made him feel
better. He began muttering to himself.

"Water, black, s-sand, hurt. Pain. Radio tanks ..."

It didn't sound right. After a few minutes, he was quiet. The
manythoughts were calling him. He must go to the manythoughts.

If his foot was bleeding, then something had happened; if something had
happened, then his foot was bleeding.

"No!"

If something had happened, then maybe other things had happened--before
that. But how could something happen in a world of flat gold sand and
