they tried to make him pay for it, he'd tell them they were lucky he
didn't sue the railroad ...

       *       *       *

He braced himself against the opposite wall, drew his foot back, and
kicked hard at the lock. Something broke. He pulled the door open.

He was looking out the open door and through the window beyond. There
was no platform, just the same dry fields he could see on the other
side. He came out and went along to his seat. The car was empty now.

He looked out the window. Why had the train stopped here? Maybe there
was some kind of trouble with the engine. It had been sitting here for
ten minutes or so now. Brett got up and went along to the door, stepped
down onto the iron step. Leaning out, he could see the train stretching
along ahead, one car, two cars--

There was no engine.

Maybe he was turned around. He looked the other way. There were three
cars. No engine there either. He must be on some kind of siding ...

Brett stepped back inside, and pushed through into the next car. It was
empty. He walked along the length of it, into the next car. It was empty
too. He went back through the two cars and his own car and on, all the
way to the end of the train. All the cars were empty. He stood on the
platform at the end of the last car, and looked back along the rails.
They ran straight, through the dry fields, right to the horizon. He
stepped down to the ground, went along the cindery bed to the front of
the train, stepping on the ends of the wooden ties. The coupling stood
open. The tall, dusty coach stood silently on its iron wheels, waiting.
Ahead the tracks went on--

And stopped.

He walked along the ties, following the iron rails, shiny on top, and
brown with rust on the sides. A hundred feet from the train they ended.
The cinders went on another ten feet and petered out. Beyond, the fields
closed in. Brett looked up at the sun. It was lower now in the west, its
light getting yellow and late-afternoonish. He turned and looked back at
the train. The cars stood high and prim, empty, silent. He walked back,
climbed in, got his bag down from the rack, pulled on his jacket. He
jumped down to the cinders, followed them to where they ended. He
hesitated a moment, then pushed between the knee-high stalks. Eastward
across the field he could see what looked like a smudge on the far
horizon.

He walked until dark, then made himself a nest in the dead stalks, and
went to sleep.

       *       *       *

He lay on his back, looking up at pink dawn clouds. Around him, dry
stalks rustled in a faint stir of air. He felt crumbly earth under his
fingers. He sat up, reached out and broke off a stalk. It crumbled into
fragile chips. He wondered what it was. It wasn't any crop he'd ever
seen before.

He stood, looked around. The field went on and on, dead flat. A locust
came whirring toward him, plumped to earth at his feet. He picked it up.
Long elbowed legs groped at his fingers aimlessly. He tossed the insect
in the air. It fluttered away. To the east the smudge was clearer now;
it seemed to be a grey wall, far away. A city? He picked up his bag and
started on.

He was getting hungry. He hadn't eaten since the previous morning. He
was thirsty too. The city couldn't be more than three hours' walk. He
tramped along, the dry plants crackling under his feet, little puffs of
dust rising from the dry ground. He thought about the rails, running
across the empty fields, ending ...

He had heard the locomotive groaning up ahead as the train slowed. And
there had been feet in the corridor. Where had they gone?

He thought of the train, Casperton, Aunt Haicey, Mr. Phillips. They
seemed very far away, something remembered from long ago. Up above the
sun was hot. That was real. The rest seemed unimportant. Ahead there was
a city. He would walk until he came to it. He tried to think of other
things: television, crowds of people, money: the tattered paper and the
worn silver--

Only the sun and the dusty plain and the dead plants were real now. He
could see them, feel them. And the suitcase. It was heavy; he shifted
hands, kept going.

There was something white on the ground ahead, a small shiny surface
protruding from the earth. Brett dropped the suitcase, went down on one
knee, dug into the dry soil, pulled out a china teacup, the handle
missing. Caked dirt crumbled away under his thumb, leaving the surface
clean. He looked at the bottom of the cup. It was unmarked. Why just one
teacup, he wondered, here in the middle of nowhere? He dropped it, took
up his suitcase, and went on.

       *       *       *

After that he watched the ground more closely. He found a shoe; it was
badly weathered, but the sole was good. It was a high-topped work shoe,
size 10-1/2-C. Who had dropped it here? He thought of other lone shoes
he had seen, lying at the roadside or in alleys. How did they get
there...?

Half an hour later he detoured around the rusted front fender of an
old-fashioned car. He looked around for the rest of the car but saw
nothing. The wall was closer now; perhaps five miles more.

A scrap of white paper fluttered across the field in a stir of air. He
saw another, more, blowing along in the fitful gusts. He ran a few
steps, caught one, smoothed it out.

    BUY NOW--PAY LATER!

He picked up another.

    PREPARE TO MEET GOD

A third said:

    WIN WITH WILLKIE

       *       *       *       *       *

The wall loomed above him, smooth and grey. Dust was caked on his skin
and clothes, and as he walked he brushed at himself absently. The
suitcase dragged at his arm, thumped against his shin. He was very
hungry and thirsty. He sniffed the air, instinctively searching for the
odors of food. He had been following the wall for a long time, searching
for an opening. It curved away from him, rising vertically from the
level earth. Its surface was porous, unadorned, too smooth to climb. It
was, Brett estimated, twenty feet high. If there were anything to make a
ladder from--

Ahead he saw a wide gate, flanked by grey columns. He came up to it, put
the suitcase down, and wiped at his forehead with his handkerchief.
Through the opening in the wall a paved street was visible, and the
facades of buildings. Those on the street before him were low, not more
than one or two stories, but behind them taller towers reared up. There
were no people in sight; no sounds stirred the hot noon-time air. Brett
picked up his bag and passed through the gate.

For the next hour he walked empty pavements, listening to the echoes of
his footsteps against brownstone fronts, empty shop windows, curtained
glass doors, and here and there a vacant lot, weed-grown and desolate.
He paused at cross streets, looked down long vacant ways. Now and then a
distant sound came to him: the lonely honk of a horn, a faintly tolling
bell, a clatter of hooves.

He came to a narrow alley that cut like a dark canyon between blank
walls. He stood at its mouth, listening to a distant murmur, like a
crowd at a funeral. He turned down the narrow way.

It went straight for a few yards, then twisted. As he followed its
turnings the crowd noise gradually grew louder. He could make out
individual voices now, an occasional word above the hubbub. He started
to hurry, eager to find someone to talk to.

Abruptly the voices--hundreds of voices, he thought--rose in a roar, a
long-drawn Yaaayyyyy...! Brett thought of a stadium crowd as the home
team trotted onto the field. He could hear a band now, a shrilling of
brass, the clatter and thump of percussion instruments. Now he could see
the mouth of the alley ahead, a sunny street hung with bunting, the
backs of people, and over their heads the rhythmic bobbing of a passing
procession, tall shakos and guidons in almost-even rows. Two tall poles
with a streamer between them swung into view. He caught a glimpse of
tall red letters:

    ... For Our Side!

       *       *       *

He moved closer, edged up behind the grey-backed crowd. A phalanx of
yellow-tuniced men approached, walking stiffly, fez tassels swinging. A
small boy darted out into the street, loped along at their side. The
music screeched and wheezed. Brett tapped the man before him.

"What's it all about...?"

He couldn't hear his own voice. The man ignored him. Brett moved along
behind the crowd, looking for a vantage point or a thinning in the
ranks. There seemed to be fewer people ahead. He came to the end of the
crowd, moved on a few yards, stood at the curb. The yellow-jackets had
passed now, and a group of round-thighed girls in satin blouses and
black boots and white fur caps glided into view, silent, expressionless.
As they reached a point fifty feet from Brett, they broke abruptly into
a strutting prance, knees high, hips flirting, tossing shining batons
high, catching them, twirling them, and up again ...

Brett craned his neck, looking for TV cameras. The crowd lining the
opposite side of the street stood in solid ranks, drably clad, eyes
following the procession, mouths working. A fat man in a rumpled suit
and a panama hat squeezed to the front, stood picking his teeth.
Somehow, he seemed out of place among the others. Behind the spectators,
the store fronts looked normal, dowdy brick and mismatched glass and
oxidizing aluminum, dusty windows and cluttered displays of cardboard, a
faded sign that read TODAY ONLY--PRICES SLASHED. To Brett's left the
sidewalk stretched, empty. To his right the crowd was packed close, the
shout rising and falling. Now a rank of blue-suited policemen followed
the majorettes, swinging along silently. Behind them, over them, a piece
of paper blew along the street. Brett turned to the man on his right.

"Pardon me. Can you tell me the name of this town?"

The man ignored him. Brett tapped the man's shoulder. "Hey! What town is
this?"

The man took off his hat, whirled it overhead, then threw it up. It
sailed away over the crowd, lost. Brett wondered briefly how people who
threw their hats ever recovered them. But then, nobody he knew would
throw his hat ...

"You mind telling me the name of this place?" Brett said, as he took the
man's arm, pulled. The man rotated toward Brett, leaning heavily against
him. Brett stepped back. The man fell, lay stiffly, his arms moving, his
eyes and mouth open.

"Ahhhhh," he said. "Whum-whum-whum. Awww, jawww ..."

Brett stooped quickly. "I'm sorry," he cried. He looked around. "Help!
This man ..."

Nobody was watching. The next man, a few feet away, stood close against
his neighbor, hatless, his jaw moving.

"This man's sick," said Brett, tugging at the man's arm. "He fell."

The man's eyes moved reluctantly to Brett. "None of my business," he
muttered.

"Won't anybody give me a hand?"

"Probably a drunk."

