The Defense Committee of the Chamber of Commerce was called to an extra
meeting at the El Dorado Hotel. The owner of the hotel was one of the
Committee, a man who, so far, had taken a very inactive part in its
transactions. He did not waste time in giving the reason for the special
meeting.

"I was called on the telephone this morning," he explained. "The person
at the other end wanted to protect my hotel from rats for the small
compensation of twenty-five thousand dollars a week. He referred
casually to the three warehouses and one laundry that had been wrecked
last week. Right at the present time I have, on an average, twelve
hundred guests a night. They are here to be entertained, not to be
frightened by rats. But here is the point. If I yield, every other hotel
in the city will be placed in a similar position. Three hundred thousand
strangers are in the city every day. Suppose that ten hotels were
overrun with rats in one week and the fact was circulated in the press?
What would that cost the city?"

"Better pay it," growled one of the men. He happened to own a hotel. He
knew how temperamental was the pleasure-seeking stranger. Singularly,
that advice was the only brand given by the rest of the Committee. They
seemed strangely unable to offer any remedy except to keep on paying and
in every way possible bar unpleasant news from the newspapers.

Inside of next month, fifty-five hotels were paying a weekly tax to the
rat racketeers. One small hotel refused, and was at once deluged with an
army of rats which drove out guests and employees, killed one old scrub
woman and severely injured twenty of the cooks, waiters and porters who
received the brunt of the rodent onslaught.

Moyer & Perkins were still paying the five thousand a week when, to
their surprise, a visitor dropped into their office and casually
suggested that they sell him their business.

"It used to be a good business," explained Moyer.

"It still is," interrupted Perkins. "What my partner means is this. We
have our share of trade, but the overhead has become so heavy that we
have not been able to make any money lately."

"That is what I understand," commented the stranger. "In fact, I was
sent here by the Chamber of Commerce. They told me you had been paying
money for rat protection. That is about the only reason I want to buy
your business. Your business is supposed to be worth about two hundred
thousand and your real estate as much more. Suppose I give you half a
million and advise you to keep quiet about the sale?"

"You mean carry on the business under the old name?" asked Moyer,
looking at the prospective buyer earnestly.

"Something like that."

The Englishman shook his head.

"Not and remain in this country! They kidnapped my son. No telling what
they will do next, if the policies of the firm are changed. Anything
that is done we shall be blamed for, no matter who really owns the
business."

"Then, you and your partner take a vacation in Europe. You can afford
it. All I am asking for is an exact account of your transactions with
these racketeers, so I can have something to work on."

"May I ask what you want to do with the business?" interrogated the
Junior Partner, Perkins.

"Certainly. I intend to use it as one of my experimental laboratories
for the study of a mammal, known as the _Mus Norvegicus_, called, in
common English, the brown rat. He is supposed to have originated from
the _Mus Humiliatus_ of Central Asia. Now will you gentlemen take the
half million?"

"We will!" exclaimed Perkins. "Then may I ask your name?"

"Winifred Willowby."

"Not the one who is reputed to own more United States bonds than any
other man in America?" gasped Richard Moyer.

"I won't admit that I do, but I am the man you are thinking about."

"Then I simply cannot understand why you want to mix up in this rat
business."

"Simple enough. I am a hundred per cent American. For five generations
my people have been born and buried in this city. I own over two hundred
million dollars worth of land here. When the dregs of Europe come over
to my city and use the rats of Asia to bleed that city white, then I
personally protest. I am going to start something. I am not sure what,
but when I finish, this city will be practically rat empty and gangster
free."

"A large programme, Mr. Willowby," whispered Perkins.

"But I am a large man. Now, suppose I write you gentlemen a check?"

Five minutes later the two partners were alone. Moyer looked at the
check, then put it in his pocket, and his hat on his head.

"Suppose we get it cashed?" he said to Perkins. "You can do as you
please with your half, but I am going to take my family and go back to
England. That man Willowby is only half pint size, but his blue eyes
look cold to me, and I bet he plays a stiff game of bridge. If he starts
fighting those gangsters, I do not want to be caught on the
battlefield."

"How about starting a business over in England?" asked Perkins.

"Not a bad idea. I came over here and together we made half a million
selling English groceries to Americans. Perhaps we can make a million
more selling American groceries to Englishmen."

Winifred Willowby not only bought the grocery business of Mover &
Perkins; he bought a laundry, a small hotel, an apartment house and a
theatre. He kept all the old employees, put in a manager, instructed
that the weekly tribute should be paid as usual, and then disappeared
from New York City.

Ten days later, in Paradise Valley, in the broken country below the
Poconos of Pennsylvania, he entertained several men, each an authority
in his special line of art or science. They kept the appointment, not
