
"If it got down here, that means they can't handle it anywhere else."

"Of course they can't. What the hell could normal slobs like them or
like us do about it?"

"Nothing, I guess. But wait a minute! You don't mean you're going to
send Mayhem, without asking him, without telling--"

"We can't ask him now, can we?"

"Johnny Mayhem's _elan_ is at the moment speeding from Canopus to Deneb,
where on the fourth planet of the Denebian system a dead body is waiting
for him in cold storage. The turnover from League to Federation status
of the Denebian system is causing trouble in Deneb City, so Mayhem--"

"Deneb City will probably survive without Mayhem. Well, won't it?"

"I guess so, but--"

"I know. The deal is we're supposed to tell Mayhem where he's going and
what he can expect. The deal also is, every inhabited world has a body
waiting for his _elan_ in cold storage. But don't you think if we could
talk to Mayhem now--"

"It isn't possible. He's in transit."

"Don't you think if we could talk to him now he would agree to board the
_Glory of the Galaxy_?"

"How should I know? I'm not Johnny Mayhem."

"If he doesn't board her, it's certain death for all of them."

"And if he does board her, what the hell can he do about it? Besides,
there isn't any dead body awaiting his _elan_ on that ship or any ship.
He wouldn't make a very efficacious ghost."

"But there are live people. Scores of them. Mayhem's _elan_ is quite
capable of possessing a living host."

"Sure. Theoretically it is. But damn it all, what would the results be?
We've never tried it. It's liable to damage Mayhem. As for the host--"

"The host might die. I know it. But he'll die anyway. The whole shipload
of them is heading on collision course for the sun."

"Does the SOS say why?"

"No. Maybe Mayhem can find out and do something about it."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yeah, maybe. That's a hell of a way to risk the life of the most
important man in the Galaxy. Because if Mayhem boards that ship and
can't do anything about it, he'll die with the rest of them."

"Why? We could always pluck his _elan_ out again."

"_If_ he were inhabiting a dead one. In a live body, I don't think so.
The attraction would be stronger. There would be forces of cohesion--"

"That's true. Still, Mayhem's our only hope."

"I'll admit it's a job for Mayhem, but he's too important."

"Is he? Don't be a fool. What, actually, is Johnny Mayhem's importance?
His importance lies in the very fact that he is expendable. His
life--for the furtherance of the new Galactic Federation."

"But--"

"And the President is aboard that ship. Maybe he can't do as much for
the Galaxy in the long run as Mayhem can, but don't you see, man, he's a
figurehead. Right now he's the most important man in the Galaxy, and if
we could talk to him I'm sure Mayhem would agree. Mayhem would want to
board that ship."

"It's funny, we've been working with Mayhem all these years and we never
even met the guy."

"Would you know him if you saw him?"

"Umm-mm, I guess not. Do you think we really can halt his _elan_ in
subspace and divert it over to the _Glory of the Galaxy_?"

"I take it you're beginning to see things my way. And the answer to your
question is yes."

"Poor Mayhem. You know, I actually feel sorry for the guy. He's had more
adventures than anyone since Homer wrote the _Odyssey_ and there won't
ever be any rest for him."

"Stop feeling sorry for him and start hoping he succeeds."

"Yeah."

"And let's see about getting a bead on his _elan_."

The two young men walked to a tri-dim chart which took up much of the
room. One of them touched a button and blue light glowed within the
chart, pulsing brightly and sharply where space-sectors intersected.

"He's in C-17 now," one of the men said as a gleaming whiteness was
suddenly superimposed at a single point on the blue.

"Can you bead him?"

"I think so. But I still feel sorry for Mayhem. He's expecting to wake
up in a cold-storage corpse on Deneb IV but instead he'll come to in a
living body aboard a spaceship on collision course for the sun."

"Just hope he--"

"I know. Succeeds. I don't even want to think of the possibility he
might fail."

In seconds, the gleaming white dot crawled across the surface of the
tri-dim chart from sector C-17 to sector S-1.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Glory of the Galaxy_ was now nineteen million miles out from the
sun and rushing through space at a hundred miles per second, normal
space drive. The _Glory of the Galaxy_ thus moved a million miles closer
to fiery destruction every three hours--but since the sun's
gravitational force had to be added to that speed, the ship was slated
to plunge into the sun's corona in little more than twenty-four hours.

Since the ship's refrigeration units would function perfectly until the
outer hull reached a temperature of eleven hundred degrees Fahrenheit,
none of its passengers knew that anything was wrong. Even the members of
the crew went through all the normal motions. Only the _Glory of the
Galaxy's_ officers in their bright new uniforms and gold braid knew the
grim truth of what awaited the gleaming two-thousand ton spaceship less
than twenty-four hours away at the exact center of its perihelion
passage.

Something--unidentified as yet--in all the thousands of intricate things
that could go wrong on a spaceship, particularly a new one making its
maiden voyage, had gone wrong. The officers were checking their
catalogues and their various areas of watch meticulously--and not
because their own lives were at stake. In spaceflight, your own life
always is at stake. There are too many imponderables: you are, to a
certain degree, expendable. The commissioned contingent aboard the
_Glory of the Galaxy_ was a dedicated group, hand-picked from all the
officers in the solar system.

       *       *       *       *       *

