flirt with the secretarial staff the other half and still be Chief
Botts' odds-on favorite for the promotion that was opening next month.
Harry Bettis was like that.

He came in and gave Johnny the full treatment. First the slow spreading
smile. Then the chuckle. Then the loud, roaring belly-laugh. "Gals
outside told me!" he shouted, loud enough so the girls outside would
know he knew they had told him. "Snow! Snow in July! Sloman, you kill
me! You really do!"

"Do you have to shout?" Johnny said.

"Do I? We all ought to shout this. To the rooftops! Sloman, my foot.
You have a new name, sonny. Snowman! Johnny Snowman."

[Illustration: Thick mud held him while terror ravened at his heels.]

Johnny groaned. Instinctively, he knew the name would stick.

"Hear you had a little trouble with the gal-friend this past p.m.,"
Harry Bettis clucked in a voice which managed to be both derisive and
sympathetic.

"How did you find out?" Johnny asked, but knew the answer at once.
Jo-Anne was a roommate of one of the Bureau Secretaries. It was how
Johnny had met her.

"You know how I found out, Snowman. Well, that's tough luck, kiddo. But
tell me, does that mean the field is wide open? I always thought your
gal-friend--your _ex_-gal-friend--had the cutest pair of--"

"I have nothing to do with whether the field is open or not open, I'm
afraid."

"Well, don't be. Afraid, I mean," Harry Bettis advised jovially. "If the
gal could make you pull a boner like that, you're better off without
her. But I forgot to ask Maxine: can I have little Jo-Anne's phone
number? Huh, boy?"

Before Johnny could answer, the three-girl staff of secretaries entered
the small office. Entered--and stared.

"That's all right, girls," Harry Bettis said. "You didn't have to follow
me in here. I'd have been right out."

But they weren't staring at Harry Bettis. They were staring at Johnny.
Their mouths had flapped open, their eyes were big and round. Johnny
didn't, but Harry Bettis knew that look on a girl's face. Without any
trouble at all, Johnny could have made any of those girls, right there,
right then, without even trying.

They gawked and gawked. One of them pointed at the window. The others
tried to, but their hands were trembling.

The one who was pointing squawked: "Look!"

The second one said, "Out the window!"

The third one said, "Will you!"

Outside the window on the twenty-fifth of July it was snowing.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an hour later. Telephones were ringing. Long-distance calls from
all over the country now that the ticker had gone out with the
incredible fact that it was snowing in the Northeast in July. Most of
the calls, though, were from Washington. Chief Botts disconnected the
PBX and walked in a dazed, staggering fashion to Johnny, smiling weakly
and saying:

"Sloman, I misjudged you. Genius, right here, right now, in this office,
and we never knew it. Sloman, I have to admit I was wrong about you. But
how did you know? How did you ever know?"

"Hell's bells," Harry Bettis said before Johnny could say it was all a
mistake. "That's easy, Chief. Anyone knows that _all_ rain starts out as
snow. It's got to. You see, the droplets of moisture in the cold upper
regions of a cloud condense around dust particles because the air up
there is too cold to hold them as vapor. Since it's below freezing, snow
is formed--snow which warms up as it passes through hotter air en route
to the ground, and--"

"That will be quite enough, Bettis," Chief Botts said. "I am a
weatherman too, you know. You don't have to tell me the most elementary
of--"

"In this case, Chief," Bettis persisted, "the biggest inversion layer
you ever saw kept the surface air down and brought the cold upper air
very close to the surface. Result: the snowflakes didn't have a chance
to melt, not even to freezing rain. Result: snow!"

"The chances of that happening," said Chief Botts coldly, "are about one
in a billion. Aren't they, Sloman, dear fellow?"

"One in two billion," Johnny said.

"He _is_ modest," Chief Botts told the staff. "He seems so unconcerned."

Just then Maxine came into the little office. The look of awe on her
face had been replaced by one of sheer amazement. "Well, I checked it,
Chief," she said. "Wait until I tell Jo-Anne!"

"Won't you please tell us first?" Chief Botts asked.

"Yes, sir," said Maxine, and read from the memo pad in her hand. "Since
coming to work for the Bureau, Johnny Sloman has once every ten days
made our official forecast. I have checked back on his forecast, Chief,
as you directed. Johnny has made fifty-five forecasts. While only one of
