the Pleistocene Era, with my oxblood two-suiter firmly clutched in my
left hand.

With snorts of steam and the loud clanking of loose drives, the train
got under way again, its whistle wailing mournfully as the last empty
coach car sped past me and retreated into the distance.

As I stood there, my brain tingling with weariness, and listened to the
absolute silence of the town triumph over the last distant wail of the
train whistle, I became aware that something about Sumac was different.

What it was, I didn't know. I stood where I was a moment longer, trying
to analyze it. In some indefinable way everything looked unreal. That
was as close as I could come to it, and of course having pinned it down
that far I at once dismissed it as a trick of the mind produced by
tiredness.

I began walking. The planks of the platform were certainly real enough.
I circled the depot without going in, and started walking in the
direction of Aunt Matilda's, which was only a short eight blocks from
the depot, as I had known since I was six.

The feeling of the unreality of my surroundings persisted, and with it
came another feeling, of an invisible pressure against me. Almost a
resentment. Not only from the people, but from the houses and even the
trees.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly I began to realize that it couldn't be entirely my imagination.
Most of the dozen or so people I passed knew me, and I remembered
suddenly that every other time I had come to Aunt Matilda's they had
stopped to talk with me and I had had to make some excuse to escape
them. Now they were behaving differently. They would look at me absently
as they might at any stranger walking from the direction of the depot,
then their eyes would light up with recognition and they would open
their lips to greet me with hearty welcome.

Then, as though they just thought of something, they would change, and
just say, "Hello, Arthur," and continue on past me.

It didn't take me long to conclude that this strange behavior was
probably caused by something in connection with Aunt Matilda. Had she
perhaps been named as corespondent in the divorce of the local minister?
Had she, of all people, had a child out of wedlock?

Things in a small town can be deadly serious, so by the time her
familiar frame house came into view down the street I was ready to keep
a straight face, no matter what, and reserve my chuckles for the privacy
of her guest room. It would be a new experience, to find Aunt Matilda
guilty of any human frailty. It was slightly impossible, but I had
prepared myself for it.

And that first day her behavior convinced me I was right in my
conclusion.

She appeared in the doorway as I came up the front walk. She was
breathing hard, as though she had been running, and there was a dust
streak on the side of her thin face.

"Hello, Arthur," she said when I came up on the porch. She shook my hand
as limply as always, and gave me a reluctant duty peck on the cheek,
then backed into the house to give me room to enter.

I glanced around the familiar surroundings, waiting for her to blurt out
the cause of her telegram, and feeling a little guilty about not having
come at once.

I felt the loneliness inside her more than I ever had before. There was
a terror way back in her eyes.

"You look tired, Arthur," she said.

"Yes," I said, glad of the opportunity she had given me to explain. "I
had to finish my thesis and get it in by last night. Two solid years of
hard work and it had to be done or the whole thing was for nothing.
That's why I couldn't come four days ago. And you seemed quite insistent
that I shouldn't call." I smiled to let her know that I remembered about
party lines in a small town.

"It's just as well," she said. And while I was trying to decide what the
antecedent of her remark was she said, "You can go back on the morning
train."

"You mean the trouble is over?" I said, relieved.

"Yes," she said. But she had hesitated.

It was the first time I had ever seen her tell a lie.

"You must be hungry," she rushed on. "Put your suitcase in the room and
wash up." She turned her back to me and hurried into the kitchen.

I was hungry. The memory of her homey cooking did it. I glanced around
the front room. Nothing had changed, I thought. Then I noticed the
framed portrait of my father and his three brothers was hanging where
the large print of a basket of fruit used to hang. The basket of fruit
picture was where the portrait should have been, and it was entirely too
big a picture for that spot. I would never have thought Aunt Matilda
could tolerate anything out of proportion. And the darker area of
wallpaper where the fruit picture had prevented fading stood out like a
sore thumb.

I looked around the room for other changes. The boat picture that had
hung to the right of the front door was not there. On the floor under
where it should have been I caught the flash of light from a shard of
glass. Next to it, the drape framing the window was not hanging right.

On impulse I went over and peeked behind the drape. There, leaning
against the wall, was the boat picture with fragments of splintered
glass still in it.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the evidence it appeared that Aunt Matilda had either been trying
to hang the picture where it belonged, or taking it down, and it had
slipped out of her hands and fallen, and she had hidden it behind the
drape and hastily swept up the broken glass.

But why? Even granting that Aunt Matilda might behave in such an erratic
fashion (which was obvious from the evidence), I couldn't imagine a
