
"But you see the point," said Henderson. "This cash-return form arrived
two weeks after the client's death."

"You said there weren't any beneficiaries," I pointed out.

"Of course. But the form was sent in by the man's partner, one Ab
Karpin. McCann left a hand-written will bequeathing all his possessions
to Karpin. Since, according to Karpin, this was done before McCann's
death, the premium money cannot be considered part of the policy, but as
part of McCann's cash-on-hand. And Karpin wants it."

"It can't be that much, can it?" I asked. I was trying my best to point
out to him that the company would spend more than it would save if it
sent me all the way out to the asteroids, a prospect I could feel coming
and one which I wasn't ready to cry hosannah over.

"McCann died," Henderson said ponderously, "at the age of fifty-six. He
had set his retirement age at sixty. He took out the policy at the age
of thirty-four, with monthly payments of fifty credits. Figure it out
for yourself."

I did--in my head--and came up with a figure of thirteen thousand and
two hundred credits. Seventy-five per cent of that would be nine
thousand and nine hundred credits. Call it ten thousand credits even.

I had to admit it. It was worth the trip.

"I see," I said sadly.

"Now," said Henderson, "the conditions--the circumstances--of McCann's
death are somewhat suspicious. And so is the cash-return form itself."

"There's a chance it's a forgery?"

"One would think so," he said. "But our handwriting experts have worn
themselves out with that form, comparing it with every other single
scrap of McCann's writing they can find. And their conclusion is that
not only is it genuinely McCann's handwriting, but it is McCann's
handwriting at age fifty-six."

"So McCann must have written it," I said. "Under duress, do you think?"

"I have no idea," said Henderson complacently. "That's what you're
supposed to find out. Oh, there's just one more thing."

I did my best to make my ears perk.

"I told you that McCann's death occurred under somewhat suspicious
circumstances."

"Yes," I agreed, "you did."

"McCann and Karpin," he said, "have been partners--unincorporated, of
course--for the last fifteen years. They had found small rare-metal
deposits now and again, but they had never found that one big strike all
the Belt prospectors waste their lives looking for. Not until the day
before McCann died."

"Ah hah," I said. "_Then_ they found the big strike."

"Exactly."

"And McCann's death?"

"Accidental."

"Sure," I said. "What proof have we got?"

"None. The body is lost in space. And law is few and far between that
far out."

"So all we've got is this guy Karpin's word for how McCann died, is that
it?"

"That's all we have. So far."

"Sure. And now you want me to go on out there and find out what's
cooking, and see if I can maybe save the company ten thousand credits."

"Exactly," said Henderson.

       *       *       *       *       *

The copter took me to the spaceport west of Cairo, and there I boarded
the good ship _Demeter_ for Luna City and points Out. I loaded up on
g-sickness pills and they worked fine. I was sick as a dog.

By the time we got to Atronics City, my insides had grown resigned to
their fate. As long as I didn't try to eat, my stomach would leave me
alone.

Atronics City was about as depressing as a Turkish bath with all the
lights on. It stood on a chunk of rock a couple of miles thick, and it
looked like nothing more in this world than a welder's practice range.

From the outside, Atronics City is just a derby-shaped dome of
nickel-iron, black and kind of dirty-looking. I suppose a transparent
dome would have been more fun, but the builders of the company cities in
the asteroids were businessmen, and they weren't concerned with having
fun. There's nothing to look at outside the dome but chunks of rock and
the blackness of space anyway, and you've got all this cheap iron
floating around in the vicinity, and all a dome's supposed to do is keep
the air in. Besides, though the Belt isn't as crowded as a lot of people
think, there _is_ quite a lot of debris rushing here and there, bumping
into things, and a transparent dome would just get all scratched up, not
to mention punctured.

From the inside, Atronics City is even jollier. There's the top level,
directly under the dome, which is mainly parking area for scooters and
tuggers of various kinds, plus the office shacks of the Assayer's
Office, the Entry Authority, the Industry Troopers and so on. The next
three levels have all been burned into the bowels of the planetoid.

Level two is the Atronics plant, and a noisy plant it is. Level three is
the shopping and entertainment area--grocery stores and clothing stores
and movie theaters and bars--and level four is housing, two rooms and
kitchen for the unmarried, four rooms and kitchen plus one room for each
child for the married.

All of these levels have one thing in common. Square corners, painted
olive drab. The total effect of the place is suffocating. You feel like
you're stuck in the middle of a stack of packing crates.

Most of the people living in Atronics City work, of course, for
International Atronics, Incorporated. The rest of them work in the
service occupations--running the bars and grocery stores and so on--that
keep the company employees alive and relatively happy.

Wages come high in the places like Atronics City. Why not, the raw
materials come practically for free. And as for working conditions,
well, take a for instance. How do you make a vacuum tube? You fiddle
with the innards and surround it all with glass. And how do you get the
air out? No problem, boy, there wasn't any air in there to begin with.

At any rate, there I was at Atronics City. That was as far as _Demeter_
would take me. Now, while the ship went on to Ludlum City and Chemisant
City and the other asteroid business towns, my two suitcases and I
dribbled down the elevator to my hostelry on level four.

       *       *       *

Have you ever taken an elevator ride when the gravity is practically
non-existent? Well, don't. You see, the elevator manages to sink faster
than you do. It isn't being _lowered_ down to level four, it's being
_pulled_ down.

What this means is that the suitcases have to be lashed down with the
straps provided, and you and the operator have to hold on tight to the
hand-grips placed here and there around the wall. Otherwise, you'd clonk
your head on the ceiling.

But we got to level four at last, and off I went with my suitcases and
the operator's directions. The suitcases weighed about half an ounce
each out here, and I felt as though I weighed the same. Every time I
raised a foot, I was sure I was about to go sailing into a wall. Local
citizens eased by me, their feet occasionally touching the iron pavement
as they soared along, and I gave them all dirty looks.

Level four was nothing but walls and windows. The iron floor went among
these walls and windows in a straight straight line, bisecting other
"streets" at perfect right angles, and the iron ceiling sixteen feet up
was lined with a double row of fluorescent tubes. I was beginning to
feel claustrophobic already.

The Chalmers Hotel--named for an Atronics vice-president--had received
my advance registration, which was nice. I was shown to a second-floor
room--nothing on level four had more than two stories--and was left to
unpack my suitcases as best I may.
