
There was no way out of it, thought Henry. He'd have to humor the old
fellow.

"The Horror," he replied, "appeared on Earth, so far as the knowledge of
man is concerned, about six months ago."

Dr. White nodded approvingly.

"You state the facts very aptly," he said.

"How so?"

"When you say 'so far as the knowledge of man is concerned.'"

"Why is that?"

"You will understand in due time. Please proceed."

Vaguely the newspaperman wondered whether he was interviewing the
scientist or the scientist interviewing him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"They were first reported," Woods said, "early this spring. At that time
they wiped out a small village in the province of Quebec. All the
inhabitants, except a few fugitives, were found dead, killed
mysteriously and half eaten, as if by wild beasts. The fugitives were
demented, babbling of black shapes that swept down out of the dark
forest upon the little town in the small hours of the morning.

"The next that was heard of them was about a week later, when they
struck in an isolated rural district in Poland, killing and feeding on
the population of several farms. In the next week more villages were
wiped out, in practically every country on the face of the Earth. From
the hinterlands came tales of murder done at midnight, of men and women
horribly mangled, of livestock slaughtered, of buildings crushed as if
by some titanic force.

"At first they worked only at night and then, seeming to become bolder
and more numerous, attacked in broad daylight."

The newspaperman paused.

"Is that what you want?" he asked.

"That's part of it," replied Dr. White, "but that's not all. What do
these Horrors look like?"

"That's more difficult," said Henry. "They have been reported as every
conceivable sort of monstrosity. Some are large and others are small.
Some take the form of animals, others of birds and reptiles, and some
are cast in appalling shapes such as might be snatched out of the horrid
imagery of a thing which resided in a world entirely alien to our own."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. White rose from his chair and strode across the room to confront the
other.

"Young man," he asked, "do you think it possible the Horror might have
come out of a world entirely alien to our own?"

"I don't know," replied Henry. "I know that some of the scientists
believe they came from some other planet, perhaps even from some other
solar system. I know they are like nothing ever known before on Earth.
They are always inky black, something like black tar, you know, sort of
sticky-looking, a disgusting sight. The weapons of mankind can't affect
them. Explosives are useless and so are projectiles. They wade through
poison gas and fiery chemicals and seem to enjoy them. Elaborate
electrical barriers have failed. Heat doesn't make them turn a hair."

"And you think they came from some other planet, perhaps some other
solar system?"

"I don't know what to think," said Henry. "If they came out of space
they must have come in some conveyance, and that would certainly have
been sighted, picked up long before it arrived, by our astronomers. If
they came in small conveyances, there must have been many of them. If
they came in a single conveyance, it would be too large to escape
detection. That is, unless--"

"Unless what?" snapped the scientist.

"Unless it traveled at the speed of light. Then it would have been
invisible."

"Not only invisible," snorted the old man, "but non-existent."

A question was on the tip of the newspaperman's tongue, but before it
could be asked the old man was speaking again, asking a question:

"Can you imagine a fourth dimension?"

"No, I can't," said Henry.

"Can you imagine a thing of only two dimensions?"

"Vaguely, yes."

The scientist smote his palms together.

"Now we're coming to it!" he exclaimed.

Henry Woods regarded the other narrowly. The old man must be turned.
What did fourth and second dimensions have to do with the Horror?

"Do you know anything about evolution?" questioned the old man.

"I have a slight understanding of it. It is the process of upward
growth, the stairs by which simple organisms climb to become more
complex organisms."

Dr. White grunted and asked still another question:

"Do you know anything about the theory of the exploding universe? Have
you ever noted the tendency of the perfectly balanced to run amuck?"

The reporter rose slowly to his feet.

"Dr. White," he said, "you phoned my paper you had a story for us. I
came here to get it, but all you have done is ask me questions. If you
can't tell me what you want us to publish, I will say good-day."

The doctor put forth a hand that shook slightly.

"Sit down, young man," he said. "I don't blame you for being impatient,
but I will now come to my point."

The newspaperman sat down again.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have developed a hypothesis," said Dr. White, "and have conducted
several experiments which seem to bear it out. I am staking my
reputation upon the supposition that it is correct. Not only that, but I
am also staking the lives of several brave men who believe implicitly in
me and my theory. After all, I suppose it makes little difference, for
if I fail the world is doomed, if I succeed it is saved from complete
destruction.

"Have you ever thought that our evolutionists might be wrong, that
evolution might be downward instead of upward? The theory of the
exploding universe, the belief that all of creation is running down,
being thrown off balance by the loss of energy, spurred onward by cosmic
accidents which tend to disturb its equilibrium, to a time when it will
run wild and space will be filled with swirling dust of disintegrated
worlds, would bear out this contention.

"This does not apply to the human race. There is no question that our
evolution is upward, that we have arisen from one-celled creatures
wallowing in the slime of primal seas. Our case is probably paralleled
by thousands of other intelligences on far-flung planets and island
universes. These instances, however, running at cross purposes to the
general evolutional trend of the entire cosmos, are mere flashes in the
eventual course of cosmic evolution, comparing no more to eternity than
a split second does to a million years.

"Taking these instances, then, as inconsequential, let us say that the
trend of cosmic evolution is downward rather than upward, from complex
units to simpler units rather than from simple units to more complex
ones.

"Let us say that life and intelligence have degenerated. How would you
say such a degeneration would take place? In just what way would it be
manifested? What sort of transition would life pass through in passing
from one stage to a lower one? Just what would be the nature of these
stages?"

The scientist's eyes glowed brightly as he bent forward in his chair.
