inside the palace, obviously trying to present an air of strolling
nonchalance. He gestured fluidly with a graceful tentacle. "You!" he
said to Crownwall. "Follow me. His Effulgence commands you to appear
before him at once." The two guards withdrew their pikes and froze into
immobility at the sides of the entrance.

Crownwall stamped out his smoke and ambled after the hurrying courtier
along tremendous corridors, through elaborate waiting rooms, under
guarded doorways, until he was finally bowed through a small curtained
arch.

At the far side of the comfortable, unimpressive room, a plump thing,
hide faded to a dull violet, reclined on a couch. Behind him stood a
heavy and pompous appearing Vegan in lordly trappings. They examined
Crownwall with great interest for a few moments.

"It's customary to genuflect when you enter the Viceroy's presence,"
said the standing one at last. "But then I'm told you're an Earthling. I
suppose we can expect you to be ignorant of those niceties customary
among civilized peoples."

"It's all right, Ggaran," said the Viceroy languidly. He twitched a
tentacle in a beckoning gesture. "Come closer, Earthling. I bid you
welcome to my capital. I have been looking forward to your arrival for
some time."

       *       *       *       *       *

Crownwall put his hands in his pockets. "That's hardly possible," he
said. "It was only decided yesterday, back on Earth, that I would be the
one to make the trip here. Even if you could spy through buildings on
Earth from space, which I doubt, your communications system can't get
the word through that fast."

"Oh, I didn't mean _you_ in particular," the Vegan said with a negligent
wave. "Who can tell one Earthling from another? What I meant was that I
expected someone from Earth to break through our blockade and come here.
Most of my advisors--even Ggaran here--thought it couldn't be done, but
I never doubted that you'd manage it. Still, if you were on your home
planet only yesterday, that's astonishing even to me. Tell me, how did
you manage to get here so fast, and without even alerting my detection
web?"

"You're doing the talking," said Crownwall. "If you wanted someone from
Earth to come here to see you, why did you put the cordon around Earth?
And why did you drop a planet-buster in the Pacific Ocean, and tell us
that it was triggered to go off if we tried to use the distorter drive?
That's hardly the action of somebody who expects visitors."

Ffallk glanced up at Ggaran. "I told you that Earthlings were
unbelievably bold." He turned back to Crownwall. "If you couldn't come
to me in spite of the trifling inconveniences I put in your way, your
presence here would be useless to both of us. But you did come, so I can
tell you that although I am the leader of one of the mightiest peoples
in the Galaxy, whereas there are scarcely six billions of you squatting
on one minor planet, we still need each other. Together, there is
nothing we can't do."

"I'm listening," said Crownwall.

"We offer you partnership with us to take over the rule of the Galaxy
from the Sunda--the so-called Master Race."

"It would hardly be an equal partnership, would it, considering that
there are so many more of you than there are of us?"

His Effulgence twitched his ear stalks in amusement. "I'm Viceroy of one
of the hundred Sectors of the Empire. I rule over a total of a hundred
Satrapies; these average about a hundred Provinces each. Provinces
consist, in general, of about a hundred Clusters apiece, and every
Cluster has an average of a hundred inhabited solar systems. There are
more inhabited planets in the Galaxy than there are people on your
single world. I, personally, rule three hundred trillion people, half of
them of my own race. And yet I tell you that it would be an equal
partnership."

"I don't get it. Why?"

"Because you came to me."

Crownwall shrugged. "So?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Vegan reached up and engulfed the end of a drinking tube with his
eating orifice. "You upstart Earthlings are a strange and a frightening
race," he said. "Frightening to the Sunda, especially. When you showed
up in the spaceways, it was decreed that you had to be stopped at once.
There was even serious discussion of destroying Earth out of hand, while
it is still possible.

"Your silly little planet was carefully examined at long range in a
routine investigation just about fifty thousand years ago. There were at
that time three different but similar racial strains of pulpy bipeds,
numbering a total of perhaps a hundred thousand individuals. They showed
many signs of an ability to reason, but a complete lack of civilization.
While these creatures could by no means be classed among the intelligent
races, there was a general expectation, which we reported to the Sunda,
that they would some day come to be numbered among the Servants of the
Emperor. So we let you alone, in order that you could develop in your
own way, until you reached a high enough civilization to be useful--if
you were going to.

