evidently powerful. They, like insects, were equipped with a thick,
durable exoskeleton, horny, brownish coating that covered arms and legs
and head. Their eyes projected slightly, protected by horny protruding
walls--eyes that were capable of movement in every direction--and there
were three of them, set at equal distances apart.

The tiny investigation machine hurled itself violently at one of the
beings, crashing against the transparent covering, flexing it, and
striking the being inside with terrific force. Hurled from his position,
he fell end over end across the weightless ship, but despite the blow,
he was not hurt.

The investigator passed to the power room ahead of the Outsiders, who
were anxiously trying to learn the reason for their companion's plight.

[Illustration: Illustrated by MOREY]

Directed by the Center of Rulers, the investigator sought the power
room, and relayed the control signals from the Rulers' brains. The
ship-brain had been destroyed, but the controls were still readily
workable. Quickly they were shot home, and the enormous plungers shut. A
combination was arranged so that the machine, as well as the
investigator and the Outsiders, were destroyed. A second investigator,
which had started when the plan was decided on, had now arrived. The
Outsider's ship nearest the transport-machine had been badly damaged,
and the investigator entered the broken side.

       *       *       *       *

The scenes were, of course, remembered by the memory-minds back on Earth
tuned with that of the investigator. The investigator flashed down
corridors, searching quickly for the apparatus room. It was soon seen
that with them the machine was practically unintelligent, very few
machines of even slight intelligence being used.

Then it became evident by the excited action of the men of the ship,
that the presence of the investigator had been detected. Perhaps it was
the control impulses, or the signal impulses it emitted. They searched
for the tiny bit of metal and crystal for some time before they found
it. And in the meantime it was plain that the power these Outsiders used
was not, as was ours of the time, the power of blasting atoms, but the
greater power of disintegrating matter. The findings of this tiny
investigating machine were very important.

Finally they succeeded in locating the investigator, and one of the
Outsiders appeared armed with a peculiar projector. A bluish beam
snapped out, and the tiny machine went blank.

The fleet was surrounded by thousands of the tiny machines by this time,
and the Outsiders were badly confused by their presence, as it became
difficult to locate them in the confusion of signal impulses. However,
they started at once for Earth.

The science-investigators had been present toward the last, and I am
there now, in memory with my two friends, long since departed. They were
the greatest human science-investigators--Roal, 25374 and Trest, 35429.
Roal had quickly assured us that these Outsiders had come for invasion.
There had been no wars on the planets before that time in the direct
memory of the machines, and it was difficult that these who were
conceived and built for cooperation, helpfulness utterly dependent on
cooperation, unable to exist independently as were humans, that these
life-forms should care to destroy, merely that they might possess. It
would have been easier to divide the works and the products. But--life
alone can understand life, so Roal was believed.

From investigations, machines were prepared that were capable of
producing considerable destruction. Torpedoes, being our principal
weapon, were equipped with such atomic explosives as had been developed
for blasting, a highly effective induction-heat ray developed for
furnaces being installed in some small machines made for the purpose in
the few hours we had before the enemy reached Earth.

In common with all life-forms, they were able to withstand only very
meager earth-acceleration. A range of perhaps four units was their
limit, and it took several hours to reach the planet.

I still believe the reception was a warm one. Our machines met them
beyond the orbit of Luna, and the directed torpedoes sailed at the
hundred great ships. They were thrown aside by a magnetic field
surrounding the ship, but were redirected instantly, and continued to
approach. However, some beams reached out, and destroyed them by instant
volatilization. But, they attacked at such numbers that fully half the
fleet was destroyed by their explosions before the induction beam fleet
arrived. These beams were, to our amazement, quite useless, being
instantly absorbed by a force-screen, and the remaining ships sailed on
undisturbed, our torpedoes being exhausted. Several investigator
machines sent out for the purpose soon discovered the secret of the
force-screen, and while being destroyed, were able to send back signals
up to the moment of annihilation.

A few investigators thrown into the heat beam of the enemy reported it
identical with ours, explaining why they had been prepared for this form
of attack.

Signals were being radiated from the remaining fifty, along a beam.
Several investigators were sent along these beams, speeding back at
great acceleration.

Then the enemy reached Earth. Instantly they settled over the Colorado
settlement, the Sahara colony, and the Gobi colony. Enormous, diffused
beams were set to work, and we saw, through the machine-screens, that
all humans within these ranges were being killed instantly by the
faintly greenish beams. Despite the fact that any life-form killed
normally can be revived, unless affected by dissolution common to living
tissue, these could not be brought to life again. The important cell
communication channels--nerves--had been literally burned out. The
complicated system of nerves, called the brain, situated in the
uppermost extremity of the human life-form, had been utterly destroyed.

Every form of life, microscopic, even sub-microscopic, was annihilated.
Trees, grass, every living thing was gone from that territory. Only the
machines remained, for they, working entirely without the vital chemical
forces necessary to life, were uninjured. But neither plant nor animal
was left.

The pale green rays swept on.

In an hour, three more colonies of humans had been destroyed.

Then the torpedoes that the machines were turning out again, came into
action. Almost desperately the machines drove them at the Outsiders in
defense of their masters and creators, Mankind.
