So Gral burrowed into the leaves, his anger diminished as he watched
with drowsy delight the sun-patterns stroking. And his eyes must have
closed, half closed....

It was no snarl that brought him back--it was a tread, soft-shod and
cautious, very close. The snarl came an instant later, deep-throated
with anger and meaning.

Another had found this Place, this warmth, these leaves that were fine
for burrowing. Gral came erect and stared into the visage of Obe the
Great Bear; just six feet away he saw the great head that swayed with
deceptive gentleness, the amber eyes burning, the twinned mountainous
muscle of shoulders ... and in that quick moment Gral saw something
else. Obe stood directly astride the pointed shaft which Gral had left
too far distant.

Gral did not breathe. He did not move. Only his hand crept slowly, but
already he knew his throw-stones were gone. Once more Obe snarled, and
Gral saw those great shoulder muscles slide. His hand encountered the
wall, groped desperately; then his fingers found something--a stick, a
root, some gnarled thing that protruded....

In one rearing flow of motion, Obe launched out in a mighty reach. Gral
caught part of that sweeping blow; stunned, he managed to gain footing,
and now both his hands were on the protruding object. He wrenched and
the thing came free, seeming strange and heavy in his hands. Obe was
upon him again, the great paws ready to crush ... pure terror sent Gral
stumbling back, but it was a different instinct that brought his arms
once up and then down in a great arc....

Once only. He felt a wondrous impact that jarred him to the
shoulders--and then it was a miracle. Obe was no longer upon him. Obe
lay half sprawled, roaring with rage, and from Obe's massive head came
the crimson life-stuff!

Gral did not question. Avoiding the destructive paws, he leaped in and
away, and then in, all the while employing the thing in his hand until
Obe's life-stuff had run its course in crimson ruin.

       *       *       *

Acceptance came slowly, as Gral sagged in weariness against the wall. He
could not believe this thing! Timorously, he approached the great
carcass and prodded with his foot. Then he accepted.

Now things were happening inside him--a great turmoil, a throbbing
within his chest. Gral straightened; he brought his arms quickly up and
around, and the thing-that-slew felt wondrous in the arc. Even better
than the throw-stones! It was like--he struggled for the meaning--like
an extension of one's self! One threw the stone and yet retained it!

But alas, it was not a stone at all, Gral discovered. He placed the
gnarled thing in sunlight and crouched to survey it. This
thing-that-slew was but a length of rotting root, frozen at the end with
clay and encrusted ice. And already the ice was shattered.

The sun did the rest, as Gral watched in despair; soon there was only
soft melting mud and a gnarled stick that would never slay again.

For a long time Gral crouched there, trying to understand. Dimly he
perceived, but his mind would not reach. He scowled angrily and flung
the useless stick away. There was a thing inside him he did not like, a
strange new thing that gnawed and nagged and brought anger again.

It was anger at being robbed of a priceless thing--but the gnawing went
deeper.

Wearily, he rose. He began his trek back to the great ledge, to make
announcement that his bring this day would be Obe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Otah came, and Lak and one other, and together they brought Obe back. No
one made remark on the slaying; it was enough that Obe was here! And
when Gral came forward at the gorging to take the bringer's share, he
merely took and retired, disdaining the great show of prowess and
exaggeration which the others used to demonstrate their kill. But he saw
that Gor-wah, the Old One, was pleased. Even Otah the Thrower-of-Stones
looked at him with envy; it was not often they had Obe the Great Bear;
only twice before had it happened, and both times it was Otah who
brought.

Gral gorged voluptuously that night. This too was new to his experience,
and this he liked. But newer still was the thing he did not like, the
thing that continued to gnaw and nag and would not let him sleep.

And next morning, with the valley still gray and murky before the dawn
and damp with bitter cold, Gral was gone in advance of the others. He
clambered down to the river and there he pursued his way--far along
toward the place where it widened into shallows. No thought of bringing
today! Instead he searched. He searched the rocky shallows as the sun
came shafting, and he was still searching later as it climbed high.

He found the place at last, where the stones were plentiful and of
proper size. There he paused; the thing was still angry and prodding
within him; Gral could not have known that this "thing-that-prodded" was
not anger but a churning impatience, a burning nameless need--that he
was in very truth a prototype, the first in the realm of pure research!

But he applied it, knowing remotely what he must do. It was long; it was
irksome; he ached all through with the effort but still he persisted.
Until at last, from all the stones in the shallows, he had gathered a
dozen that pleased him.

These he seized eagerly. He spread them out; he examined; he grunted and
grimaced and paused in perplexity. It was difficult to choose when each
might do! But he chose, weighing each in his hand before discarding,
until finally _one_ remained.

He grunted his pleasure, knowing purpose now. The vines! Again he
selected carefully. _Tight_, said the thing-that-prodded, _it must be
tight or you will have only a throw-stone_.

And so began the long task of arranging stone to shaft, as he brought
the vine round and round again. It was crude; his fingers were clumsy
and unaccustomed; the vine tangled and tore, and there was no way of
