
       *       *       *       *       *




SIBLEY COLLEGE LECTURES.--1887-88.

BY THE CORNELL UNIVERSITY NON-RESIDENT LECTURERS IN MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING.

THE EVOLUTION OF THE MODERN MILL.[1]

   [Footnote 1: The lecture was illustrated by about fifty views on
   the screen, which cannot be reproduced here, showing photographs
   of mills and mechanical drawings of the methods of construction
   alluded to in the lecture.]

BY C. J. H. WOODBURY, BOSTON, MASS.


The great factories of the textile industries in this country are
fashioned after methods peculiarly adapted to the purposes for which
they are designed, particularly as regards the most convenient placing
of machinery, the distribution of power, the relation of the several
processes to each other in the natural sequence of manufacture, and
the arrangement of windows securing the most favorable lighting. The
floors and roofs embody the most economical distribution of material,
and the walls furnish examples of well known forms of masonry
originating with this class of buildings.

These features of construction have not been produced by a stroke of
genius on the part of any one man. There has been no Michael Angelo,
no Sir Christopher Wren, whose epitaph bids the reader to look around
for a monument; but the whole has been a matter of slow, steady
growth, advancing by hair's breadth; and, as the result of continual
efforts to adapt means to ends, an inorganic evolution has been
effected, resulting in the survival of the fittest, and literally
pushing the weaker to the wall.

This advance in methods has, like all inventions, resulted in the
impairment of invested capital. There are hundreds of mill buildings,
the wonder of their day, now used for storage because they cannot be
employed to sufficient advantage in manufacturing purposes to compete
with the facilities furnished by mills of later design. Thus their
owners have been compelled to erect new buildings, and, as far as the
original purpose of manufacturing is concerned, to abandon their old
mills.

In the case of a certain cotton mill built about thirty years ago, and
used for the manufacture of colored goods of fancy weave, the owners
added to the plant by constructing a one story mill, which proved to
be peculiarly adapted to this kind of manufacture, by reason of added
stability, better light, and increased facilities for transferring the
stock in process of manufacture; and they soon learned not only that
the old mill could not compete with the new one, but that they could
not afford to run it at any price; the annual saving in the cost of
gas, as measured by the identical meter used to measure the supply to
the old mill, being six per cent. on the cost of the new mill.

In another instance, one of two cordage mills burned, and a new mill
of one story construction was erected in its place. The advantage of
manufacture therein was so great that the owners of the property
changed the remaining old mill into a storehouse; and now, as they
wish to increase their business, it is to be torn down as a cumberer
of the ground, to make room for a building of similar construction to
the new mill.

It is true that such instances pertain more particularly to industries
and lines of manufacture where competition is close and conditions are
exacting. Still they apply in a greater or less degree to nearly every
industrial process in which a considerable portion of the expense of
manufacture consists in the application of organized labor to machines
of a high degree of perfection.

These changes have been solely due to the differences in the
conditions imposed by improvement in the methods of manufacture. The
early mills of this country were driven by water power, and situated
where that could be developed in the easiest manner. They were
therefore placed in the narrow valleys of rapid watercourses. The
method of applying water power in that day being strictly limited to
placing the overshot or breast wheel in the race leading from the
canal to the river, the mill was necessarily placed on a narrow strip
of land between these two bodies of water, with the race-way running
under the mill.

To meet these conditions of location, which was limited to this strip
of land, the mill must be narrow and short, and the requisite floor
area must be obtained by adding to the number of stories. It was
essential that the roof of such a mill should be strong and well
braced in order to sustain the excessive stress brought to bear upon
it. The old factory roof was a curious structure, with eaves springing
out of the edge of hollow cornices, the roof rising sharply until
about six feet above the attic floor, with an upright course of about
three feet, filled with sashes reaching to a second roof, which, at a
more moderate pitch than the first slope, trended to the ridge.

The attic was reduced to an approximately square room, by placing
sheathing between the columns underneath the sashes, and ceiling
underneath the collar beams above; thus forming a cock-loft above and
concealed spaces at the sides which diminished the practically
available floor space in the attic. This cock-loft and these concealed
spaces became receptacles for rubbish and harbors for vermin, both of
which were frequent causes of fire.

The floors of such a mill were similar in their arrangement to those
of a dwelling. Joists connecting the beams supported the floor; and
the under side was covered over by sheathing or lath and plaster, thus
forming, as in the case of the roof, hollow spaces which were a source
of danger. This method caused at the same time an extravagant
distribution of material, by the prodigal use of lumber and the
unnecessary thickness of such floors, and entailed an excessive amount
of masonry in the walls.

Mills built after this manner were frequently in odd dimensions; and
the machinery was necessarily placed in diversified arrangement,
calling forth a similar degree of wasted skill as that used in making
a Chinese puzzle conform to its given boundaries. Their area depended
upon the topography of the site, and their height upon the owner's
pocket book. There was in Massachusetts a mill with ten floors, built
on land worth at that time ten cents or less per square foot, which
has been torn down and a new mill rebuilt in its place, because, since
the advent of modern mills, it has failed every owner by reason of the
excessive expenditure necessary for the distribution of power, for
supervision, and for the transfer of stock in process, in comparison
with the mills of their competitors, built with greater ground area
and less number of stories.

With the advent of the steam engine as prime mover in mills, and the
introduction of the turbine wheel with its trunk, affording greater
facilities in the application of water power, the character of these
buildings changed very materially, though still retaining many of
their old features. One of the first of these changes may be noticed
in the consideration which millwrights gave to the problem of fixing
upon the dimensions of a mill so as to arrange the machinery in the
most convenient manner. Although the floors were still hollow, there
was a better distribution of material, the joists being deeper, of
longer span, and resting upon the beams, thus avoiding the pernicious
method of wasting lumber, and guarding against fracture by tenoning
joists into the upper side of beams.

But this secondary type of mills was not honest in the matter of
design. The influence of architects who attempted effects not
accordant with or subservient to the practical use of the property is
apparent in such mills. The most frequent of these wooden efforts at
classic architecture was the common practice of representing a
diminutive Grecian temple surrounding a factory bell perched in mid
air. There were also windows with Romanesque arches copied from
churches, and Mansard roofs, exiled from their true function of
decorating the home, covering a factory without an answering line
anywhere on its flat walls.

I do not mean to criticise any of these elements of design in their
proper place and environment; but utility is the fundamental element
in design, and should be especially noticeable in a building
constructed for industrial purposes, and used solely as a source of
commercial profit in such applications. Its lines therefore fulfill
their true function in design in such measure as they suggest
stability and convenience; and this can be obtained in such structures
without the adoption of bad proportions offensive to the taste. In
fact, certain decorative effects have been made with good results; but
these have been wholly subordinate to the fundamental idea of utility.

The endurance with which brick will withstand frost and fires, and the
disintegrating forces of nature, in addition to its resistance to
crushing and the facility of construction, constitute very important
reasons for its value for building purposes. But the use of this has
been too often limited to plain brick in plain walls, whose monotony
portrayed no artistic effect beyond that furnished by a few
geometrical designs of the most primitive form of ornament, and
falling far short of what the practice of recent years has shown to be
possible with this material.

Additions of cast iron serve as ornaments only in the phraseology of
trade catalogues; and the mixture of stone with brick shows results in
flaring contrasts, producing harsh dissonance in the effect. The
facades of such buildings show that this is brick, this is stone, or
this is cast iron; but they always fail to impress the beholder with
the idea of harmonious design. The use of finer varieties of clay in
terra cotta figures laid among the brickwork furnishes a field of
architectural design hardly appreciated. The heavy mass of brick,
divided by regular lines of demarkation, serves as the groundwork of
such ornamentation, while the suitable introduction in the proper
places of the same material in terra cotta imparts the most
appropriate elements of beauty in design; for clay in both forms shows
alike its capacity for utility and decoration. The absorption of light
by both forms of this material abates reflection, and renders its
proportions more clearly visible than any other substance used in
building construction.

The modern mill has been evolved out of the various exacting
conditions developed in the effort to reduce the cost of production to
the lowest terms. These conditions comprise in a great measure
questions of stability, repairs, insurance, distribution of power, and
arrangement of machinery.

In presenting to your attention some of the salient features of modern
mill construction, I do not assume to offer a general treatise upon
the subject; but propose to confine myself to a consideration of some
topics which may not have been brought to your notice, as they are
still largely matters of personal experience which have not yet found
their way into the books on the subject. Much of this, especially the
drawings thrown on the screen, is obtained from the experience of the
manufacturers' mutual insurance companies, with which I am connected.
By way of explanation, I will say that these companies confine their
work to writing upon industrial property; and there is not a
mechanical process, or method of building, or use of raw material,
which does not have its relation to the question of hazard by fire, by
reason of the elements of relative danger which it embodies.

It is indeed fortunate that it has been found by experience that those
methods of building which are most desirable for the underwriter are
also equally advantageous for the manufacturer. There is no pretense
made at demands to compass the erection of fireproof buildings. In
fact, as I have once remarked, a fireproof mill is commercially
impossible, whatever effort may be made to overcome the constructive
difficulties in the way of erecting and operating a mill which shall
be all that the name implies. The present practice is to build a mill
of slow burning construction.


FOUNDATIONS.

In considering the elements of such buildings, I wish to devote a few
words to the question of foundations, because in the excessive loads
imposed by this class of buildings, and in the frequent necessity of
constructing them upon sites where alluvial drift or quicksands form
compressible foundations, there is afforded an opportunity for the
widest range of engineering skill in dealing with the problem. In such
instances, a settling of the building must be foreseen and provided
for, in order that it may be uniform under the whole structure. This
is generally accomplished by means of independent foundations under
the various points of pressure, arranged so as to give a uniform
intensity of pressure upon all parts of the foundation. It is
considered important to limit the load upon such foundations to two
tons a square foot, although loads frequently exceed this amount.

There is a large building in New York City which has recently been
reconstructed, and the foundations rearranged, where the load reached
to the enormous amount of six to ten tons per square foot. It was a
frequent occurrence in the class of high mills spoken of to impose
loads of so much greater intensity upon the wall foundation than upon
the piers under the columns of the mill, that the floors became much
lower at the walls than at the middle.

The stone for such foundations should be laid in cement rather than in
mortar, not merely because cement offers so much greater resistance to
crushing, but because its setting is due to chemical changes occurring
simultaneously throughout the mass. The hardening of mortar, on the
other hand, is due to the drying out of the water mechanically
contained with it, and its final setting is caused by the action of
the carbonic acid gas in the air.

Although quicksands are never to be desired, yet they will sustain
heavy loads if suitably confined. When inclined rock strata are met
with, all horizontal components of stress should be removed by cutting
steps so that the foundation stones shall lie upon horizontal beds.

Foundations are frequently impaired by the slow, insidious action of
springs or of water percolating from the canal which supplies the
water power for the mill; and the proper diversion of such streams
should be carefully provided for.

In the question of foundations, there is much of a general nature
which is applicable to all structures; but, at the same time, each
case requires independent consideration of the circumstances involved.


WALLS.

In addition to what has been said, there is but little for me to offer
on the subject of walls beyond the general question of stability. In
mill construction, walls of uniform thickness have been displaced by
pilastered walls, about sixteen inches thick at the upper story, and
increasing four inches in thickness with each story below.

The remainder of the walls is from four to six inches less in
thickness than at the pilasters. Frequently the outside dimensions of
these pilasters are somewhat increased, giving greater stability and
artistic effect. By leaving hollow flues within them, and using these
flues as conductors for heated air which may be forced in by a blower,
such pilasters afford a means for the most efficient method of warming
the building.

Consideration must be given to the contraction of brick masonry,
especially when an extension or addition is to be made to an older
building. This shrinkage amounts to about three-sixteenths of an inch
to the rod, an item which is of considerable importance in the floors
of high buildings, where the aggregate difference is very appreciable.
Some degree of annoyance is caused by neglect to consider this element
of shrinkage in reference to the window and door frames, which should
have a slight space above them allowing for such contraction. This
contraction is often the source of serious trouble in brick buildings
with stone faces, the shrinkage of the brick imposing excessive stress
on the stone. Instances of this are quite frequent, especially in
large public buildings, notably the capitol at Hartford and the public
building at Philadelphia, where the shivering of the joints of the
stone work gave undue alarm, on the general assumption that it
indicated a dangerous structural weakness. The difficulty has, I
believe, been entirely remedied in both cases.

The limit of good practice on loads upon brickwork is eight to ten
tons per square foot, although it is true that these loads are largely
exceeded at times. It is not to be shown, however, that the limits of
safety in regard to desirable construction should be confined to the
use of masonry for any low buildings. Structures which may be said to
be equal to those of brickwork, as far as commercial risk is
concerned, can be built wholly or in part of wood so as to conform to
all practical conditions of safety. This statement does not apply
except to low buildings of one or possibly two stories in height,
where the timber cannot be subjected to the intense blast of flame
occurring when a high building is on fire.

Mr. George H. Corliss, the eminent engine builder, of Providence,
first built a one-story machine shop, with brick walls extending only
to the base of the windows, above this the windows being very close
together, with solid timber construction between them.

Another method is to place upright posts reaching from the sill to the
roof timbers, and to lay three-inch plank on the outside of such posts
up to the line of the windows. A sheathing on the outside plank
between the timbers is laid vertically and fastened to horizontal
furring strips. In some instances a small amount of mortar is placed
over each of the furring strips. The reason for this arrangement is to
prevent the formation of vertical flues, which are such a potent
factor in the extension of fires.


WINDOWS.

Light is often limited or misapplied on account of faulty position or
size of windows. The use of pilastered walls permits the introduction
of larger windows, which are in most instances virtually double
windows, the two pairs of sashes being set in one frame separated by a
mullion. A more recent arrangement, widely adopted in English
practice, is to place a swinging sash at the top of the window, which
can be opened, when necessary, to assist in the ventilation, while the
main sashes of the window are permanently fixed.

Rough plate glass is used in such windows, because it gives a softer
and more diffused light, which is preferred to that from ordinary
clear glass. White glass may be rendered translucent by a coat of
white zinc and turpentine.

The top of a window should be as near the ceiling as practicable,
because light entering the upper portion of a room illuminates it more
evenly, and with less sharply marked shadows, than where the windows
are lower down.

The walls below the windows should be sloped, in order that there may
be no opportunity to use them as a resting place for material which
should be placed elsewhere.


FIRE WALLS.

Brick division walls should be built so as to constitute a fire wall
wherever it is practicable to do so. Such walls should project at
least three feet above the roof, and should be capped by stone, terra
cotta, or sheet metal. They must form a complete cut-off of all
combustible material, especially at the cornices.


FIRE DOORS.

All openings in such walls must be provided with such fireproof doors
as will prove reliable in time of need. Experience with iron doors of
various forms of construction show that they have been utterly
unreliable in resisting the heat of even a small fire. They will warp
and buckle so as to open the passageway and allow the fire to pass
through the doorway into the next room.

A door made of wood, completely enveloped by sheets of tinned iron,
and strongly fastened to the wall, has proved to resist fire better
than any door which can be applied to general use. I have seen such
doors in division walls where they had successfully resisted the flame
which destroyed four stories of a building filled with combustible
material, without imposing any injury upon the door except the removal
of the tin on the sheet iron; and the doors were kept in further
service without any repairs other than a coat of paint.

The reason for this resistance to fire is that the wood, being a poor
conductor of heat, will not warp and buckle under heat, and cannot
burn for lack of air to support combustion. A removal of the sheet
metal on such a door after a fire in a mill shows that the surface of
the wood is carbonized, not burned, reduced to charcoal, but not to
ashes.

Many fire doors are constructed and hung in such a manner that it is
doubtful whether they could withstand a fire serious enough to require
their services.

The door should be made of two thicknesses of matched pine boards of
well dried stock, and thoroughly fastened with clinched nails. It
should be covered with heavy tin, secured by hanging strips, and the
sheets lock-jointed to each other, with the edge sheets wrapping
around, so that no seam will be left on the edge.

Sliding doors are preferable to swinging doors for many reasons,
especially because they cannot be interfered with by objects on the
floor. But, if swinging doors are used, care should be taken that the
hinges and latches are very strong, and securely fastened directly to
the walls, and not to furring or anything in turn attached to the
walls. The portion of the fixtures attached to the doors must be
fastened by carriage bolts, and not by wood screws.

Sliding on trucks is the preferable method of hanging sliding doors,
inclined two and one half inches to the foot, and bolted to the wall.
The trucks should be heavy "barn door hangers," bolted to the door;
and a grooved door jamb, of wood, covered with tin similar to the
door, should receive it when shut. A step of wood will hold the door
against the wall when closed. A threshold in the doorway retards fire
from passing under the door, and also prevents the flow of water from
one room to another.

These doors are usually placed in pairs, and sometimes an automatic
sprinkler is placed between them.

Fire doors should always be closed at night. In some well ordered
establishments there is a printed notice over each door directing the
night watchmen to close such doors after them. In a storage warehouse
in Boston, the fire doors are connected with the watchman's electric
clock system, so that all openings of fire doors are matters of record
on the dial sheet.

Fire doors should certainly be closed at times of fire; yet, that such
doors are open at night fires, or left open by fleeing help at day
fires, is an old story with underwriters. A simple automatic device
can be used to shut such doors. It consists of two round pieces of
wood with a scarfed joint held by a ferrule, forming a strut which is
placed on two pins, keeping the door open, as other sticks have long
since served like purposes.

The peculiarity of this arrangement is that the ferrule is not
homogeneous, but is made up of four segments of brass soldered
together with the alloy fusible at 163 degrees Fahr., which is widely
known for its use in automatic sprinklers. When the solder yields, the
rod cripples, and the door rolls down the inclined rail and shuts. At
any time the door can be closed by removing one end of the rod from
one of the pins and allowing it to hang from the other pin.

