
1. _Calor febrilis._ The heat in fevers arises from the increase of some
secretion, either of the natural fluids, as in irritative fevers; or of new
fluids, as in infectious fevers; or of new vessels, as in inflammatory
fevers. The pain of heat is a consequence of the increased extension or
contraction of the fibres exposed to so great a stimulus. See CLASS I. 1.
5. 6.

2. _Rubor febrilis._ Febrile redness. When the cold fit of fever
terminates, and the pulsations of the heart and arteries become strong as
well as quick from the increase of their irritability after their late
quiescence, the blood is impelled forwards into the fine extremities of the
arteries, and the anastomozing capillaries, quicker than the extremities of
the veins can absorb and return it to the heart. Hence the pulse at the
wrist becomes full, as well as quick and strong, and the skin glows with
arterial blood, and the veins become empty and less visible.

In elderly people the force of the heart and arteries becomes less, while
the absorbent power of the veins remains the same; whence the capillary
vessels part with the blood, as soon as it is received, and the skin in
consequence becomes paler; it is also probable, that in more advanced life
some of the finer branches of the arteries coalesce, and become impervious,
and thus add to the opacity of the skin.

3. _Sudor calidus._ Warm sweat may be divided into four varieties,
according to their remote causes. _First_, the perspirable matter is
secreted in as great quantity during the hot fit of fever, as towards the
end of it, when the sweat is seen upon the skin. But during the hot fit the
cutaneous absorbents act also with increased energy, and the exhalation is
likewise increased by the greater heat of the skin; and hence it does not
appear in drops on the surface, but is in part reabsorbed, and in part
dissipated in the atmosphere. But as the mouths of the cutaneous absorbents
are exposed to the cool air or bedclothes; whilst those of the capillary
glands, which secrete the perspirable matter, are exposed to the warmth of
the circulating blood; the former, as soon as the fever-fit begins to
decline, lose their increased action first; and hence the absorption of the
sweat is diminished, whilst the increased secretion of it continues for
some hours afterwards, which occasions it to stand in drops upon the skin.

As the skin becomes cooler, the evaporation of the perspirable matter
becomes less, as well as the absorption of it. And hence the dissipation of
aqueous fluid from the body, and the consequent thirst, are perhaps greater
during the hot fit, than during the subsequent sweat. For the sweats do not
occur, according to Dr. Alexander's experiments, till the skin is cooled
from 112 to 108 degrees of heat; that is, till the paroxysm begins to
decline. From this it appears, that the sweats are not critical to the hot
fit, any more than the hot fit can be called critical to the cold one; but
simply, that they are the natural consequence of the decline of the hot
fit, commencing with the decreased action of the absorbent system, and the
decreased evaporation from the skin. And from hence it may be concluded,
that a fever-fit is not in general an effort of nature to restore health,
as Sydenham considered it, but a necessary consequence of the previous
torpor; and that the causes of fevers would be less detrimental, if the
fever itself could be prevented from existing; as appears in the cool
treatment of the small-pox.

It must be noted that the profuse sweats on the skin are more frequent at
the decline of fever-fits than the copious urine, or loose stools, which
are mentioned below; as the cutaneous absorbents, being exposed to the cool
air, lose their increased action sooner than the urinary or intestinal
absorbents; which open into the warm cavities of the bladder and
intestines; but which are nevertheless often affected by their sympathy
with the cutaneous absorbents. Hence few fevers terminate without a
moisture of the skin; whence arose the fatal practice of forcing sweats by
the external warmth of air or bedclothes in fevers; for external warmth
increases the action of the cutaneous capillaries more than that of the
other secerning vessels; because the latter are habituated to 98 degrees of
heat, the internal warmth of the body; whereas the cutaneous capillaries
being nearer the surface are habitually kept cooler by the contact of the
external air. Sweats thus produced by heat in confined rooms are still more
detrimental; as the air becomes then not only deprived of a part of its
oxygene by frequent respiration, but is loaded with animal effluvia as well
as with moisture, till it can receive no more; and in consequence, while
the cutaneous secretion stands upon the skin in drops for want of
exhalation, the lungs are exposed to an insalubrious atmosphere.

I do not deny, that sweating may be so managed as to be serviceable in
preventing the return of the cold paroxysm of fevers; like the warm bath,
or any other permanent stimulus, as wine, or opium, or the bark. For this
purpose it should be continued till past the time of the expected cold fit,
supported by moderate doses of wine-whey, with spirit of hartshorn, and
moderate degrees of warmth. Its salutary effect, when thus managed, was
probably one cause of its having been so much attended to; and the fetid
smell, which when profuse is liable to accompany it, gave occasion to the
belief, that the supposed material cause of the disease was thus eliminated
from the circulation.

When too great external heat is applied, the system is weakened by excess
of action, and the torpor which causes the cold paroxysm recurs sooner and
more violently. For though some stimuli, as of opium and alcohol, at the
same time that they exhaust the sensorial power by promoting increase of
fibrous action, may also increase the production or secretion of it in the
brain, yet experience teaches us, that the exhaustion far out-balances the
increased production, as is evinced by the general debility, which succeeds
intoxication.

In respect to the fetor attending copious continued sweats, it is owing to
the animalized part of this fluid being kept in that degree of warmth,
which most favours putrefaction, and not suffered to exhale into the
atmosphere. Broth, or other animal mucus, kept in similar circumstances,
would in the same time acquire a putrid smell; yet has this error
frequently produced miliary eruptions, and increased every kind of
inflammatory or sensitive fever.

The ease, which the patient experiences during sweating, if it be not
produced by much external heat, is similar to that of the warm bath; which
by its stimulus applied to the cutaneous vessels, which are generally
cooler than the internal parts of the system, excites them into greater
action; and pleasureable sensation is the consequence of these increased
actions of the vessels of the skin. From considering all these
circumstances, it appears that it is not the evacuation by sweats, but the
continued stimulus, which causes and supports those sweats, which is
serviceable in preventing the returns of fever-fits. And that sweats too
long continued, or induced by too great stimulus of warmth, clothes, or
medicines, greatly injure the patient by increasing inflammation, or by
exhausting the sensorial power. See Class I. 1. 2. 14.

_Secondly_, The sweats produced by exercise or labour are of the warm kind;
as they originate from the increased action of the capillaries of the skin,
owing to their being more powerfully stimulated by the greater velocity of
the blood, and by a greater quantity of it passing through them in a given
time. For the blood during violent exercise is carried forwards by the
action of the muscles faster in the arteries, than it can be taken up by
the veins; as appears by the redness of the skin. And from the consequent
sweats, it is evinced, that the secretory vessels of the skin during
exercise pour out the perspirable matter faster, than the mouths of the
absorbent vessels can drink it up. Which mouths are not exposed to the
increased muscular action, or to the stimulus of the increased velocity and
quantity of the blood, but to the cool air.

_Thirdly_, the increased secretion of perspirable matter occasioned by the
stimulus of external heat belongs likewise to this place; as it is caused
by the increased motions of the capillary vessels; which thus separate from
the blood more perspirable matter, than the mouths of their correspondent
absorbent vessels can take up; though these also are stimulated by external
heat into more energetic action. If the air be stationary, as in a small
room, or bed with closed curtains, the sweat stands in drops on the skin
for want of a quicker exhalation proportioned to the quicker secretion.

A _fourth_ variety of warm perspiration is that occasioned by stimulating
drugs, of which opium and alcohol are the most powerful; and next to these
the spices, volatile alkali, and neutral salts, especially sea salt; that
much of the aqueous part of the blood is dissipated by the use of these
drugs, is evinced by the great thirst, which occurs a few hours after the
use of them. See Art. III. 2. 12. and Art. III. 2. 1.

We may from hence understand, that the increase of this secretion of
perspirable matter by artificial means, must be followed by debility and
emaciation. When this is done by taking much salt, or salted meat, the
sea-scurvy is produced; which consists in the inirritability of the
bibulous terminations of the veins arising from the capillaries; see Class
I. 2. 1. 14. The scrophula, or inirritability of the lymphatic glands,
seems also to be occasionally induced by an excess in eating salt added to
food of bad nourishment. See Class I. 2. 3. 21. If an excess of
perspiration is induced by warm or stimulant clothing, as by wearing
flannel in contact with the skin in the summer months, a perpetual
febricula is excited, both by the preventing the access of cool air to the
skin, and by perpetually goading it by the numerous and hard points of the
ends of the wool; which when applied to the tender skins of young children,
frequently produce the red gum, as it is called; and in grown people,
either an erysipelas, or a miliary eruption, attended with fever. See Class
II. 1. 3. 12.

Shirts made of cotton or calico stimulate the skin too much by the points
of the fibres, though less than flannel; whence cotton handkerchiefs make
the nose sore by frequent use. The fibres of cotton are, I suppose, ten
times shorter than those of flax, and the number of points in consequence
twenty times the number; and though the manufacturers singe their calicoes
on a red-hot iron cylinder, yet I have more than once seen an erysipelas
induced or increased by the stimulus of calico, as well as of flannel.

The increase of perspiration by heat either of clothes, or of fire,
contributes much to emaciate the body; as is well known to jockeys, who,
when they are a stone or two too heavy for riding, find the quickest way to
lessen their weight is by sweating themselves between blankets in a warm
room; but this likewise is a practice by no means to be recommended, as it
weakens the system by the excess of so general a stimulus, brings on a
premature old age, and shortens the span of life; as may be further deduced
from the quick maturity, and shortness of the lives, of the inhabitants of
Hindostan, and other tropical climates.

M. Buffon made a curious experiment to shew this circumstance. He took a
numerous brood of the butterflies of silkworms, some hundreds of which left
their eggs on the same day and hour; these he divided into two parcels; and
placing one parcel in the south window, and the other in the north window
of his house, he observed, that those in the colder situation lived many
days longer than those in the warmer one. From these observations it
appears, that the wearing of flannel clothing next the skin, which is now
so much in fashion, however useful it may be in the winter to those, who
have cold extremities, bad digestions, or habitual coughs, must greatly
debilitate them, if worn in the warm months, producing fevers, eruptions,
and premature old age. See Sect. XXXVII. 5. Class I. 1. 2. 14. Art. III. 2.
1.

4. _Urina uberior colorata._ Copious coloured urine. Towards the end of
fever-fits a large quantity of high coloured urine is voided, the kidneys
continuing to act strongly, after the increased action of the absorbents of
the bladder is somewhat diminished. If the absorbents continue also to act
strongly, the urine is higher coloured, and so loaded as to deposit, when
cool, an earthy sediment, erroneously thought to be the material cause of
the disease; but is simply owing to the secretion of the kidnies being
great from their increased action; and the thinner parts of it being
absorbed by the increased action of the lymphatics, which are spread very
thick on the neck of the bladder; for the urine, as well as perhaps all the
other secreted fluids, is produced from the kidnies in a very dilute state;
as appears in those, who from the stimulus of a stone, or other cause,
evacuate their urine too frequently; which is then pale from its not having
remained in the bladder long enough for the more aqueous part to have been
reabsorbed. The general use of this urinary absorption to the animal
oeconomy is evinced from the urinary bladders of fish, which would
otherwise be unnecessary. High coloured urine in large quantity shews only,
that the secreting vessels of the kidnies, and the absorbents of the
bladder, have acted with greater energy. When there is much earthy
sediment, it shews, that the absorbents have acted proportionally stronger,
and have consequently left the urine in a less dilute state. In this urine
the transparent sediment or cloud is mucous; the opake sediment is probably
coagulable lymph from the blood changed by an animal or chemical process.
The floating scum is oil. The angular concretions to the sides of the pot,
formed as the urine cools, is microcosmic salt. Does the adhesive blue
matter on the sides of the glass, or the blue circle on it at the edge of
the upper surface of the urine, consist of Prussian blue?

5. _Diarrhoea calida._ Warm diarrhoea. This species may be divided into
three varieties deduced from their remote causes, under the names of
diarrhoea febrilis, diarrhoea crapulosa, and diarrhoea infantum. The
febrile diarrhoea appears at the end of fever-fits, and is erroneously
called critical, like the copious urine, and the sweats; whereas it arises
from the increased action of those secerning organs, which pour their
fluids into the intestinal canal (as the liver, pancreas, and mucous
glands), continuing longer than the increased action of the intestinal
absorbents. In this diarrhoea there is no appearance of curdled chyle in
the stools, as occurs in cholera. I. 3. 1. 5.

The _diarrhoea crapulosa_, or diarrhoea from indigestion, occurs when too
great a quantity of food or liquid has been taken; which not being
compleatly digested, stimulates the intestines like any other extraneous
acrid material; and thus produces an increase of the secretions into them
of mucus, pancreatic juice, and bile. When the contents of the bowels are
still more stimulant, as when drastic purges, or very putrescent diet, have
been taken, a cholera is induced. See Sect. XXIX. 4.

The _diarrhoea infantum_, or diarrhoea of infants, is generally owing to
too great acidity in their bowels. Milk is found curdled in the stomachs of
all animals, old as well as young, and even of carnivorous ones, as of
hawks. (Spallanzani.) And it is the gastric juice of the calf, which is
employed to curdle milk in the process of making cheese. Milk is the
natural food for children, and must curdle in their stomachs previous to
digestion; and as this curdling of the milk destroys a part of the acid
juices of the stomach, there is no reason for discontinuing the use of it,
though it is occasionally ejected in a curdled state. A child of a week
old, which had been taken from the breast of its dying mother, and had by
some uncommon error been suffered to take no food but water-gruel, became
sick and griped in twenty-four hours, and was convulsed on the second day,
and died on the third! When all young quadrupeds, as well as children, have
this natural food of milk prepared for them, the analogy is so strong in
favour of its salubrity, that a person should have powerful testimony
indeed of its disagreeing, before he advises the discontinuance of the use
of it to young children in health, and much more so in sickness. The
farmers lose many of their calves, which are brought up by gruel, or gruel
and old milk; and among the poor children of Derby, who are thus fed,
hundreds are starved into the scrophula, and either perish, or live in a
state of wretched debility.

When young children are brought up without a breast, they should for the
first two months have no food but new milk; since the addition of any kind
of bread or flour is liable to ferment, and produce too much acidity; as
appears by the consequent diarrhoea with green dejections and gripes; the
colour is owing to a mixture of acid with the natural quantity of bile, and
the pain to its stimulus. And they should never be fed as they lie upon
their backs, as in that posture they are necessitated to swallow all that
is put into their mouths; but when they are fed, as they are sitting up, or
raised up, when they have had enough, they can permit the rest to run out
of their mouths. This circumstance is of great importance to the health of
those children, who are reared by the spoon, since if too much food is
given them, indigestion, and gripes, and diarrhoea, is the consequence; and
if too little, they become emaciated; and of this exact quantity their own
palates judge the best.

M. M. In this last case of the diarrhoea of children, the food should be
new milk, which by curdling destroys part of the acid, which coagulates it.
Chalk about four grains every six hours, with one drop of spirit of
hartshorn, and half a drop of laudanum. But a blister about the size of a
shilling is of the greatest service by restoring the power of digestion.
See Article III. 2. 1. in the subsequent Materia Medica.

6. _Salivatio calida._ Warm salivation. Increased secretion of saliva. This
may be effected either by stimulating the mouth of the gland by mercury
taken internally; or by stimulating the excretory duct of the gland by
pyrethrum, or tobacco; or simply by the movement of the muscles, which lie
over the gland, as in masticating any tasteless substance, as a lock of
wool, or mastic.

In about the middle of nervous fevers a great spitting of saliva sometimes
occurs, which has been thought critical; but as it continues sometimes two
or even three weeks without the relief of the patient, it may be concluded
to arise from some accidental circumstance, perhaps not unsimilar to the
hysteric ptyalisms mentioned in Class I. 3. 2. 2. See Sect. XXIV.

M. M. Cool air, diluents, warm bath, evacuations.

7. _Catharrhus calidus._ Warm catarrh. Consists in an increased secretion
of mucus from the nostrils without inflammation. This disease, which is
called a cold in the head, is frequently produced by cold air acting for
some time on the membranes, which line the nostrils, as it passes to the
lungs in respiration. Whence a torpor of the action of the mucous glands is
first introduced, as in I. 2. 3. 3. and an orgasm or increased action
succeeds in consequence. Afterwards this orgasm and torpor are liable to
alternate with each other for some time like the cold and hot fits of ague,
attended with deficient or exuberant secretion of mucus in the nostrils.

At other times it arises from reverse sympathy with some extensive parts of
the skin, which have been exposed too long to cold, as of the head, or
feet. In consequence of the torpor of these cutaneous capillaries those of
the mucous membrane of the nostrils act with greater energy by reverse
sympathy; and thence secrete more mucus from the blood. At the same time
the absorbents, acting also with greater energy by their reverse sympathy
with those of some distant part of the skin, absorb the thinner parts of
the mucus more hastily; whence the mucus is both thicker and in greater
quantity. Other curious circumstances attend this disease; the membrane
becomes at times so thickened by its increased action in secreting the
mucus, that the patient cannot breathe through his nostrils. In this
situation if he warms his whole skin suddenly by fire or bed-clothes, or by
drinking warm tea, the increased action of the membrane ceases by its
reverse sympathy with the skin; or by the retraction of the sensorial power
to other parts of the system; and the patient can breathe again through the
nostrils. The same sometimes occurs for a time on going into the cold air
by the deduction of heat from the mucous membrane, and its consequent
inactivity or torpor. Similar to this when the face and breast have been
very hot and red, previous to the eruption of the small-pox by inoculation,
and that even when exposed to cool air, I have observed the feet have been
cold; till on covering them with warm flannel, as the feet have become
warm, the face has cooled. See Sect. XXXV. 1. 3. Class II. 1. 3. 5. IV. 2.
2. 10. IV. 1. 1. 5.

M. M. Evacuations, abstinence, oil externally on the nose, warm diluent
fluids, warm shoes, warm night-cap.

8. _Expectoratio calida._ Warm expectoration consists of the increased
secretion of mucus from the membrane, which lines the bronchiae, or
air-cells of the lungs, without inflammation. This increased mucus is
ejected by the action of coughing, and is called a cold, and resembles the
catarrh of the preceding article; with which it is frequently combined.

M. M. Inhale the steam of warm water, evacuations, warm bath, afterwards
opium, sorbentia.

9. _Exsudatio pone aures._ A discharge behind the ears. This chiefly
affects children, and is a morbid secretion; as appears from its fetor; for
if it was owing to defect of absorption, it would be saline, and not fetid;
if a morbid action has continued a considerable time, it should not be
stopped too suddenly; since in that case some other morbid action is liable
to succeed in its stead. Thus children are believed to have had cholics, or
even convulsions, consequent to the too sudden healing of these morbid
effusions behind their ears. The rationale of this is to be explained from
a medical fact, which I have frequently observed; and that is, that a
blister on the back greatly strengthens the power of digestion, and removes
the heart-burn in adults, and green stools in children. The stimulus of the
blister produces sensation in the vessels of the skin; with this additional
sensorial power these vessels act more strongly; and with these the vessels
of the internal membranes of the stomach and bowels act with greater energy
from their direct sympathy with them. Now the acrid discharge behind the
ears of children produces sensation on that part of the skin, and so far
acts as a small blister. When this is suddenly stopped, a debility of the
digestive power of the stomach succeeds from the want of this accustomed
stimulus, with flatulency, green stools, gripes, and sometimes consequent
convulsions. See Class II. 1. 5. 6. and II. 1. 4. 6.

M. M. If the matter be absorbed, and produces swelling of the lymphatics of
the neck, it should be cured as soon as possible by dusting the part with
white lead, cerussa, in very fine powder; and to prevent any ill
consequence an issue should be kept for about a month in the arm; or a
purgative medicine should be taken, every other day for three or four
times, which should consist of a grain of calomel, and three or four grains
of rhubarb, and as much chalk. If there be no appearance of absorption, it
is better only to keep the parts clean by washing them with warm water
morning and evening; or putting fuller's earth on them; especially till the
time of toothing is past. The tinea, or scald head, and a leprous eruption,
which often appears behind the ears, are different diseases.

10. _Gonorrhea calida._ Warm gleet. Increased discharge of mucus from the
urethra or prostrate gland without venereal desire, or venereal infection.
See Class I. 2. 3. 8.

M. M. Cantharides, balsams, rhubarb, blister in perinaeum, cold bath,
injections of metallic salts, flannel shirt, change of the form of the
accustomed chair or saddle of the patient.

11. _Fluor albus calidus._ Warm fluor albus. Increased secretion of mucus
in the vagina or uterus without venereal desire or venereal infection. It
is distinguished from the fluor albus frigidus by the increased sense of
warmth in the part, and by the greater opacity or spissitude of the
material discharged; as the thinner parts are reabsorbed by the increased
action of the absorbents, along with the saline part, whence no smarting or
excoriation attends it.

M. M. Mucilage, as isinglass, hartshorn jelly, gum arabic. Ten grains of
rhubarb every night. Callico or flannel shift, opium, balsams. See Class I.
2. 3. 7.

12. _Haemorrhois alba._ White piles. An increased discharge of mucus from
the rectum frequently mistaken for matter; is said to continue a few weeks,
and recur like the bleeding piles; and to obey lunar influence. See Class
I. 2. 1. 6.

M. M. Abstinence from vinous spirit. Balsam of copaiva. Spice swallowed in
large fragments, as ten or fifteen black pepper-corns cut in half, and
taken after dinner and supper. Ward's paste, consisting of black pepper and
the powdered root of Helenium Enula.

13. _Serum e vesicatorio._ Discharge from a blister. The excretory ducts of
glands terminate in membranes, and are endued with great irritability, and
many of them with sensibility; the latter perhaps in consequence of their
facility of being excitable into great action; instances of this are the
terminations of the gall-duct in the duodenum, and of the salivary and
lachrymal glands in the mouth and eye; which produce a greater secretion of
their adapted fluids, when the ends of their excretory ducts are
stimulated.

The external skin consists of the excretory ducts of the capillaries, with
the mouths of the absorbents; when these are stimulated by the application
of cantharides, or by a slice of the fresh root of bryonia alba bound on
it, the capillary glands pour an increased quantity of fluid upon the skin
by their increased action; and the absorbent vessels imbibe a greater
quantity of the more fluid and saline part of it; whence a thick mucous or
serous fluid is deposited between the skin and cuticle.

14. _Perspiratio foetida._ Fetid perspiration. The uses of the perspirable
matter are to keep the skin soft and pliant, for the purposes of its easier
flexibility during the activity of our limbs in locomotion, and for the
preservation of the accuracy of the sense of touch, which is diffused under
the whole surface of it to guard us against the injuries of external
bodies; in the same manner as the secretion of tears is designed to
preserve the cornea of the eye moist, and in consequence transparent; yet
has this cutaneous mucus been believed by many to be an excrement; and I
know not how many fanciful theories have been built on its supposed
obstruction. Such as the origin of catarrhs, coughs, inflammations,
erysypelas, and herpes.

To all these it may be sufficient to answer, that the antient Grecians
oiled themselves all over; that some nations have painted themselves all
over, as the Picts of this island; that the Hottentots smear themselves all
over with grease. And lastly, that many of our own heads at this day are
covered with the flour of wheat and the fat of hogs, according to the
tyranny of a filthy and wasteful fashion, and all this without
inconvenience. To this must be added the strict analogy between the use of
the perspirable matter and the mucous fluids, which are poured for similar
purposes upon all the internal membranes of the body; and besides its being
in its natural state inodorous; which is not so with the other excretions
of feces, or of urine.

In some constitutions the perspirable matter of the lungs acquires a
disagreeable odour; in others the axilla, and in others the feet, emit
disgustful effluvia; like the secretions of those glands, which have been
called odoriferae; as those, which contain the castor in the beaver, and
those within the rectum of dogs, the mucus of which has been supposed to
guard them against the great costiveness, which they are liable to in hot
summers; and which has been thought to occasion canine madness, but which,
like their white excrement, is more probably owing to the deficient
secretion of bile. Whether these odoriferous particles attend the
perspirable matter in consequence of the increased action of the capillary
glands, and can properly be called excrementitous; that is, whether any
thing is eliminated, which could be hurtful if retained; or whether they
may only contain some of the essential oil of the animal; like the smell,
which adheres to one's hand on stroking the hides of some dogs; or like the
effluvia, which is left upon the ground, from the feet of men and other
creatures; and is perceptible by the nicer organs of the dogs, which hunt
them, may admit of doubt.

M. M. Wash the parts twice a day with soap and water; with lime water;
cover the feet with oiled silk socks, which must be washed night and
morning. Cover them with charcoal recently made red hot, and beaten into
fine powder and sifted, as soon as cold, and kept well corked in a bottle,
to be warned off and renewed twice a day. Internally rhubarb grains vi. or
viii. every night, so as to procure a stool or two extraordinary every day,
and thus by increasing one evacuation to decrease another. Cool dress,
diluting liquids?

15. _Crines novi._ New hairs. The black points on the faces of some people
consist of mucus, which is become viscid, and which adheres in the
excretory ducts of the glands of the skin; as described in Class I. 2. 2.
9. and which may be pressed out by the fingers, and resembles little worms.
Similar to this would seem the fabrication of silk, and of cobweb by the
silk worm and spider; which is a secreted matter pressed through holes,
which are the excretory ducts of glands. And it is probable, that the
production of hair on many parts of the body, and at different periods of
life, may be effected by a similar process; and more especially as every
hair may be considered as a slender flexible horn, and is an appendage of
the skin. See Sect. XXXIX. 3. 2. Now as there is a sensitive sympathy
between the glands, which secrete the semen, and the throat, as appears in
the mumps; see Hydrophobia, Class IV. 1. 2. 7. and Parotitis, Class IV. 1.
2. 19. The growth of the beard at puberty seems to be caused by the greater
action of the cutaneous glands about the chin and pubes in consequence of
their sympathy with those of the testes. But this does not occur to the
female sex at their time of puberty, because the sensitive sympathy in them
seems to exist between the submaxillary glands, and the pectoral ones;
which secrete the milk, and afford pleasure both by that secretion, and by
the erection of the mamulae, or nipples; and by delivering the milk into
the mouth of the child; this sensitive sympathy of the pectoral and
submaxillary glands in women is also observable in the Parotitis, or mumps,
as above referred to.

When hairs grow on the face or arms so as to be disagreeable, they may be
thus readily removed without pain or any ill consequence. Warm the ends of
a pair of nippers or forceps, and stick on them a little rosin, or burgundy
pitch; by these means each single hair may be taken fast hold of; and if it
be then plucked off slowly, it gives pain; but if plucked off suddenly, it
gives no pain at all; because the vis inertiae of the part of the skin, to
which it adheres, is not overcome; and it is not in consequence separated
from the cellular membrane under it. Some of the hairs may return, which
are thus plucked off, or others may be induced to grow near them; but in a
little time they may be thus safely destroyed; which is much to be
preferred to the methods said to be used in Turkey to eradicate hair; such
as a mixture of orpiment and quick lime; or of liver of sulphur in
solution; which injure the skin, if they are not very nicely managed; and
the hair is liable to grow again as after shaving; or to become white, if
the roots of it have been much inflamed by the causticity of the
application. See Class I. 2. 2. 11. on grey hairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Irritation._

GENUS III.

_With increased Actions of the Absorbent System._

These are not attended with so great increase of heat as in the former
genus, because the fluids probably undergo less chemical change in the
glands of the absorbent system; nor are the glands of the absorbent vessels
so numerous or so extensive as those of the secerning ones. Yet that some
heat is produced by the increased action of the absorbents appears from the
greater general warmth of the skin and extremities of feeble patients after
the exhibition of the peruvian bark, and other medicines of the article
Sorbentia.

SPECIES.

1. _Lingua arida._ Dry tongue occurs in those fevers, where the expired air
is warmer than natural; and happens to all those, who sleep with their
mouths open; the currents of air in respiration increasing the evaporation.
There is also a dryness in the mouth from the increased action of the
absorbent vessels, when a sloe or a crab-apple are masticated; and after
the perforation has been much increased by eating salt or spice, or after
other copious secretions; as after drunkenness, cathartics, or fever fits,
the mucus of the mouth becomes viscid, and in small quantity, from the
increased absorption, adhering to the tongue like a white slough. In the
diabaetes, where the thirst is very great, this slough adheres more
pertinaciously, and becomes black or brown, being coloured after a few days
by our aliment or drink. The inspissated mucus on the tongue of those, who
sleep with their mouths open, is sometimes reddened as if mixed with blood,
and sometimes a little blood follows the expuition of it from the fauces
owing to its great adhesion. When this mucus adheres long to the papillae
of the tongue, the saliva, which it contains in its interstices, like a
sponge, is liable to become putrid, and to acquire a bitter taste, like
other putrid animal substances; which is generally mistaken for an
indication of the presence of bile.

M. M. Warm subacid liquids. See Class I. 2. 5. 8.

2. _Fauces aridae._ Dry throat. The expuition of a frothy mucus with great
and perpetual hawking occurs in hydrophobia, and is very distressing to the
patient; which may be owing to the increased irritability or sensibility of
the upper part of the oesophagus, which will not permit any fluid to rest
on it.

It affects some people after intoxication, when the lungs remain slightly
inflamed, and by the greater heat of the air in expiration the mucus
becomes too hastily evaporated, and is expectorated with difficulty in the
state of white froth.

I knew a person, who for twenty years always waked with his tongue and
throat quite dry; so that he was necessitated to take a spoonful of water,
as soon as he awoke; otherwise a little blood always followed the forcible
expuition of the indurated mucus from his fauces. See Class II. 1. 3. 17.

M. M. Steel-springs fixed to the night-cap so as to suspend the lower jaw
and keep it closed; or springs of elastic gum. Or a pot of water suspended
over the bed, with a piece of list, or woollen cloth, depending from it,
and held in the mouth; which will act like a syphon, and slowly supply
moisture, or barley water should be frequently syringed into the mouth of
the patient.

3. _Nares aridi._ Dry nostrils with the mucus hardening upon their internal
surface, so as to cover them with a kind of skin or scale, owing to the
increased action of the absorbents of this membrane; or to the too great
dryness of the air, which passes into the lungs; or too great heat of it in
its expiration.

When air is so dry as to lose its transparency; as when a tremulous motion
of it can be seen over corn fields in a hot summer's day; or when a dry
mist, or want of transparency of the air, is visible in very hot weather;
the sense of smell is at the same time imperfect from the dryness of the
membrane, beneath which it is spread.

4. _Expectoratio solida._ Solid expectoration. The mucus of the lungs
becomes hardened by the increased absorption, so that it adheres and forms
a kind of lining in the air-cells, and is sometimes spit up in the form of
branching vessels, which are called polypi of the lungs. See Transact. of
the College, London. There is a rattling or weezing of the breath, but it
is not at first attended with inflammation.

The Cynanche trachealis, or Croup, of Dr. Cullen, or Angina polyposa of
Michaelis, if they differ from the peripneumony of infants, seem to belong
to this genus. When the difficulty of respiration is great, venesection is
immediately necessary, and then an emetic, and a blister. And the child
should be kept nearly upright in bed as much as may be. See Tonsillitis,
Class II. 1. 3. 3.

M. M. Diluents, emetics, essence of antimony, foetid gums, onions, warm
bath for half an hour every day for a month. Inhaling the steam of water,
with or without volatile alcali. Soap.

5. _Constipatio alvi._ Costiveness from increased action of the intestinal
absorbents. The feces are hardened in lumps called scybala; which are
sometimes obliged to be extracted from the rectum with a kind of marrow
spoon. This is said to have happened from the patient having taken much
rust of iron. The mucus is also hardened so as to line the intestines, and
to come away in skins, rolled up as they pass along, so as to resemble
worms, for which they are frequently mistaken; and sometimes it is
evacuated in still larger pieces, so as to counterfeit the form of the
intestines, and has been mistaken for a portion of them. Balls of this
kind, nearly as heavy as marble, and considerably hard, from two inches to
five in diameter, are frequently found in the bowels of horses. Similar
balls found in goats have been called Bezoar.

M. M. Cathartics, Diluents, fruit, oil, soap, sulphur, warm bath.
Sprinkling with cold water, cool clothing. See Class I. 2. 4. 18.

6. _Cutis arida._ Dry skin. This dry skin is not attended with coldness as
in the beginning of fever-fits. Where this cutaneous absorption is great,
and the secreted material upon it viscid, as on the hairy scalp, the skin
becomes covered with hardened mucus; which adheres so as not to be easily
removed, as the scurf on the head; but is not attended with inflammation
like the Tinea, or Lepra. The moisture, which appears on the skin beneath
resinous or oily plasters, or which is seen to adhere to such plasters, is
owing to their preventing the exhalation of the perspirable matter, and not
to their increasing the production of it, as some have idly imagined.

M. M. Warm bathing, oil externally, oil-skin gloves, resinous plasters.
Wax.

7. _Urina parca colorata._ Diminished urine, which is high coloured, and
deposits an earthy sediment, when cold, is owing to the great action of the
urinary absorbents. See Class I. 1. 2. 4. In some dropsies the cutaneous
absorbents are paralytic, as well as those opening into the cellular
membrane; and hence, no moisture being acquired from the atmosphere, or
from the cellular membrane, great thirst is excited; and great absorption
from all parts, where the absorbents are still capable of action. Hence the
urine is in very small quantity, and of deep colour, with copious sediment;
and the kidneys are erroneously blamed for not doing their office;
stimulant diuretic medicines are given in vain; and very frequently the
unhappy patient is restrained from quenching his thirst, and dies a martyr
to false theory.

M. M. Diluent liquids, and warm bathing, are the natural cure of this
symptom; but it generally attends those dropsies, which are seldom curable;
as they are owing to a paralysis both of the cutaneous and cellular
lymphatics.

8. _Calculus felleus._ Gall-stone. From the too hasty absorption of the
thinner parts of the bile, the remainder is left too viscid, and
crystallizes into lumps; which, if too large to pass, obstruct the ductus
choledochus, producing pain at the pit of the stomach, and jaundice. When
the indurated bile is not harder than a boiled pea, it may pass through the
bile-duct with difficulty by changing its form; and thus gives those pains,
which have been called spasms of the stomach; and yet these viscid lumps of
bile may afterwards dissolve, and not be visible among the feces.

In two instances I have seen from thirty to fifty gall-stones voided after
taking an oil vomit as below. They were about the size of peas, and
distinguishable when dry by their being inflammable like bad wax, when put
into the flame of a candle. For other causes of jaundice, see Class I. 2.
4. 19.

M. M. Diluents, daily warm bathing. Ether mixed with yolk of egg and water.
Unboiled acrid vegetables, as lettice, cabbage, mustard, and cresses. When
in violent pain, four ounces of oil of olives, or of almonds, should be
swallowed; and as much more in a quarter of an hour, whether it stays or
not. The patient should lie on the circumference of a large barrel, first
on one side, and then on the other. Electric shocks through the gall-duct.
Factitious Selter's water made by dissolving one dram of Sal Soda in a pint
of water; to half a pint of which made luke-warm add ten drops of marine
acid; to be drank as soon as mixed, twice a day for some months. Opium must
be used to quiet the pain, if the oil does not succeed, as two grains, and
another grain in half an hour if necessary. See Class IV. 2. 2. 4.

9. _Calculus renis._ Stone of the kidney. The pain in the loins and along
the course of the ureter from a stone is attended with retraction of the
testicle in men, and numbness on the inside of the thigh in women. It is
distinguished from the lumbago or sciatica, as these latter are seldom
attended with vomiting, and have pain on the outside of the thigh,
sometimes quite down to the ankle or heel. See Herpes and Nephritis.

Where the absorption of the thinner parts of the secretion takes place too
hastily in the kidnies, the hardened mucus, and consequent calculous
concretions, sometimes totally stop up the tubuli uriniferi; and no urine
is secreted. Of this many die, who have drank much vinous spirit, and some
of them recover by voiding a quantity of white mucus, like chalk and water;
and others by voiding a great quantity of sand, or small calculi. This
hardened mucus frequently becomes the nucleus of a stone in the bladder.
The salts of the urine, called microcosmic salt, are often mistaken for
gravel, but are distinguishable both by their angles of crystallization,
their adhesion to the sides or bottom of the pot, and by their not being
formed till the urine cools. Whereas the particles of gravel are generally
without angles, and always drop to the bottom of the vessel, immediately as
the water is voided.

Though the proximate cause of the formation of the calculous concretions of
the kidneys, and of chalk-stones in the gout, and of the insoluble
concretions of coagulable lymph, which are found on membranes, which have
been inflamed in peripneumony, or rheumatism, consists in the too great
action of the absorbent vessels of those parts; yet the remote cause in
these cases is probably owing to the inflammation of the membranes; which
at that time are believed to secrete a material more liable to coagulate or
concrete, than they would otherwise produce by increased action alone
without the production of new vessels, which constitutes inflammation. As
defined in Class II. 1. 2.

The fluids secreted from the mucous membranes of animals are of various
kinds and consistencies. Hair, silk, scales, horns, fingernails, are owing
to natural processes. Gall-stones, stones found in the intestines of
horses, scurf of the skin in leprosy, stones of the kidnies and bladder,
the callus from the inflamed periosteum, which unites broken bones, the
calcareous cement, which repairs the injured shells of snails, the
calcareous crust on the eggs of birds, the annually renewed shells of
crabs, are all instances of productions from mucous membranes, afterwards
indurated by absorption of their thinner parts.

All these concretions contain phosphoric acid, mucus, and calcareous earth
in different proportions; and are probably so far analogous in respect to
their component parts as well as their mode of formation. Some calcareous
earth has been discovered after putrefaction in the coagulable lymph of
animals. Fordyce's Elements of Practice. A little calcareous earth was
detected by Scheel or Bergman in the calculus of the bladder with much
phosphoric acid, and a great quantity of phosphoric acid is shewn to exist
in oyster-shells by their becoming luminous on exposing them a while to the
sun's light after calcination; as in the experiments of Wilson. Botanic
Garden, P. 1. Canto 1. l. 182, note. The exchange of which phosphoric acid
for carbonic acid, or fixed air, converts shells into limestone, producing
mountains of marble, or calcareous strata.

Now as the hard lumps of calcareous matter, termed crabs' eyes, which are
found in the stomachs of those animals previous to the annual renewal of
their shells, are redissolved, probably by their gastric acid, and again
deposited for that purpose; may it not be concluded, that the stone of the
bladder might be dissolved by the gastric juice of fish of prey, as of
crabs, or pike; or of voracious young birds, as young rooks or hawks, or
even of calves? Could not these experiments be tried by collecting the
gastric juice by putting bits of sponge down the throats of young crows,
and retracting them by a string in the manner of Spallanzani? or putting
pieces of calculus down the throat of a living crow, or pike, and observing
if they become digested? and lastly could not gastric juice, if it should
appear to be a solvent, be injected and born in the bladder without injury
by means of catheters of elastic resin, or caoutchouc?

M. M. Diluents. Cool dress. Frequent change of posture. Frequent horizontal
rest in the day. Bathe the loins every morning with a sponge and cold
water. Aerated alcaline water internally. Abstinence from all fermented or
spirituous liquors. Whatever increases perspiration injures these patients,
as it dissipates the aqueous particles, which ought to dilute the urine.
When the constitution begins to produce gravel, it may I believe be
certainly prevented by a total abstinence from fermented or spirituous
liquors; by drinking much aqueous fluids; as toast and water, tea, milk and
water, lemonade; and lastly by thin clothing, and sleeping on a hardish
bed, that the patient may not lie too long on one side. See Class IV. 2. 2.
2. There is reason to believe, that the daily use of opium contributes to
produce gravel in the kidnies by increasing absorption, when they are
inflamed; in the same manner as is done by fermented or spirituous liquor.
See Class I. 3. 2. 11.

When the kidnies are so obstructed with gravel, that no urine passes into
the bladder; which is known by the external appearance of the lower part of
the abdomen, which, when the bladder is full, seems as if contracted by a
cord between the navel and the bladder; and by the tension on the region of
the bladder distinguishable by the touch; or by the introduction of the
catheter; the following methods of cure are frequently successful.
Venesection to six or eight ounces, ten grains of calomel, and an infusion
of senna with salts and oil, every three hours, till stools are procured.
Then an emetic. After the patient has been thus evacuated, a blister on the
loins should be used; and from ten to twenty electric shocks should be
passed through the kidnies, as large as can be easily borne, once or twice
a day. Along with this method the warm bath should be used for an hour once
or twice a day. After repeated evacuations a clyster, consisting of two
drams of turpentine dissolved by yolk of egg, and sixty drops of tincture
of opium, should be used at night, and repeated, with cathartic medicines
interposed, every night, or alternate nights. Aerated solution of alcali
should be taken internally, and balsam of copaiva, three or four times a
day. Some of these patients recover after having made no water for nine or
ten days.

If a stone sticks in the ureter with incessant vomiting, ten grains of
calomel must be given in small pills as above; and some hours afterwards
infusion of senna and salts and oil, if it can be made to stay on the
stomach. And after the purge has operated four or five times, an opiate is
to be given, if the pain continues, consisting of two grains of opium. If
this does not succeed, ten or twenty electric shocks through the kidney
should be tried, and the purgative repeated, and afterwards the opiate. The
patient should be frequently put into the warm bath for an hour at a time.
Eighty or an hundred drops of laudanum given in a glyster, with two drams
of turpentine, is to be preferred to the two grains given by the stomach as
above, when the pain and vomiting are very urgent.

10. _Calculus vesicae._ Stone of the bladder. The nucleus, or kernel, of
these concretions is always formed in the kidney, as above described; and
passing down the ureter into the bladder, is there perpetually increased by
the mucus and salts secreted from the arterial system, or by the mucus of
the bladder, disposed in concentric strata. The stones found in the bowels
of horses are also formed on a nucleus, and consist of concentric spheres;
as appears in sawing them through the middle. But as these are formed by
the indurated mucus of the intestines alone without the urinary salts, it
is probable a difference would be found on their analysis.

As the stones of the bladder are of various degrees of hardness, and
probably differ from each other in the proportions at least of their
component parts; when a patient, who labours under this afflicting disease,
voids any small bits of gravel; these should be kept in warm solutions of
caustic alcali, or of mild alcali well aerated; and if they dissolve in
these solutions, it would afford greater hopes, that that which remains in
the bladder, might be affected by these medicines taken by the stomach, or
injected into the bladder.

To prevent the increase of a stone in the bladder much diluent drink should
be taken; as half a pint of water warmed to about eighty degrees, three or
four times a day: which will not only prevent the growth of it, by
preventing any microcosmic salts from being precipitated from the urine,
and by keeping the mucus suspended in it; but will also diminish the stone
already formed, by softening, and washing away its surface. To this must be
added cool dress, and cool bed-clothes, as directed above in the calculus
renis.

When the stone is pushed against or into the neck of the bladder, great
pain is produced; this may sometimes be relieved by the introduction of a
bougie to push the stone back into the fundus of the bladder. Sometimes by
change of posture, or by an opiate either taken into the stomach, or by a
clyster.

A dram of sal soda, or of salt of tartar, dissolved in a pint of water, and
well saturated with carbonic acid (fixed air), by means of Dr. Nooth's
glass-apparatus, and drank every day, or twice a day, is the most
efficacious internal medicine yet discovered, which can be easily taken
without any general injury to the constitution. An aerated alcaline water
of this kind is sold under the name of factitious Seltzer water, by J.
Schweppe, at N^o 8, King's-street, Holborn, London; which I am told is
better prepared than can be easily done in the usual glass-vessels,
probably by employing a greater pressure in wooden ones.

Lythotomy is the last recourse. Will the gastric juice of animals dissolve
