
"No!" said Graham starting.

"Near a dozand," said the man, "a dozand men!" and hurried on.

A number of men and a girl passed in the darkness, gesticulating and
shouting: "Capitulated! Given up!" "A dozand of men." "Two dozand of
men." "Ostrog, Hurrah! Ostrog, Hurrah!" These cries receded, became
indistinct.

Other shouting men followed. For a time his attention was absorbed
in the fragments of speech he heard. He had a doubt whether all were
speaking English. Scraps floated to him, scraps like Pigeon English,
like 'nigger' dialect, blurred and mangled distortions. He dared
accost no one with questions. The impression the people gave him jarred
altogether with his preconceptions of the struggle and confirmed the
old man's faith in Ostrog. It was only slowly he could bring himself
to believe that all these people were rejoicing at the defeat of the
Council, that the Council which had pursued him with such power and
vigour was after all the weaker of the two sides in conflict. And if
that was so, how did it affect him? Several times he hesitated on the
verge of fundamental questions. Once he turned and walked for a long
way after a little man of rotund inviting outline, but he was unable to
master confidence to address him.

It was only slowly that it came to him that he might ask for the
"wind-vane offices," whatever the "wind-vane offices" might be.
His first enquiry simply resulted in a direction to go on towards
Westminster. His second led to the discovery of a short cut in which
he was speedily lost. He was told to leave the ways to which he had
hitherto confined himself knowing no other means of transit--and
to plunge down one of the middle staircases into the blackness of a
crossway. Thereupon came some trivial adventures; chief of these an
ambiguous encounter with a gruff-voiced invisible creature speaking in
a strange dialect that seemed at first a strange tongue, a thick flow of
speech with the drifting corpses of English words therein, the dialect
of the latter-day vile. Then another voice drew near, a girl's voice
singing, "tralala tralala." She spoke to Graham, her English touched
with something of the same quality. She professed to have lost her
sister, she blundered needlessly into him he thought, caught hold of him
and laughed. But a word of vague remonstrance sent her into the unseen
again.

The sounds about him increased. Stumbling people passed him, speaking
excitedly. "They have surrendered!" "The Council! Surely not the
Council!" "They are saying so in the Ways." The passage seemed wider.
Suddenly the wall fell away. He was in a great space and people were
stirring remotely. He inquired his way of an indistinct figure. "Strike
straight across," said a woman's voice. He left his guiding wall, and in
a moment had stumbled against a little table on which were utensils of
glass. Graham's eyes, now attuned to darkness, made out a long vista
with pallid tables on either side. He went down this. At one or two of
the tables he heard a clang of glass and a sound of eating. There were
people then cool enough to dine, or daring enough to steal a meal
in spite of social convulsion and darkness. Far off and high up he
presently saw a pallid light of a semi-circular shape. As he approached
this, a black edge came up and hid it. He stumbled at steps and found
himself in a gallery. He heard a sobbing, and found two scared little
girls crouched by a railing. These children became silent at the near
sound of feet. He tried to console them, but they were very still until
he left them. Then as he receded he could hear them sobbing again.

Presently he found himself at the foot of a staircase and near a wide
opening. He saw a dim twilight above this and ascended out of the
blackness into a street of moving Ways again. Along this a disorderly
swarm of people marched shouting. They were singing snatches of the song
of the revolt, most of them out of tune. Here and there torches flared
creating brief hysterical shadows. He asked his way and was twice
puzzled by that same thick dialect. His third attempt won an answer
he could understand. He was two miles from the wind-vane offices in
Westminster, but the way was easy to follow.

When at last he did approach the district of the wind-vane offices it
seemed to him, from the cheering processions that came marching along
the Ways, from the tumult of rejoicing, and finally from the restoration
of the lighting of the city, that the overthrow of the Council must
already be accomplished. And still no news of his absence came to his
ears.

The re-illumination of the city came with startling abruptness. Suddenly
he stood blinking, all about him men halted dazzled, and the world was
incandescent. The light found him already upon the outskirts of the
excited crowds that choked the Ways near the wind-vane offices, and the
sense of visibility and exposure that came with it turned his colourless
intention of joining Ostrog to a keen anxiety.

For a time he was jostled, obstructed, and endangered by men hoarse and
weary with cheering his name, some of them bandaged and bloody in his
cause. The frontage of the wind-vane offices was illuminated by some
moving picture, but what it was he could not see, because in spite
of his strenuous attempts the density of the crowd prevented his
approaching it. From the fragments of speech he caught, he judged it
conveyed news of the fighting about the Council House. Ignorance and
indecision made him slow and ineffective in his movements. For a time he
could not conceive how he was to get within the unbroken facade of this
place. He made his way slowly into the midst of this mass of people,
until he realised that the descending staircase of the central Way led
to the interior of the buildings. This gave him a goal, but the crowding
in the central path was so dense that it was long before he could reach
it. And even then he encountered intricate obstruction, and had an hour
of vivid argument first in this guard room and then in that before he
could get a note taken to the one man of all men who was most eager
to see him. His story was laughed to scorn at one place, and wiser for
that, when at last he reached a second stairway he professed simply to
have news of extraordinary importance for Ostrog. What it was he would
not say. They sent his note reluctantly. For a long time he waited in
a little room at the foot of the lift shaft, and thither at last came
Lincoln, eager, apologetic, astonished. He stopped in the doorway
scrutinising Graham, then rushed forward effusively.

"Yes," he cried. "It is you. And you are not dead!"

Graham made a brief explanation.

"My brother is waiting," explained Lincoln. "He is alone in the
wind-vane offices. We feared you had been killed in the theatre. He
doubted--and things are very urgent still in spite of what we are
telling them _there_--or he would have come to you."

They ascended a lift, passed along a narrow passage, crossed a
great hall, empty save for two hurrying messengers, and entered a
comparatively little room, whose only furniture was a long settee and a
large oval disc of cloudy, shifting grey, hung by cables from the wall.
There Lincoln left Graham for a space, and he remained alone without
understanding the shifting smoky shapes that drove slowly across this
disc.

His attention was arrested by a sound that began abruptly. It was
cheering, the frantic cheering of a vast but very remote crowd, a
roaring exultation. This ended as sharply as it had begun, like a sound
heard between the opening and shutting of a door. In the outer room was
a noise of hurrying steps and a melodious clinking as if a loose chain
was running over the teeth of a wheel.

Then he heard the voice of a woman, the rustle of unseen garments. "It
is Ostrog!" he heard her say. A little bell rang fitfully, and then
everything was still again.

Presently came voices, footsteps and movement without. The footsteps
of some one person detached itself from the other sounds and drew
near, firm, evenly measured steps. The curtain lifted slowly. A tall,
white-haired man, clad in garments of cream coloured silk, appeared,
regarding Graham from under his raised arm.

For a moment the white form remained holding the curtain, then dropped
it and stood before it. Graham's first impression was of a very broad
forehead, very pale blue eyes deep sunken under white brows, an aquiline
nose, and a heavily-lined resolute mouth. The folds of flesh over the
eyes, the drooping of the corners of the mouth contradicted the
upright bearing, and said the man was old. Graham rose to his feet
instinctively, and for a moment the two men stood in silence, regarding
each other.

"You are Ostrog?" said Graham.

"I am Ostrog."

"The Boss?"

"So I am called."

Graham felt the inconvenience of the silence. "I have to thank you
chiefly, I understand, for my safety," he said presently.

"We were afraid you were killed," said Ostrog.

"Or sent to sleep again--for ever. We have been doing everything to keep
our secret--the secret of your disappearance. Where have you been? How
did you get here?"

Graham told him briefly.

Ostrog listened in silence.

He smiled faintly. "Do you know what I was doing when they came to tell
me you had come?"

"How can I guess?"

"Preparing your double."

"My double?"

"A man as like you as we could find. We were going to hypnotise him, to
save him the difficulty of acting. It was imperative. The whole of this
revolt depends on the idea that you are awake, alive, and with us. Even
now a great multitude of people has gathered in the theatre clamouring
to see you. They do not trust... You know, of course--something of your
position?"

"Very little," said Graham.

"It is like this." Ostrog walked a pace or two into the room and turned.
"You are absolute owner," he said, "of more than half the world. As a
result of that you are practically King. Your powers are limited in
many intricate ways, but you are the figure head, the popular symbol of
government. This White Council, the Council of Trustees as it is called."

"I have heard the vague outline of these things."

"I wondered."

"I came upon a garrulous old man."

"I see... Our masses--the word comes from your days--you know of course,
that we still have masses--regard you as our actual ruler. Just as a
great number of people in your days regarded the Crown as the ruler.
They are discontented--the masses all over the earth--with the rule
of your Trustees. For the most part it is the old discontent, the old
quarrel of the common man with his commonness--the misery of work and
discipline and unfitness. But your Trustees have ruled ill. In certain
matters, in the administration of the Labour Companies, for example,
they have been unwise. They have given endless opportunities. Already we
of the popular party were agitating for reforms--when your waking came.
Came! If it had been contrived it could not have come more opportunity."
He smiled. "The public mind, making no allowance for your years of
quiescence, had already hit on the thought of waking you and appealing
to you, and--Flash!"

He indicated the outbreak by a gesture, and Graham moved his head to
show that he understood.

"The Council muddled--quarreled. They always do. They could not decide
what to do with you. You know how they imprisoned you?"

"I see. I see. And now--we win?"

"We win. Indeed we win. Tonight, in five swift hours. Suddenly we struck
everywhere. The windvane people, the Labour Company and its millions,
burst the bonds. We got the pull of the aeropiles."

He paused. "Yes," said Graham, guessing that aeropile meant flying
machine.

"That was, of course, essential. Or they could have got away. All the
city rose, every third man almost was in it! All the blue, all the
public services, save only just a few aeronauts and about half the red
police. You were rescued, and their own police of the Ways--not half of
them could be massed at the Council House--have been broken up, disarmed
or killed. All London is ours--now. Only the Council House remains.

"Half of those who remain to them of the red police were lost in that
foolish attempt to recapture you. They lost their heads when they lost
you. They flung all they had at the theatre. We cut them off from
the Council House there. Truly tonight has been a night of victory.
Everywhere your star has blazed. A day ago--the White Council ruled as
it has ruled for a gross of years, for a century and a half of years,
and then, with only a little whispering, a covert arming here and there,
suddenly--So!"

"I am very ignorant," said Graham. "I suppose--. I do not clearly
understand the conditions of this fighting. If you could explain. Where
is the Council? Where is the fight?"

Ostrog stepped across the room, something clicked, and suddenly,
save for an oval glow, they were in darkness. For a moment Graham was
puzzled.

Then he saw that the cloudy grey disc had taken depth and colour, had
assumed the appearance of an oval window looking out upon a strange
unfamiliar scene.

At the first glance he was unable to guess what this scene might be.
It was a daylight scene, the daylight of a wintry day, grey and clear.
Across the picture and halfway as it seemed between him and the remoter
view, a stout cable of twisted white wire stretched vertically. Then he
perceived that the rows of great windwheels he saw, the wide intervals,
the occasional gulfs of darkness, were akin to those through which he
had fled from the Council House. He distinguished an orderly file of red
figures marching across an open space between files of men in black,
and realised before Ostrog spoke that he was looking down on the upper
surface of latter-day London. The overnight snows had gone. He judged
that this mirror was some modern replacement of the camera obscura, but
that matter was not explained to him. He saw that though the file of red
figures was trotting from left to right, yet they were passing out of
the picture to the left. He wondered momentarily, and then saw that the
picture was passing slowly, panorama fashion, across the oval.

"In a moment you will see the fighting," said Ostrog at his elbow.
"Those fellows in red you notice are prisoners. This is the roof space
of London--all the houses are practically continuous now. The streets
and public squares are covered in. The gaps and chasms of your time have
disappeared."

Something out of focus obliterated half the picture. Its form suggested
a man. There was a gleam of metal, a flash, something that swept across
the oval, as the eyelid of a bird sweeps across its eye, and the picture
was clear again. And now Graham beheld men running down among the
wind-wheels, pointing weapons from which jetted out little
smoky flashes. They swarmed thicker and thicker to the right,
gesticulating--it might be they were shouting, but of that the picture
told nothing. They and the windwheels passed slowly and steadily across
the field of the mirror.

"Now," said Ostrog, "comes the Council House," and slowly a black edge
crept into view and gathered Graham's attention. Soon it was no longer
an edge but a cavity, a huge blackened space amidst the clustering
edifices, and from it thin spires of smoke rose into the pallid winter
sky. Gaunt ruinous masses of the building, mighty truncated piers and
girders, rose dismally out of this cavernous darkness. And over these
vestiges of some splendid place, countless minute men were clambering,
leaping, swarming.

"This is the Council House," said Ostrog. "Their last stronghold. And
the fools wasted enough ammunition to hold out for a month in blowing up
the buildings all about them--to stop our attack. You heard the smash?
It shattered half the brittle glass in the city."

And while he spoke, Graham saw that beyond this sea of ruins,
overhanging it and rising to a great height, was a ragged mass of white
building. This mass had been isolated by the ruthless destruction of
its surroundings. Black gaps marked the passages the disaster had torn
apart; big halls had been slashed open and the decoration of their
interiors showed dismally in the wintry dawn, and down the jagged wall
hung festoons of divided cables and twisted ends of lines and metallic
rods. And amidst all the vast details moved little red specks, the
red-clothed defenders of the Council. Every now and then faint flashes
illuminated the bleak shadows. At the first sight it seemed to Graham
that an attack upon this isolated white building was in progress, but
then he perceived that the party of the revolt was not advancing, but
sheltered amidst the colossal wreckage that encircled this last ragged
stronghold of the red-garbed men, was keeping up a fitful firing.
