the length of a carving knife--case perfectly straight in the first
instance, but greatly rounded at the end on the edge side; the upper
edge at the end, for the length of about two inches, is ground into
the small segment of a circle and rendered sharp; thus leaving an
apparent curve of the knife, although in reality the upturned point is
not higher than the line of the back. The back itself gradually
increases in weight of metal as it approaches the hilt, on which a
small guard is placed. The Bowie knife, therefore, has a curved, keen
point; is double edged for the space of about a couple of inches of
its length; and when in use, falls with the weight of a bill
hook.--Bowie went to Texas during the troubles which preceded the
independence of that country,--and was lying sick in bed at the
fortress of the Alamo, when, on the 6th of March, 1836, it was stormed
by Santa Anna and taken. Bowie was murdered there upon his pillow. The
hand that formed the dreadful knife could no longer wield it.

       *       *       *       *       *




FORESTS AND STREAMS.


That remarkable man, Humbolt, has reduced it almost to a
demonstration, that the streams of our country, fail in proportion to
the destruction of its timber. And of course, if the streams fail, our
seasons will be worse; it must get drier and drier in proportion.
Humbolt, speaking of the Valley of Araguay in Venezuela, says that the
lake receded as agriculture advanced, until the beautiful plantations
of sugar-cane, banana and cotton-trees, were established on its banks,
which (banks) year after year were farther from them. After the
separation of that Province from Spain, and the decline of agriculture
amid the desolating wars which swept over this beautiful region, the
process of clearing was arrested, and old lands grew up in trees with
that rapidity common to the tropics, and in a few years the
inhabitants were alarmed by a rise of the waters, and an inundation of
their choice plantations.

       *       *       *       *       *




PRUSSIAN MUSIC.


The Boston Brigade Band has been presented with a copy of the
collection of the celebrated martial music of the Prussian army.
Prussia has long been famous for the excellence of its military bands,
and the music which they have produced is of the highest order. We
hope this attempt to introduce it into our city will improve the style
of martial music here.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHILOSOPHY.


"Uncle Jo," said an observing little boy, "our folks always put up the
window when the room is filled with smoke, and the wind always blows
in so as to prevent the smoke from going out that way: now where does
the smoke go?" "It goes into the people's eyes," was uncle Jo's
philosophic answer.

       *       *       *       *       *




POLITE PREACHING.


A certain preacher, when treating on the subject of repentance, said,
"My dear hearers, you must repent; if you do not, you will go to a
place which it would be improper to mention in this polite assembly."

       *       *       *       *       *




Mr. H. Longfellow of Cincinnati, has about one hundred acres under
culture of grapes, strawberries, peaches and raspberries.


[Illustration: VARIETY.]




PURE AIR.


  Throw open the window and fasten it there!
    Fling the curtain aside and the blind,
  And give a free entrance to heaven's pure air,
    'Tis the life and health of mankind.

  Behold that dull concourse in yonder closed space,
    With visages sluggish and red;
  How calmly they sit, each one in his place,
    While their lungs with poison are fed.

  What makes the grave deacon so drowsy at church?
    The scholar so dull in his class?
  Dry sermons!--dry studies!--the brain's in the lurch,
    For want of pure oxygen gas.

  Come, 'rouse, from your stupor, before it's too late,
    And do not yourself so abuse--
  To sit all day with your feet on the grate;
    No wonder you're getting the "blues!"

  Are you fond of coughs, colds, dyspepsia and rheums?
    Of headaches, and fevers and chills?
  Of bitters, hot-drops, and medicine fumes,
    And bleeding, and blisters and pills?

  Then shut yourself up like a monk in his cave,
    Till nature grows weary and sad,
  And imagine yourself on the brink of the grave.
    Where nothing is cheerful and glad.

  Be sure when you sleep, that all is shut out:
    Place, too, a warm brick to your feet--
  Wrap a bandage of flannel your neck quite about
    And cover your head with the sheet.

  But would you avoid the dark gloom of disease?
    Then haste to the fresh open air,
  Where your cheek may kindly be tanned by its breeze;
    'Twill make you well, happy and fair.

  O, prize not this lightly, so precious a thing;
    'Tis laden with gladness and wealth--
  The richest of blessings that heaven can bring,
    The bright panacea of health.

  Then open the window, and fasten it there!
    Fling the curtain aside and the blind.
  And give a free entrance to heaven's pure air,
    'Tis light, life, and joy to mankind.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DEERFIELD (N. H.) PHENOMENA.


We have frequently heard of singular and unaccountable reports, as of
explosion, in Deerfield, but nothing so definite as the following
statement by a correspondent of the Portsmouth Journal.

"Mr Editor,--During the last twelve years, certain curious, not to say
alarming phenomena in the town of Deerfield, N. H., have excited the
fears of the inhabitants, and we think should, ere this, have
attracted the attention of the scientific. These are reports of
explosions in the ground, apparently of a volcanic or gaseous nature.
When first heard they were attributed to the blasting of rocks in
Manchester, a new town some ten miles distant; but from the frequency
of the reports at all hours in the night as well as the day, from the
consideration that they were so loud, and were heard in all seasons,
winter as well as summer, it was soon concluded that they had some
other origin. The explosions, if they may be so called, commenced on a
ridge of land running S. E. and N, W, some five miles in length, and
principally on that portion called the South Road. They have, however,
extended, and arc now heard in a northerly direction. The sounds have
become louder, and during the last fall and the present spring or
summer, as many as twenty have been heard in one night. Many of them
jar the houses and ground perceptibly, so much so, that a child whose
balance is not steady, will roll from one side to the other. They are
as loud as a heavy cannon fired near the house, with no reverberation,
and little roll. Last fall some of the inhabitants were riding in a
wagon when an explosion was heard, and they saw the stone wall, which
was apparently quite compact, fall over on one side of the way, and a
second after upon the other. The stone wall of an unfinished cellar
also fell in. This can be attested by many witnesses. There is no
regularity in these reports, as they are heard at intervals of a day,
a week, and sometimes of months: but for the last year they have
become very common, and are heard almost every week more or less."

       *       *       *       *       *




EXTRAORDINARY INSTANCE OF GAMBLING.


It is well known upon the western waters, that the firemen and other
hands employed upon the boats spend much of their idle time in playing
cards. Of the passion for gaming, thus excited, an instance has been
narrated to us upon the most credible authority, which surpasses the
highest wrought fictions of the gambler's fate. A colored fireman, on
board a steamboat running between Saint Louis and New-Orleans, had
lost all his money at poker with his companions. He then staked his
clothing, and being still unfortunate, pledged his own freedom for a
small amount. Losing this, the bets were doubled, and he finally at
one desperate hazard, ventured his full value as a slave, and laid
down his free papers to represent the stake. He lost, suffered his
certificates to be destroyed, and was actually sold by the winner to a
slave dealer, who hesitated not to take him at a small discount upon
his assessed value. When last heard of by one who knows him, and
informed us of the fact, he was still paying in servitude the penalty
of his criminal folly.

       *       *       *       *       *




GEN. TAYLOR'S PATRIOTISM.


In answer to the complimentary resolutions passed at a meeting in this
city some weeks since, Gen. Taylor says, "It is a source of
gratulation to me that the meeting refrained from the meditated
nomination for the presidency. For the high office in question I have
no aspirations. The government has assigned to me an arduous and
responsible duty in the prosecution of the existing war: in conducting
it with honor to the country lie all my real aspirations."

       *       *       *       *       *




THE COLUMBIAN MAGAZINE.


The October number of this splendid work will be found to be equal, if
not superior, to anything and everything of the kind in the literary
region. It presents three superb embellishments--"A Cure for Love,"
mezzotint, by Sadd; "View on the St. Lawrence," fine steel engraving,
by C. F, Giles, and a plate of fashions; in a new style, besides a
piece of first rate music. This work is published monthly by Isreal
Post, 140 Nassau st. Terms, only $3 per annum.

       *       *       *       *       *




A MOUNTAIN IN LABOR.


The workmen, says a Paris paper, are still busily engaged in
excavating Montmartre in quest of holy vases and other riches said to
have been deposited there in early days of the French revolution by
the orders of Lady Superior of the Abbey of Montmartre. Two workmen,
who were at the time charged with transporting the wealth to the place
designated were never seen, and it is supposed that they were
sacrificed to the necessity of the secret. The Superior, at her death,
bequeathed the secret to a lady friend, who in turn, on her death bed,
divulged it to her daughter, then 13 years of age. The child, now a
sexagenary, disclosed it to the municipiality. Her statements have
thus far been found scrupulously correct. The _cesarian_ operation is
actively going on, an excavation of fifty feet having been made, and
the mountain's speedy deliverance of a mine of wealth is anticipated.
May it not prove a mouse!

       *       *       *       *       *




THE POPE'S WILL.


The late Pope has left a fortune of eleven millions of francs, which,
after some religious bequests; is to be divided among his relations!
upon the singular condition that they never contest the will, and that
they never take up their residence in Rome.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED RAILROAD.


The Harlem Railroad Company have laid down a section of their road
with cast iron rails of a new construction, invented by Mr. Imley.
These rails are highly approved, and are expected to supersede the
common wrought rails to a considerable extent.

       *       *       *       *       *


It is reported that Mr. Isaac Fisk of Massachusetts, spells his name
"Eyzurk Physque." Well, what if he does?

       *       *       *       *       *




SAGEISMS.


He who is passionate and hasty is generally honest. It's your cool,
dissembling, smiling hypocrite, of whom you should beware. There is no
deceit about a bull dog. It's only the cur that sneaks up and bites
you when your back's turned. Again, we say, beware of a man who has
psalmody in his looks.

If a person is bent on quarrelling with you, leave the whole of it to
himself, and he will soon become weary of his unencouraged occupation.
Even the most malicious ram will soon cease to butt against a
disregarding object, and will usually find his own head more injured
than the object of his blind animosity. So let them kick.

An easy flow of words is no sign of an abundance of ideas. Swift made
a wise comparison when he likened a well stored mind to a crowded
church, where the people elbow each other, and cannot get out.

"If a civil word or two will render a man happy," said a French king,
"he must be a wretch indeed who will not give them to him. Such a
disposition is like lighting another man's candle by one's own, which
loses none of its brilliancy by what the other gains."

       *       *       *       *       *




IN PREPARATION.


We have in course of preparation for future numbers, some large and
elegant engravings, illustrative of some of the most interest and
deeply scientific _new inventions_, together with illustrations of
architecture, geometry and magnetism. Also a variety of intelligence
in _arts and trades_.

       *       *       *       *       *




A STRONG POSITION.


