diabolical power, he had gone for hundreds of years into the future, a
thing surely possible only to the devil and his minions, and heard him
tell other blasphemies before they seized him and brought him to the
Inquisitor of the King, praying that he be burned and his work of
sorcery thus halted.

"Therefore, Henri Lothiere, since you were seen to vanish and to
reappear as only the servants of the evil one might do, and were heard
by many to utter the blasphemies mentioned, I must adjudge you a
sorcerer with the penalty of death by fire. If anything there be that
you can advance in palliation of your black offense, however, you may
now do so before final sentence is passed upon you."

Jean de Marselait laid down the parchment, and raised his eyes to the
prisoner. The latter looked round him quickly for a moment, a
half-glimpsed panic for an instant in his eyes, then seemed to steady.

"Sire, I cannot change the sentence you will pass upon me," he said
quietly, "yet do I wish well to relate once, what happened to me and
what I saw. Is it permitted me to tell that from first to last?"

The Inquisitor's head bent, and Henri Lothiere spoke, his voice gaining
in strength and fervor as he continued.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sire, I, Henri Lothiere, am no sorcerer but a simple apothecary's
assistant. It was always my nature, from earliest youth, to desire to
delve into matters unknown to men; the secrets of the earth and sea and
sky, the knowledge hidden from us. I knew well that this was wicked,
that the Church teaches all we need to know and that heaven frowns when
we pry into its mysteries, but so strong was my desire to know, that
many times I concerned myself with matters forbidden.

"I had sought to know the nature of the lightning, and the manner of
flight of the birds, and the way in which fishes are able to live
beneath the waters, and the mystery of the stars. So when these
thunderclaps began to be heard in the part of Paris in which I lived, I
did not fear them so much as my neighbors. I was eager to learn only
what was causing them, for it seemed to me that their cause might be
learned.

"So I began to go to that field from which they issued, to study them. I
waited in it and twice I heard the great thunderclaps myself. I thought
they came from near the field's center, and I studied that place. But I
could see nothing there that was causing them. I dug in the ground, I
looked up for hours into the sky, but there was nothing. And still, at
intervals, the thunderclaps sounded.

"I still kept going to the field, though I knew that many of my
neighbors whispered that I was engaged in sorcery. Upon that morning of
the third day of June, it had occurred to me to take certain
instruments, such as loadstones, to the field, to see whether anything
might be learned with them. I went, a few superstitious ones following
me at a distance. I reached the field's center, and started the
examinations I had planned. Then came suddenly another thunderclap and
with it I passed from the sight of those who had followed and were
watching, vanished from view.

"Sire, I cannot well describe what happened in that moment. I heard the
thunderclap come as though from all the air around me, stunning my ears
with its terrible burst of sound. And at the same moment that I heard
it, I was buffeted as though by awful winds and seemed falling downward
through terrific depths. Then through the hellish uproar, I felt myself
bumping upon a hard surface, and the sounds quickly ceased from about
me.

"I had involuntarily closed my eyes at the great thunderclap, but now,
slowly, I opened them. I looked around me, first in stupefaction, and
then in growing amazement. For I was not in that familiar field at all,
sire, that I had been in a moment before. I was in a room, lying upon
its floor, and it was such a room as I had never seen before.

"Its walls were smooth and white and gleaming. There were windows in the
walls, and they were closed with sheets of glass so smooth and clear
that one seemed looking through a clear opening rather than through
glass. The floor was of stone, smooth and seamless as though carven from
one great rock, yet seeming not, in some way, to be stone at all. There
was a great circle of smooth metal inset in it, and it was on it that I
was lying.

"All around the room were many great things the like of which I had
never seen. Some seemed of black metal, seemed contrivances or machines
of some sort. Black cords of wire connected them to each other and from
part of them came a humming sound that did not stop. Others had glass
tubes fixed on the front of them, and there were square black plates on
which were many shining little handles and buttons.

"There was a sound of voices, and I turned to find that two men were
bending over me. They were men like myself, yet they were at the same
time like no men I had ever met! One was white-bearded and the other
plump and bare of face. Neither of them wore cloak or tunic or hose.
Instead they wore loose and straight-hanging garments of cloth.

"They were both greatly excited, it seemed, and were talking to each
other as they bent over me. I caught a word or two of their speech in a
moment, and found it was French they were talking. But it was not the
French I knew, being so strange and with so many new words as to be
almost a different language. I could understand the drift, though, of
what they were saying.

