
He nodded. "Guess it shows, huh?" he said, brushing the road dust from
his trousers.

"Uh-huh. Where you from? Not around here, I know."

"Far back as I can remember, Oregon has been home."

It wasn't hard to guess why he was almost a thousand miles from home.
During the war, over ten million American families had been separated,
their way of life destroyed by the hell of atomic bombings. Ever since
its end, people had been seeking their loved ones; many, only to find
them dead or dying. Sometimes the searches stretched across continents
or oceans. In that respect the boy sitting opposite me was no different
from hundreds of others I've seen in the past ten years. The only
difference was in his face.

"Looking for your family," I said, making it a statement.

"Yessir." He smiled, as though the sentence had double meaning.

After he had eaten, he went down to the town store to look through its
records. They all do. They turn the pages of the big stopover book,
hoping a relative or friend had passed through the same town. Then they
sign the book, put down the date and where they're headed, and set out
once more. Almost all towns have stopover books nowadays, and a good
thing, too. They helped me find Marty back in '63, when the truce was
finally signed. In fact, I found her right here in this town. We got
married, settled down, and haven't been more than a hundred miles away
since then.

Martha called me into the kitchen almost as soon as he was gone. "He's a
nice boy."

"That he is," I agreed. "You know, I've been thinking; we could use a
young fella around here to help with the work."

"If he'll stay. There was something in his eyes; a sort of longing for
someone very close to him. That kind usually takes off after a night's
rest."

"I know. Guess I'll drop by the store; see if I can talk him into
staying."

By the time I reached the store, school was out, and a group of kids
were gathered around him, listening to his description of the Rocky
Mountains, which he had crossed during the summer. The kids weren't the
only ones listening. Even the adults were standing around in the store,
remembering the places they had once seen themselves, and getting such
bits of news as he dropped about the other towns he had passed through.
The Searchers are, next to the town radio stations, the only source of
information we have now, so it's no wonder they're so warmly greeted
wherever they stop.

Soon as he'd finished telling about the Rockies, I said we'd appreciate
it if he would stay for supper. He said he would, and later, while he
and Tommy, my eight-year-old son, and I were walking home, I asked him
if he'd stay with us for a while.

For a moment he looked wistful, as if wishing he could stay here, and
forget whoever he was trying to find. Then he smiled and said, thanks,
he would stay for a week or so.

He was real helpful, too, cutting stove and fireplace wood for the
coming winter, running errands, hunting for game animals, and teaching
at the school. Almost all Searchers teach when they can be persuaded to
stay in town for a spell. Since there are no more colleges to produce
teachers, anyone who knows something useful takes a turn at teaching.
'Fore the war, I was a mathematics major in college, so twice a week I
teach all kinds of math at school, from numbers through calculus.
Mostly, Searchers teach about what the places they had passed through
are like.

Then, when I opened the door to the shed that day, and saw the axe
suspended in mid-air, I suddenly realized why he had that sad, tired
look about him all the time.

He picked up the axe from where it had fallen, and stood it against the
