  METHOD OF STUDYING THE RECORD--To be discussed as it stands--An
  early Astronomical Observation. BEFORE THE BATTLE--Movements of
  the Israelites--Reasons for the Gibeonites' Action--Rapid
  Movements of all the Parties. DAY, HOUR, AND PLACE OF THE
  MIRACLE--Indication of the Sun's Declination--Joshua was at
  Gibeon--And at High Noon--On the 21st Day of the Fourth Month.
  JOSHUA'S STRATEGY--Key to it in the Flight of the Amorites by the
  Beth-horon Route--The Amorites defeated but not surrounded--King
  David as a Strategist. THE MIRACLE--The Noon-day Heat, the great
  Hindrance to the Israelites--Joshua desired the Heat to be
  tempered--The Sun made to "be silent"--The Hailstorm--The March
  to Makkedah--A Full Day's March in the Afternoon--"The Miracle"
  not a Poetic Hyperbole--Exact Accord of the Poem and the Prose
  Chronicle--The Record made at the Time--Their March, the
  Israelites' Measure of Time                                      351

CHAPTER II. THE DIAL OF AHAZ

  The Narrative--Suggested Explanations--The "Dial of Ahaz,"
  probably a Staircase--Probable History and Position of the
  Staircase--Significance of the Sign                              385

CHAPTER III. THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM

  The Narrative--No Astronomical Details given--Purpose of the
  Scripture Narrative--Kepler's suggested Identification of the
  Star--The New Star of 1572--Legend of the Well of Bethlehem--True
  Significance of the Reticence of the Gospel Narrative            393

  A TABLE OF SCRIPTURAL REFERENCE                                  401

  INDEX                                                            405




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                             PAGE
     THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM (_Burne-Jones_)         _Frontispiece_

     THE RAINBOW (_Rubens_)                                     2

     MERODACH AND TIAMAT                                       25

     CIRRUS AND CUMULI                                         47

     A CORNER OF THE MILKY WAY                                 94

     THE GREAT COMET OF 1843                                  102

     FALL OF AN AEROLITE                                      110

     METEORIC SHOWER OF 1799                                  115

     THE ASSYRIAN 'RING WITH WINGS'                           126

     CORONA OF MINIMUM TYPE                                   127

     ST. PAUL PREACHING AT ATHENS (_Raphael_)                 148

     THE ANCIENT CONSTELLATIONS SOUTH OF THE ECLIPTIC         155

     THE CELESTIAL SPHERE                                     156

     THE MIDNIGHT CONSTELLATIONS OF SPRING, B.C. 2700         164

     THE MIDNIGHT CONSTELLATIONS OF WINTER, B.C. 2700         165

     OPHIUCHUS AND THE NEIGHBOURING CONSTELLATIONS            189

     AQUARIUS AND THE NEIGHBOURING CONSTELLATIONS             192

     HERCULES AND DRACO                                       197

     HYDRA AND THE NEIGHBOURING CONSTELLATIONS                200

     ANDROMEDA AND CETUS                                      207

     STARS OF THE PLEIADES                                    219

     INNER NEBULOSITIES OF THE PLEIADES                       227

     STARS OF ORION                                           232

     ORION AND THE NEIGHBOURING CONSTELLATIONS                236

     POSITION OF SPRING EQUINOX, B.C. 2700                    246

     POSITION OF SPRING EQUINOX, A.D. 1900                    247

     STARS OF THE PLOUGH, AS THE WINNOWING FAN                263

     'BLOW UP THE TRUMPET IN THE NEW MOON'                    268

     POSITION OF THE NEW MOON AT THE EQUINOXES                316

     BOUNDARY-STONE IN THE LOUVRE                             318

     WORSHIP OF THE SUN-GOD AT SIPPARA                        322

     'SUN, STAND THOU STILL UPON GIBEON, AND THOU MOON IN
         THE VALLEY OF AJALON'                                350

     MAP OF SOUTHERN PALESTINE                                357

     BEARINGS OF THE RISING AND SETTING POINTS OF THE SUN
         FROM GIBEON                                          363


[Illustration: _By permission of the Autotype Co. 74, New Oxford
Street, London W.C._

THE RAINBOW (_by Rubens_).

"The bow that is in the cloud on the day of rain."]




THE ASTRONOMY OF THE BIBLE




BOOK I

THE HEAVENLY BODIES




CHAPTER I

THE HEBREW AND ASTRONOMY


Modern astronomy began a little more than three centuries ago with the
invention of the telescope and Galileo's application of it to the study
of the heavenly bodies. This new instrument at once revealed to him the
mountains on the moon, the satellites of Jupiter, and the spots on the
sun, and brought the celestial bodies under observation in a way that no
one had dreamed of before. In our view to-day, the planets of the solar
system are worlds; we can examine their surfaces and judge wherein they
resemble or differ from our earth. To the ancients they were but points
of light; to us they are vast bodies that we have been able to measure
and to weigh. The telescope has enabled us also to penetrate deep into
outer space; we have learnt of other systems besides that of our own sun
and its dependents, many of them far more complex; clusters and clouds
of stars have been revealed to us, and mysterious nebulae, which suggest
by their forms that they are systems of suns in the making. More lately
the invention of the spectroscope has informed us of the very elements
which go to the composition of these numberless stars, and we can
distinguish those which are in a similar condition to our sun from those
differing from him. And photography has recorded for us objects too
faint for mere sight to detect, even when aided by the most powerful
telescope; too detailed and intricate for the most skilful hand to
depict.

Galileo's friend and contemporary, Kepler, laid the foundations of
another department of modern astronomy at about the same time. He
studied the apparent movements of the planets until they yielded him
their secret so far that he was able to express them in three simple
laws, laws which, two generations later, Sir Isaac Newton demonstrated
to be the outcome of one grand and simple law of universal range, the
law of gravitation. Upon this law the marvellous mathematical conquests
of astronomy have been based.

All these wonderful results have been attained by the free exercise of
men's mental abilities, and it cannot be imagined that God would have
intervened to hamper their growth in intellectual power by revealing to
men facts and methods which it was within their own ability to discover
for themselves. Men's mental powers have developed by their exercise;
they would have been stunted had men been led to look to revelation
rather than to diligent effort for the satisfaction of their curiosity.
We therefore do not find any reference in the Bible to that which
modern astronomy has taught us. Yet it may be noted that some
expressions, appropriate at any time, have become much more appropriate,
much more forcible, in the light of our present-day knowledge.

The age of astronomy which preceded the Modern, and may be called the
Classical age, was almost as sharply defined in its beginning as its
successor. It lasted about two thousand years, and began with the
investigations into the movements of the planets made by some of the
early Greek mathematicians. Classical, like Modern astronomy, had its
two sides,--the instrumental and the mathematical. On the instrumental
side was the invention of graduated instruments for the determination of
the positions of the heavenly bodies; on the mathematical, the
development of geometry and trigonometry for the interpretation of those
positions when thus determined. Amongst the great names of this period
are those of Eudoxus of Knidus (B.C. 408-355), and Hipparchus of
Bithynia, who lived rather more than two centuries later. Under its
first leaders astronomy in the Classical age began to advance rapidly,
but it soon experienced a deadly blight. Men were not content to observe
the heavenly bodies for what they were; they endeavoured to make
them the sources of divination. The great school of Alexandria (founded
about 300 B.C.), the headquarters of astronomy, became invaded by
the spirit of astrology, the bastard science which has always
tried--parasite-like--to suck its life from astronomy. Thus from the
days of Claudius Ptolemy to the end of the Middle Ages the growth of
astronomy was arrested, and it bore but little fruit.

It will be noticed that the Classical age did not commence until about
the time of the completion of the last books of the Old Testament; so we
do not find any reference in Holy Scripture to the astronomical
achievements of that period, amongst which the first attempts to explain
the apparent motions of sun, moon, stars, and planets were the most
considerable.

We have a complete history of astronomy in the Modern and Classical
periods, but there was an earlier astronomy, not inconsiderable in
amount, of which no history is preserved. For when Eudoxus commenced his
labours, the length of the year had already been determined, the
equinoxes and solstices had been recognized, the ecliptic, the celestial
equator, and the poles of both great circles were known, and the five
principal planets were familiar objects. This Early astronomy must have
had its history, its stages of development, but we can only with
difficulty trace them out. It cannot have sprung into existence
full-grown any more than the other sciences; it must have started from
zero, and men must have slowly fought their way from one observation to
another, with gradually widening conceptions, before they could bring it
even to that stage of development in which it was when the observers of
the Museum of Alexandria began their work.

The books of the Old Testament were written at different times during
the progress of this Early age of astronomy. We should therefore
naturally expect to find the astronomical allusions written from the
standpoint of such scientific knowledge as had then been acquired. We
cannot for a moment expect that any supernatural revelation of purely
material facts would be imparted to the writers of sacred books, two or
three thousand years before the progress of science had brought those
facts to light, and we ought not to be surprised if expressions are
occasionally used which we should not ourselves use to-day, if we were
writing about the phenomena of nature from a technical point of view. It
must further be borne in mind that the astronomical references are not
numerous, that they occur mostly in poetic imagery, and that Holy
Scripture was not intended to give an account of the scientific
achievements, if any, of the Hebrews of old. Its purpose was wholly
different: it was religious, not scientific; it was meant to give
spiritual, not intellectual enlightenment.

An exceedingly valuable and interesting work has recently been brought
out by the most eminent of living Italian astronomers, Prof. G. V.
Schiaparelli, on this subject of "Astronomy in the Old Testament," to
which work I should like here to acknowledge my indebtedness. Yet I feel
that the avowed object of his book,[7:1]--to "discover what ideas the
ancient Jewish sages held regarding the structure of the universe, what
observations they made of the stars, and how far they made use of them
for the measurement and division of time"--is open to this
criticism,--that sufficient material for carrying it out is not within
our reach. If we were to accept implicitly the argument from the silence
of Scripture, we should conclude that the Hebrews--though their calendar
was essentially a lunar one, based upon the actual observation of the
new moon--had never noticed that the moon changed its apparent form as
the month wore on, for there is no mention in the Bible of the lunar
phases.

The references to the heavenly bodies in Scripture are not numerous, and
deal with them either as time-measurers or as subjects for devout
allusion, poetic simile, or symbolic use. But there is one
characteristic of all these references to the phenomena of Nature, that
may not be ignored. None of the ancients ever approached the great
Hebrew writers in spiritual elevation; none equalled them in poetic
sublimity; and few, if any, surpassed them in keenness of observation,
or in quick sympathy with every work of the Creator.

These characteristics imply a natural fitness of the Hebrews for
successful scientific work, and we should have a right to believe that
under propitious circumstances they would have shown a pre-eminence in
the field of physical research as striking as is the superiority of
their religious conceptions over those of the surrounding nations. We
cannot, of course, conceive of the average Jew as an Isaiah, any more
than we can conceive of the average Englishman as a Shakespeare, yet the
one man, like the other, is an index of the advancement and capacity of
his race; nor could Isaiah's writings have been preserved, more than
those of Shakespeare, without a true appreciation of them on the part of
many of his countrymen.

But the necessary conditions for any great scientific development were
lacking to Israel. A small nation, planted between powerful and
aggressive empires, their history was for the most part the record of a
struggle for bare existence; and after three or four centuries of the
unequal conflict, first the one and then the other of the two sister
kingdoms was overwhelmed. There was but little opportunity during these
years of storm and stress for men to indulge in any curious searchings
into the secrets of nature.

Once only was there a long interval of prosperity and peace; viz. from
the time that David had consolidated the kingdom to the time when it
suffered disruption under his grandson, Rehoboam; and it is significant
that tradition has ascribed to Solomon and to his times just such a
scientific activity as the ability and temperament of the Hebrew race
would lead us to expect it to display when the conditions should be
favourable for it.

Thus, in the fourth chapter of the First Book of Kings, not only are the
attainments of Solomon himself described, but other men, contemporaries
either of his father David or himself, are referred to, as distinguished
in the same direction, though to a less degree.

     "And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much,
     and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the
     seashore. And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the
     children of the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt. For
     he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman,
     and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in
     all nations round about. And he spake three thousand proverbs:
     and his songs were a thousand and five. And he spake of trees,
     from the cedar-tree that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop
     that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of beasts, and
     of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes. And there came
     of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of
     the earth, which had heard of his wisdom."

The tradition of his great eminence in scientific research is also
preserved in the words put into his mouth in the Book of the Wisdom of
Solomon, now included in the Apocrypha.

     "For" (God) "Himself gave me an unerring knowledge of the
     things that are, to know the constitution of the world, and
     the operation of the elements; the beginning and end and
     middle of times, the alternations of the solstices and the
     changes of seasons, the circuits of years and the positions"
     (_margin_, constellations) "of stars; the natures of living
     creatures and the ragings of wild beasts, the violences of
     winds and the thoughts of men, the diversities of plants and
     the virtues of roots: all things that are either secret or
     manifest I learned, for she that is the artificer of all
     things taught me, even Wisdom."

Two great names have impressed themselves upon every part of the
East:--the one, that of Solomon the son of David, as the master of every
secret source of knowledge; and the other that of Alexander the Great,
as the mightiest of conquerors. It is not unreasonable to believe that
the traditions respecting the first have been founded upon as real a
basis of actual achievement as those respecting the second.

But to such scientific achievements we have no express allusion in
Scripture, other than is afforded us by the two quotations just made.
Natural objects, natural phenomena are not referred to for their own
sake. Every thought leads up to God or to man's relation to Him.
Nature, as a whole and in its every aspect and detail, is the handiwork
of Jehovah: that is the truth which the heavens are always
declaring;--and it is His power, His wisdom, and His goodness to man
which it is sought to illustrate, when the beauty or wonder of natural
objects is described.

     "When I consider Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers,
      The moon and the stars, which Thou hast ordained;
      What is man, that Thou art mindful of him?
      And the son of man, that Thou visitest him?"

The first purpose, therefore, of the following study of the astronomy of
the Bible is,--not to reconstruct the astronomy of the Hebrews, a task
for which the material is manifestly incomplete,--but to examine such
astronomical allusions as occur with respect to their appropriateness to
the lesson which the writer desired to teach. Following this, it will be
of interest to examine what connection can be traced between the Old
Testament Scriptures and the Constellations; the arrangement of the
stars into constellations having been the chief astronomical work
effected during the centuries when those Scriptures were severally
composed. The use made of the heavenly bodies as time-measurers amongst
the Hebrews will form a third division of the subject; whilst there are
two or three incidents in the history of Israel which appear to call for
examination from an astronomical point of view, and may suitably be
treated in a fourth and concluding section.


FOOTNOTES:

[7:1] _Astronomy in the Old Testament_, p. 12.




CHAPTER II

THE CREATION


A few years ago a great eclipse of the sun, seen as total along a broad
belt of country right across India, drew thither astronomers from the
very ends of the earth. Not only did many English observers travel
thither, but the United States of America in the far west, and Japan in
the far east sent their contingents, and the entire length of country
covered by the path of the shadow was dotted with the temporary
observatories set up by the men of science.

It was a wonderful sight that was vouchsafed to these travellers in
pursuit of knowledge. In a sky of unbroken purity, undimmed even for a
moment by haze or cloud, there shone down the fierce Indian sun.
Gradually a dark mysterious circle invaded its lower edge, and covered
its brightness; coolness replaced the burning heat; slowly the dark
covering crept on; slowly the sunlight diminished until at length the
whole of the sun's disc was hidden. Then in a moment a wonderful
starlike form flashed out, a noble form of glowing silver light on the
deep purple-coloured sky.

There was, however, no time for the astronomers to devote to admiration
of the beauty of the scene, or indulgence in rhapsodies. Two short
minutes alone were allotted them to note all that was happening, to take
all their photographs, to ask all the questions, and obtain all the
answers for which this strange veiling of the sun, and still stranger
unveiling of his halo-like surroundings, gave opportunity. It was two
minutes of intensest strain, of hurried though orderly work; and then a
sudden rush of sunlight put an end to all. The mysterious vision had
withdrawn itself; the colour rushed back to the landscape, so
corpse-like whilst in the shadow; the black veil slid rapidly from off
the sun; the heat returned to the air; the eclipse was over.

