

What they called me, that was what started it. I'm as good an American
as the next fellow, and maybe a little bit better than men like that,
big men drinking in a bar who can't find anything better to do than to
spit on a man and call him Mex. As if a Mexican is something to hide or
to be ashamed of. We have our own heroes and our own strength and we
don't have to bend down to men like that, or any other men. But when
they called me that I saw red and called them names back.

"Mex kid," one of the men said, a big red-haired bully with his sleeves
rolled back and muscles like ropes on the big hairy arms. "Snot-nosed
little Mex brat."

I called him a name. He only laughed back at me and turned his back,
waving a hand for the bartender. Maybe in a big city in the North it
would be different and probably it would not: this toleration we hear
about is no more good than an open fight, and there must be
understanding instead. But here near the border, just on the American
side of the border, a Mexican is called fair game, and a
seventeen-year-old like me is less than nothing to them, to the white
ones who go to the big bars.

I thought carefully about what to do, and finally when I had made my
mind up I went for him and tried to hit him. But other men held me back,
and I was kicking and shouting with my legs off the ground. When I
stopped they put me down, so I started for the big red-haired man again
and they had to stop me again. The red-haired man was laughing all this
time. I wanted to run, back to my own family in their little house, and
yet running would have been wrong; I was too angry to run, so I stayed.

"My sister," I said. "My sister is a witch and I will get her to put a
curse on you." I was very angry, you must understand this.

And of course they had no idea that my sister is a real witch, and her
curses are real, and only last year Manuel Valdez had died from the
effects of her curse. Of all people, sometimes I wish I were my sister
most of all, to curse people and see them shrivel and sicken and choke
and die.

"Go ahead, half-pint," one of the other men yelled. "Get your sister to
put a curse on me. I bet she knows who I am; I been with every Mex girl
this side of the border."

This made me see red; my sister is pure and must be pure, since she is a
witch. And she is not like some of the others even aside from that. I
have heard her talk about them and I know.

I called him a name and ran up to him and hit him; my fist against his
