right; but in their other important belief, viz. that the earth was
placed at the centre of all things, they were indeed very far from the
truth.

By the second century of the Christian era, the ideas of the early
philosophers had become hardened into a definite theory, which, though
it appears very incorrect to us to-day, nevertheless demands exceptional
notice from the fact that it was everywhere accepted as the true
explanation until so late as some four centuries ago. This theory of the
universe is known by the name of the Ptolemaic System, because it was
first set forth in definite terms by one of the most famous of the
astronomers of antiquity, Claudius Ptolemaeus Pelusinensis (100-170
A.D.), better known as Ptolemy of Alexandria.

In his system the Earth occupied the centre; while around it circled in
order outwards the Moon, the planets Mercury and Venus, the Sun, and
then the planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Beyond these again revolved
the background of the heaven, upon which it was believed that the stars
were fixed--

     "Stellis ardentibus aptum,"

as Virgil puts it (see Fig. 1).

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--The Ptolemaic idea of the Universe.]

The Ptolemaic system persisted unshaken for about fourteen hundred years
after the death of its author. Clearly men were flattered by the notion
that their earth was the most important body in nature, that it stood
still at the centre of the universe, and was the pivot upon which all
things revolved.




CHAPTER II

THE MODERN VIEW


It is still well under four hundred years since the modern, or
Copernican, theory of the universe supplanted the Ptolemaic, which had
held sway during so many centuries. In this new theory, propounded
towards the middle of the sixteenth century by Nicholas Copernicus
(1473-1543), a Prussian astronomer, the earth was dethroned from its
central position and considered merely as one of a number of planetary
bodies which revolve around the sun. As it is not a part of our purpose
to follow in detail the history of the science, it seems advisable to
begin by stating in a broad fashion the conception of the universe as
accepted and believed in to-day.

The Sun, the most important of the celestial bodies so far as we are
concerned, occupies the central position; not, however, in the whole
universe, but only in that limited portion which is known as the Solar
System. Around it, in the following order outwards, circle the planets
Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune
(see Fig. 2, p. 21). At an immense distance beyond the solar system, and
scattered irregularly through the depth of space, lie the stars. The two
first-mentioned members of the solar system, Mercury and Venus, are
known as the Inferior Planets; and in their courses about the sun, they
always keep well inside the path along which our earth moves. The
remaining members (exclusive of the earth) are called Superior Planets,
and their paths lie all outside that of the earth.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--The Copernican theory of the Solar System.]

The five planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, have been
known from all antiquity. Nothing then can bring home to us more
strongly the immense advance which has taken place in astronomy during
modern times than the fact that it is only 127 years since observation
of the skies first added a planet to that time-honoured number. It was
indeed on the 13th of March 1781, while engaged in observing the
constellation of the Twins, that the justly famous Sir William Herschel
caught sight of an object which he did not recognise as having met with
before. He at first took it for a comet, but observations of its
movements during a few days showed it to be a planet. This body, which
the power of the telescope alone had thus shown to belong to the solar
family, has since become known to science under the name of Uranus. By
its discovery the hitherto accepted limits of the solar system were at
once pushed out to twice their former extent, and the hope naturally
arose that other planets would quickly reveal themselves in the
immensities beyond.

For a number of years prior to Herschel's great discovery, it had been
noticed that the distances at which the then known planets circulated
appeared to be arranged in a somewhat orderly progression outwards from
the sun. This seeming plan, known to astronomers by the name of Bode's
Law, was closely confirmed by the distance of the new planet Uranus.
There still lay, however, a broad gap between the planets Mars and
Jupiter. Had another planet indeed circuited there, the solar system
would have presented an appearance of almost perfect order. But the void
between Mars and Jupiter was unfilled; the space in which one would
reasonably expect to find another planet circling was unaccountably
empty.

On the first day of the nineteenth century the mystery was however
explained, a body being discovered[1] which revolved in the space that
had hitherto been considered planetless. But it was a tiny globe hardly
worthy of the name of planet. In the following year a second body was
discovered revolving in the same space; but it was even smaller in size
than the first. During the ensuing five years two more of these little
planets were discovered. Then came a pause, no more such bodies being
added to the system until half-way through the century, when suddenly
the discovery of these so-called "minor planets" began anew. Since then
additions to this portion of our system have rained thick and fast. The
small bodies have received the name of Asteroids or Planetoids; and up
to the present time some six hundred of them are known to exist, all
revolving in the previously unfilled space between Mars and Jupiter.

In the year 1846 the outer boundary of the solar system was again
extended by the discovery that a great planet circulated beyond Uranus.
The new body, which received the name of Neptune, was brought to light
as the result of calculations made at the same time, though quite
independently, by the Cambridge mathematician Adams, and the French
astronomer Le Verrier. The discovery of Neptune differed, however, from
that of Uranus in the following respect. Uranus was found merely in the
course of ordinary telescopic survey of the heavens. The position of
Neptune, on the other hand, was predicted as the result of rigorous
mathematical investigations undertaken with the object of fixing the
position of an unseen and still more distant body, the attraction of
which, in passing by, was disturbing the position of Uranus in its
revolution around the sun. Adams actually completed his investigation
first; but a delay at Cambridge in examining that portion of the sky,
where he announced that the body ought just then to be, allowed France
to snatch the honour of discovery, and the new planet was found by the
observer Galle at Berlin, very near the place in the heavens which Le
Verrier had mathematically predicted for it.

Nearly fifty years later, that is to say, in our own time, another
important planetary discovery was made. One of the recent additions to
the numerous and constantly increasing family of the asteroids, a tiny
body brought to light in 1898, turned out after all not to be
circulating in the customary space between Mars and Jupiter, but
actually in that between our earth and Mars. This body is very small,
not more than about twenty miles across. It has received the name of
Eros (the Greek equivalent for Cupid), in allusion to its insignificant
size as compared with the other leading members of the system.

This completes the list of the planets which, so far, have revealed
themselves to us. Whether others exist time alone will show. Two or
three have been suspected to revolve beyond the path of Neptune; and it
has even been asserted, on more than one occasion, that a planet
circulates nearer to the sun than Mercury. This supposed body, to which
the name of "Vulcan" was provisionally given, is said to have been
"discovered" in 1859 by a French doctor named Lescarbault, of Orgeres
near Orleans; but up to the present there has been no sufficient
evidence of its existence. The reason why such uncertainty should exist
upon this point is easy enough to understand, when we consider the
overpowering glare which fills our atmosphere all around the sun's place
in the sky. Mercury, the nearest known planet to the sun, is for this
reason always very difficult to see; and even when, in its course, it
gets sufficiently far from the sun to be left for a short time above the
horizon after sunset, it is by no means an easy object to observe on
account of the mists which usually hang about low down near the earth.
One opportunity, however, offers itself from time to time to solve the
riddle of an "intra-Mercurial" planet, that is to say, of a planet which
circulates within the path followed by Mercury. The opportunity in
question is furnished by a total eclipse of the sun; for when, during an
eclipse of that kind, the body of the moon for a few minutes entirely
hides the sun's face, and the dazzling glare is thus completely cut off,
astronomers are enabled to give an unimpeded, though all too hurried,
search to the region close around. A goodly number of total eclipses of
the sun have, however, come and gone since the days of Lescarbault, and
no planet, so far, has revealed itself in the intra-Mercurial space. It
seems, therefore, quite safe to affirm that no globe of sufficient size
to be seen by means of our modern telescopes circulates nearer to the
sun than the planet Mercury.

Next in importance to the planets, as permanent members of the solar
system, come the relatively small and secondary bodies known by the name
of Satellites. The name _satellite_ is derived from a Latin word
signifying _an attendant_; for the bodies so-called move along always in
close proximity to their respective "primaries," as the planets which
they accompany are technically termed.

The satellites cannot be considered as allotted with any particular
regularity among the various members of the system; several of the
planets, for instance, having a goodly number of these bodies
accompanying them, while others have but one or two, and some again have
none at all. Taking the planets in their order of distance outward from
the Sun, we find that neither Mercury nor Venus are provided with
satellites; the Earth has only one, viz. our neighbour the Moon; while
Mars has but two tiny ones, so small indeed that one might imagine them
to be merely asteroids, which had wandered out of their proper region
and attached themselves to that planet. For the rest, so far as we at
present know, Jupiter possesses seven,[2] Saturn ten, Uranus four, and
Neptune one. It is indeed possible, nay more, it is extremely probable,
that the two last-named planets have a greater number of these secondary
bodies revolving around them; but, unfortunately, the Uranian and
Neptunian systems are at such immense distances from us, that even the
magnificent telescopes of to-day can extract very little information
concerning them.

From the distribution of the satellites, the reader will notice that the
planets relatively near to the sun are provided with few or none, while
the more distant planets are richly endowed. The conclusion, therefore,
seems to be that nearness to the sun is in some way unfavourable either
to the production, or to the continued existence, of satellites.

A planet and its satellites form a repetition of the solar system on a
tiny scale. Just as the planets revolve around the sun, so do these
secondary bodies revolve around their primaries. When Galileo, in 1610,
turned his newly invented telescope upon Jupiter, he quickly recognised
in the four circling moons which met his gaze, a miniature edition of
the solar system.

Besides the planets and their satellites, there are two other classes of
bodies which claim membership of the solar system. These are Comets and
Meteors. Comets differ from the bodies which we have just been
describing in that they appear filmy and transparent, whereas the others
are solid and opaque. Again, the paths of the planets around the sun and
of the satellites around their primaries are not actually circles; they
are ovals, but their ovalness is not of a marked degree. The paths of
comets on the other hand are usually _very_ oval; so that in their
courses many of them pass out as far as the known limits of the solar
system, and even far beyond. It should be mentioned that nowadays the
tendency is to consider comets as permanent members of the system,
though this was formerly not by any means an article of faith with
astronomers.

Meteors are very small bodies, as a rule perhaps no larger than pebbles,
which move about unseen in space, and of which we do not become aware
until they arrive very close to the earth. They are then made visible to
us for a moment or two in consequence of being heated to a white heat by
the friction of rushing through the atmosphere, and are thus usually
turned into ashes and vapour long before they reach the surface of our
globe. Though occasionally a meteoric body survives the fiery ordeal,
and reaches the earth more or less in a solid state to bury itself deep
in the soil, the majority of these celestial visitants constitute no
source of danger whatever for us. Any one who will take the trouble to
gaze at the sky for a short time on a clear night, is fairly certain to
be rewarded with the view of a meteor. The impression received is as if
one of the stars had suddenly left its accustomed place, and dashed
across the heavens, leaving in its course a trail of light. It is for
this reason that meteors are popularly known under the name of "shooting
stars."


[1] By the Italian astronomer, Piazzi, at Palermo.

[2] Probably eight. (See note, page 232.)




CHAPTER III

THE SOLAR SYSTEM


We have seen, in the course of the last chapter, that the solar system
is composed as follows:--there is a central body, the sun, around which
revolve along stated paths a number of important bodies known as
planets. Certain of these planets, in their courses, carry along in
company still smaller bodies called satellites, which revolve around
them. With regard, however, to the remaining members of the system, viz.
the comets and the meteors, it is not advisable at this stage to add
more to what has been said in the preceding chapter. For the time being,
therefore, we will devote our attention merely to the sun, the planets,
and the satellites.

Of what shape then are these bodies? Of one shape, and that one alone
which appears to characterise all solid objects in the celestial spaces:
they are spherical, which means _round like a ball_.

Each of these spherical bodies rotates; that is to say, turns round and
round, as a top does when it is spinning. This rotation is said to take
place "upon an axis," a statement which may be explained as
follows:--Imagine a ball with a knitting-needle run right through its
centre. Then imagine this needle held pointing in one fixed direction
while the ball is turned round and round. Well, it is the same thing
with the earth. As it journeys about the sun, it keeps turning round and
round continually as if pivoted upon a mighty knitting needle
transfixing it from North Pole to South Pole. In reality, however, there
is no such material axis to regulate the constant direction of the
rotation, just as there are no actual supports to uphold the earth
itself in space. The causes which keep the celestial spheres poised, and
which control their motions, are far more wonderful than any mechanical
device.

At this juncture it will be well to emphasise the sharp distinction
between the terms _rotation_ and _revolution_. The term "rotation" is
invariably used by astronomers to signify the motion which a celestial
body has upon an axis; the term "revolution," on the other hand, is used
for the movement of one celestial body around another. Speaking of the
earth, for instance, we say, that it _rotates_ on its axis, and that it
_revolves_ around the sun.

So far, nothing has been said about the sizes of the members of our
system. Is there any stock size, any pattern according to which they may
be judged? None whatever! They vary enormously. Very much the largest of
all is the Sun, which is several hundred times larger than all the
planets and satellites of the system rolled together. Next comes Jupiter
and afterwards the other planets in the following order of
size:--Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, the Earth, Venus, Mars, and Mercury.
Very much smaller than any of these are the asteroids, of which Ceres,
the largest, is less than 500 miles in diameter. It is, by the way, a
strange fact that the zone of asteroids should mark the separation of
the small planets from the giant ones. The following table, giving
roughly the various diameters of the sun and the principal planets in
miles, will clearly illustrate the great discrepancy in size which
prevails in the system.

Sun          866,540 miles
Mercury        2,765  "
Venus          7,826  "
Earth          7,918  "
Mars           4,332  "

ZONE OF ASTEROIDS

Jupiter       87,380  "
Saturn        73,125  "
Uranus[3]     34,900  "
Neptune[3]    32,900  "

It does not seem possible to arrive at any generalisation from the above
data, except it be to state that there is a continuous increase in size
from Mercury to the earth, and a similar decrease in size from Jupiter
outwards. Were Mars greater than the earth, the planets could then with
truth be said to increase in size up to Jupiter, and then to decrease.
But the zone of asteroids, and the relative smallness of Mars, negative
any attempt to regard the dimensions of the planets as an orderly
sequence.

Next with respect to relative distance from the sun, Venus circulates
nearly twice as far from it as Mercury, the earth nearly three times as
far, and Mars nearly four times. After this, just as we found a sudden
increase in size, so do we meet with a sudden increase in distance.
Jupiter, for instance, is about thirteen times as far as Mercury, Saturn
about twenty-five times, Uranus about forty-nine times, and Neptune
about seventy-seven. (See Fig. 2, p. 21.)

It will thus be seen how enormously the solar system was enlarged in
extent by the discovery of the outermost planets. The finding of Uranus
plainly doubled its breadth; the finding of Neptune made it more than
half as broad again. Nothing indeed can better show the import of these
great discoveries than to take a pair of compasses and roughly set out
the above relative paths in a series of concentric circles upon a large
sheet of paper, and then to consider that the path of Saturn was the
supposed boundary of our solar system prior to the year 1781.

We have seen that the usual shape of celestial bodies themselves is
spherical. Of what form then are their paths, or _orbits_, as these are
called? One might be inclined at a venture to answer "circular," but
this is not the case. The orbits of the planets cannot be regarded as
true circles. They are ovals, or, to speak in technical language,
"ellipses." Their ovalness or "ellipticity" is, however, in each case
not by any means of the same degree. Some orbits--for instance, that of
the earth--differ only slightly from circles; while others--those of
Mars or Mercury, for example--are markedly elliptic. The orbit of the
tiny planet Eros is, however, far and away the most elliptic of all, as
we shall see when we come to deal with that little planet in detail.

It has been stated that the sun and planets are always rotating. The
various rates at which they do so will, however, be best appreciated by
a comparison with the rate at which the earth itself rotates.

But first of all, let us see what ground we have, if any, for asserting
that the earth rotates at all?

If we carefully watch the heavens we notice that the background of the
sky, with all the brilliant objects which sparkle in it, appears to turn
once round us in about twenty-four hours; and that the pivot upon which
this movement takes place is situated somewhere near what is known to us
as the _Pole Star_. This was one of the earliest facts noted with regard
to the sky; and to the men of old it therefore seems as if the heavens
and all therein were always revolving around the earth. It was natural
enough for them to take this view, for they had not the slightest idea
of the immense distance of the celestial bodies, and in the absence of
any knowledge of the kind they were inclined to imagine them
comparatively near. It was indeed only after the lapse of many
centuries, when men had at last realised the enormous gulf which
separated them from even the nearest object in the sky, that a more
reasonable opinion began to prevail. It was then seen that this
revolution of the heavens about the earth could be more easily and more
satisfactorily explained by supposing a mere rotation of the solid earth
about a fixed axis, pointed in the direction of the polar star. The
probability of such a rotation on the part of the earth itself was
further strengthened by the observations made with the telescope. When
the surfaces of the sun and planets were carefully studied these bodies
were seen to be rotating. This being the case, there could not surely
be much hesitation in granting that the earth rotated also; particularly
when it so simply explained the daily movement of the sky, and saved men
from the almost inconceivable notion that the whole stupendous vaulted
heaven was turning about them once in every twenty-four hours.

If the sun be regularly observed through a telescope, it will gradually
be gathered from the slow displacement of sunspots across its face,
their disappearance at one edge and their reappearance again at the
other edge, that it is rotating on an axis in a period of about
twenty-six days. The movement, too, of various well-known markings on
the surfaces of the planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn proves to us that
these bodies are rotating in periods, which are about twenty-four hours
for the first, and about ten hours for each of the other two. With
regard, however, to Uranus and Neptune there is much more uncertainty,
as these planets are at such great distances that even our best
telescopes give but a confused view of the markings which they display;
still a period of rotation of from ten to twelve hours appears to be
accepted for them. On the other hand the constant blaze of sunlight in
the neighbourhood of Mercury and Venus equally hampers astronomers in
this quest. The older telescopic observers considered that the rotation
periods of these two planets were about the same as that of the earth;
but of recent years the opinion has been gaining ground that they turn
round on their axes in exactly the same time as they revolve about the
sun. This question is, however, a very doubtful one, and will be again
referred to later on; but, putting it on one side, it will be seen from
what we have said above, that the rotation periods of the other planets
of our system are usually about twenty-four hours, or under. The fact
that the rotation period of the sun should run into _days_ need not seem
extraordinary when one considers its enormous size.

The periods taken by the various planets to revolve around the sun is
the next point which has to be considered. Here, too, it is well to
start with the earth's period of revolution as the standard, and to see
how the periods taken by the other planets compare with it.

The earth takes about 365-1/4 days to revolve around the sun. This
period of time is known to us as a "year." The following table shows in
days and years the periods taken by each of the other planets to make a
complete revolution round the sun:--

Mercury  about  88 days.
Venus     "    226   "
Mars      "      1 year and 321 days.
Jupiter   "     11 years and 313 days.
Saturn    "     29 years and 167 days.
Uranus    "     84 years and 7 days.
Neptune   "    164 years and 284 days.

From these periods we gather an important fact, namely, that the nearer
a planet is to the sun the faster it revolves.

Compared with one of our years what a long time does an Uranian, or
Neptunian, "year" seem? For instance, if a "year" had commenced in
Neptune about the middle of the reign of George II., that "year" would
be only just coming to a close; for the planet is but now arriving back
to the position, with regard to the sun, which it then occupied. Uranus,
too, has only completed a little more than 1-1/2 of its "years" since
Herschel discovered it.

Having accepted the fact that the planets are revolving around the sun,
the next point to be inquired into is:--What are the positions of their
orbits, or paths, relatively to each other?

Suppose, for instance, the various planetary orbits to be represented by
a set of hoops of different sizes, placed one within the other, and the
sun by a small ball in the middle of the whole; in what positions will
these hoops have to be arranged so as to imitate exactly the true
condition of things?

First of all let us suppose the entire arrangement, ball and hoops, to
