orbited pole-to-pole two thousand miles above Alpha Centauri's second
planet. While we took an atmosphere-brushing approach which wouldn't
burn off the shuttle's skin, we went as swiftly as we could.

A week before we had completed man's first trip through hyperspace.
We were now making the first landing on an inhabited planet of
another sun. All the preliminary investigations had been made via
electronspectroscopes and electrontelescopes from the stellatomic.

We knew that the atmosphere was breathable and were reasonably certain
that the peoples of the world into whose atmosphere we were dropping
were at peace. We went unarmed, just the two of us; it might not be wise
to go in force.

We were silent, and I know that Harry Albrecht was as perplexed as I was
over the fact that our all-wave receivers failed to pick up any signs of
radio communication whatever. We had assumed that we would pick up
signals of some type as soon as we had passed down through the
unfamiliar planet's ionosphere.

The scattered arrangement of the towering cities appeared to call for
radio communications. The hundreds of atmosphere ships flashing along a
system of airways between the cities seemed to indicate the existence of
electronic navigational and landing aids. But perhaps the signals were
all tightly beamed; we would know when we came lower.

We dropped down into the airway levels, and still our receivers failed
to pick up a signal of any sort--not even a whisper of static. And
strangely, our radarscopes failed to record even a blip from their
atmosphere ships!

"I guess it's our equipment, Harry," I said. "It just doesn't seem to
function in this atmosphere. We'll have to put Edwards to work on it
when we go back upstairs."

We spotted an airport on the outskirts of a large city. The runways were
laid out with the precision of Earth's finest. I put our ship's nose
eastward on a runway and took it down fast through a lull in the
atmosphere ship traffic.

As we went down I saw tiny buildings spotted on the field which surely
housed electronic equipment, but our receivers remained silent.

I taxied the shuttle up to an unloading ramp before the airport's
terminal building and I killed the drive.

"Harry," I said, "if it weren't that their ships are so outlandishly
stubby and their buildings so outflung, we might well be on Earth!"

"I agree, Captain. Strange, though, that they're not mobbing us. They
couldn't take this delta-winged job for one of their ships!"

It _was_ strange.

