there was no danger of getting lost.

Nobody interfered with us at our departure, as we had feared they might,
and in a short time we had become so absorbed in the strange spectacles
of the narrow streets, lined with shops and filled with people on foot,
while small air ships continually passed just above the roofs, that we
forgot the necessity of keeping our landmark constantly in view, and were
lost without knowing it.

One thing which immediately struck us was the entire absence of beasts of
burden--nothing like horses or mules did we see. There were not even
dogs, although, as I have told you, some canine-like animals dwelt with
the people of the caverns. Everybody went either on foot or in air ships.
There were no carriages, except a kind of palanquin, some running on
wheels and others borne by hand.

"I should think they would have autos," said Jack, "with all their
science and ingenuity which Edmund admires so much."

But there was not a sign of anything resembling an auto; the silence of
the crowded streets was startling, and made the scene more dreamlike.
Everybody appeared to be shod with some noise-absorbing material. We
strolled along, turning corners with blissful carelessness, staring and
being stared at (for, of course, everybody knew who we were), peering
into open doors and the gaping fronts of bazaars, chattering like a
couple of boys making their first visit to a city, and becoming every
moment more hopelessly, though unconsciously, lost, and more interested
by what we saw. The astonishing display of pleasing colors and the
brilliancy of everything fascinated us. I had never seen anything
comparable to this in beauty, variety, and richness. We passed a market
where we saw some of the bright-plumaged birds that we had eaten at our
first repast hung up for sale. They had a way of serving these birds at
table with the brilliant feathers of the head and neck still attached, as
if they found a gratification even at their meals in seeing beautiful
colors before them.

Other shops were filled with birds in gilded cages, which we should have
taken for songsters but for the fact that, although crowds gathered about
and regarded them with mute admiration, not a sound issued from their
throats--at least we heard none. A palanquin stopped at one of these
shops, and a lady alighted and bought three beautiful birds which she
carried away in their cages, watching them with every indication of the
utmost pleasure, which we ascribed to the splendor of their plumage and
the gracefulness of their forms. As a crowd watched the transaction
without interference on the part of the shopkeeper, or evidence of
annoyance on that of the lady, we took the liberty of a close look
ourselves. Then we saw their money.

"Good, yellow gold," whispered Jack.

Such, indeed, it seemed to be. The lady took the money, which consisted
of slender rings, chased with strange characters, from a golden purse,
and the whole transaction seemed so familiar that we might well have
believed ourselves to be witnessing a purchase in a bazaar of Cairo or
Damascus. This scene led to a desire on Jack's part to buy something
himself.

"If I only had some of their money," he said, "I'd like to get some
curiosities to carry home. I wonder if they'd accept these?" and he drew
from his pocket some gold and silver coins.

"No doubt they'd be glad to have a few as keepsakes," I said.

"By Jo! I think I'll try it," said Jack, "but not here. I'm not a bird
fancier myself. Let's look a little farther."

We wandered on, getting more and more interested, and followed by a
throng of curious natives, who treated us, I must say, much more
respectfully than we should have been treated in similar circumstances at
home. Many of the things we saw, I cannot describe, because there is
nothing to liken them to, but all were as beautiful as they were strange.
At last we found a shop whose contents struck Jack's fancy. The place
differed from any that we had yet seen; it was much larger, and more
richly fitted up than the others, and there were no counters, the things
that it contained being displayed on the inner walls, while a single
keeper, of a grave aspect, and peculiarly attired, all in black, occupied
a seat at the back. The objects on view were apparently ornaments to be
hung up, as we hang plaques on the wall. They were of both gold and
silver, and in some the two metals were intermixed, with pleasing
effects. What seemed singular was the fact that the _motif_ of the
ornaments was always the same, although greatly varied in details of
execution. As near as I could make it out, the intention appeared to be
to represent a sunburst. There was invariably a brilliant polished boss
in the center, sometimes set with a jewel, and surrounding rays of
crinkled form, which plunged into a kind of halo that encircled the
entire work. The idea was commonplace, and it did not occur to me amidst
my admiration of the extreme beauty of the workmanship that there was any
cause for surprise in the finding of a sunburst represented here. Jack
was enthusiastic.

"That's the ticket for me," he said. "How would one of those things look
hanging over the fireplace of old Olympus? You bet I'm going to persuade
the old chap to exchange one for a handful of good solid American money."

I happened to glance behind us while Jack was scooping his pocket, and
was surprised to see that the crowd of idlers, which had been following
us, had dispersed. Looking out of the doorway, I saw some of them
furtively regarding us from a respectful distance. I twitched Jack by the
sleeve:

"See here," I said, "there's some mistake about this. I don't believe
that this is a shop. You'd better be careful, or we may make a bad
break."

"Oh, pshaw!" he replied; "it's a shop all right, or if it isn't exactly a
shop that old duffer will be glad to get a little good money for one of
his gimcracks."

My suspicion that all was not right was not allayed when I noticed that
the old man, whose complexion differed from the prevailing tone here, and
who was specially remarkable by the possession of an eagle-beaked nose, a
peculiarity that I had not before observed among these people, began to
frown as Jack brusquely approached him. But I could not interfere before
Jack had thrown a handful of coin in his lap, and, reaching up, had put
his hand upon one of the curious sunbursts, saying:

"I guess this will suit; what do you say, Peter?"

Instantly the old fellow sprang to his feet, sending the coins rolling
over the polished floor, and with eyes ablaze with anger, seized Jack by
the throat. I sprang to his aid, but in a second four stout fellows,
darting out of invisible corners, grappled us, and before we could make
any effective resistance, they had our arms firmly bound behind our
backs! Jack exerted all his exceptional strength to break loose, but in
vain.

"I tried to stop you, Jack--" I began, in a tone of annoyance, but
immediately he cut me off:

"This is on _me_, Peter; don't you worry. _You_ haven't done anything."

"I'm afraid it's on all of us," I replied. "The whole party, Edmund and
all, may have to suffer for our heedlessness."

"Fiddlesticks," he returned. "I haven't got his old ornament, but he's
got my coin. This looks like a skin game to me. What in thunder did he
hang the things up for if he didn't want to sell 'em?"

"But I told you this wasn't a shop."

"No, I see it isn't; it's a trap for suckers, I guess."

Jack's indignation grew hotter as we were dragged out into the street,
and followed by a crush of people drawn to the scene, were hurried along,
we knew not whither. In fact, his indignation swallowed up the alarm
which he ought to have experienced, and which I felt in full force. I
beat my brains in vain to find some explanation for the merciless
severity with which we were treated so out of all proportion to the
venial fault that had unconsciously been committed, and my perplexity
grew when I saw in the faces of the crowd surrounding us, and running to
keep up, a look of horror, as if we had been guilty of an unspeakable
crime. We were too much hurried and jolted by our captors to address one
another, and in a short time we were widely separated, Jack being led, or
rather dragged, ahead, as if to prevent any communication between us.
Once in a while, to my regret, I observed him exerting all his force to
break his bonds and slinging his custodians about; but he could not get
away, and at last, to my infinite comfort, he ceased to struggle, and
went along as quietly as the rapid pace would permit.

Presently an air ship swooped down from above, and alighted in a little
square which we had just entered. Immediately we were taken aboard, with
small regard to our comfort, and the air ship rose rapidly, and bore off
in the direction of the great tower of the palace which we could now see.
Upon our arrival we were taken through the inevitable labyrinth of
corridors, and finally found ourselves in a place that was entirely new
to us.

It was a round chamber, perhaps two hundred feet in diameter, lighted,
like the Roman Pantheon, by a huge circular opening in the vaulted roof,
through which I caught a glimpse of the pearl-tinted cloud dome, which
seemed infinitely remote. No opposition was made when I pushed ahead in
order to be at Jack's side, and as a throng quickly hedged us round, our
conductors released their hold, although our arms remained bound. When at
last we stood fast we were in front of a rich dais, containing a
thronelike seat occupied by a personage attired in black, the first
glimpse of whose face gave me such a shock as I had not experienced since
the priest of the earth-worshipers seized me for his prey. I have never
seen anything remotely resembling that face. It was without beard, and of
a ghastly paleness. It was seen only in profile, except when, with a
lightning-like movement, it turned, for the fraction of a second, toward
us, and was instantly averted again. It made my nerves creep to look at
it. The nose was immense, resembling a huge curved beak, and the eyes, as
black and glittering as jet, were roofed with shaggy brows, and seemed
capable of seeing crosswise.

Sometimes one side of the face and sometimes the other was presented, the
transition being effected by two instantaneous jerks, with a slight pause
between, during which the terrible eyes transfixed us. At such moments
the creature--though he bore the form of a man--seemed to project his
dreadful countenance toward the object of his inspection like a monstrous
bird stretching forth its neck toward its prey. The effect was
indescribable, terrifying, paralyzing! The eyes glowed like fanned
embers.

"In God's name," gasped Jack, leaning his trembling shoulder upon me,
"what is it?"

I was, perhaps, more unmanned than he, and could make no reply.

Then there was a movement in the throng surrounding us, and the old man
of the sunbursts appeared before the throne, and, after dropping on his
knees and rising again, indicated us with his long finger, and, as was
plain, made some serious accusation. The face turned upon us again with a
longer gaze than usual, and we literally shrank from it. Then its owner
rose from his seat, towering up, it seemed, to a height of full seven
feet, shot his hand out with a gesture of condemnation, and instantly sat
down again and averted his countenance. There seemed to have been a world
of meaning in this brief act to those who could comprehend it. We were
seized, even more roughly than before, and dragged from the chamber, and
at the end of a few minutes found ourselves thrown into a dungeon, where
there was not the slightest glimmer of light, and the door was locked
upon us.

It was a long time before either of us summoned up the courage to speak.
At length I said faintly:

"Jack, I'm afraid it's all over with us. We must have done something
terrible, though I cannot imagine what it was."

But Jack, after his manner, was already recovering his spirits, and he
replied stoutly:

"Nonsense, Peter, we're all right, as Edmund says. Wait till he comes and
he'll fix it."

"But how can he know what has happened? And what could he do if he did?
More likely they will all be condemned along with us."

Jack felt around in the dark and got me by the hand, giving it a hearty
pressure.

"Remember Ala," he said. "She's our friend, or Edmund's, and they'll
bring us out of this. You want to brace up."

"Remember Ingra!" I responded with a shiver, and I could feel Jack start
at the words.

"Hang him!" he muttered. "If I'd only finished him when I had the drop!"

After that neither spoke. If Jack's thoughts were blacker than mine he
must have wished for his pistol to blow out his own brains. At no time
since our arrival on the planet had I felt so depressed. I had no courage
left; could see no lightening of the gloom anywhere. In the horror of the
darkness which enveloped us, the _horror of space_ came over my spirit.
One feels a little of that sometimes when the breadth of an ocean
separates him from home, and from all who really care for him--but what
is the Atlantic or the Pacific to millions upon millions of leagues of
interplanetary space! To be cast away among the inhabitants of another
world than one's own! To have lost, as we had done (for in that moment of
despair I was _sure_ Edmund could never repair the car), the only
possible means of return! To have offended, just _because_ we were
strangers, and _could_ not know better, some incomprehensible social law
of this strange people, who owned not a drop of the blood of our race, or
of any race whatsoever dwelling on the earth! To lie under the
condemnation of that goblin face, without the possibility of pleading
even the mercy that our hearts instinctively grant to the smallest mite
of fellow life on our own planet! To be alone! friendless! forsaken!
condemned!--in a far-off, kinless world! I could have fallen down in
idolatry before a grain of sand from the shore of the Atlantic!

In the murkiest depth of my despair a sound roused me with a shock that
made my heart ache. In a moment the door opened, light streamed in, and
Edmund stood there.



CHAPTER XIV


THE SUN GOD

Strangely enough, I, who have an exceptional memory for spoken words,
cannot, by any effort, recall what Edmund said, as his face beamed in
upon us. I have only a confused recollection that he spoke, and that his
words had a marvelous effect upon my broken spirit. But I can see, as if
it were yet before me, the smile that illumined his features. My heart
bounded with joy, as if a messenger had come straight from the earth
itself, bearing a reprieve whose authority could not be called in
question.

Jack's joy was no less than mine, although he had not suffered mentally
as I had done. And the sight of Ala was hardly less reassuring to us, but
to find Ingra, too, present was somewhat of a shock to our confidence in
speedy delivery from trouble. And, in fact, we were not at once
delivered. We had to spend many weary hours yet in our dark prison, but
they were rendered less gloomy by Edmund's assurance that he would save
us. The confidence that he always inspired seems to me to have been
another mark of his genius. We had an instinct that he could do in any
circumstances what was impossible to ordinary men.

At last the welcome moment came, and we were led forth, free, and
rejoined Edmund, Henry, and Juba in our apartments. Then, for the first,
we learned what we had done, and how narrow had been our escape from a
terrible doom. It was a new chapter of wonder that Edmund opened before
us. I shall tell it in his own words.

"When I returned to the palace and found you missing I was greatly
wrought up. Immediately I applied to Ala for aid in finding you. She was
quickly informed of all the circumstances of your arrest, and I saw at
once, by the expression of her features, that it was a matter of the
utmost gravity. I was not reassured by Ingra's evident joy. I could read
in his face the pleasure that the news gave him, and I perceived that
there was again opposition between him and Ala, and that she was trying,
with less success than I hoped for, to bring him round to her view.

"With no little trouble I finally discovered the nature of your offense.
I understood it the more readily because I had already begun to suspect
the existence among these people of a strange form of idolatry, in some
respects akin to the earth-worship of the cavern dwellers. I have told
you that certain things had led me to think that they occasionally see
the sun here. It is a phenomenon of excessive rarity, and whole
generations sometimes pass without its recurrence. It is due to an
opening which at irregular periods forms for a brief space of time in the
cloud dome. I imagine that it may be in some way connected with sunspots,
but here they have no notion of its cause, and look upon it as entirely
miraculous.

"Whenever this rare event occurs it gives rise to extraordinary religious
excitement, and ceremonies concerning which there is some occult mystery
that I have not yet penetrated. I suspect that the ceremonies are not
altogether unlike the Bacchanalian festivals of ancient Greece. At any
rate the momentary appearance of the sun at these times is regarded as
the avatar of a supreme god, and their whole religious system is based
upon it. So universal and profound is the superstition to which it gives
rise that the most instructed persons among them are completely under its
dominion. The eagle-beaked individual who condemned you, and whom I have
since seen, is the chief priest of this superstition, and within his
sphere his power is unlimited. It is solely to the belief--which, through
Ala, I have succeeded in impressing upon him--that we are _children of
the sun_ that I owe the success of my efforts in your behalf. Without
that you would surely have been sacrificed, and we with you.

"One of the forms which this superstition takes is a belief that the
anger of the sun god can be mollified by offerings of images, made in his
likeness, which are first consecrated by the chief priest, and then hung
up on the walls of certain small temples, which are scattered through the
city, and are always kept open to the air under the guard of a minor
priest and his attendants. A whole family, as I understand it, deems
itself protected by one of these images, which are made by artists who
never touch any other work, and which are only granted to those who have
undergone a painful series of purifications in the great temple. The
preliminary ceremonies finished, the images are suspended, and at certain
times those to whom they belong go and kneel and pray before them, as
before their guardian saints."

"What a fool I was not to understand it," I murmured.

"You will understand now," Edmund continued, "how serious was Jack's
offense in insulting a priest, and laying impious hands upon a sacred
image, belonging, no doubt, to a family whose antiquity of descent would
make our oldest pedigrees on the earth seem as ephemeral as the existence
of a May fly; for I am convinced that here life has gone on,
uninterrupted by wars and changes of dynasty, for untold ages.

"It is a marvel that you escaped, for already they were preparing the
awful sacrifice. The chief priest was amazed when an interposition was
made on your behalf. Such a thing had never been known, and, as I have
said, it was only by acting upon his superstition that I succeeded, with
Ala's assistance, in obtaining a reprieve. As the case stands, we find
ourselves occupying a dangerous eminence, which it may be difficult for
us to maintain. I must beseech you to be on your guard, and to act only
under my direction. It is all the more serious for us because I am
convinced that Ingra has no faith whatever in the legend which protects
us. He persists in believing that we are simply interlopers from the dark
hemisphere, and the opposition between him and Ala has now become so
sharp that he would gladly witness our destruction. I am sure that he
will do his utmost to unmask us, and thus send us to our death."

"But--" I began.

"Wait a moment," said Edmund, "I have not yet finished. I must now tell
you who Ingra is. _He is the destined consort of Ala._ That explains his
influence over her. From what I can make out, it appears that he is of
the royal blood, and that the marriage of the queen is arranged, not by
her preference, but by an unwritten law, administered by the chief
priest. She has no choice in the matter."

"I should say not," broke in Jack. "She never would have chosen that
jackanapes! If you hadn't spoiled my aim I'd have relieved her of the
burden."

"Not another word of that!" said Edmund severely. "In no manner, not even
by a look, are you ever to express your dislike of him. And remember, you
must govern your very thoughts, for here they lie open, as legible as
print."

"Hang me," growled Jack, "if I like a world where a man can't even think
his own thoughts because his mind goes bare! Take me back where you have
to speak before you are understood."

"When you have wicked thoughts don't look them in the eyes," said Edmund,
half smiling, "and then you will run no danger. It is through the eyes
that they read. Now, to resume what I was saying, I am more than ever
anxious to recover the car, and to find the materials that will enable me
