
Some months ago, while they were experimenting upon apparatus for
reversing the electrical charges of an atom's electrons and protons,
they had first stumbled upon the incredible fact that such a place
as Arret really existed. They found that it was another world
occupying the same position in space as Earth, with the fundamental
difference in the two interwoven planes of existence lying in the
electrical make-up of the atoms that constituted matter in each
plane.

On Earth all atoms are composed of small heavy protons that are
always positive in charge, and larger lighter electrons that are
always negative. In Arret the protons were negative, and the
electrons positive. The result was two worlds occupying the same
space at the same time, yet with matter so essentially and
completely different that each world was intangible to the other.
They had named the unseen world Arret, the reverse of Terra.

Finding it impossible to work directly upon most forms of matter,
the experimenters had finally evolved a silver alloy that served as
a medium both for sending objects into Arret and then bringing
them back to Earth. By focussing the flame of the projection
apparatus upon a Silver Belt of this alloy, the electrical charges
of the Belt's atoms were reversed, automatically causing the Belt to
vanish from Earth and materialize in Arret. At the same time the
atoms of any object within the Belt's immediate radius were
similarly transformed, and that object was taken into Arret with the
Belt.

The recall mechanism functioned by broadcasting a power wave that
again reversed the atomic charge of the Belt and its contained
object back to that of Earth. At the same time the recall wave
exerted an attractive force that drew the atoms back to a central
point in the laboratory, where they were re-materialized upon the
same floor-plate from which they had originally been sent.

       *       *       *       *       *

The twelve-hour time limit was half up when Benjamin Marlowe and
Larry Powell finally straightened up wearily from their work over
the recall mechanism, their repairs completed. It had been one
o'clock in the afternoon when Joan Marlowe vanished from Earth in
the roseate flare of the projector. It was now nearly seven o'clock.

With nerves tense from anxiety, the two men crossed over to the
control-panel of the recall apparatus. This time they donned goggles
of dark glass to shield their eyes from the blinding green glare.
Marlowe threw the main switch, and the banked tubes came to life in
a flood of vivid emerald light.

Marlowe began stepping the rheostat up gradually to more power,
advancing it with cautious slowness to avoid any chance of a
repetition of the previous accident. The green radiance streaming
from the tubes in every direction began to throb with an electric
force that the two men could feel pulsing through their own bodies.

There was a click as the rheostat struck the last notch. The green
radiance was now a searing flame that half-blinded them even through
the thick dark glass of their protective goggles, while the vibrant
force of the green rays was sweeping through their bodies with a
tingling shock that nearly took their breath away.

Tensely the two men stared at the metal floor-plate in the center of
the area bounded by the flaming green tubes. Just over the plate the
green radiance seemed to be thickening and swirling oddly. The
swirling eddy became a small dense cloud of darker green light. Then
abruptly, like the fade-in on a moving picture screen, from the
cloud over the plate the misty outlines of an object swiftly cleared
and solidified into a bizarre something at whose unfamiliar aspect
both Marlowe and Powell gasped in amazement.

Marlowe snapped the switch off, and the green radiance vanished.
Stripping the dark goggles from their eyes, the two men hurried over
for a closer view of the thing that rested quiescent and apparently
lifeless there on the metal floor-plate.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was shaped like a huge egg, a little over a yard long, and was
apparently composed of a solid lump of some unknown crystalline
substance that closely resembled very clear, pale amber. Embedded in
the heart of the strange egg were clearly visible objects which
caused Marlowe and Powell to gasp in mingled horror and amazement.

Chief among the things imprisoned in that amber shroud was the
Silver Belt that Joan had worn, but the Belt was now looped over the
bony shoulder of a skeleton that by no possible stretch of the
imagination could ever have been that of a creature of this Earth.

The skeleton was still perfectly articulated, and gleamed through
the crystalline amber as though its bony surfaces were encrusted
with diamond dust. The bones were apparently those of a creature
that in life had been half dwarf-ape and half giant rat.

The beast had stood a little under a yard in height. The legs were
short, powerful, and bowed. The long arms ended in claw-like
travesties of hands. The skull was relatively small, with a sharply
sloping forehead and projecting squirrel-like teeth that were
markedly rodent.

Around the skeleton's neck there was a wide band of some strange
gray metal, with its smooth outer surface roughly scratched in
characters that resembled primitive hieroglyphics.

Marlowe's face was white with grief as he turned to Powell. "Joan
must be dead, Larry," he said sadly. "Otherwise, she would surely
never have allowed her Silver Belt to pass into the possession
of--this! She knew that the Belt represented her only hope of ever
being brought back to this world."

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment Powell stared intently into the heart of the
crystalline egg without answering. Then suddenly he straightened up
with marked excitement upon his face.

"There's a small sheet of paper entwined in the coils of that Belt!"
he exclaimed. "It may be a message from Joan!"

Swiftly the two men lifted the amber egg up to the top of a
workbench. Powell took a small hammer to test the hardness of the
strange translucent substance.

He struck it a sharp rap, then recoiled in surprise at the effect of
his blow, for the entire egg instantly shattered with a tinkling
crash like the bursting of a huge glass bubble. So complete was the
disintegration of the egg and the skeleton within it that all that
remained of either was a heap of diamond and amber dust. The only
things left intact were the Silver Belt and the metal collar.

Powell snatched up the Belt and extracted the small piece of paper
that had been firmly tucked into its coils. Hurriedly written in
pencil upon the paper was a message in a handwriting familiar to
both Powell and Marlowe:

    Help! I am held prisoner in the Cave of Blue Flames!
                                                 --Joan.

"Larry, Joan must still be alive over there in Arret!" There was new
hope in Benjamin Marlowe's voice.

"Yes, alive and held captive by whatever monstrosities may inhabit
that unknown plane," Powell agreed grimly. "There's only one way in
which we can possibly rescue her now. That is for you to send me
into Arret with a reserve Belt for Joan. I'll be ready to start as
soon as I get a couple of automatic pistols that I have up in my
room. It's a sure thing that I'll need them over there in Arret."

       *       *       *       *       *

Five minutes later Powell stood ready and waiting upon the
