been anyone else, I might have thought it wasn't entirely Helen's fault,
but George and I had been roommates in college and I knew him like a
brother. He was a person who got along with almost everyone.
Intelligent, easy-going and likeable.

He lifted his glass and glared at me as if I were the guilty party.
"She's a worry-wart," he continued. "A hypochondriac, a neurotic, an
escapist, and a communist." He studied the ceiling thoughtfully. "And
sometimes I think she's a little crazy."

I tried to calm him, "Don't worry about it. If things get worse, get a
divorce."

"Divorce, ha! She wouldn't give me a divorce if--"

The door opened.

Helen smiled half-heartedly, her pale face quickly resuming its unhappy
expression as if it tired her facial muscles when she smiled. "Hello,
Ed. Nice to see you again."

"Hello, Helen." I glanced at George and noticed he had closed his eyes
as if the sight of his wife was unbearable. His lower lip was white
where he gripped it with his teeth and I silently hoped he wouldn't draw
blood.

Helen sank into a chair and raised her skirt to reveal her right leg.
"Did George tell you about my legs?" she inquired. She stroked the leg
affectionately. "Arthritis. George grafted a new one on for me. Feels
ten times better."

My face blanched. The idea of replacing body parts from Banks didn't
nauseate me. If a man is in an automobile accident and loses an arm, and
that arm can be replaced, I think that's marvelous. What sickened me
were the people who actually _enjoyed_ having a part of their body
replaced with a part from a criminal or corpse.

"No." I sat down. My knees were weak. I felt short of breath. "George
didn't tell me. I--"

She interrupted with details of the operation. The details and list of
her other ailments lasted half an hour, during which George drank
steadily and I waited for a lull so I could glance at my watch and say
something about being late for an appointment.

I saw George several times during the next few weeks. Never at his
house. I didn't visit him on my own initiative because Helen, as I had
seen during my last visit, had passed from the stage of being unpleasant
and reached the stage of being unbearable. I didn't want to be around
her or listen to her, and George must have realized my feelings because
he didn't invite me to his house for some time.

But both of us had a habit of stopping at a club on the outskirts of
town and we met there often. Each time we met, George complained. Each
time, he seemed to drink more and complain more.

I worried about his job. He was a surgeon--one of the best--and a
