Earthmaker had given the knowledge of how to make such things to the
pale eyes, but not to the Sauk and Fox. Her people wore the skins of
animals, scraped and pushed and pulled and tanned with the animals'
brains and women's urine until they were soft and pliant and could be
worn comfortably next to the skin. But the clothing of the pale eyes was
more comfortable, and easier to keep clean. And more colorful. Sauk and
Fox shirts and leggings and skirts, unless painted or decorated with
dyed quills, were usually the brown or tan of animal skins. The best
deerskin garments were worked till they were white. The dresses and
shawls and blankets the pale eyes traders offered were of many
colors--blue and yellow, red and green, with flowers and other pictures
and designs on them. Redbird often spent long moments staring at the
good calico dress her father, Owl Carver, had gotten for her from the
pale eyes traders, just delighting in the tiny red roses printed on its
pale blue background.

For a moment, lost in thought about the pale eyes, she had forgotten
Gray Cloud's danger and her own pain. Now it came back to her like a war
club crushing her chest.

Soon it would be night again. Gray Cloud had been in the cave a whole
night and a whole day, while the snow fell. And the snow was falling
still. If someone did not rescue him, he would surely die.

She would go to her father, Owl Carver, and demand that Gray Cloud be
brought back from the sacred cave.

She turned and pushed her feet through the fresh snow, hurrying past the
round-roofed, snow-covered wickiups of the British Band's winter camp in
Ioway country. A dog burst out of Wolf Paw's doorway and floundered
through the snow, its short pointed ears flattened, barking at her. Wolf
Paw's dogs were a nuisance, barking and snapping at anyone who passed
near his dwelling.

The dog stopped barking, and she heard footsteps squeaking in the snow.
She stopped and turned. Wolf Paw himself was standing before his wickiup
beside the tall pole from whose top hung six Sioux scalps he had taken
last winter.

Wolf Paw glowered at her, arms folded under a bright red blanket. Three
short black stripes near one edge were the pale eyes trader's guarantee
that the blanket was of highest quality. Despite the snow, Wolf Paw's
head was uncovered, all shaved except for the stiff-standing crest of
red-dyed deer hair in the middle. Three black and white eagle feathers
were tied into it.

Redbird did not like Wolf Paw. He never let people forget that he was
the son of the great war chief Black Hawk, whose wickiup lay only a
short distance from his own. He never smiled, and she knew very well
what he was thinking when he looked at her.

She turned without a greeting and walked on, kicking the snow as she
went. But the sight of Wolf Paw had reminded her that though Owl Carver
was her father, she still had only a woman's influence. The spirit
journey of Gray Cloud was a matter for men.

Owl Carver loved her and was good to her, but if she tried to interfere
in his holy calling, he would be furious. He would never agree to bring
Gray Cloud down from the cave before he came down on his own. Such a
thing was against the way of the shaman.

She was still wondering what she dared say when she came to her family's
wickiup and found Owl Carver standing beside it, hands clasped behind
his back, staring eastward toward the Great River.

As she shuffled through the snow toward him, he turned and held out his
hands. When she reached him, he put his hands on her shoulders. She
peered into his face, hard to see now that night had fallen, and tried
to read it.

Owl Carver's face was flat. His long white hair was bound at his
forehead with a beaded band and fell from there to his shoulders,
spreading like a white shawl. His necklace of little round, striped
shells of the water creatures called megis rattled in the wind.

She trembled inwardly in his presence. The shaman of the tribe could
both heal and kill.

"How can he live in this blizzard?" she said, almost weeping.

"Did you not see the lightning, my daughter, and hear the thunder? Do
you think that merely betokens a young man freezing to death? Hear
me--once in a thousand years a man comes among us who is capable of
being a Great Shaman. Of being to other shamans, like myself, what
Earthmaker is to the lesser spirits of beasts and birds. But to be
known, and to discover the greatness of his powers, such a man must be
as greatly tested. I saw in Gray Cloud a man beyond the ordinary."

Owl Carver's willingness to talk made Redbird feel bolder. "Surely Gray
Cloud has been in the sacred cave long enough, my father. Will you not
go now and bring him down?"

He pushed her away, staring at her. "Earthmaker decides what is enough.
A man must _suffer_ to be worthy of the power his spirit guide bestows
on him. When I first began to walk the shaman's path, I wandered far
away into the great desert of the West and nearly died of hunger and
thirst. I did not suffer as much as Gray Cloud is suffering. But that is
because he can be a much greater shaman than I, if he lives. If he does
not live, he is like a foal born lame in the springtime. The wolves must
get him. It is Earthmaker's way."

Frightened though she was, Redbird forced herself to speak up. "There is
suffering that even the strongest cannot bear."

Owl Carver took a step toward her, his eyes round with anger. "Remember
what the law of the Sauk and Fox decrees for anyone who disturbs a man
on a spirit journey, even to help him. They take you to the Great River.
In the summer they would throw you in with rocks tied to you. In this
season they chop a hole in the ice and they push you in. The current
flows swiftly under the ice. It carries you away from the opening, and
you drown there in the cold and dark."

Redbird shrank back. Owl Carver had felt her pain when she first came to
him, but now he was angry. She sensed that behind that anger there
lurked fear. Fear that she might risk her life for Gray Cloud.

"Your mother has been calling for you," he said. "Go and help her with
her work."

Afraid to say any more, Redbird hurried past him and lifted the heavy
buffalo skin that covered the doorway of the family's wickiup. She
looked over her shoulder once and saw that her father was once again
looking toward the river where Gray Cloud had gone. Owl Carver held his
hands behind his back, knotting them together.

He was afraid for Gray Cloud, too. As she sensed that, her heart sank
further.

Entering the wickiup she saw, silhouetted against the light of the low
fire in the center, a figure rising up big as a buffalo, her half
brother, Iron Knife. Redbird took his hands in greeting.

"Gray Cloud will be well," Iron Knife said in a low, gruff voice.

Iron Knife was always kind to her. She was grateful for his words, but
she knew they were no more than a well-meant wish. Though Iron Knife was
the son of Owl Carver by his first wife, he had not a trace of the
shaman's ability to foretell events. Iron Knife could see only with his
eyes, hear only with his ears. His mother had died giving birth to him,
and there were those who said the spirits had chosen to give him no
gifts because he had killed his mother. Redbird had even heard that
while in mourning Owl Carver had predicted that Iron Knife would one day
be killed by a man whose mother had also died giving birth to him. No
one dared speak of these things in Iron Knife's presence.

Redbird knew she had more of the shaman in her than Iron Knife. She
knew, as her father did, that right now Gray Cloud was in terrible
danger.

"Where have you been?" Wind Bends Grass called out from the shadows. She
and Redbird's sisters were already bedded down for the night on
buffalo-robe pallets along the wall of the wickiup. Wind Bends Grass and
her two little girls, Wild Grape and Robin's Nest, slept together for
greater warmth.

"I was down in the woods, seeing to our horses," Redbird lied. She had
been near the horses, but only to watch for Gray Cloud.

"I needed you here," Wind Bends Grass said crossly. "I was stringing
beads for a new sash for your father, and your sisters are too small to
help me."

_Does my mother want me to string beads while Gray Cloud freezes to
death?_

"The snow was heavy on the horses' backs," Redbird said. "They needed
someone to brush them off."

"Nonsense," said Wind Bends Grass, sitting up. "You were waiting and
worrying for that pale eyes boy. And meanwhile Wolf Paw came again to
speak to your father today. How can you refuse the son of the mighty
Black Hawk and think of marrying that boy who has no father? His mother
lay with a pale eyes and got Gray Cloud. The pale eyes lived with her
only five summers and then ran away. He would have run away sooner, but
our people held him prisoner because of the war."

Redbird heard muffled giggles from the bedding beside her mother. Her
little sisters thought the story of Gray Cloud's parentage funny. Wind
Bends Grass struck with her hand at the two shaking bundles.

"Wolf Paw already has a wife," Redbird said.

"He is a _man_," said Wind Bends Grass. "A brave. He can make two wives,
three wives, _four_ wives happy."

Rage at her mother for belittling Gray Cloud when he might be dying
boiled up inside her and almost choked her. She bit her lip and held
back the angry words. She hurt too much to want to quarrel.

She took off her fur cap, wet boots and mittens and laid them near the
fire. Keeping on her buffalo-hide cloak, her doeskin dress and leggings,
she lay down on her own pallet, padded with blankets and prairie grass.
Curling up her legs, she wrapped the heavy cloak around herself.

The wickiup was quiet, except for the popping of burning twigs.

Redbird knew that her fear for Gray Cloud, deepening as the night
deepened, would keep her awake. She decided that when they were all
asleep, she would go back to the wickiup of Sun Woman and watch with
her.

She lay staring at the blackened ceiling that arched over her head.
Partly obscured by drifting smoke, the curved poles cast deep shadows in
the flickering light. Iron Knife had laid fresh branches on the fire.
Smoke stung her eyes.

Sometimes she thought she saw spirit messages above her in the patterns
of the twigs interwoven with the larger poles, and in the cracks in the
sheets of bark that lined the inside of the wickiup. But tonight her
mind was too absorbed in Gray Cloud's fate to try to read the patterns.

Over the breathing of the others she could hear the voice of the wind
humming across the roof. From time to time it would rise to a howl, and
the framework of the wickiup would creak and crackle under the strain.
Even though there was a fire and the wickiup was tightly sealed, Redbird
felt the cold seeping up from the earth. Its icy fingers touched her
body through the buffalo robe. Her dread for Gray Cloud turned to
heart-pounding panic.

_If I feel the cold, here in my warm wickiup, what must it be like for
him?_

After the snow stopped falling, the cold of this night would be the cold
that killed without mercy. Such a deepening cold often seemed to follow
a great snow. After a night like this, women would find rabbit and deer
lying in the drifts near the camp. The animals trying to get close to
warmth had overcome their fear of people, but the cold had leeched the
life from their bodies. Even the strongest animals might die. Only
people, to whom Earthmaker had given the knowledge of how to shelter
themselves and make fire, could withstand this death-dealing cold.

Her fists clenched on the blanket. Her heart filled up with anger. Anger
against the cold, against her mother, who despised Gray Cloud, against
Owl Carver, who had sent him to almost certain death. Against the
spirits, who had permitted this. Out of her anger blazed up a fierce
resolve.

_I will not let you take him from me._

If everyone else accepted Gray Cloud's death, she did not. She would go
to him. She would go to Sun Woman and gather what medicines she might
have, anything that would keep the cold from draining the last bit of
warmth and strength out of Gray Cloud.

_Have you not been told what the tribe decrees for anyone who disturbs a
man on a spirit journey, even to help him?_

Her anger turned to fear, and she lay there, not wanting to move,
knowing that if she threw off the blankets and stood up, she would be
taking the first step on a path that might be her death.

But then she thought of that terrible wind, sharp as a pale eyes' steel
knife, shrieking around Gray Cloud's body. If she did something now, he
might live; and if she did nothing, he was sure to die.

She had loved Gray Cloud for as long as she could remember. To be
without him--she could not bear to think of it.

She had heard tales of women who died fighting beside their men. Yes,
better to die with Gray Cloud, to walk the Trail of Souls into the West
with him, than live a long life grieving for him.

She listened to the sounds of the sleepers, Iron Knife's rumbling snore,
Wind Bends Grass's heavy breathing that sounded like her name, the
rustlings and murmurings of Wild Grape and Robin's Nest.

Owl Carver still had not come in, and he might stay out there most of
the night. She dared not wait any longer. She would have to face him.

Silently she pushed off her coverings and stood up. She quickly put back
on her fur cap, boots and mittens.

The deepened cold bit into her cheeks like a weasel's teeth. While she
had lain in the wickiup the snow, which had been falling continually for
a night and a day, had stopped at last. The clouds overhead were
breaking up, and she could see the full moon, round and bright as a pale
eyes' silver coin. The Moon of Ice. It seemed frozen in place in the
black sky. Stars glittered, little chips of ice. With her first indrawn
breath the insides of her nostrils seemed to freeze, the air burned in
her nose and throat. Her heart quailed for Gray Cloud.

The black figure of Owl Carver stood just where she had left him. How
could he stand the cold this long?

Owl Carver turned to her. "Where are you going?"

"To Sun Woman's wickiup, to watch with her."

She hated Owl Carver. He was the one who had sent Gray Cloud on this
spirit journey, and now would do nothing to save him from death.

As if sensing her agony, he said, "The spirits will watch over Gray
Cloud."

She wanted to believe him, but she could not. She had begged him to help
Gray Cloud, and he had commanded her to be silent. Now she had no more
to say to him. She turned from Owl Carver.

He could have forbidden her to go to Sun Woman. But he would not do
that. There was an understanding between Redbird and her father that she
could not put into words. She knew that when he looked at her, he was
torn between pride that she, the oldest of his children by Wind Bends
Grass, possessed the same gifts he did, and sorrow that she was a woman,
and could never be a shaman. And she knew that of all his children, he
loved her best.

The snow, blown off the roofs of the wickiups, piled up in long drifts
on their western sides. The east wind battered Redbird as she plodded
through the winter camp toward one low, rounded black structure that
rose out of the snow a bit apart from the others, on the north side of
the camp.

The skinned quarters of small animals hung frozen from a rack outside
Sun Woman's doorway. Redbird went up to the flap of buffalo hide and
called, "It is Redbird. May I come in?"

Redbird heard Sun Woman undoing the sinew laces that held the flap down.
She bent and entered.

In the firelight within Sun Woman's wickiup, Redbird saw agony in the
tightness of the older woman's wide mouth and the clenching of her
strong jaw. Gray Cloud's mother was built big, with broad shoulders and
hips and large hands, but there was a helplessness now in the way she
stood staring into the fire. Hanging from the curving bark wall behind
her were her craft objects, a medicine bundle of deerskin, the carved
figures of a naked man and a naked woman, clamshells to mold maple
sugar, a horse's tail dyed red, a small drum and a flute.

Redbird spoke in a rush. "If he dies I do not want to live." She feared
that if she tried to address Sun Woman properly, her voice would be
choked by sobs before she could say what demanded to be said.

She should not even suggest to Gray Cloud's mother that he might die.
And she should not even hint to his mother of her love for Gray Cloud,
when neither Sun Woman nor Owl Carver had spoken to each other of plans
for their children. The band would be appalled at such rudeness.

"Forgive me for speaking so to you," she said timidly.

Sun Woman smiled, but Redbird saw that there was much sadness in the
smile. "You know you can."

"Yes, you are different," Redbird said.

_Even though the pale eyes killed your husband, you took a pale eyes
into your wickiup._

This had happened more than fifteen winters ago, and Redbird knew it
only as a story that her mother and other women liked to repeat while
they did their work together. Sun Woman's husband, a brave named Dark
Water, had been killed in a quarrel with pale eyes settlers. In spite of
that, when Gray Cloud's pale eyes father came to live with the Sauk, Sun
Woman had come to love him.

"I am different, too," said Redbird. She wondered if Sun Woman knew how
different she was. Most women lived from season to season, while Redbird
sometimes thought about what the tribe might be doing, where they might
be, ten summers from now.

Only two kinds of people thought the kind of long thoughts that came
often to Redbird--chiefs and shamans. She sometimes imagined what it
would be like to be a shaman. To live in accord with the gift Earthmaker
gave her. She thought so often about it that it became a longing within
her, even though she knew that such a thing could not be.

This, Redbird thought, was the most she could hope for--to become a
medicine woman, like Gray Cloud's mother. A medicine woman had an
important place in the band, but she was not listened to, as the shaman
was.

Sun Woman reached out and laid her bare hand on top of Redbird's, which
was still in a mitten. "That is why I would be pleased if you and my son
shared a wickiup."

Redbird was startled and, amidst her fear and grief for Gray Cloud,
delighted. Truly, no mother ever spoke like this before words between
parents had been exchanged. And to know that Sun Woman would accept her
as her son's wife--wondrous!

But Gray Cloud might already be dead. "How can we talk and smile so?"
she cried. "He is up in the sacred cave, and the snow fell all last
night and all day today."

Sun Woman shook her head. "When I gave the boy to Owl Carver, I gave up
the right to say what was to be done with him. Like Owl Carver, Gray
Cloud belongs to the spirits now."

"But the spirits--" Redbird waved her hands helplessly. "They protect as
they like and they let death strike as they like."

A shadow of pain crossed Sun Woman's face. "Do you say such things to
hurt me?"

Redbird was shocked. "No!"

"Do you think I feel no pain?"

Redbird felt tears filling her eyes, burning them. She wiped her face.
"I know you do."

Sun Woman brought her face closer to Redbird's, took Redbird's chin in
her hand, and said, "I do not show pain because I do not want to make
others suffer with me. But you know what I feel."

Sun Woman opened her arms, and Redbird pressed her body against the
bigger, older woman's. She felt Sun Woman's strength flow into her and
she knew that she had found more comfort here than she ever would in the
arms of her own mother.

In the firelit wickiup, Redbird looked around her, thinking that this
was where Gray Cloud had been a baby. She looked at the bench where she
knew he slept every night. Where he must sleep again.

"Do you have anything to give a person who has been very cold for a long
time?" Redbird asked urgently.

"Ah." Sun Woman went to the back of the wickiup and came back with a
bundle of long, dark red peppers.

"These peppers are grown far to the south, where the sacred mushroom and
the bright blue stones come from. The longer you boil them, the hotter
the water will get. He is to drink the water, but not swallow the
peppers. If he is very cold, give him one pepper to chew on. That would
bring the dead back to life. If you meet him before I do, this is how
you can help him."

_She thinks I mean to try to meet him when he comes back._

"I will go to him," Redbird said abruptly.

Sun Woman stared at her. "You must not. If you interrupt his spirit
journey it might kill him."

"He has been in a cave for a night and a day, and this is the second
night, colder than any night I can remember. My father watches for him,
but he does not come. He could still be sitting in that cave. He has no
fire. He has no food or water. The wind blows in from the river. The
snow here at the camp is so deep that in some places the drifts are over
my head. The cave could be full of snow. When he is suffering all this,
how can you say that _I_ am a danger to him?"

Sun Woman sat cross-legged on the rush mat floor and stared down at her
hands folded in her lap. After a silence she looked up, and her grave,
dark eyes held Redbird's.

"You are a good young woman, and you love my son. But you must
understand that the greater danger to Gray Cloud is not from the cold.
If you try to wake Gray Cloud's body when his soul is gone from it, his
spirit will never come back to his empty body. It will set its feet on
the Trail of Souls and walk west, to the land of the dead."

Sun Woman's eyes shone, and the shadows and firelight gave her the face
of an angry spirit. Redbird drew back.

"I will not do that," she said. "I promise you." But if she saw that
Gray Cloud would surely die anyway, of freezing, would it not then be
best to take the risk of waking him?

And what if he did wake on his own, but was too frozen to climb out of
the cave and walk back to the camp by himself? Then he would need her
help.

She decided that if she got to the cave and his spirit was still out of
his body, she would do everything to help him short of waking him. She
would build a fire near him. She would cover him with warm cloaks, try
to warm his body if she could do that without disturbing him.

She boiled the peppers in a small tin pot set on stones over Sun Woman's
low fire. After she had filled a skin with the pepper water, she rolled
tinder and a pale eyes fire striker into a blanket. She put her hand on
Sun Woman's snowshoes, leaning against a wall of the little wickiup, and
Sun Woman nodded silently.

Redbird paddled over the snow with her head down, watching the long
shadow she cast under the full moon on the sparkling white surface.
Ahead, the leeward sides of the wickiups were rows of snowdrifts, all
the same size. When she looked over her shoulder, their windward sides
were like black holes in the snow. She could see her family's wickiup,
but Owl Carver was no longer standing outside watching. She lifted her
round wickerwork snowshoes high with each step. Even though she could
walk over the snow, she would be exhausted, she realized, long before
she pushed her way to the sacred cave.

Dogs barked. Fear made the back of her neck tingle, and she stood
motionless. They might be Wolf Paw's dogs. But they did not come after
her.

She heard no sounds of voices, or of people moving. She felt safe enough
to keep walking.

But a feeling grew on her that someone was following her. She stopped
again and listened and looked around. The wickiups were silent under
their glistening blue-white hummocks. Being able to sense when she was
being watched was one of the gifts she, like her father, possessed. But
her eyes and ears did not confirm what her inner sense told her. She
decided fear was confusing her, and she walked on.

She left the camp behind. On her right was gently rolling, snow-covered
prairie. On her left were the woods that grew along the Ioway River. She
saw the shadows of the horses among the trees, heard them snort and
stamp their feet. Beside the woods ran the long trail leading to the
bluff where the sacred cave overlooked the river. This close to the
trees, she hoped, the snow would not be so deep.

A shadow appeared on the snow beside her. A bolt of terror stabbed her.

A powerful hand seized her arm. She felt paralyzed, like a rabbit about
to be torn apart by a wildcat. She did not try to pull away. She could
feel that the grip on her arm was too strong.

She turned slowly.

The moon was behind the man who held her, shadowing his face, but she
could make out the glitter of piercing eyes, a stern mouth with strong
lips under his brown fur turban.

"Where are you going?" Wolf Paw's fingers hurt her arm.

No words came to her. Frantically, she tried to think of some excuse for
walking out so late on a night like this. He could have her killed, she
thought, and terror made her feel like sinking into the snow.

But then she remembered some of the lore Sun Woman had taught her.

"My father sent me--to look for a certain herb whose power is greatest
when the moon is full."

He barked disdainfully. "Gathering herbs when the snow is up to your
knees?"

"It grows under the snow."

He brought his face so close to hers that his black eyes seemed to fill
the world.

"You cannot lie to me, Redbird. I see what you are doing. You are going
to _him_."

"No, no, I am looking for herbs."

"What is _this_?" With his free hand he tore away the blanket roll she
had tied to her back and threw it into the snow. "And _this_?" He jerked
on the water skin so hard that the strap broke, and he threw that down,
too.

"Do you need those things to help you find herbs?" he shouted.

Trembling from head to foot, she felt herself starting to cry. She hated
herself for showing such weakness in front of Wolf Paw. If she was to
die, she wanted to be strong.

To her surprise, the sense that she was being watched from a distance
came back again. There was someone else out here in the frozen darkness
besides herself and Wolf Paw.

"It is death to interfere with a spirit quest," Wolf Paw growled. "The
shaman's daughter of all people should know better than to break a holy
law."

Her fear made her feel as cold, as breathless, as if she were already
plunged into black, freezing water, swept along, an enormous weight of
ice between her and the air.

"I have done nothing."

"You meant to. That is as bad."

She saw the hunting knife at Wolf Paw's belt. She could make a grab for
it, try to stab him.

No, he was one of the tribe's mightiest braves. He would be too quick
and strong for her. And, at least, up to now she had done no harm to
anyone but herself. To try to murder the son of the war leader would be
a great crime.

His grip on her arm still cruelly tight, he gestured back behind him
toward the snow-covered camp. "Think of your mother's weeping over what
I caught you doing. Your father, his heart torn in his chest. But he,
the shaman, would have to say that you must be killed."

Hopelessness crushed her. Now she would never be able to help Gray
Cloud. He was going to die. And she was caught by Wolf Paw and would be
dishonored before the whole tribe and then killed.

She hung her head.

"But it is true, Redbird, you have done nothing," Wolf Paw said more
softly. "I am the only one who knows that you were about to break the
law."

_Sun Woman knows. But Wolf Paw will never learn that from me._

"I do not want you to die, Redbird," said the low voice from the figure
towering over her.

She looked up at him. Was he going to be merciful?

He said, "It makes me angry that you throw your life away for that
fatherless pale eyes boy. To wed the son of Black Hawk would bring you
honor."

She understood now. He was going to offer to spare her life, if she
would marry him and give up Gray Cloud. He did not understand that she
would rather be dead twice over than spend her life mourning Gray Cloud
and married to Wolf Paw.

She was about to tell him so when she heard a rumble, almost like
thunder, from the trees nearer the camp. With much whinnying and
cracking of shrubbery, all the band's horses burst out of the woods and
ran, floundering and kicking up clouds of snow, out on the prairie.

"Be still," Wolf Paw cautioned in a low voice, "until we see what
frightened them." He stood with his head high, listening.

Whatever it was, she was grateful that it had taken Wolf Paw's mind off
her.

She heard a crashing in the forest, branches breaking, snow crunching.
Something large was coming toward them.

She turned. Through the trees she saw a bulky, hunched figure. It seemed
to be a large animal, but it was walking on its hind legs. It came
forward slowly, a step at a time. Its forelimbs swung at its sides. It
was a little taller than a man.

It looked very much like a bear. A new fear, greater than the fear of
what Wolf Paw might do, assailed her.

A bear in coldest winter, when all of that people withdrew to their dens
and slept? Once in a while, she had heard, a very hungry bear would
awaken and forage for food and then go back to sleep again. Such a bear
would kill anything it met. She tensed herself to run, though she knew
she could never outrun a hungry bear.

The shambling tread of the bear, or whatever it was, had brought it
closer, and she saw that it was all white, glittering in the moonlight
like a snowdrift.

She glanced at Wolf Paw and saw his eyes glisten as they widened. The
look on his shadowed face was one she never thought to see on him--fear.

He sucked in a shuddering breath. The hand that had held her arm
suddenly released her.

No wonder Wolf Paw was afraid. This was a white bear, a spirit bear. Its
eyes, reflecting the moonlight, seemed to glow.

Wolf Paw uttered a terrified, inarticulate cry. She turned to see him
racing over the snow. Were she not so frightened herself, she might have
laughed to see how his knees flew up, first one, then the other, as
white clouds sprayed from his snowshoes. Strong as he was, he could
never outrun a bear. Especially not this bear.

As for herself, she was surely doomed. She thought, _May this be a
better death than drowning under the ice_.

And she turned to face the spirit bear.




3

Claw Marks


The white bear was out of the forest now. Redbird had seen bears run,
and she knew it could cover the distance that separated them in a few
bounds.

It did not seem to be looking at her, and she wondered if it saw her. It
sparkled in the moonlight. Its breath came in huge frosty clouds,
obscuring its head. Did spirit bears breathe?

She looked around again to see where Wolf Paw was. He had become a
small, dark spot against the white at the edge of the village. His
snowshoes had carried him far quickly. She, too, would have run, if she
could run like Wolf Paw.

She did not think Wolf Paw a coward. His courage was well known. Facing
a being like this, the bravest man in the world would run.

_It doesn't seem to see me. Maybe it is best to stand still._

She trembled from head to foot, unable to decide what to do. She felt
dizzy, as if she might collapse into the snow. The bright light that
seemed to come from the bear dazzled her.

But would a spirit bear attack people in the night and kill them? Devils
and cannibal giants would, but she had never heard of a spirit doing any
such thing.

She was learning to be a medicine woman, and a medicine woman must deal
unafraid with the beings of the other world. Talk the bad spirits out of
a sick person's body and call upon the good spirits to aid in healing.

She took a deep breath. Whether this be a good spirit or a devil, she
would stand here holding herself proudly. Wolf Paw, if he looked back,
would see the maiden he had threatened standing in the place he had run
from.

The white bear took a step toward her.

In spite of her fear, she made herself look at the spirit as it came on.
It walked so slowly. Perhaps, after all, she could run away from it.

Under the pointed snout she saw eyes that seemed to glow out of a
shadowed face.

It was a man she was facing.

She saw that its path was taking it past her. It--he--did not seem to
see her at all. But he was close enough now for her to see the face
under the bear's skull. The large, round eyes, the long, thin features
ending in a pointed chin, the bony beak of a nose, the down-curving,
tender mouth. His face was covered with a mask of frost.

Gray Cloud.

How could she have forgotten that when he walked out of the camp
yesterday he had worn a black bear's skin draped over his arms and
shoulders? Snow and frost had turned the fur white. The night and her
terror had tricked her into thinking she saw a white bear spirit. Wolf
Paw, the seasoned warrior, had been tricked and terrified, too.

Gray Cloud was alive!

A scream tried to force its way out of her chest, but her windpipe was
so tight that all she managed was a gasp.

Joy blazed up in her like a summer campfire.

But no--he could not be alive and look like that. What she was seeing
must be the ghost of Gray Cloud, or his dead body walking. The cold and
snow had killed him there in the sacred cave, and this shuffling, frozen
husk was all that was left of him.

"Gray Cloud," she whispered, unable to speak aloud, "talk to me."

If he walked right past her without seeing her, he must be still on his
spirit journey. She had always heard that the bodies of men on a spirit
journey remained motionless, sitting or lying down. But she was certain
that Gray Cloud was not fully awake.

She stood staring at him, her mouth open, as he shambled on past her.

She slowly turned to follow him, and now she was facing into the
moonlight and seeing the shadows of the snow-covered wickiups. He was
walking in that frighteningly slow, measured way toward the village.
Wolf Paw was nowhere to be seen.

The feeling came to her again of other eyes upon her. Besides Wolf Paw,
besides the strange creature Gray Cloud had become, someone else seemed
to be out here in the snow-covered field with her. She shuddered.

She looked around to see if she could guess where the secret watcher
might be hiding. Someone might be crouching behind one of the long
snowdrifts that rippled across the prairie like waves on a lake. Or in
the trees by the river.

She must not let herself be caught out here. She picked up the blanket
roll and water skin that Wolf Paw had thrown into the snow and padded on
her snowshoes after the lumbering white figure. She must hurry and try
to get to a place where her presence would be unnoticed, or if noticed,
not questioned.

Her legs ached. She did not have the strength to run. Gray Cloud had
left a trail of two shallow furrows in the snow where he had pushed his
legs through and the snow had fallen in behind him. On her snowshoes she
pressed on behind him.

Even though the snowshoes helped her, her legs ached. She wanted to
throw down her burdens of blanket roll and water skin, but they were too
valuable for her to let them be lost out here. Merciless pain shot up
from her shins through her knees to her hips. Still, the miseries felt
by her body could not touch the joy of her spirit. Gray Cloud lived.

A wall of fur coated with white snow loomed up before her. As Gray Cloud
lumbered along, she quickly stepped to the side and hurried around him.

She turned for a closer look at him. His steaming breath obscured his
face. He stopped. He swayed, and the bear's skull fell back from his
lolling head. She screamed, a sound that rang distantly in her ears.

Gray Cloud dropped to his knees, then fell forward on his face, sending
up a great puff of powdery snow that glittered in the moonlit air.

The silence after his fall was as stunning as thunder. Redbird felt
tears stream from her eyes--and freeze at once on her cheeks. That he
should have lived through two nights of blizzard and cold, that he
should come down alive from the sacred cave, only to die within sight of
the village under her very eyes, was more than she could stand.

"Oh, no!" she whispered. "He must not die."

She fell to her knees beside him.

He lay face down, half buried. She put her hands under his shoulder and
pushed to raise his head. He was heavy, but her fear and her love for
him made her strong enough to move him. She lifted his upper body and
turned him on his side, and she saw the beloved features, frost-white.
Hope made her heart beat faster as little clouds of warm air puffed from
his nostrils. But his breathing was ragged and shallow. She had to get
him in out of the cold. Gasping with the effort, she rolled him over on
his back.

She would have to try to drag him to the village.

Sobbing with near-exhaustion, she sat by his head, shoved her hands
under his shoulders and tried to stand, pulling him up with her.

All at once there was no weight on her arms. Someone else was there,
lifting Gray Cloud.

She looked up, thankful, yet afraid she might see Wolf Paw returned to
do them harm.

No, it was Iron Knife.

Seeing the broad face of her half brother, a cry of relief burst from
her throat.

"Oh, Iron Knife! It is so good you are here."

He smiled grimly, grunting as he hauled Gray Cloud to his feet. Gray
Cloud's eyes were shut, his mouth hanging open.

"Lucky for Wolf Paw that Gray Cloud came when he did," Iron Knife said.
"I was getting an arrow ready for Wolf Paw." He jerked his head at the
bow slung over his shoulder.

"Even the son of Black Hawk?" She vividly remembered Wolf Paw's threats,
but the thought of Iron Knife murdering him horrified her.

"Do you think I'd let him drown my sister?" Iron Knife put an arm around
Gray Cloud's shoulders, bent down and picked him up under the knees,
bearskin cloak and all. Blowing a cloud of steam out of his mouth, he
straightened, cradling Gray Cloud in his arms. Though Gray Cloud was
nearly as tall as Iron Knife, he was much lighter.

