useless on iron bottoms, but also injurious. What then is _the_
substance: 1st. One of the oxides of lead (red lead). 2d. The purest
oxide of iron to be found. If properly made these articles can be
carried to no higher state of oxidation, and respectively, as to order
named, they have no superiors for body and durability. By preference,
1st, red lead, either out of or under water; 2d, Prince's oxide of iron
only, out of water. The color of these paints--the first red, the latter
brown, may be hidden by a coat of white or tinted color. If there were
to be had in combination as a white paint, an oxide of lead and an oxide
of zinc, it would be immensely superior to either, but that such has not
been produced is rather the fault of carelessness than of possibility.
Zinc protects iron with great effect, but it is too rapidly worn in the
effort to be of lasting value. Hence the great desideratum, the yet to
be, the coming pigment is a white oxide of lead or a combined white
oxide of lead and white oxide of zinc, without sulphates or chlorides.

Those materials answer very well for work exposed to atmospheric air,
and perhaps nothing will ever be found better; but a different need is
that for salt water. No mere protector of the iron from rust can be
found superior to pure red lead and linseed oil. We have seen a natural
combination of zinc, lead, and iron, which, in our experience, ranks
next; but the zinc is acted on by the chloride of sodium, and wears away
too much of the material. Red lead, however, while covering the iron
perfectly and effectually preventing rust, and also having but little
disposition to chloridize, when it does, will foul both with grass and
barnacles. Hence, the first desideratum being obtained, how shall we
accomplish the other. The prevention of fouling may be accomplished in
two ways: First, cover the vessel's bottom with two or even three coats
of red lead, and give each time to dry hard. Then melt in an iron pot a
mixture of two parts beeswax, two parts tallow, and one part pine resin;
mix thoroughly, and apply hot one or two coats. This mixture may be
tinted with vermilion or chrome green. It is not necessary to use any
poisonous substance, as it is only by its softness and gradual wear
that it is kept clean. Second, mix red lead and granular metallic zinc,
ground fine, or such a mineral as we have mentioned--crystalline and
granular in its character. Put on two or three coats, and allow each to
set--they will never dry hard. The zinc will slowly wear off, keeping
the whole surface clean, while there will be left enough coating of the
lead to preserve the iron from rust. The oil I would urge for these
pigments is linseed--as little boiled as possible, to be thinned with
spirits of turpentine. There seems to have been a mania for mixtures of
tar and resins, their spirits and oils; my experience fails to show me
any advantage for them on an iron bottom. They have neither elasticity
nor durability, while linseed oil has both in a pre-eminent degree, and
is no more likely to foul than they, when in a combination that does
not dry hard. Besides they are difficult to grind, inconvenient to
transport, and offensive to use.

Perhaps we have not, in the opinion of some, answered the want expressed
in the first paragraph. No pigment with the requisites of durability and
cheapness will resist the attacks of strong acids on iron. The first we
have mentioned will--all such as may float in our air from factories or
chemical works. Chemically it is converted by nitric acid and chlorine
into an insoluble substance--plumbic acid or the cyanide of lead. An
experience of more than three years, with almost unlimited means at our
command for experiment, demonstrates to us that we have indicated
the means of filling the other requisites asked for. It may be that
something new will be discovered, but we doubt it. Let any one tread the
road we have trod, investigate and experiment where and as much as we
have, and, if that place is, where we have not, and their experience
will be the same as ours.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BANANAS AND PLANTAINS OF THE TROPICS.

[For the Scientific American.]


Poets have celebrated the banana plant for its beauty, its luxuriance,
the majesty of its leaves, and the delicacy of its fruit; but never have
they sufficiently praised the utility of this tropical product.
Those who have never lived in southern countries are unable to fully
appreciate its value. Some look even with indifference upon the gigantic
clusters of this fruit, as they are unloaded from the steamers and
sailing vessels; and yet they deserve special attention and admiration,
for they are to the inhabitants of the torrid zone, what bread and
potatoes are to those of the north temperate zone.

The banana tree is one of the most striking illustrations of tropical
fertility and exuberance. A plant, which in a northern climate, would
require many years to gain strength and size, is there the production of
ten or twelve months. The native of the South plants a few grains, taken
from an old tree, in a moist and sandy soil, along some river or lake;
they develop with the greatest rapidity, and at the end of ten months
the first crop may be gathered, though the cluster and bananas are yet
small; but the following year one cluster alone will weigh some sixty or
more pounds. Even in the South they are always cut down when green, as
they lose much of their flavor when left to ripen or soften on the tree.

The trunk of the tree, if it may be so called, and which grows to a
hight of some fifteen feet, is formed only by the fleshy part of the
large leaves, some of which attain a length of eighteen feet, and are
two and a half feet in width. While from an upper sprout you perceive
the large yellow flowers, or already formed fruits, you see underneath a
cluster, which is bending the tree by its weight.

The plantain tree is much the same as the banana, with the difference,
however, that its fruit cannot be eaten raw, like the banana's, and that
it is much larger in size. Almost every portion of the banana tree is
useful. First of all, the nutritious fruit. The plantains when green and
hard, are boiled in water or with meat like our potatoes, or they are
cut in slices and fried in fat, when they are soft and ripe. There is a
singularity about the boiled plaintain, worthy of being mentioned. Pork
especially, and other meats are so exceedingly fat in the tropics that
they would be most disgusting or even impossible to eat with either
bread or potatoes, but the plaintain seems to neutralize or absorb all
the greasy substance, and the fattest meat is thus eaten by natives and
foreigners without the least inconvenience.

Ripe bananas are mashed into a paste, of which the natives bake a sort
of bread, which is very nourishing, though somewhat heavy. This paste,
which contains much starch, can be dried, and thus kept for a length of
time, which is often of great service to mariners. The young sprouts are
used and prepared like vegetables, and the fibrous parts of the stalks
of the majestic leaves are used like manilla for ropes and coarse cloth.

The utility of the leaves is a theme rich enough to fill a volume; they
are used to cover the huts, for table-cloths and napkins, or wrapping
paper. The dough of bread, instead of being put in a pan, into the oven,
is spread on a piece of plantain leaf; it will neither crisp nor adhere
to the bread when taken out. The Indians of America carry all their
products, such as maize, sugar, coffee, etc., in bags made of this leaf,
which they know how to arrange so well, that they transport an "arroba,"
or twenty-five pounds any distance without a single grain escaping, and
without any appliance other than a liana or creeper to tie it up with.
As to the medicinal qualities of the leaves, they are numerous. Indeed,
a book has been written upon them. I speak, however, from my own
experience. The young, yet unrolled leaves are superior to any salve
or ointment. If applied to an inflamed part of the body, the effect is
soothing and cooling, or if applied to a wound or ulcer, they excite
a proper healthy action, and afterwards completely heal the wound.
Decoctions made of the leaves are used among the natives for various
diseases.

Since the beginning of the world this plant has ranked among the first
in the Flora of Asia. The Christians of the orient look upon it as the
tree of Paradise which bore the forbidden fruit, and they think its
leaves furnished the first covering to our original parents. According
to other historians, the Adam's fig was the plant, which the messengers
brought from the promised land to Moses, who had sent them out to
reconnoitre. "It is under the shade of the _musa sapientium_, that," as
recorded by Pliny, "the learned Indians seated themselves to meditate
over the vicissitudes of life, and to talk over different philosophic
subjects, and the fruit of this tree was their only food." The Oriental
Christians, up to the present date, regard the banana almost with
reverence; their active fancy beholds in its center, if a cut is made
transverse, the image of the cross, and they consider it a crime to use
a knife in cutting the fruit.

In the holy language of the Hindoo, the Sanscrit, the Adam's fig is
called "modsha," whence doubtless, the word "musa" is derived. It is
generally believed that the plant came from India to Egypt in the
seventh century; it still forms a most important article of commerce in
the markets of Cairo and Alexandria. In the year 1516, the banana was
brought to the West Indian Islands by a monk, since which time it
has rapidly spread over the tropics of America, and is found to the
twenty-fifth degree north and south of the equator. It is equally
indispensable and is appreciated by the immigrant and by the native as
a beautifier of the landscape; affording shelter from the sun and rain,
and giving bread to the children; for if every other crop should fail,
the hungry native looks up to the banana tree, like a merchant to his
well-filled storehouse.

       *       *       *       *       *




PUTTING UP STOVES.

BY MARK TWAIN.


We do not remember the exact date of the invention of stoves, but it was
some years ago. Since then mankind have been tormented once a year, by
the difficulties that beset the task of putting them up, and getting the
pipes fixed. With all our Yankee ingenuity no American has ever invented
any method by which the labor of putting up stoves can be lessened. The
job is as severe and vexatious as humanity can possibly endure, and gets
more so every year.

Men always put their stoves up on a rainy day. Why, we know not; but we
never heard of any exception to this rule. The first step to be taken is
to put on a very old and ragged coat, under the impression that when he
gets his mouth full of plaster it will keep the shirt bosom clean. Next,
the operator gets his hand inside the place where the pipe ought to go,
and blacks his fingers, and then he carefully makes a black mark down
the side of his nose. It is impossible to make any headway, in doing
this work, until this mark is made down the side of the nose. Having got
his face properly marked, the victim is ready to begin the ceremony.

The head of the family--who is the big goose of the sacrifice--grasps
one side of the bottom of the stove, and his wife and the hired girl
take hold of the other side. In this way the load is started from the
woodshed toward the parlor. Going through the door, the head of the
family will carefully swing his side of the stove around and jam his
thumb nail against the door post. This part of the ceremony is never
omitted. Having got the family comfort in place, the next thing is to
find the legs. Two of these are left inside the stove since the spring
before. The other two must be hunted after, for twenty-five minutes.
They are usually found under the coal. Then the head of the family holds
up one side of the stove while his wife puts two of the legs in place,
and next he holds up the other while the other two are fixed, and one of
the first two falls out. By the time the stove is on its legs he gets
reckless, and takes off his old coat, regardless of his linen.

Then he goes for the pipe and gets two cinders in his eye. It don't make
any difference how well the pipe was put up last year it will always be
found a little too short or a little too long. The head of the family
jams his hat over his eyes and taking a pipe under each arm goes to the
tin shop to have it fixed. When he gets back, he steps upon one of the
best parlor chairs to see if the pipe fits, and his wife makes him get
down for fear he will scratch the varnish off from the chairs with the
nails in his boot heel. In getting down he will surely step on the cat,
and may thank his stars that it is not the baby. Then he gets an old
chair and climbs up to the chimney again, to find that in cutting the
pipe off, the end has been left too big for the hole in the chimney. So
he goes to the woodshed and splits one side of the end of the pipe with
an old axe, and squeezes it in his hands to make it smaller.

Finally he gets the pipe in shape, and finds the stove does not stand
true. Then himself and wife and the hired girl move the stove to the
left, and the legs fall out again. Next it is to move to the right. More
difficulty now with the legs. Move to the front a little. Elbow not even
with the hole in the chimney, and the head of the family goes again to
the woodshed after some little blocks. While putting the blocks under
the legs, the pipe comes out of the chimney. That remedied, the elbow
keeps tipping over, to the great alarm of the wife. Head of the family
gets the dinner table out, puts the old chair on it, gets his wife to
hold the chair, and balances himself on it to drive some nails into the
ceiling. Drops the hammer on wife's head. At last he gets the nails
driven, takes a wire swing to hold the pipe, hammers a little here,
pulls a little there, takes a long breath, and announces the ceremony
concluded.

Job never put up any stoves. It would have ruined his reputation if he
had. The above programme, with unimportant variations, will be carried
out in many respectable families during the next six weeks.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MAGIC LANTERN.


The invention of the magic lantern dates back to 1650, and is attributed
to Professor Kircher, a German philosopher of rare talents and extensive
reputation. The instrument is simple and familiar. It is a form of the
microscope. The shadows cast by the object are, by means of lenses,
focussed upon something capable of reflection, such as a wall or screen.
No essential changes in the principles of construction have been made
since the time of Kircher; but the modern improvements in lenses,
lights, and pictures, have raised the character of the instrument from
that of a mere toy to an apparatus of the highest utility. By its
employment the most wonderful forms of creation, invisible, perhaps, to
the eye, are not only revealed but reproduced in gigantic proportions,
with all the marvelous truth of nature itself. The success of some of
the most celebrated demonstrations of Faraday, Tyndall, Doremus, Morton,
and others, was due to the skillful use of the magic lantern. As an
educator, the employment of this instrument is rapidly extending. No
school apparatus is complete without it; and now that transparencies
are so readily multiplied by photography upon glass, and upon mica, or
gelatin, by the printing press or the pen, it is destined to find
a place in every household; for in it are combined the attractive
qualities of beauty, amusement, and instruction.

The electric light affords, probably, the strongest and best
illumination for the magic lantern; then comes the magnesium light; but
their use is a little troublesome and rather expensive; next to these
in illuminating power is the oxy-hydrogen or Drummond light. The
preparation of the gases and the use of the calcium points involve
considerable skill.

Need has long been felt for some form of the magic lantern, having a
strong light, but more easily produced than any of those just mentioned;
and this has at last been accomplished, after several years' study and
experiment, by Prof. L.J. Marcy, 632 Arch St., Philadelphia, Pa.

The "Sciopticon," is the name of his new instrument, and from actual
trial we find that it possesses many superior qualities. Its lenses
are excellent, and in illuminating power its light ranks next to the
oxy-hydrogen. The sciopticon light is produced from ordinary coal oil
by an ingenious arrangement of double flames, intensifying the heat and
resulting in a pencil of strong white light. Prof. Marcy's instrument
is the perfection of convenience, simplicity, and safety. Any one may
successfully work it and produce the most brilliant pictures upon
the screen. It is peculiarly adapted for school purposes and home
entertainment. Those who wish to do a good thing for young people
should provide one of these instruments. Photographic transparencies of
remarkable places, persons, and objects, may now be purchased at small
cost; while there is no end to the variety of pictures which may be
drawn by hand at home upon mica, glass or gelatin, and then reproduced
upon the screen by the sciopticon.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Largest Well in the World--Capacity 1,000,000 Gallons of Water per
Day.


One of the grand necessities of the Prospect Park, Brooklyn, N.Y., that
of providing for a continual supply of water for all the purposes of
the Park developed itself, as the Commissioners progressed with their
stupendous undertaking. Mr. Stranahan, the President of the Board, after
carefully weighing the cost, the practicability, and importance
of having an independent water supply for the Park, advised the
Commissioners of the plan which had suggested itself, and the
calculations which had been made by the engineers relative to the
project, and the work was commenced, the first idea being to secure at
least a partial supply of water by means of a well constructed in the
Park. The subject was thus treated in the last annual report of Mr. C.C.
Martin, the engineer in charge:

