or folding sides, C, and swinging or folding top, A, and bottom, B,
substantially as described and for the purpose set forth.


72,125.--APPARATUS FOR DISTILLING OILS.--Herbert W.C. Tweddle,
Pittsburg, Pa

I claim, 1st, A trough or troughs, having perforations for the passage
of the oil in small quantities and furnished with points near to such
perforations, so as to cause the oil to pass therefrom in drops, or fine
streams, or thin films or layers, over heated pipes or tubes placed
thereunder, when used within a vacuum still, for the purposes
substantially as described.

2d, In a vacuum still for distilling oil, the use of a series or coil
of steam pipe, placed horizontally, one under another, as a series of
evaporating surfaces, substantially as and for the purposes above set
forth.

3d, In a vacuum still for distilling oil, a series or coil of steam jet
pipes, e, in combination with a series or coil of evaporating pipes, a,
substantially as and for the purposes above set forth.

4th, Combining together a series of apparatus, such as hereinbefore
described, for the purpose of procuring a continuous distillation
of petroleum, each member of a series consisting of a vacuum still
containing a coil of steam pipe as evaporating surfaces, and troughs
for the gradual distillation of the oil, in combination with suitable
condensing apparatus, substantially as and and for the purposes
hereinbefore set forth.

5th, A vacuum residnum receiver D, connected to and in combination with
a vacuum still, or a battery of such stills, substantially in the manner
and for the purposes above set forth.


72,126.--DISTILLING HYDROCARBON OILS.--Herbert W. C. Tweddle, Pittsburg,
Pa.

I claim, 1st, In distilling hydrocarbon oils, vaporizing the oil by
causing it to flow in a thin film or layer over the surfaces of a series
of heated pipes in a vacuum still, with or without the application of
superheated steam, substantially as above described.

2d, The application of the process of distillation, hereinbefore
described, to the re-distillation of fire-distilled oils, for the
purpose of producing an oil similar to the refined oil of commerce,
substantially as above set forth.

3d, Securing a continuous and complete distillation of hydrocarbon oils
by causing the oil to flow over the surfaces of a succession of heated
pipes in different vacuum stills, the temperature of such pipes
increasing in each successive still, so as to drive off at first more
volatile ingredients, and then those less so, and so on till only the
residuum remains, substantially as hereinbefore described.


72,127.--GRAIN DRILL.--Joseph G. Yale, Cumberland Co, Pa.

I claim the quarti-elliptical shovel, B, with its base, E E', coming to
a point at E, the rod, C, the rod, H, with thereon the balls, D and D',
together with the funnel, A, all constructed and operating in the manner
and for the purpose described.


72,128.--WINDOW-SASH STOP.--George R. Vanderbilt (assigner to himself,
J. J. Lindstrom, and D. W. Stidolph), Mount Vernon, N.Y.

I claim, 1st, The two clamping plates, and the tightening bolt, combined
and operated substantially as and for the purpose specified.

2d, The springs, arranged in relation to the plates, c d, substantially
as and for the purpose specified.


72,129.--MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.--George W. van Dusen, Williamsburg, N.Y.

I claim the combination and arrangement of lever, V, with finger piece,
Y, at one end and stud, b, at the other valve, G, and air passage, E,
closed by a flexible diaphragm, K, substantially as herein described,
and for the purpose of producing, by means of air, an action upon any
suitable sound-producing mechanism through the movement of a sheet or
strip perforated, or in any other eqivalent manner prepared.


72,130.--WATER INDICATOR FOR BOILERS.--Andreas Vang, Chicago, Ill.

I claim the arrangement of the globe, a, arm, b, cylinder, c, indicator,
f, and whistle, g, substantially as herein set forth.


72,131.--HORSE HAY FORK.--Oliver Vanorman, Ripon, Wis.

I claim the arrangement of the fork heads, B B', in the frame, A, and
with the arms, C C', rollers, e e, and cords, D D, as and for the
purpose set forth.


72,132.--WASHING MACHINE.--Lewis Vaughan, Rapids, O.

I claim the adjustable bottom, B, and spring lever, I, as arranged
in combination with the roller, C, in the manner substantially as
described.


72,133.--HAY RAKER AND LOADER.--Albert Vose, Pittsfield, assignor to
himself and Ambros S. Vose, Randolph, Vt.

I claim, 1st, the fork arm, b, hinged or pivoted to the frame in line
with the axle, and operated by means of friction blocks, as described.

2d, The friction blocks, d, in combination with fork arm, b, and
eccentric levers, e, arranged as described.

3d, The fork arms, b, in combination with the freely-swiveling fork bar,
o, operated as described.

4th, The forks, q, pivoted in swiveling bar, o, and operated by means of
levers, v, and rods, cords, or chains, substantially as described.

5th, The levers, v, mounted on fork bars or arms, b, in combination with
the fork, q, substantially as described.

6th, The combination of forks, q, spring, t, chains, w, and levers, v,
with the fork arm, b, substantially as and for the purpose set forth.

7th, The means for opening and closing the lifting forks in combination
with a means for operating the friction blocks, or their equivalent,
whereby they are operated simultaneously, as described.

8th, The lever, e, for closing the forks and applying the friction
blocks, as described, in combition with the arms, g, for releasing the
same as described.

9th, The extension, x, of the pivoted fork bars, b, in combination with
cords or chains, 5, operating as described.

10th, The curved or semicircular rake head, or its equivalent,
arranged in rear of and operated in connection with the lifting fork,
substantially as described.


72,134.--WASHING MACHINE.--George E. Wade, Jefferson City, Mo.

I claim the lever, M, the spiral metal plate, F, the wash boards, A and
B, corrugated as shown, and the springs, c c' c". In combination with a
common wash tub, when constructed, arranged, and operating substantially
as shown and specified.


72,135.--BOLT AND RIVET MACHINE.--John Wakefield, Birmingham, England,
assignor to Isaac Smith and William Fothergill Bartho.

I claim, 1st, the arrangement or combination, substantially as
hereinbefore described, and illustrated in the accompanying drawings, of
the vertical dies, b b, for cutting off and carrying the cut-off
length of rod, and for shaping the head of the rivet or bolt, with the
horizontal punch or die, m, for shaping the shank of the rivet or bolt,
and upsetting the end of the rivet or bolt into a head in the vertical
dies.

2d, The arrangement or combination of parts hereinbefore described, and
illustrated in the accompanying drawings, for giving motion to the said
vertical dies, b b, and horizontal punch or die, m.

3d, The arrangement or combination of parts hereinbefore described and
illustrated in the accompanying drawings, for removing the finished
rivet or bolt from the horizontal punch or die.


72,136.--EGG BEATER.--Dudley Webster, Washington, D. C.

I claim as a new article of manufacture an egg-beater spoon, constructed
as described, viz., with its circumference and the edges of an inner
central opening serrated as and for the purpose described.


72,137.--BRICK MACHINE.--P.V.Westfall, Kalamazoo, Mich.

I claim, 1st, the combination of the two molding cylinders, C C, when
the molding recesses, I I, in said cylinders, and their intermediate
followers, J J, are so proportioned with each other that the faces of
the said followers cannot be brought in contact with each other, and
when the said follower pieces have substantially the degree of curvature
herein represented and described.

2d, In connection with the molding cylinders, C C, I also claim the
central shaft, b, and its operating levers, L L, in combination with
the jointed rods, n n, and the crank arms, m m, on the respective cam
shafts, for operating all the cams simultaneously, substantially in the
manner herein set forth.

3d, Also the vibrating spring scraper, i, in combination with the wire
cloth belt, w, when arranged with the molding cylinders, C C, and
operated substantially in the manner and for the purpose herein set
forth.


72,138.--APPARATUS FOR ENAMELING PHOTOGRAPHIC PICTURES.--Nathaniel
Weston, San Francisco, Cal.

I claim the rest, A, for the glass, or its equivalent, the use of the
glasses, B B, the weight G, the fastenings, H, the clamps, E E, or their
equivalents, in combination, for the purposes, herein set forth.


72,139.--VALVE GEAR FOR STEAM ENGINES.--Norman W. Wheeler, Brooklyn,
N.Y.

I claim, 1st, Opening the ports, as i' i" so as to suspend the operation
of the moving force upon the valve or valves at the period when the
steam is cut off, and before the exhaust is opened, substantially as and
for the purpose herein set forth.

2d, Also the closure of certain ports, as i' i" and k' k", so as to
cause the valve or valves to resume the movement toward its or their
full throw at the proper period, substantially as and for the purposes
herein set forth.

3d, Also opening the proper ports, as h' h, so as to suspend the moving
force operating upon the valve or valves, when they or it have reached
the proper limit of throw, substantially as and for the purposes herein
set forth.

4th, Also regulating the times of closing passages, so as to induce
the cutting-off movement of the valve or valves, at variable periods,
substantially in the manner and for the purposes herein set forth.

5th, Also changing a continuous reciprocating motion derived from an
eccentric, or equivalent moving part of the engine, to an intermittent
reciprocating motion, by means of a hydraulic apparatus as hereinbefore
described, substantially in the manner and for the purpose herein set
forth.


72,140.--DITCHING MACHINE.--A.H.Whitacre and T.S.Whitacre, Morrow, Ohio.

We claim, 1st, The combination of the sled, A, and the frame, B,
connected by the racks and pinions, c a, at the corners, arranged and
operating substantially as and for the purpose described.

2d, The pulleys, D and E, carrying the endles chain, g, with the scoops,
h h, in combination, with the drum, C, the plungers, n n, operating
by the double incline, p, around the wheel, K, and the sweep, F,
constructed and operating substantially as and for the purpose herein
described.


72,141.--FARM FENCE.--Samuel P. Williams, Sheridan, N.Y.

I claim the application and use of the triangular brace posts, B B,
and tie-rod, C, in the construction of farm fences, in the manner
substantially as described.


72,142.--VENTILATING TUNNEL.--Hugh B. Wilson, N.Y. city.

I claim, 1st, The method of applying street lamp posts, and awning
and other useful or ornamental posts, pillars, or structures, to the
purposes of ventilating underground railway tunnels, substantially as
within described.

2d. Also the combination of street lamp posts, and awning and other
posts, pillars, or structures, whether for ornament or use, with the
connecting tubes of such railway tunnels, substantially in manner set
forth.


72,143.--MEDICAL COMPOUND.--J.T. Wilson, Brooklyn, N.Y.

I claim the combination of the above-named ingredients in the manner as
and for the purpose described.


72,144.--SHOE LIFTER.--Wm.H. Winans, Newark, N.J.

I claim, 1st, The combination of the lever plate, A, griping plate, B,
spring, b, and holding level, C, substantially as and for the purpose
specified.

2d, The teeth or studs, a', provided upon the inner surface of the
griping plate B, and arranged in relation with the back of the plate, A,
substantially as and for the purpose specified.


72,145.--STOVE.--T.W.Wisner, Howell, Mich.

I claim the portable hop-drying stove, constructed as described, of
the corrugated side and end plates, A, supported upon the ash pan, B,
extending the entire length of the stove, and mounted upon wheels,
the adjustable grate placed at b, in the center of the stove, and the
boiler, all arranged as described for the purpose specified.


72,146.--PAPER FILE.--John Wolfe, Washington, D. C.

I claim the paper file or holder constructed and operated as herein
recited.


72,147.--LATHE BOX AND JOURNAL.--Aurin Wood, Worcester, Mass.

I claim, 1st, The combination and relative arrangement of the oil box,
B, and grove, a, and inclined oil passage, e, formed in the bottom part,
A, of the journal box, substantially in the manner and for the purpose
herein shown and specified.

The combination of the journal, C, having the peculiarly shaped grooves,
d d, cut in its surface, with the journal box, D, provided in its lower
part with the oil box, inclined oil passage, and groove, a, under the
arrangement substantially as herein shown and set forth.


72,148.--LATHE FOR TURNING SHAFTING.--Aurin Wood, Worcester, Mass.

I claim, 1st, The combination with the bed of the lathe, provided with a
reservoir or receptacle, as described, of the sliding tool carriage and
the pump, attached to and moving with said carriage, substantially as
and for the purposes shown and set forth.

2d, The combination with the sliding tool carriage and pump, mounted
