were inspired? And tonight she had said, with her gentle smile as she
lay dying, that if that were so--it had been an inspiration from his
grandfather.

Something of science which his grandfather had devised, and which had
enabled him to--go away. What could that mean? Go where? And why had he
gone? To seek an ideal? Because he was dissatisfied with life here? Her
half incoherent words had seemed to imply that. And now, because Lee was
twenty-one--a man--his grandfather was coming back. Because he had
thought that Lee would be able to help him?... Help him to do--what?

He stirred in his chair. It was nearly midnight now. The little
cottage--this little second floor bedroom where death was hovering--was
heavy with brooding silence. It was awesome; almost frightening. He bent
closer to the bed. Was she dead? No, there was still a faint fluttering
breath, but it seemed now that there would be no strength for her to
speak to him again.

Mysterious business, this passing on. Her eyelids were closed, a symbol
of drawn blinds of the crumbling old house in which she had lived for so
long. It was almost a tenantless house now. And yet she was somewhere
down there behind those drawn blinds. Reluctant perhaps to leave, still
she lingered, with the fires going out so that it must be cold ... cold
and silent where she huddled. Or was she hearing now the great organ of
the Beyond with its sweep of harmonies summoning her to come--welcoming
her....

A shiver ran through young Lee Anthony as he saw that the pallid
bloodless lips of the white wrinkled face had stirred into a smile. Down
there somewhere her spirit--awed and a little frightened doubtless--had
opened some door to let the sound of the organ in--and to let in the
great riot of color which must have been outside.... And then she had
not been frightened, but eager....

He realized suddenly that he was staring at an empty shell and that old
Anna Green had gone....

       *       *       *       *       *

A sound abruptly brought Lee out of his awed thoughts. It was outside
the house--the crunching of wheels in the gravel of the driveway--the
squeal of grinding brakes. A car had stopped. He sat erect in his chair,
stiffened, listening, with his heart pounding so that the beat of it
seemed to shake his tense body. His grandfather--returning?

An automobile horn honked. Footsteps sounded on the verandah. The front
doorbell rang.

There were voices outside as he crossed the living room--a man's voice,
and then a girl's laugh. He flung open the door. It was a young man in
dinner clothes and a tall blonde girl. Tom Franklin, and a vivid,
theatrical-looking girl, whom Lee had never seen before. She was inches
taller than her companion. She stood clinging to his arm; her beautiful
face, with beaded lashes and heavily rouged lips, was laughing. She was
swaying; her companion steadied her, but he was swaying himself.

"Easy, Viv," he warned. "We made it--tol' you we would.... Hello there,
Lee ol' man--your birthday--think I'd forget a thing like that, not on
your life. So we come t'celebrate--meet Vivian Lamotte--frien' o' mine.
Nice kid, Viv--you'll like her."

"Hello," the girl said. She stared up at Lee. He towered above her, and
beside him the undersized and stoop-shouldered Franklin was swaying
happily. Admiration leaped into the girl's eyes.

"Say," she murmured, "you sure are a swell looker for a fact. He said
you were--but my Gawd--"

"And his birthday too," Frank agreed, "so we're gonna celebrate--" His
slack-jawed, weak-chinned face radiated happiness and triumph. "Came
fas' to get here in time. I tol' Viv I could make it--we never hit a
thing--"

"Why, yes--come in," Lee agreed awkwardly. He had only met young Tom
Franklin once or twice, a year ago now, and Lee had completely forgotten
it. The son of a rich man, with more money than was good for him....
With old Anna lying there upstairs--surely he did not want these happy
inebriated guests here now....

He stood with them just inside the threshold. "I--I'm awfully sorry," he
began. "My birthday--yes, but you see--old Mrs. Green--my guardian--just
all the family I've got--she died, just a few minutes ago--upstairs
here--I've been here alone with her--"

It sobered them. They stared blankly. "Say, my Gawd, that's tough," the
girl murmured. "Your birthday too. Tommy listen, we gotta get
goin'--can't celebrate--"

It seemed that there was just a shadow out on the dark verandah. A tall
figure in a dark cloak.

"Why--what the hell," Franklin muttered.

A group of gliding soundless figures were out there in the darkness. And
across the living room the window sash went up with a thump. A black
shape was there, huddled in a great loose cloak which was over the head
so that the thing inside was shapeless.

For an instant Lee and his two companions stood stricken. The shapes
seemed babbling with weird unintelligible words. Then from the window
came words of English:

"_We--want--_" Slow words, strangely intoned. Young Tom Franklin broke
in on them.

"Say--what the devil--who do you people think you are, comin' in here--"
He took a swaying step over the threshold. There was a sudden sharp
command from one of the shapes. Lee jumped in front of the girl. On the
verandah the gliding figures were engulfing Franklin; he had fallen.

Lee went through the door with a leap, his fist driving at the cowled
head of one of the figures--a solid shape that staggered backward from
his blow. But the others were on him, dropping down before his rush,
gripping his legs and ankles. He went down, fighting. And then something
struck his face--something that was like a hand, or a paw with claws
that scratched him. His head suddenly was reeling; his senses fading....

       *       *       *       *       *

How long he fought Lee did not know. He was aware that the girl was
screaming--and that he was hurling clutching figures away--figures that
came pouncing back. Then the roaring in his head was a vast uproar. The
fighting, scrambling dark shapes all seemed dwindling until they were
tiny points of white light--like stars in the great abyss of
nothingness....

He knew--as though it were a blurred dream--that he was lying inert on
the verandah, with Franklin and the girl lying beside him.... The house
was being searched.... Then the muttering shapes were standing here. Lee
felt himself being picked up. And then he was carried silently out into
the darkness. The motion seemed to waft him off so that he knew nothing
more.




CHAPTER II

_The Flight Into Size and Space_


Lee came back to consciousness with the feeling that some great length
of time must have elapsed. He was on a couch in a small, weird-looking
metal room--metal of a dull, grey-white substance like nothing he had
ever seen before. With his head still swimming he got up dizzily on one
elbow, trying to remember what had happened to him. That fingernail, or
claw, had scratched his face. He had been drugged. It seemed obvious. He
could remember his roaring senses as he had tried to fight, with the
drug gradually overcoming him....

The room had a small door, and a single round window, like a bullseye
pane of thick lens. Outside there was darkness, with points of stars.
His head was still humming from the remaining effect of the drug. Or was
the humming an outside noise? He was aware as he got to his feet and
staggered to the door, that the humming was distantly outside the room.
The door was locked; its lever resisted his efforts to turn it.

There he saw the inert figures of the girl, and Tom Franklin. They were
lying uninjured on two other small couches against the room's metal
wall. The girl stirred a little as he touched her dank forehead. Her
dyed blonde hair had fallen disheveled to her shoulders. Franklin lay
sprawled, his stiff white shirt bosom dirty and rumpled, his thin sandy
hair dangling over his flushed face. His slack mouth was open. He was
breathing heavily.

At the lens-window Lee stood gasping, his mind still confused and
blurred, trying to encompass what was out there. This was a spaceship! A
small globular thing of white metal. He could see a rim of it, like a
flat ring some ten feet beneath him. A spaceship, and obviously it had
left the Earth! There was a black firmament--dead-black monstrous abyss
with white blazing points of stars. And then, down below and to one side
there was just an edge of a great globe visible. The Earth, with the
sunlight edging its sweeping crescent limb--the Earth, down there with a
familiar coastline and a huge spread of ocean like a giant map in
monochrome.

Back on the couch Lee sat numbed. There was the sound of scraping metal;
a doorslide in the wall opened. A face was there--a man with a blur of
opalescent light behind him.

"You are all right now?" a voice said.

"Yes. I guess so. Let me out of here--"

Let him out of here? To do what? To make them head this thing back to
Earth.... To Lee Anthony as he sat confused, the very thoughts were a
fantasy.... Off the Earth! Out in Space! So often he had read of it, as
a future scientific possibility--but with this actuality now his mind
seemed hardly to grasp it....

The man's voice said gently, "We cannot trust you. There must be no
fighting--"

"I won't fight. What good could it do me?"

"You did fight. That was bad--that was frightening. We must not harm
you--"

"Where are we going?" Lee murmured. "Why in the devil are you--"

"We think now it is best to say nothing. We will give you food through
here. And over there--behind you--a little doorslide to another room.
You and these other two can be comfortable--"
