she will yaw five miles to port or starboard ere she is under control
again. Give her full helm and she returns on her track like a whip-lash.
Cant the whole forward--a touch on the wheel will suffice--and she
sweeps at your good direction up or down. Open the complete circle and
she presents to the air a mushroom-head that will bring her up all
standing within a half mile.

"Yes," says Captain Hodgson, answering my thought, "Castelli thought
he'd discovered the secret of controlling aeroplanes when he'd only
found out how to steer dirigible balloons. Magniac invented his rudder
to help war-boats ram each other; and war went out of fashion and
Magniac he went out of his mind because he said he couldn't serve his
country any more. I wonder if any of us ever know what we're really
doing."

"If you want to see the coach locked you'd better go aboard. It's due
now," says Mr. Geary. I enter through the door amidships. There is
nothing here for display. The inner skin of the gas-tanks comes down to
within a foot or two of my head and turns over just short of the turn of
the bilges. Liners and yachts disguise their tanks with decoration, but
the G. P. O. serves them raw under a lick of gray official paint. The
inner skin shuts off fifty feet of the bow and as much of the stern, but
the bow-bulkhead is recessed for the lift-shunting apparatus as the
stern is pierced for the shaft-tunnels. The engine-room lies almost
amidships. Forward of it, extending to the turn of the bow tanks, is an
aperture--a bottomless hatch at present--into which our coach will be
locked. One looks down over the coamings three hundred feet to the
despatching-caisson whence voices boom upward. The light below is
obscured to a sound of thunder, as our coach rises on its guides. It
enlarges rapidly from a postage-stamp to a playing-card; to a punt and
last a pontoon. The two clerks, its crew, do not even look up as it
comes into place. The Quebec letters fly under their fingers and leap
into the docketed racks, while both captains and Mr. Geary satisfy
themselves that the coach is locked home. A clerk passes the waybill
over the hatch-coaming. Captain Purnall thumb-marks and passes it to Mr.
Geary. Receipt has been given and taken. "Pleasant run," says Mr. Geary,
and disappears through the door which a foot-high pneumatic compressor
locks after him.

"A-ah!" sighs the compressor released. Our holding-down clips part with
a tang. We are clear.

Captain Hodgson opens the great colloid underbody-porthole through
which I watch million-lighted London slide eastward as the gale gets
hold of us. The first of the low winter clouds cuts off the well-known
view and darkens Middlesex. On the south edge of it I can see a postal
packet's light ploughing through the white fleece. For an instant she
gleams like a star ere she drops toward the Highgate Receiving Towers.
"The Bombay Mail," says Captain Hodgson, and looks at his watch. "She's
forty minutes late."

"What's our level?" I ask.

"Four thousand. Aren't you coming up on the bridge?"

The bridge (let us ever bless the G. P. O. as a repository of ancientest
tradition!) is represented by a view of Captain Hodgson's legs where he
stands on the control platform that runs thwartships overhead. The bow
colloid is unshuttered and Captain Purnall, one hand on the wheel, is
feeling for a fair slant. The dial shows 4,300 feet.

"It's steep to-night," he mutters, as tier on tier of cloud drops under.
"We generally pick up an easterly draught below three thousand at this
time o' the year. I hate slathering through fluff."

"So does Van Cutsem. Look at him huntin' for a slant!" says Captain
Hodgson. A fog-light breaks cloud a hundred fathoms below. The Antwerp
Night Mail makes her signal and rises between two racing clouds far to
port, her flanks blood-red in the glare of Sheerness Double Light. The
gale will have us over the North Sea in half an hour, but Captain
Purnall lets her go composedly--nosing to every point of the compass as
she rises.

"Five thousand--six, six thousand eight hundred"--the dip-dial reads ere
we find the easterly drift, heralded by a flurry of snow at the
thousand-fathom level. Captain Purnall rings up the engines and keys
down the governor on the switch before him. There is no sense in urging
machinery when AEolus himself gives you good knots for nothing. We are
away in earnest now--our nose notched home on our chosen star. At this
level the lower clouds are laid out all neatly combed by the dry fingers
of the East. Below that again is the strong westerly blow through which
we rose. Overhead, a film of southerly drifting mist draws a theatrical
gauze across the firmament. The moonlight turns the lower strata to
silver without a stain except where our shadow underruns us. Bristol and
Cardiff Double Lights (those statelily inclined beams over Severnmouth)
are dead ahead of us; for we keep the Southern Winter Route. Coventry
Central, the pivot of the English system, stabs upward once in ten
seconds its spear of diamond light to the north; and a point or two off
our starboard bow The Leek, the great cloud-breaker of Saint David's
Head, swings its unmistakable green beam twenty-five degrees each way.
There must be half a mile of fluff over it in this weather, but it does
not affect The Leek.

"Our planet's overlighted if anything," says Captain Purnall at the
wheel, as Cardiff-Bristol slides under. "I remember the old days of
common white verticals that 'ud show two or three thousand feet up in a
mist, if you knew where to look for 'em. In really fluffy weather they
might as well have been under your hat. One could get lost coming home
then, an' have some fun. Now, it's like driving down Piccadilly."

He points to the pillars of light where the cloud-breakers bore through
the cloud-floor. We see nothing of England's outlines: only a white
pavement pierced in all directions by these manholes of variously
coloured fire--Holy Island's white and red--St. Bee's interrupted white,
and so on as far as the eye can reach. Blessed be Sargent, Ahrens, and
the Dubois brothers, who invented the cloud-breakers of the world
whereby we travel in security!

"Are you going to lift for The Shamrock?" asks Captain Hodgson. Cork
Light (green, fixed) enlarges as we rush to it. Captain Purnall nods.
There is heavy traffic hereabouts--the cloud-bank beneath us is streaked
with running fissures of flame where the Atlantic boats are hurrying
Londonward just clear of the fluff. Mail-packets are supposed, under the
Conference rules, to have the five-thousand-foot lanes to themselves,
but the foreigner in a hurry is apt to take liberties with English air.
"No. 162" lifts to a long-drawn wail of the breeze in the fore-flange of
the rudder and we make Valencia (white, green, white) at a safe 7,000
feet, dipping our beam to an incoming Washington packet.

There is no cloud on the Atlantic, and faint streaks of cream round
Dingle Bay show where the driven seas hammer the coast. A big
S. A. T. A. liner (_Societe Anonyme des Transports Aeriens_) is diving
and lifting half a mile below us in search of some break in the solid
west wind. Lower still lies a disabled Dane: she is telling the liner
all about it in International. Our General Communication dial has caught
her talk and begins to eavesdrop. Captain Hodgson makes a motion to shut
it off but checks himself. "Perhaps you'd like to listen," he says.

"'Argol' of St. Thomas," the Dane whimpers. "Report owners three
starboard shaft collar-bearings fused. Can make Flores as we are, but
impossible further. Shall we buy spares at Fayal?"

The liner acknowledges and recommends inverting the bearings. The
"Argol" answers that she has already done so without effect, and begins
to relieve her mind about cheap German enamels for collar-bearings. The
Frenchman assents cordially, cries "_Courage, mon ami_," and switches
off.

Their lights sink under the curve of the ocean.

"That's one of Lundt & Bleamers's boats," says Captain Hodgson. "Serves
'em right for putting German compos in their thrust-blocks. _She_ won't
be in Fayal to-night! By the way, wouldn't you like to look round the
engine-room?"

I have been waiting eagerly for this invitation and I follow Captain
Hodgson from the control-platform, stooping low to avoid the bulge of
the tanks. We know that Fleury's gas can lift anything, as the
world-famous trials of '89 showed, but its almost indefinite powers of
expansion necessitate vast tank room. Even in this thin air the
lift-shunts are busy taking out one-third of its normal lift, and still
"162" must be checked by an occasional downdraw of the rudder or our
flight would become a climb to the stars. Captain Purnall prefers an
overlifted to an underlifted ship; but no two captains trim ship alike.
"When _I_ take the bridge," says Captain Hodgson, "you'll see me shunt
forty per cent. of the lift out of the gas and run her on the upper
rudder. With a swoop upwards instead of a swoop downwards, _as_ you say.
Either way will do. It's only habit. Watch our dip-dial! Tim fetches her
down once every thirty knots as regularly as breathing."

So is it shown on the dip-dial. For five or six minutes the arrow creeps
from 6,700 to 7,300. There is the faint "szgee" of the rudder, and back
slides the arrow to 6,500 on a falling slant of ten or fifteen knots.

"In heavy weather you jockey her with the screws as well," says Captain
Hodgson, and, unclipping the jointed bar which divides the engine-room
from the bare deck, he leads me on to the floor.

Here we find Fleury's Paradox of the Bulkheaded Vacuum--which we accept
now without thought--literally in full blast. The three engines are
H. T. &. T. assisted-vacuo Fleury turbines running from 3,000 to the
Limit--that is to say, up to the point when the blades make the air
"bell"--cut out a vacuum for themselves precisely as over-driven marine
propellers used to do. "162's" Limit is low on account of the small size
of her nine screws, which, though handier than the old colloid
Thelussons, "bell" sooner. The midships engine, generally used as a
reinforce, is not running; so the port and starboard turbine
vacuum-chambers draw direct into the return-mains.

The turbines whistle reflectively. From the low-arched expansion-tanks
on either side the valves descend pillarwise to the turbine-chests, and
thence the obedient gas whirls through the spirals of blades with a
force that would whip the teeth out of a power-saw. Behind, is its own
pressure held in leash or spurred on by the lift-shunts; before it, the
vacuum where Fleury's Ray dances in violet-green bands and whirled
turbillions of flame. The jointed U-tubes of the vacuum-chamber are
pressure-tempered colloid (no glass would endure the strain for an
instant) and a junior engineer with tinted spectacles watches the Ray
intently. It is the very heart of the machine--a mystery to this day.
Even Fleury who begat it and, unlike Magniac, died a multi-millionaire,
could not explain how the restless little imp shuddering in the U-tube
can, in the fractional fraction of a second, strike the furious blast of
gas into a chill grayish-green liquid that drains (you can hear it
trickle) from the far end of the vacuum through the eduction-pipes and
the mains back to the bilges. Here it returns to its gaseous, one had
almost written sagacious, state and climbs to work afresh. Bilge-tank,
upper tank, dorsal-tank, expansion-chamber, vacuum, main-return (as a
liquid), and bilge-tank once more is the ordained cycle. Fleury's Ray
sees to that; and the engineer with the tinted spectacles sees to
Fleury's Ray. If a speck of oil, if even the natural grease of the human
finger touch the hooded terminals Fleury's Ray will wink and disappear
and must be laboriously built up again. This means half a day's work
for all hands and an expense of one hundred and seventy-odd pounds to
the G. P. O. for radium-salts and such trifles.

"Now look at our thrust-collars. You won't find much German compo there.
Full-jewelled, you see," says Captain Hodgson as the engineer shunts
open the top of a cap. Our shaft-bearings are C. M. C. (Commercial
Minerals Company) stones, ground with as much care as the lens of a
telescope. They cost L37 apiece. So far we have not arrived at their
term of life. These bearings came from "No. 97," which took them over
from the old "Dominion of Light," which had them out of the wreck of the
"Perseus" aeroplane in the years when men still flew linen kites over
thorium engines!

They are a shining reproof to all low-grade German "ruby" enamels,
so-called "boort" facings, and the dangerous and unsatisfactory alumina
compounds which please dividend-hunting owners and turn skippers crazy.

The rudder-gear and the gas lift-shunt, seated side by side under the
engine-room dials, are the only machines in visible motion. The former
sighs from time to time as the oil plunger rises and falls half an inch.
The latter, cased and guarded like the U-tube aft, exhibits another
Fleury Ray, but inverted and more green than violet. Its function is to
shunt the lift out of the gas, and this it will do without watching.
That is all! A tiny pump-rod wheezing and whining to itself beside a
sputtering green lamp. A hundred and fifty feet aft down the flat-topped
tunnel of the tanks a violet light, restless and irresolute. Between the
two, three white-painted turbine-trunks, like eel-baskets laid on their
side, accentuate the empty perspectives. You can hear the trickle of
the liquefied gas flowing from the vacuum into the bilge-tanks and the
soft _gluck-glock_ of gas-locks closing as Captain Purnall brings "162"
down by the head. The hum of the turbines and the boom of the air on our
skin is no more than a cotton-wool wrapping to the universal stillness.
And we are running an eighteen-second mile.

I peer from the fore end of the engine-room over the hatch-coamings into
the coach. The mail-clerks are sorting the Winnipeg, Calgary, and
Medicine Hat bags: but there is a pack of cards ready on the table.
