arm as his craft slid out from beneath him. The void below dragged at
him. He put forth a last tremendous spurt of effort.

Two thousand feet below, Jim Holcomb, dizzy and gasping, manipulated
the controls frenziedly, his eyes fastened on the dropping
pressure-gauge. From somewhere outside the tent a dull thud sounded.
"Crashed! Darl's crashed! It's all over!" Hope gone, only the instinct
of duty held him to his post. But the gauge needle quivered, ceased
its steady fall and began a slow rise. Jim stared uncomprehendingly at
the dial, then, as the fact seeped in, staggered to the entrance.
"That's better, a lot better," he exclaimed. "But, damn it, what was
that crash?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The headquarters tent was at one edge of the circular plain. Jim's
bleary eyes followed the springing arch of a vertical girder, up and
up, to where it curved inward to the space ship landing lock that hung
suspended from the center of the vaulted roof. Within that bulge, at
the very apex, was the little conning-tower, with its peri-telescope,
its arsenal of ray-guns and its huge beam-thrower that was the Dome's
only means of defense against an attack from space. Jim's gaze
flickered down again, wandered across the brown plain, past the long
rows of canvas barracks and the derrick-like shaft-head. Hard by the
further wall a crumpled white heap lay huddled.

"My God! It was his plane!" The burly Earthman sobbed as his ten-foot
leaps carried him toward the wreck.

Darl was his friend as well as Chief, and together they had served the
Interplanetary Trading Association, ITA, for years, working and
fighting together in the wilds of the outer worlds. A thought struck
him, even as he ran. "What in th' name o' Jupiter's nine moons stopped
th' leak?" He glanced up, halted, his mouth open in amazement. "Well,
I'm a four-tailed, horn-headed Plutonian if there ain't th' boy
himself!"

Far up in the interlaced steel of the framework, so high that to his
staring comrade he seemed a naked doll, Darl stood outstretched on a
level beam, his tiny arms holding a minute square against the wall.
Lucky it was that he was so tall and his arms so long. For the saving
plate just lapped the upper rim of the hole, and stemmed the fierce
current by only a half-inch margin.

       *       *       *       *       *

The throbbing atmosphere machine in the sub-surface engine-room was
replacing the lost air rapidly, and now the increasing pressure was
strong enough to hold the translucent sheet against the wall by its
own force. Jim saw the extended arms drop away. The manikin waved down
to him, then turned to the shell again, as if to examine the emergency
repair. For a moment Darl stood thus, then he was running along the
girder, was climbing, ape-like, along a latticed beam that curved up
and in, to swing down and merge with the bulge of the air-lock's
wall.

"Like a bloomin' monkey! Can't he wait till I get him down with th'
spare plane?"

But Darl wasn't thinking of coming down. Something he had seen through
the translucent repair sheet was sending him to the look-out tower
within the air-lock. Hand over hand he swung, tiny above that vast
immensity of space. In his forehead a pulse still jumped as his heart
hurried new oxygen to thirsty cells. He held his gaze steadily to the
roof. A moment's vertigo, a grip missed by the sixteenth of an inch,
the slightest failure in the perfect team-play of eye and brain, and
rippling muscle, and he would crash, a half mile beneath, against hard
rock.

At last he reached the curving side of the landing lock. But the
platform at the manhole entrance jutted diagonally below him, fifteen
feet down and twelve along the bellying curve. Darl measured the angle
with a glance as he hung outstretched, then his body became a human
pendulum over the sheer void. Back and forth, back and forth he swung,
then, suddenly, his grasp loosened and a white arc flashed through the
air.

Breathless, Jim saw the far-off figure flick across the chasm toward
the jutting platform. He saw Darl strike its edge, bit his lip as his
friend teetered on the rim and swayed slowly outward. Then Darl found
his balance. An imperative gesture sent the watcher back to his post,
his sorrel-topped head shaking slowly in wonderment.

       *       *       *       *       *

Darl Thomas ran headlong up the staircase that spiralled through the
dim cavern. "No mistake about it," he muttered. "I saw something
moving outside that hole. Two little leaks before, and now this big
one. There's something a lot off-color going on around here."

Quickly he reached the little room at the summit. He flung the canvas
cover from the peri-telescope screen. Tempered by filters as it was
the blaze of light from outside hit him like a physical blow. He
adjusted the aperture and beat eagerly over the view-table.

Vacation jaunts and travel view-casts have made the moon's landscape
familiar to all. Very similar was the scene Darl scanned, save that
the barren expanse, pitted and scarred like Luna's, glowed almost
liquid under the beating flame of a giant sun that flared in a black
sky. Soundless, airless, lifeless, the tumbled plain stretched to a
jagged horizon.

The Earthman depressed the instrument's eye, and the silvered outside
of the Dome, aflame with intolerable light, swept on to the screen
disk. The great mirror seemed alive with radiant heat as it shot back
the sun's withering darts. The torrid temperature of the oven within,
unendurable save to such veterans of the far planets as Darl and Jim
Holcomb, was conveyed to it through the ground itself. The direct rays
of the sun, nearer by fifty million miles than it is to Earth, would
have blasted them, unprotected, to flaked carbon in an eye-blink.

An exclamation burst from Darl. A half-inch from the Dome's blazing
arc, a hundred yards in actuality, the screen showed a black fleck,
moving across the waste! Darl quickly threw in the full-power lens,
and the image leaped life-size across the table. The black fleck was
the shadow of a space-suited figure that lumbered slowly through the
viscous, clinging footing. How came this living form, clad in gleaming
silver, out there in that blast-furnace heat? In one of the space
suit's claw-like hands a tube flashed greenly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Darl's hand shot out to the trigger of the beam-thrower. Aimed by the
telescope's adjustment, the ray that could disintegrate a giant space
flier utterly flared out at his finger's pressure. Against the lambent
brown a spot glowed red where the beam struck. But, warned by some
uncanny prescience, the trespasser leaped aside in the instant between
Thomas' thought and act. Before Darl could aim and fire again the foe
had dodged back and was protected by the curve of the Dome itself.

Two white spots showed on either side of Darl's nostrils. His mouth
was a thin white slit, his eyes gray marbles. Standing against the
wall beside him was a space suit, mirror-surfaced and double-walled
against the planet's heat. In a few moments he was encased within it,
had snatched a pocket ray-gun from the long rack, and was through the
door to the auxiliary air-lock. The air soughed out in response to his
swift thrust at a lever, a second door opened, and he was on the
outside, reeling from the blast of that inferno of light and heat.

For a moment the Earthman was dazzled, despite the smoked quartz
eye-pieces in his helmet. Then, as his eyes grew used to the glare, he
saw, far below, the erect figure of the stranger. The man was standing
still, waiting. His immobility, the calm confidence with which he
