controls, he felt overcome with helplessness.

The passenger on his right was a girl--red-haired and undeniably
attractive. He remembered her name. It was Gloria White, and she was the
daughter of Colonel White who had led the expedition to Venus. Her
father had died months before but his friends had used their influence
to establish her as a secretary on the spaceport where it was assumed
she would be comparatively safe.

He had seen her frequently but almost always at a distance. She had been
friendly enough, but she had never exchanged more than a few casual
words with him. He had often paused in his work to admire her. But now,
aboard one of the last ships to leave Earth, he evaluated her only as
another passenger.

The man on his left was dressed expensively. His general appearance
radiated prestige although his fleshy face was filled with disbelief as
if he were witnessing a fantastic nightmare.

_Rinnnng! Rinnnng!_ Corbin's thoughts were interrupted by a clamoring
alarm bell declaring by its volume and insistence that the danger was
still acute. _That bell will ring until the ship is destroyed_, he
thought wildly. _It could very well mean that the ship will be
destroyed!_

The pilots leaped away from the controls as if they had abruptly become
white hot. "_Rocket_," one of them screamed. "Enemy rocket on our tail!"

Corbin turned suddenly and ran across the room in sudden, blind panic.
"We can't shake it! Nobody can shake one!" Mumbling incoherently, he
grabbed a spacesuit and began to don it.

The room was suddenly a seething mass of confusion. The pilots
distributed spacesuits and helped passengers into them while the cabin
continued to sway and lurch. Fear-crazed passengers ran aimlessly in
circles. Some fainted and others were shocked into immobility.

Emmett had barely finished securing his helmet when the ship shook
violently and he was knocked to the floor. The lights fluttered, then
went out.

When the trembling at last subsided, he struggled to his feet and looked
about the room. His eyes gradually adjusted to the faint light from the
luminous paint on the walls and he was able to make out two shadowy
figures moving hesitantly about the wreckage.

He remained motionless as one of the two men approached him, reached out
and adjusted the dials on his spacesuit controls. The earphones in his
helmet blared with a familiar voice, "Are you all right?"

"Y-Yeah. Just a little shaken."

The man walked toward the third passenger and presently Emmett heard a
quick, sobbing breath through the earphones.

"Are you hurt?" the man asked.

"No." Even under the abnormal conditions Gloria White's calm voice came
through clearly.

They wandered aimlessly about the room, each engrossed in his private
mental turmoil. Finally the pilot broke the silence, "Since we're
probably the last ones alive on the ship, we should know each other. My
name is George Hartman."

"Emmett Corbin."

"Gloria ... Gloria White."

The pilot said with grim urgency: "We've got to do something. There's no
sense in just standing here--waiting for the enemy to come."

"Come?" Emmett inquired. "You mean that the Agronians will actually
board our ship?"

"They always examine disabled ships. They are determined to learn as
much as they can about us."

"Well, let's get some weapons and be ready. I'm no hero, understand. But
I agree with you that there's no sense in just waiting."

The pilot said: "There are no hand weapons on the ship. Our only
possible course of action would be to _hide_." His emphasis conveyed to
the others how much he disliked the thought.
