
"Yes, sir," he said. "Can I show you something in a new TV?"

"Where are they?" asked Sutter, surveying the empty stand.

"Out back," replied the man. "Just a minute and I'll show you."

He rose lazily from his chair and led the way around to the rear of the
stand. Sutter could have sworn he had seen an apple orchard behind the
structure as he rode up, but he must have been mistaken for now he saw a
low-roofed, aluminum-walled building there, huge doors open on one side.
It looked, he thought, somewhat like a hangar....

Two hours later Sutter arrived back at his home in town. He parked the
car, went around to the rear compartment, lifted out a large packing
case and carried it to his sitting room. There, with the aid of hammer
and crowbar, he stripped away the protective boards and then trundled
the cabinet to an unoccupied corner.

It was certainly a unique TV set. A very new model, the salesman had
said. The cabinet was shaped like a delta with a cube surmounted on the
pointed end of the triangle. The cube held the screen, the triangle, the
controls. Finished in a subdued ochre color, the set captured the light
of the dying day that filtered through the bay window and gleamed with a
soft radiance.

Sutter looked at the control panel and his smile of satisfaction faded
somewhat. It looked a little complicated....

Instead of the usual knobs there were five small spoked wheels, each
closely calibrated in lavender with resilient studs that seemed to be
made of plush. Below this was a small dial with the legend _Element of
Probability_ lettered on it.

Sutter was about to switch on the set when the door buzzer sounded. He
crossed to the door and pulled it open.

A tall gangly man stood there. Swarthy, face partially covered by a
neatly trimmed beard, he looked the conventional picture of a story-book
villain. He wore a broad-brimmed hat and an under-slung pipe was clamped
in his teeth. He said in a deep booming voice, "Are you Mr. Martin
Sutter?"

"Yes, I am. What can I do for you?"

The man said his name was Lucien Travail. He explained that he had been
looking for a room and that Mrs. Conworth, the landlady, had informed
him she had no vacancies but suggested that her roomer, Mr. Sutter,
might be interested in a roommate.

"Of course I realize you don't know me but I believe our strangeness
will be offset by our mutual hobby."

Sutter was silent, waiting for him to continue.

"I collect shells," Travail said.

For thirty years Sutter had pursued a hobby which had begun in his
boyhood days during summer vacations at the seashore--the collecting of
exoskeletons of mollusks and crustaceans. Long ago his assortment of
cowries, spiny combs and yellow dragon-castles had outgrown their glass
cabinet and overflowed into three carefully catalogued packing cases.

To Sutter, anyone who liked shells was a person above suspicion. Thus it
was that two days later, after a casual checking of the bearded man's
references, he invited Travail to move in with him.

During those two days Sutter tried unsuccessfully to put his new
television set into operation. But the set refused to work. Turn the
queer dials as he would, all he could get on the elliptical screen was a
blur of blinding colors.

On the evening of the third day Travail looked up from his newspaper,
said, "It says here that the president of the Federal Union Congress is
going to make a speech in New Paris. Will you tune him in?"

Sutter frowned. "I would," he said, "but my set is out of order. I
should call a repair man, but I had hoped to get it regulated myself."

Travail laid down his pipe. "Out of order, eh?" he said. "I'm sort of
handy with gadgets. Let me take a look at it."

He walked across to the cabinet, turned it around and stood peering at
the complicated chassis. A small brass nameplate caught his eye:
_Manufactured by the Tanganyika Company, Dodoma, Empire of Tanganyika,
East Africa. Under charter of the Atomic Commercial Enterprise
Commission. Warning: Permit only an accredited employee of this company
to touch wiring._

Travail snorted. "Accredited employee, my foot! I know as much about
these things as they do."

He went into the kitchen and returned with a screwdriver. While Sutter
looked on with apprehensive eyes, he began to tinker with the wiring.
Suddenly there was a dull report and a flash of flame. Travail jerked
