
She was beautiful, but not coldly so. Despite her imperious bearing,
there was something seductive about the soft curves of her beautiful
body; something to rouse the pulses of a man in the langour of her
intensely blue eyes, and the full, sensuous lips, scarlet as a smear
of fresh blood.

"So this is the stowaway," I said, trying to keep my voice coolly
indifferent. "What is your name?"

"I should prefer," she replied, speaking the universal language with a
sibilant accent that was very fascinating, "to speak with you
privately."

"You will speak with me," I informed her crisply, "in the presence of
these officers. I repeat: what is your name?"

She smiled faintly, her eyes compelling mine.

"I am called Liane," she said. "Chief Priestess of the Flame. Mother
of Life. Giver of Death. I believe my name and position are not
unknown to you, Commander Hanson?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Known to me? If Base was not in error--and for all their faults, the
silver-sleeves are seldom wrong in matters of this sort--this woman
was the reason for our present mission.

"They are known to me," I admitted. "They do not explain, however,
your presence here."

"And yet they should," protested Liane gently. "I was taken from my
own people by those who had no right to command me. I was subjected to
the indignity of questioning by many men. I have merely taken the
simplest and quickest way of returning to my own people."

"You know, then, our destination?"

"I was informed of that by those who questioned me," nodded Liane.
"Then, since I had been assured I was an honored guest, and no
prisoner, I secreted myself aboard the ship, hiding in a small room
nearly filled with what I took to be spare parts. I had provisions,
and a few personal belongings. When I felt sufficient time had elapsed
to make a return improbable, I donned attire more fitting than the
masculine workman's guise in which I had secreted myself, and--I
believe you are acquainted with the remaining facts."

"I am. I will consider your case and advise you later. Mr. Correy,
will you conduct the stowaway to my quarters and place her under
guard? Return when you have attended to this matter, and ask Mr.
Kincaide to do likewise."

"To your quarters, you said, sir?" asked Correy, his eyes very
serious, but not sufficiently so to entirely disguise the twinkle in
their depths. "Not to the brig?"

I could cheerfully have kicked him.

"To my quarters," I repeated severely, "and under guard."

"Right, sir," said Correy.

       *       *       *       *       *

While we were awaiting Correy and Kincaide, I briefly considered the
rather remarkable story which had been told me at Base.

"Commander Hanson," the Chief of Command had said, "we're turning over
to you a very delicate mission. You've proved yourself adept at
handling matters of this kind, and we have every confidence you'll
bring this one to a highly successful conclusion."

"Thank you, sir; we'll do our best," I had told him.

"I know that; the assurance isn't necessary, although I appreciate it.
Briefly, here's what we're confronted with:

"Lakos, as you know, is the principal source of temite for the
universe. And without temite, modern space travel would be impossible;
we would have to resort to earlier and infinitely more crude devices.
You realize that, of course.

"Now, for some time, those in charge of operations on Lakos have
complained of a growing unrest, increasing insubordination on the part
of the Lakonians, and an alarming decrease in production.

"It has been extremely difficult--indeed, impossible--to determine the
reasons for this, for, as you are perhaps aware, the atmosphere of
Lakos is permeated with certain mineral fumes which, while not
directly harmful to those of other worlds, do serve to effectively
block the passage of those rays of the sun which are essential to the
health of beings like ourselves. Those in charge of operations there
are supplied artificially with these rays, as you are in your ship, by
means of emanations from ethon tubes, but they have to be transferred
at frequent periods to other fields of activity. The constant shifting
about produces a state of disorder which makes the necessary
investigation impossible. Too, operations are carried on with an
insufficient personnel, because it is extremely difficult to induce
desirable types of volunteer for such disagreeable service.

"We have, however, determined a few very important facts. This unrest
has been caused by the activities of a secret organization or order
known as the Worshipers of the Flame. That's as close a translation as
I can give you. It sounds harmless enough, but from what we gather,
it is a sinister and rather terrible organization, with a fanatical
belief amounting, at times, to a veritable frenzy. These Lakonians are
a physically powerful but mentally inadequate people, as perhaps you
are aware.

"The leader of this order or cult call it what you will--seems to be a
woman: a very fascinating creature, infinitely superior to her people
as a whole; what biologists call a 'sport,' I believe--a radical
departure from the general racial trend.

"This leader calls herself Liane, Chief Priestess of the Flame, Mother
of Life, Giver of Death, and a few other high-sounding things. We have
called her here to Base for questioning, and while she has been here
some time, we have so far learned next to nothing from her. She is
very intelligent, very alluring, very feminine--but reveals nothing
she does not wish to reveal.

"Our purpose in having her brought here was two-fold: first, to gain
what information we could from her, and if possible, prevail upon her
to cease her activities; second, to deprive her cult of her leadership
while you conducted your investigation.

"Your orders, then, are simple: you will proceed at once to Lakos, and
inquire into the activities of this order. Somehow, it must be
crushed; the means I shall leave to you. You will have complete
cooperation of those in charge of operations on Lakos; they are
Zenians and natives of Earth, and you may depend upon them implicitly.
Do not, however, place any faith in any Lakonians; the entire native
populace may well be suspected of participation in the rites of this
cult, and they are a treacherous and ruthless people at best. Have you
any questions, Commander?"

"None," I had told him. "I have full authority to take any action I
see fit?"

"Yes, at your discretion. Of course," he had added rather hastily,
"you appreciate the importance of our supply of temite. Only Lakonians
can gather it in commercial quantities, under the existing conditions
on Lakos, and our reserve supply is not large. We naturally wish to
increase production there, rather than endanger it. It's a delicate
mission, but I'm trusting you and your men to handle it for us. I know
you will."

He had arisen then, smilingly, and offered his hand to me in that
gesture which marks a son of Earth throughout the universe, thus
bringing the interview to a close.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN talking the things over with my officers, we had decided the
mission promised to be an interesting one, but full of difficulties.
The _Ertak_ had set down on Lakos more than once, and we all had
unpleasant memories of the place.

The sunlight on Lakos, such as it was, was pale green and thin,
lacking in warmth and vitality. The vegetation was flaccid and nearly
colorless, more like a mushroom growth than anything else; and the
inhabitants were suspicious and unfriendly.

Remembering the typical Lakonians, it was all the more surprising that
a gracious creature like Liane could have sprung from their midst.
They were a beetle-browed, dark race, with gnarled muscles and huge,
knotted joints, speaking a guttural language all their own. Few spoke
the universal language.

But Liane, Chief Priestess of the Flame! The image of her kept
drifting back to my mind. There was a woman to turn any man's head!
And such a turning would be dangerous, for Liane had no soft woman's
soul, if I had read her brilliant blue eyes aright.

"Rather a beauty, isn't she, sir?" commented Hendricks as I paused in
my restless pacing, and glanced at the two-dimensional charts.

"The stowaway? Rather," I agreed shortly. "And chief instigator of the
trouble we've been sent to eliminate."

"That seems almost--almost unbelievable, doesn't it?"

"Why, Mr. Hendricks?"

Correy and Kincaide entered before my junior officer could reply. I
think he was rather glad of the excuse for not presenting his reasons.

"Well, sir, she's under guard," reported Correy. "And now what's to be
done about her?"

"That," I admitted, "is a question. After all, she's an important
personage at home. She was brought to Base as a guest, probably
something of a guest of honor, of the Council, I gather. And,
