       *       *       *       *       *

I am seeing and listening to that news item right now which has been
repeated a dozen times the last twenty-four hours as if nobody could
believe it. I am Septimus Spink, and descended from a long line of
Spinks that began somewhere back at the time they put up the pyramids.

All my ancestors was never satisfied with what progress they saw during
when they lived, and they are the reasons we have got where we are
today. And if there was no Spinks today the scientists would get away
with saying that the Earth was only a drop from the sun that got a crust
on it after millions of years. And they want to send me back to get
fitted for a duronylon strait jacket again.

An hour after I shut off the viso-screen, and while I am taking my
calves' liver and onion capsules, my friend and space-lanceman,
D'Ambrosia Zahooli comes in. He just qualifies as a spaceman as he
takes up very little and is not much easier to look at than a Nougatine.
Once D'Ambrosia applied for a plasticectomy but the surgeons at the
Muzayo clinic just laughed and told him there was a limit to science
even in the year 2022. But the citizen was at home when they divided the
brains. Of course that is only my opinion. He is to fly with me into
inner space.

"Greetin's and salutations, and as the Martians say, 'max nabiscum,'
Sep," Zahooli says. "I have been figuring that we won't have to go
deeper than about four thousand kilometers. All that is worryin' me is
gettin' back up. I still do not fully believe that we won't melt.
Supposin' Professor Zalpha is right and that we will dive down into a
core of live iron ore. You have seen them pour it out of the big dippers
in the mills, Sep."

"Columbus started off like us," I says. "Who knew what he would find or
where he ended up? Chris expected to fall right off the edge of the
world, but did that scare him? No!"

"Of course you can count on me," Zahooli says. "When do we start
building this mechanical mole?"

"In just two days," I says. "Our backers have purchased an extinct
spaceship factory not far from Commonwealth Seven. Yeah, we will call
our project 'Operation Earthworm,' pal."

D'Ambrosia sits down and starts looking chicken. "We wouldn't get no
astrogator in his right mind to go with us, Sep. How many times the
thrust will we need over what we would use if we was just cutting space?
We start out in about a foot of topsoil, then some hard rock and then
more hard rock. Can we harness enough energy to last through the
diggin'? Do you mind if I change my mind for a very good reason which is
that I'm an awful coward?"

"Of course not," I says. "It would be a coincidence if you quit though,
my dear old friend, and right after Coordinator One found out who was
sipping Jovian drambuie on a certain space bistro last Monday with his
Venutian wife."

"You have sold me," Zahooli says. "I wouldn't miss this trip for one of
those four-legged turkey farms up in Maine. It is kind of frustratin'
though, don't you think, Septimus? We are still not thirty and could
live another hundred years what with the new arteries they are making
out of Nucrolon and the new tickers they are replacing for the old
ones."

"Let us look over the model again," I says. "You are just moody today,
D'Ambrosia."

It still looks like it would work to me. It is just a rocket ship
pointed toward terra firma instead of the other way, and has an auger
fixed in place at the nose. It is about twenty feet long and four feet
wide and made out of the strongest metal known to modern science,
cryptoplutonite. It won't heat up or break off and it will start
spinning around as soon as we cut loose with the tail blasts.

"How much time do we need and how much energy for only four thousand
kilometers?" I asks Zahooli. "We got enough stored up to go seventy
million miles into space? We'll cross that bridge when we get to the
river."

"You mean the Styx?"

"That is one thing I will not believe," I sniff. "We will never find
Attila the Hun or Hitler down there. Or Beelzebub."

All at once we hear a big rumbling noise and the plexidomed house we are
in shakes and rattles and we are knocked out of our chairs and deposited
on the seats of our corylon rompers. The viso-screen blacks out, I get
to all fours and ask, "You think the Nougatines have gone to war again,
D'Ambrosia?"

"It was not mice," Zahooli gulps. "It is either a hydroradium plant
backfired or a good old-fashioned earthquake."

After a while we have the viso-screen working. The face of Coordinator
Five appears. He says the worst earthquake in five centuries has
happened. There is a crack in the real estate of Department X6 near the
Rockies that makes the Grand Canyon look like a kid just scraped a stick
through some mud. Infra-Red Cross units, he says, are rocketing to the
area.

"There might be somethin' goin' on inside this earth," I says. "If you
don't poke a hole in a baked potato its busts right open from heat
generated inside. Our project, D'Ambrosia, seems even more expedient
than ever."

"That is a new word for 'insane' I must look up," Zahooli says.

