To James Atwater, of New Haven, Ct., for improvement in Door Locks.
Patented 24th July, 1846.

To Richard Flint, of Meriden, Ct., for improvement in Rat-Tail Files.
Patented 24th July, 1846.

To Addison Smith, of Perrysburgh, Ohio, for improvement in Magnetic
Fire Alarms.--Patented 24th July, 1846.

To Charles F. Johnson, of Oswego, N. Y., for improvement in Turret
Clocks. Patented 28th July, 1846.

To H, D. Reynolds, of Mill-Hall, Pa., for improvement in Smut
Machines. Patented 28th July, 1846.

To Charles Edward Jacot, of New York City, for improvement in Lever
Escapements. Patented 28th July, 1846.

To Ross Winans, of Baltimore, Md., for improvement in Locomotive
Carriages. Patented 28th July, 1846.

To Jonathan Knowles, of Lowell, Mass., for improvement in Children's
Chairs and Wagons. Patented 28th July, 1846.

To Moses Miller, of Fort Ann, N. Y., for improvement in Sleighs.
Patented 28th July, 1846.

To William Hatch, of Medford, Mass., for improvement in Spike and Nail
Machines.--Patented 28th July, 1846.




[Illustration: Variety]

=Old Bachelors.=

    They are wanderers and ramblers--never at home,
    Making sure of a welcome wherever they roam.
    And ev'ry one knows that the bachelor's den
    Is a room set apart for these singular men--
    A nook in the clouds, of some five feet by four,
    Though sometimes, perchance, it may be rather more,
    With skylight, or no light, ghosts, goblins and gloom,
    And ev'ry where termed, 'The Bachelor's Room.'

    These creatures, they say, are not valued at all,
    Except when the herd give a Bachelor's ball.
      Then drest in their best,
      In their gold broidered vest,
      It is known as a fact,
      That they act with much tact,
      And they lisp out 'How do?'
      And they coo and they woo,
      And they smile, for a while,
      Their fair guests to beguile;
      Condescending and bending,
      For fear of offending,
    Though inert,                       And they spy,
    They exert,                         With their eye,
    To be pert,                         And they sigh
    And to flirt,                       As they fly.

      And they whisk, and they whiz,
      And are brisk, when they quiz.

    For they meet,                      Advancing,
    To be sweet,                        And glancing,
    And are fleet,                      And dancing,
    On their feet,                      And prancing.

      Sliding and gliding with minuet pace,
      Piroueting and setting with infinite grace.

    And jumping,                        And racing,
    And bumping,                        And chasing,
    And stumping,                       And pacing,
    And thumping,                       And lacing.

    They are flittering and glittering, gallant and gay,
    Yawning all the morning, and lounging all day,
      But when he grows old,
      And his sunshine is past,
      Three score years being told,
      Brings repentance at last.

    He then becomes an odd old man:
    His warmest friend's the frying pan;
    He's fidgety, fretful and weary; in fine,
    Loves nothing but self, and his dinner and wine.

      He rates and he prates,
      And reads the debates:

    Despised by the men, and the women he hates.

    Then prosing,                       And pouring,
    And dozing,                         And snoring,
    And cozing,                         And boring,
    And nosing,                         And roaring,

    Whene'er befalls in with a rabble,
    His delight is to vapor and gabble.

    He's gruffy,                        And musty,
    And puffy,                          And tusty,
    And stuffy,                         And rusty,
    And huffy,                          And crusty,

    He sits in his slippers, with back to the door,

    Near freezing,                      And grumbling,
    And wheezing,                       And mumbling,
    And teazing,                        And stumbling,
    And sneezing,                       And tumbling,

    And curses the carpet, or nails in the floor.

    Oft falling,                        Oft waking,
    And bawling,                        And aching,
    And sprawling,                      And quaking,
    And crawling,                       And shaking,

    His hand is unsteady: his stomach is sore,

    He's railing,                       Uncheery,
    And failing,                        And dreary,
    And ailing,                         And teary,
    Bewailing,                          And weary,

      Groaning and moaning,
      His selfishness owning.
      Grieving and heaving,
      Though nought is he leaving.
      But pelf and ill health,
      Himself and his wealth.

    He sends for a doctor, to cure or to kill,
    Who gives him advice, and offence, and a pill,
    And drops him a hint about making his will,
    As fretful antiquity cannot be mended,
    The mis'rable life of a bachelor's ended.
    Nobody misses him, nobody sighs,
    Nobody grieves when the bachelor dies.


=Wellman's Illustrated Botany.=

We have received the October number of this incomparable work, and
find it equal in all respects to its "illustrious predecessors." Among
the flowers presented in full colors, by way of illustration, we
notice the Scarlet Pimpernel, China Aster, Blue Hepatia, Cerus
Speciosus, Agrimonia Eupatoria, besides several other sketches of
buds, sections, &c. We esteem this work worth at least double the
publishers' price,--$3 per annum. Published at 116 Nassau street.


=Literary Emporium.=

We have hitherto neglected to notice the September and October numbers
of this serious, rational and elegant periodical. Each number is
embellished with beautiful portraits, landscapes and flowers, and
contains the most useful and interesting reading matter, as well as
choice poetry and occasional music. Terms $1 per annum. By J. K.
Wellman, 116 Nassau street.


=A Delicate Compliment.=

Washington was sometimes given to pleasantry. Journeying east on one
occasion, attended by two of his aids, he asked some young ladies at a
hotel where he breakfasted, how they liked the appearance of his young
men! One of them promptly replied, 'We cannot judge of the STARS in
the presence of the SUN!'


=Fatal Deer Fight.=

The skeleton heads of two deers, their antlers so closely interlocked
that they cannot be disengaged without violence, were found about a
month ago by a gentleman while hunting in Nassau county, East Florida.
The ground for a quarter of an acre was completely cut up by their
hoofs.


=A Provoking Blunder.=

The letter bags for the steamer Cambria, despatched from this city,
and containing upwards of ten thousand letters for Europe, was taken
from the Boston Post Office by a country stage driver, through
mistake, and the Cambria was compelled to sail without them. They were
returned to this city.


=Curious Needlework.=

A complete map of the State of Pennsylvania, wrought in lace--in which
the town, counties, rivers, &c., are all distinctly shown, each county
being worked in a style of lace different from those adjoining--is
being exhibited in Baltimore, and commands much admiration.


=The Credit System.=

We infer, from certain polite hints and intimation, in the
'Massachusetts Farmers' and Mechanics' Leger,' that that paper is
circulated on trust. If so, the publishers are in no danger of wanting
business for some years to come.


=Charcoal Road.=

The citizens of Yazoo, Miss., have determined to make a charcoal road
over the valley swamp of that place. Sixty hands cutting timber will
burn and spread the coal over two miles in thirty days--the
embankments being already thrown up.


=Quick Work.=

The Baltimore Sun says--'A communication was made from _Buffalo to
Baltimore_ last week, and an answer was received at the telegraph
office in the former city in about _two hours_!'


=Oregon Currency.=

By an act of the Oregon Legislature, wheat is made a lawful tender, in
payment of debts or taxes, at the market prices, when delivered at
such places as it is customary for the merchants to receive it.


=Suffering by Success.=

It is reported that a gentleman congratulated Mr. Polk on having
carried all his measures through Congress. Mr. Polk replied, 'Yes, I
have carried all of them through, and am the weaker for the passage of
each one of them.'


=A Rich Ore.=

The Detroit Advertiser, in an article upon the nature of the ores in
the Lake Superior region, remarks that Messrs. Robbins and Hubbard, of
that city, have recently assayed a specimen of native copper from Lake
Superior, and found in 12 ounces of copper, not only 1-3/4 ounces of
pure silver, but several grains of gold!


=Musical.=

The gross receipts of a late musical festival at Birmingham, amounted
to $56,000. The excitement was caused by performing Mendleson's
Messiah, which we learn is to be brought out in this city.


=Singular Accident.=

The steamboat Highland having got aground near Turkey Island, on the
Mississippi, a large tree, three feet in diameter, fell directly
across the boat, smashing the cabin, breaking the connecting pipe, and
seriously injuring the pilot.


=Combined Accomplishments.=

Mr. S. Lover, who recently arrived in this city, is said to be a good
poet, a good painter, a good musician, full of wit, anecdotes and
pleasantry--it is impossible to pass a dull evening in his company.


=Marriage of Rossini.=

This celebrated composer was married at Bologna, on the 16th of
August, after a courtship of 16 years, to Mademoiselle Olympe Bearrien
of Paris. It may change the turn of his muse.


=Great Luck.=

A poor Englishman, with a wife and family living in St. Louis, has
had a fortune of $265,000 in money, and a family estate worth
$115,000, recently left him by a deceased relative.


=Zinc Mines.=

There are several mines of zinc in New Jersey, one of which is said to
consist of a deposit 600 feet in length, and is thought to contain ore
worth $2,000,000.


=A Monstrous Woman.=

The Ohio State Journal says that there is a woman in Pickaway county,
in that State, who weighs 46 pounds!


=Old Boy.=

A southern paper advertises a runaway boy, _thirty-six years of age_!

    *    *    *    *    *

By a recent telegraphic arrangement, the papers in Albany, Troy,
