
The doctor moved toward the Med Ship's exit-port.

"I answered your questions," he said grimly. "But if I talked to anyone
else as I've done to you, I'd be lucky only to be driven into exile!"

"I shan't give you away," said Calhoun. He did not smile.

When the doctor had gone, Calhoun said deliberately;

"Murgatroyd, you should be grateful that you're a _tormal_ and not a
man. There's nothing about being a _tormal_ to make you ashamed!"

Then he grimly changed his garments for the full-dress uniform of the
Med Service. There was to be a banquet at which he would sit next to the
planet's chief executive and hear innumerable speeches about the
splendor of Weald. Calhoun had his own, strictly Med Service opinion of
the planet's latest and most boasted-of achievement. It was a domed city
in the polar regions, where nobody ever had to go outdoors. He was less
than professionally enthusiastic about the moving streets, and much less
approving of the dream-broadcasts which supplied hypnotic,
sleep-inducing rhythms to anybody who chose to listen to them. The price
was that while asleep one would hear high praise of commercial products,
and one might believe them when awake.

But it was not Calhoun's function to criticize when it could be avoided.
Med Service had been badly managed in Sector Twelve. So at the banquet
Calhoun made a brief and diplomatic address in which he temperately
praised what could be praised, and did not mention anything else.

The chief executive followed him. As head of the government he paid some
tribute to the Med Service. But then he reminded his hearers proudly of
the high culture, splendid health, and remarkable prosperity of the
planet since his political party took office. This, he said, was in
spite of the need to be perpetually on guard against the greatest and
most immediate danger to which any world in all the galaxy was exposed.
He referred to the blueskins, of course. He did not need to tell the
people of Weald what vigilance, what constant watchfulness was necessary
against that race of depraved and malevolent deviants from the norm of
humanity. But Weald, he said with emotion, held aloft the torch of all
that humanity held most dear, and defended not alone the lives of its
people against blueskin contagion, but their noble heritage of ideals
against Blueskin pollution.

When he sat down, Calhoun said very politely;

"It looks like some day it should be practical politics to urge the
massacre of all blueskins. Have you thought of that?"

The chief executive said comfortably;

"The idea's been proposed. It's good politics to urge it, but it would
be foolish to carry it out. People vote against blueskins. Wipe them
out, and where'd you be?"

Calhoun ground his teeth, quietly.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were more speeches. Then a messenger, white-faced, arrived with a
written note for the chief executive. He read it and passed it to
Calhoun. It was from the Ministry of Health. The space-port reported
that a ship had just broken out from overdrive within the Wealdian
solar system. Its tape-transmitter had automatically signalled its
arrival from the mining-planet Orede. But, having sent off its automatic
signal, the ship lay dead in space. It did not drive toward Weald. It
did not respond to signals. It drifted like a derelict upon no course at
all. It seemed ominous, and since it came from Orede--the planet nearest
to Dara of the blueskins--the health ministry informed the planet's
chief executive.

"It'll be blueskins," said that astute person, firmly. "They're
next-door to Orede. That's who's done this. It wouldn't surprise me if
they'd seeded Orede with their plague, and this ship came from there to
give us warning!"

"There's no evidence for anything of the sort," protested Calhoun. "A
ship simply came out of overdrive and didn't signal further. That's
all."

"We'll see," said the chief executive ominously. "We'll go directly to
the spaceport."

Calhoun retrieved Murgatroyd who had been visiting with the wives of the
higher-up officials. His small paunch distended with cakes and coffee
and such delicacies as he'd been plied with. He was half comatose from
over-feeding and over-petting, but he was glad to see Calhoun. At the
spaceport they discovered the situation remained unchanged.

A ship from Orede had come out of overdrive and lay dead in emptiness.
It did not answer calls. It did not move in space. It floated eerily in
no orbit around anything, going nowhere; doing nothing. And panic was
the consequence.

It seemed to Calhoun that the official handling of the matter accounted
for the terror that he could feel building up. The so-far-unexplained
bit of news was on the air all over the planet Weald. There was nobody
awake of all the world's population who did not believe that there was a
new danger in the sky. Nobody doubted that it came from blueskins. The
treatment of the news was precisely calculated to keep alive the hatred
of Weald for the inhabitants of the world Dara.

Calhoun put Murgatroyd into the Med Ship and went back to the spaceport
office. A small space-boat, designed to inspect the circling grain-ships
from time, was already aloft. The landing-grid had thrust it swiftly out
most of the way. Now it droned and drove on sturdily toward the
enigmatic ship.

Calhoun took no part in the agitated conferences among the officials and
news reporters at the space-port. But he listened to the talk about him.
As the investigating small ship drew nearer and nearer to the
deathly-still cargo vessel, the guesses about the meaning of its
breakout and following silence grew more and more wild. But, singularly,
there was not one suggestion that the mystery might not be the work of
blueskins. Blueskins were scapegoats for all the fears and all the
uneasiness a perhaps over-civilized world developed.

Presently the investigating space-boat reached the mystery ship and
circled it, beaming queries. No answer. It reported the cargo-ship dark.
No lights shone anywhere on or in it. There were no induction-surges
from even pulsing, idling engines. Delicately, the messenger-craft
maneuvered until it touched the silent vessel. It reported that
microphones detected no motion whatever inside.

"Let a volunteer go aboard," commanded the chief executive. "Have him
report what he finds."

A pause. Then the solemn announcement of an intrepid volunteer's name,
from far, far away. Calhoun listened, frowning darkly. This pompous
heroism wouldn't be noticed in the Med Service. It would be routine
behavior.

Suspenseful, second-by-second reports. The volunteer had rocketed
himself across the emptiness between the two again-separated ships. He
had opened the airlock from outside. He'd gone in. He'd closed the outer
airlock door. He'd opened the inner. He reported.

The relayed report was almost incoherent, what with horror and
incredulity and the feeling of doom that came upon the volunteer. The
ship was a bulk-cargo ore-carrier, designed to run between Orede and
Weald with cargoes of heavy-metal ores and a crew of no more than five
men. There was no cargo in her holds now, though. Instead, there were
men. They packed the ship. They filled the corridors. They had crawled
into every cargo and other space where a man could find room to push
himself. There were hundreds of them. It was insanity. And it had been
greater insanity still for the ship to have taken off with so
preposterous a load of living creatures.

But they weren't living any longer. The air apparatus had been designed
for a crew of five. It could purify the air for possibly twenty or more.
But there were hundreds of men in hiding as well as in plain view in the
cargo-ship from Orede. There were many, many times more than her air
apparatus and reserve tanks could possibly have serviced. They couldn't
even have been fed during the journey from Orede to Weald!

But they hadn't starved. Air-scarcity killed them before the ship came
out of overdrive.

A remarkable thing was that there was no written message in the ship's
log which referred to its take-off. There was no memorandum of the
taking on of such an impossible number of passengers.

"The blueskins did it," said the chief executive of Weald. He was pale.
All about Calhoun men looked sick and shocked and terrified. "It was the
blueskins! We'll have to teach them a lesson!" Then he turned to
Calhoun. "The volunteer who went on that ship ... He'll have to stay
there, won't he? He can't be brought back to Weald without bringing
contagion ..."

Calhoun raged at him.




CHAPTER 2


There was a certain coldness in the manner of those at the Weald
spaceport when the Med Ship left next morning. Calhoun was not popular
because Weald was scared. It had been conditioned to scare easily, where
blueskins might be involved. Its children were trained to react
explosively when the word "blueskin" was uttered in their hearing, and
its adults tended to say "blueskin" when anything to cause uneasiness
entered their minds. So a planet-wide habit of non-rational response had
formed and was not seen to be irrational because almost everybody had
it.

The volunteer who'd discovered the tragedy on the ship from Orede was
safe, though. He'd made a completely conscientious survey of the ship
he'd volunteered to enter and examine. For his courage, he'd have been
doomed but for Calhoun. The reaction of his fellow-citizens was that by
entering the ship he might have become contaminated by blueskin
infective material if the plague still existed, and if the men in the
ship had caught it--but they certainly hadn't died of it--and if there
had been blueskins on Orede to communicate it--for which there was no
evidence--and if blueskins were responsible for the tragedy. Which was
at the moment pure supposition. But Weald feared he might bring death
back to Weald if he were allowed to return.

Calhoun saved his life. He ordered that the guard-ship admit him to its
airlock, which then was to be filled with steam and chlorine. The
combination would sterilize and partly even eat away his space-suit,
after which the chlorine and steam should be bled out to space, and air
from the ship let into the lock. If he stripped off the space-suit
without touching its outer surface, and reentered the investigating ship
while the suit was flung outside by a man in another space-suit,
handling it with a pole he'd fling after it, there could be no possible
contamination brought back.

Calhoun was quite right, but Weald in general considered that he'd
persuaded the government to take an unreasonable risk.

There were other reasons for disapproving of him. Calhoun had been
unpleasantly frank. The coming of the death-ship stirred to frenzy those
people who believed that all blueskins should be exterminated as a pious
act. They'd appeared on every visionscreen, citing not only the ship
from Orede but other incidents which they interpreted as crimes against
Weald. They demanded that all Wealdian atomic reactors be modified to
turn out fusion-bomb materials while a space-fleet was made ready for an
anti-blueskin crusade. They confidently demanded such a rain of
fusion-bombs on Dara that no blueskin, no animal, no shred of
vegetation, no fish in the deepest ocean, not even a living
virus-particle of the blueskin plague could remain alive on the blueskin
world!

One of these vehement orators even asserted that Calhoun agreed that no
other course was possible, speaking for the Interstellar Medical
Service. And Calhoun furiously demanded a chance to deny it by
broadcast, and he made a bitter and indiscreet speech from which a
planet-wide audience inferred that he thought them fools. He did.

So he was definitely unpopular when his ship lifted from Weald. He'd
curtly given his destination as Orede, from which the death-ship had
come. The landing-grid locked on, raised the small space-craft until
Weald was a great shining ball below it, and then somehow scornfully
cast him off. The Med Ship was free, in clear space where there was not
enough of a gravitational field to hinder overdrive.

He aimed for his destination, his face very grim. He said savagely;

"Get set, Murgatroyd! Overdrive coming!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He thumbed down the overdrive button. The universe of stars went out,
while everything living in the ship felt the customary sensations of
dizziness, of nausea, and of a spiralling fall to nothingness. Then
there was silence. The Med Ship actually moved at a rate which was a
preposterous number of times the speed of light, but it felt absolutely
solid, absolutely firm and fixed. A ship in overdrive feels exactly as
if it were buried deep in the core of a planet. There is no vibration.
There is no sign of anything but solidity and--if one looks out a
port--there is only utter blackness plus an absence of sound fit to make
one's eardrums crack.

But within seconds random tiny noises began. There was a reel and there
were sound-speakers to keep the ship from sounding like a grave. The
reel played and the speakers gave off minute creakings, and meaningless
hums, and very tiny noises of every imaginable sort, all of which were
just above the threshold of the inaudible.

Calhoun fretted. Sector Twelve was in very bad shape. A conscientious
Med Service man would never have let the anti-blueskin obsession go
unmentioned in a report on Weald. Health is not only a physical affair.
There is mental health, also. When mental health goes a civilization can
be destroyed more surely and more terribly than by any imaginable war or
plague-germ. A plague kills off those who are susceptible to it, leaving
immunes to build up a world again. But immunes are the first to be
killed when a mass neurosis sweeps a population.

Weald was definitely a Med Service problem world. Dara was another. And
when hundreds of men jammed themselves into a cargo-boat which could not
furnish them with air to breathe, and took off and went into overdrive
before the air could fail.... Orede called for no less of worry.

"I think," said Calhoun dourly, "that I'll have some coffee."

"Coffee" was one of the words that Murgatroyd recognized immediately. He
would usually watch the coffee-maker with bright, interested eyes. He'd
even tried to imitate Calhoun's motions with it, once, and had scorched
his paws in the attempt. This time he did not move.

Calhoun turned his head. Murgatroyd sat on the floor, his long tail
coiled reflectively about a chair-leg. He watched the door of the Med
Ship's sleeping-cabin.

"Murgatroyd," said Calhoun. "I mentioned coffee!"

"_Chee!_" shrilled Murgatroyd.

But he continued to look at the door. The temperature was kept lower in
the other cabin, and the look of things was different from the
control-compartment. The difference was part of the means by which a man
was able to be alone for weeks on end--alone save for his
_tormal_--without becoming ship-happy. There were other carefully
thought out items in the ship with the same purpose. But none of them
should cause Murgatroyd to stare fixedly and fascinatedly at the
sleeping-cabin door. Not when coffee was in the making!

Calhoun considered. He became angry at the immediate suspicion that
occurred to him. As a Med Service man, he was duty-bound to be
impartial. To be impartial might mean not to side absolutely with Weald
in its enmity to blueskins. The people of Weald had refused to help Dara
in a time of famine; they'd blockaded that pariah world for years
afterward; they had other reasons for hating the people they'd treated
badly. It was entirely reasonable for some fanatic on Weald to consider
that Calhoun must be killed lest he be of help to the blueskins Weald
abhorred.

In fact, it was quite possible that somebody had stowed away on the Med
Ship to murder Calhoun, so that there would be no danger of any report
favorable to Dara ever being presented anywhere. If so, such a stowaway
would be in the sleeping-cabin now, waiting for Calhoun to walk
unsuspiciously in to be shot dead.

So Calhoun made coffee. He slipped a blaster into a pocket where it
would be handy. He filled a small cup for Murgatroyd and a large one for
himself, and then a second large one.

He tapped on the sleeping-cabin door, standing aside lest a blaster-bolt
came through it.

"Coffee's ready," he said sardonically. "Come out and join us."

There was a long pause. Calhoun rapped again.

"You've a seat at the captain's table," he said more sardonically still.
"It's not polite to keep me waiting!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He listened, alert for a rush which would be a fanatic's desperate
attempt to do murder despite premature discovery. He was prepared to
shoot quite ruthlessly.

But there was no rush. Instead, there came hesitant foot-falls. The door
of the cabin slid slowly aside. A girl appeared in the opening,
desperately white and desperately composed.

"H-how did you know I was there?" she asked shakily. She moistened her
lips. "You didn't see me! I was in a closet, and you didn't even enter
the room!"

Calhoun said grimly;

"I've sources of information." He pointed to Murgatroyd.

The girl did not move. Her eyes went from Murgatroyd to Calhoun.

"And now," said Calhoun, "do you want to tell me your story? You have
one ready, I'm sure."

"There--there isn't any," said the girl unsteadily. "Just--I--I need to
get to Orede, and you're going there. There's no other way to go--now."

"To the contrary," said Calhoun, "there'll undoubtedly be a fleet
heading for Orede as soon as it can be assembled and armed. But I'm
afraid that's not a very good story. Try another."

She shivered a little.

"I'm--running away ..."

"Ah!" said Calhoun. "In that case I'll take you back."

"No!" she said fiercely. "I'll--I'll die first! I'll wreck this ship
first!"

Her hand came from behind her. There was a tiny blaster in it. But it
shook visibly as she tried to aim it.

"I'll--shoot out the controls!"

Calhoun blinked. He'd had to make a drastic change in his estimate of
the situation the instant he saw that the stowaway was a girl. Now he
had to make another when her threat was not to kill him but to disable
the ship. Women are rarely assassins, and when they are they don't use
energy weapons. Daggers and poisons are more typical.

"I'd rather you didn't do that," said Calhoun drily. "Besides, you'd get
deadly bored if we were stuck in a derelict waiting for our air and food
to give out."

Murgatroyd, for no reason whatever, felt it necessary to enter the
conversation. He said;

"_Chee-chee-chee!_"

"A very sensible suggestion," observed Calhoun. "We'll sit down and have
a cup of coffee." To the girl he said, "I'll take you to Orede, since
that's where you say you want to go."

"I--there's a boy there--"

Calhoun shook his head.

"No," he said reprovingly. "Nearly all the mining colony had packed
itself into the ship that came into Weald with everybody dead. But not
all. And there's been no check of what men were in the ship and what men
weren't. You wouldn't go to Orede if it were likely your fellow had died
on the way to you. Here's your coffee. Sugar or saccho, and do you take
cream?"

She trembled a little, but she took the cup.

"I--don't understand--."

"Murgatroyd and I," explained Calhoun--and he did not know whether he
spoke out of anger or something else--"we are do-gooders. We go around
trying to keep people from getting killed. It's our profession. We
practise it even on our own behalf. We want to stay alive. So since you
make such drastic threats, we will take you where you want to go.
Especially since we're going there anyhow."

"You--don't believe anything I've said!" It was a statement.

"Not a word," admitted Calhoun. "But you'll probably tell us something
more believable presently. When did you eat last?"

"Yesterday--."

"Better have something now. We'll talk more later." Calhoun showed her
how to punch the readier for such-and-such dishes, to be extracted from
storage and warmed or chilled, as the case might be, and served at
dialed-for intervals.

       *       *       *       *       *

Calhoun deliberately immersed himself in the Galactic Directory, looking
up the planet Orede. He was headed there, but he'd had no reason to
inform himself about it before. Now he read with every appearance of
absorption.

The girl ate daintily. Murgatroyd watched with highly amiable interest.
But she looked acutely uncomfortable.

Calhoun finished with the Directory. He got out the microfilm reels
which contained more information. He was specifically after the Med
Service history of all the planets in this sector. He went through the
filmed record of every inspection ever made on Weald and on Dara. But
Sector Twelve had not been well-run. There was no adequate account of a
plague which had wiped out three-quarters of the population of an
inhabited planet! It had happened shortly after one Med Ship visit, and
was over before another Med Ship came by. But there should have been
painstaking investigation, even after the fact. There should have been a
collection of infective material and a reasonably complete
identification and study of the infective agent. It hadn't been made.
There was probably some other emergency at the time, and it slipped by.
But Calhoun--whose career was not to be spent in this sector--resolved
on a blistering report about this negligence and its consequences.

He kept himself casually busy, ignoring the girl. A Med Ship man has
resources of study and meditation with which to occupy himself during
overdrive travel from one planet to another. Calhoun made use of those
resources. He acted as if he were completely unconscious of the
stowaway. But Murgatroyd watched her with charmed attention.

Hours after her discovery, she said uneasily;

"Please?"

Calhoun looked up.

"Yes?"

"I--don't know exactly how things stand."

"You are a stowaway," said Calhoun. "Legally, I have the right to put
you out the airlock. It doesn't seem necessary. There's a cabin. When
you're sleepy, use it. Murgatroyd and I can make out quite well here.
When you're hungry, you now know how to get something to eat. When we
land on Orede, you'll probably go about whatever business you have
there. That's all."

She stared at him.

"But--you don't believe what I've told you!"

"No," agreed Calhoun. But he didn't add to the statement.

