Beardsley thought, more than a mere tiredness. He had never seen Arnold
this way.

"Yes sir, this is the day!" A muscle twitched in his corded neck; Arnold
eased his long frame into a chair, rubbed thumb and forefinger at his
eyes. "Been up half the night running off clearance tests. Can't afford
to foul up on this one!"

Beardsley tossed off his drink and blinked at the fiery strength of it.
Now why should Arnold say that? When had ECAIAC ever fouled up? He
watched the man across the desk. Jeff Arnold was a vigorous, striking
specimen, handsome in an athletic way, with long stubborn jaw and
unhappy gray eyes beneath his unruly hair; the sort of face that
intrigues women, Beardsley catalogued from past experience. And, he
added, altogether too young a man to be operating a monster like ECAIAC.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arnold indicated the empty glass. "Another?"

"No, I think not," Beardsley replied carefully.

Arnold hesitated, eyeing the briefcase in Beardsley's clutch. "It's been
rough on you, too, I imagine. Hope there aren't more than thirty
variants! We're set up for more, of course, but it'll necessitate--"

"Twenty-two," Beardsley assured him. Carefully, he spread the coded and
sealed _persona-tapes_ across the desk. "Fresh from Citizen-File
Augment, everything annotated and cross-checked. Blood-count, emotional
stasis, plethora, psycho-geneological index, neuro-thalamic
imbalance--every type factor is here. We really went to the Files on
this case."

"Looks as if you did! How does it narrow down?"

"Fifteen possibles, four Logicals and three Primes--" Beardsley stopped
abruptly. (That news-caster: how had he known there were three Primes?
This stuff was not supposed to leak!) "Twenty-two who _knew_ Carmack,"
he went on. "That includes associational as well as motive-opportunity
factors, with a probability sphere of .004...."

Arnold nodded thoughtfully; his fingers moved unconscious and caressing
across the edge of the desk. "Yes, I see. That's close! Good job," he
said uncertainly.

"Should be! Seven weeks for annotation and code." Beardsley was watching
Arnold's fingers; there was something aimless and fretful as they pushed
among the code-sealed tapes. Beardsley made his voice casual. "If it
interests you," he said, "yes--you are there."

       *       *       *       *       *

He wanted a reaction and he got it.

"Me!" Arnold stiffened, pulled his fingers away hastily.

"That surprises you? Don't worry, you're not one of the Primes; probably
be rejected on the first run. It's just that you once knew Carmack
rather well. Cal Tech, wasn't it, when Carmack was doing his special
work on magnetronics? Naturally you've had contact since, due to the
nature of your job."

Arnold nodded, frowning. "That's right. It just hadn't occurred to me
that--"

Beardsley realized that he wasn't lying. _It was not the thought of his
own tape that bothered Arnold._

"Oh, we're thorough over at 'Cooerdinates Division!'" Beardsley laughed,
making a minor joke of it. "Now here," he touched a spool labelled in
red, "is your Basic Invariant. Carmack--Amos T. Murdered man. Found
bludgeoned in library of his home, night of April 4. Age 56, held all
outstanding patents on ECAIAC, worth millions, and"--he looked up,
beaming--"leaves beautiful wife."

He paused for the merest moment. Save for a soft drumming of fingers on
the desk, Arnold was silent.

"And here's a sub-Basic: Mrs. Carmack will be a rich woman now. She was
considerably younger than Carmack--and she's been having an affair with
another man." Beardsley smiled at Jeff Arnold. "That's a sociological
note beyond our sphere, but we managed to get the data. I'll bet the
department was appalled that such a gorgeous woman could be resolved
into neo-Euclidian equations!"

"Why?" Arnold was suddenly irritable. "It's been done a thousand times
before!"

"Of course," shrugged Beardsley. "And it's really up to ECAIAC, isn't
it? A Prime can be negated, while on the other hand a variant can shift
from possible to Logical to Prime. Or am I wrong? I've never been up on
the mechanics."

Arnold grunted. "There's bound to be some correlatory shift! The
Primes--how many did you say?"

"Three as of now."

Arnold rose abruptly, then strode to the alco-mech and dialled himself
another drink. He took an uncommonly long time about it. "Look," he
said, "we both know about these things! In a case like this there are
bound to be political repercussions--" He hit Beardsley with a gauging
glance. "Well," he blurted, "I have to admit I'm damn curious! Mind
telling me who are the three Primes? Ah--strictly off the record, you
understand."

Beardsley had expected something like this, and he was quite ready to
answer; but he carefully removed his glasses, massaged the bridge of his
nose and frowned. "Well, now...."

"Come on, give! I know it's against protocol and all that ... but hell!
We'll have the answer anyway in a matter of hours."

Beardsley nodded with a show of thoughtfulness. "Yes, that's true, isn't
it? Very well. But strictly off the record! I warn you--not only will
the first Prime startle you, but the information could be dangerous!"

He waited a moment, then he leaned forward and whispered: "Mandleco!"

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment Arnold didn't move. His face was ludicrous. Then Beardsley
saw his hands clench.

"Mandleco!" the word jolted from his lips. "George Mandleco, Minister of
Justice? I don't believe you!"

"It's a fact," Beardsley told him. "Right now he equates into an
uncertain Prime."

"Yes, yes ... but Mandleco! Good Lord...."

"I said _uncertain_ Prime. As you mentioned yourself, there is sure to
be a shift of variants. Surely you have faith in ECAIAC?"

"Of course! But Mandleco, why Mandleco?"

"Why not? He was a friend of Carmack's--or a business associate shall we
say? He worked with Carmack on the ECAIAC lobby, was largely responsible
for pushing it through."

"Yes, I--say, that's right! It would be in C-F...."

"There are things," murmured Beardsley, "in Central File that would
astound you."

Arnold was staring at the coded tapes. "Mandleco," he breathed. "And
with elections coming up!" He shook himself out of the daze. "The--the
other two Primes?"

"Next is not so startling. A really strong Recessive Factor there ...
Professor Karl Losch."

Arnold jerked erect suddenly. "Losch? Say, I remember him! Now _there's_
a man pursued by bad luck. He was working along similar lines to
Carmack--in fact, wasn't he in Carmack's employ for a while?--but
Carmack was first with the patents. You don't suppose that Losch--"

"I'm not supposed to suppose," Beardsley said softly. "But clinically,
it is interesting to note that motive factor alone equates Losch from
Logical into Prime. _Plus_ a high neuro-thalamic imbalance--132 over 80
on the last Index, with pronounced efforts at suppression."

He watched Arnold absorb that, and went on: "Now for the third Prime. I
think it'll interest you...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He waited deliberately. He looked at Jeff Arnold for a long moment and
saw that the man was calm. Too calm. So absolutely motionless that it
wasn't real.

"Third Prime. A strong one, believe me. In a way most interesting of
all." He pressed the words out slowly and flatly. "The third Prime,"
said Beardsley, "is ... Pederson."

He watched Arnold relax ever so slowly, leaning back, the tension going
away as he uncoiled in the chair; but the young man's face wasn't so
much relieved as it was puzzled.

"Pederson. Pederson? I don't seem to--You can't mean _Brook_ Pederson,
the one-time tele-columnist?"

"None other. I don't suppose you remember, but back in '60 he opposed
the ECAIAC lobby. I mean _opposed_ it, _fought_ it! Predicted that
Government installation of such a machine would not inspire confidence,
that the nation's crime rate would rise ... he saw nothing but chaos.
For a while there he was quite a man. Got himself a following. Had
ambitions."

"But I do remember it!" Arnold thumped the desk. "Of course! Pederson
headed a bloc against 'Carmack's Folly,' but he backed the wrong horse,
and when the bubble burst he was out in the cold. Became a laughing
stock." Arnold paused, and his glance held something of shrewdness and a
livening challenge. "Actually, Pederson couldn't have been more wrong.
In those first two years ECAIAC reduced the crime-rate by some forty
percent."

"So it's claimed!" This was a sore point and Beardsley rose to the bait.
"It couldn't be that crime was on the down-grade already? I could show
you plenty of statistics that--why, I could show you methods--"

"I'll just bet you could." Arnold gave a thin tolerant smile. "I refuse
to enter _that argument_ again, not with you, Beardsley. I for one trust
in machines not in evolution. I've told you before...."

       *       *       *       *       *

And Beardsley found himself sitting there with a flush of heat at his
hair-roots, half-angry and half foolish as he realized how he had been
baited.

Jeff Arnold was abruptly all business. He plunged his finger at a
button, spoke into the intercom. "Joe! How's that test-run coming?"

"All-X so far! Give us ten minutes for clearance."

"Take twenty, but make sure it's _clearance_. Checked Quantitative, have
you? How about feed-backs? ... yes ... what's that? Semantic circuits!
Hell yes, check _all_ synaptics for clearance! I want no excess data
fouling up this run!"

He clicked off and sat there moodily, and Beardsley watched him, noting
the quick nervous rhythm of Arnold's fingers. Arnold noticed it, too,
and desisted.

"Look," he said. "Mandleco, Losch, Pederson. Those three Primes just
don't make sense to me!"

"They don't?" Beardsley allowed just the proper note of resentment.
"Surely you are not questioning Cooerdinates...."

"You know I'm not! But--"

Beardsley waited, knowing it was coming now. The thing Arnold had been
aching to voice for the past five minutes.

"But--well, damn it, there is _Mrs._ Carmack, for example. As you
pointed out yourself, she'll be a rich woman now! It would seem to me--"

"That she'd be a Prime? I'm surprised at you, Jeff; that's ancient
thinking." If there was a trace of sarcasm, it was lost on Arnold. "Oh,
I grant you it used to hold true--principle beneficiary was always prime
suspect. Fiction especially was full of it. Queen, Dickson Carr, Boucher
you--know the ilk. But with ECAIAC we've gotten away from all that,
haven't we?"

Arnold stared at him suspiciously, hesitated, then brought it out with
an effort. "Well--how _did_ she equate?"

"Who? Oh yes, the beautiful widow. She only made Logical, and even that
is borderline."

"I see." Arnold rose, dialled himself another drink, then changed his
mind and put it down untouched. He turned to gather up the tapes, and
his voice was apologetic.

"It's not that I'd ever questioned Cooerdinates Division! We're too
closely aligned for that, Raoul...." (_First time he's ever used my
first name_, thought Beardsley.) "You have a splendid record to uphold,
as we do here at Mechanical. That's why ... well, I want to get this off
as smoothly as possible!"

Something indefinable, a queasy feeling, took Beardsley about the
middle. He said sharply: "Any reason why not?"

"No, not really. But in recent weeks--I tell you this in strictest
confidence, understand!--in recent weeks it's been a rather ticklish
thing to get total synaptic clearance."

       *       *       *       *       *

Synaptics? Beardsley began thinking back to the Crime-Central "Required
Annual Basic." The Mechanical had never been his strong point. He said
uncertainly, "But--that's serious!"

"It's just that we've found ECAIAC holding back excess data from
previous runs. Fouls up the relays, takes hours to iron out the
clearance." Arnold gave him a keen look. "More of a nuisance really,
but the weirdest thing. Stubborn!"

_Stubborn._ Beardsley could have thought of a better word. Through the
panelled glass he glimpsed the black metal sheathe of the monster out
there, the shapeless crouching and malevolent winking lights, and he
felt himself going to pieces inside with a sudden shaking crumble; he
hated himself for it but he couldn't stop it; his hands clenched until
the knuckles showed white.

"... matter of time until we find the cause," Arnold was saying, "but I
guarantee total clearance _today_. Shall we get on with it?" Hands
loaded with tapes, he moved for the door.

"No!" Beardsley cried. "Arnold, if you don't mind, I--"

"Oh, for God's sake, not again! Raoul, I swear I'm going to do something
about this phobia of yours; it's getting to be not so funny any more."
With a show of exasperation, Arnold propelled him through the door. "I
