with a resounding clang.

"Jon Venex! I knew it was you as soon as I saw you sticking up out of
this crowd like a green tree trunk. I haven't seen you since the old
days on Venus!"

Jon didn't need to check the number stamped on the short one's scratched
chestplate. Alec Diger had been his only close friend during those
thirteen boring years at Orange Sea Camp. A good chess player and a whiz
at Two-handed Handball, they had spent all their off time together. They
shook hands, with the extra squeeze that means friendliness.

"Alec, you beat-up little grease pot, what brings you to New York?"

"The burning desire to see something besides rain and jungle, if you
must know. After you bought out, things got just too damn dull. I began
working two shifts a day in that foul diamond mine, and then three a day
for the last month to get enough credits to buy my contract and passage
back to earth. I was underground so long that the photocell on my right
eye burned out when the sunlight hit it."

He leaned forward with a hoarse confidential whisper, "If you want to
know the truth, I had a sixty-carat diamond stuck behind the eye lens. I
sold it here on earth for two hundred credits, gave me six months of
easy living. It's all gone now, so I'm on my way to the employment
exchange." His voice boomed loud again, "And how about _you_?"

Jon Venex chuckled at his friend's frank approach to life. "It's just
been the old routine with me, a run of odd jobs until I got side-swiped
by a bus--it fractured my knee bearing. The only job I could get with a
bad leg was feeding slops to pigs. Earned enough to fix the knee--and
here _I_ am."

Alec jerked his thumb at a rust-colored, three-foot-tall robot that had
come up quietly beside him. "If you think you've got trouble take a look
at Dik here, that's no coat of paint on him. Dik Dryer, meet Jon Venex
an old buddy of mine."

Jon bent over to shake the little mech's hand. His eye shutters dilated
as he realized what he had thought was a coat of paint was a thin layer
of rust that coated Dik's metal body. Alec scratched a shiny path in
the rust with his fingertip. His voice was suddenly serious.

"Dik was designed for operation in the Martian desert. It's as dry as a
fossil bone there so his skinflint company cut corners on the stainless
steel.

"When they went bankrupt he was sold to a firm here in the city. After a
while the rust started to eat in and slow him down, they gave Dik his
contract and threw him out."

The small robot spoke for the first time, his voice grated and
scratched. "Nobody will hire me like this, but I can't get repaired
until I get a job." His arms squeaked and grated as he moved them. "I'm
going by the Robot Free Clinic again today, they said they might be able
to do something."

Alec Diger rumbled in his deep chest. "Don't put too much faith in those
people. They're great at giving out tenth-credit oil capsules or a
little free wire--but don't depend on them for anything important."

It was six now, the robots were pushing through the doors into the
silent streets. They joined the crowd moving out, Jon slowing his stride
so his shorter friends could keep pace. Dik Dryer moved with a jerking,
irregular motion, his voice as uneven as the motion of his body.

"Jon--Venex, I don't recognize your family name. Something to do--with
Venus--perhaps."

"Venus is right, Venus Experimental--there are only twenty-two of us in
the family. We have waterproof, pressure-resistant bodies for working
down on the ocean bottom. The basic idea was all right, we did our part,
only there wasn't enough money in the channel-dredging contract to keep
us all working. I bought out my original contract at half price and
became a free robot."

Dik vibrated his rusted diaphragm. "Being free isn't all it should be. I
some--times wish the Robot Equality Act hadn't been passed. I would just
l-love to be owned by a nice rich company with a machine shop and
a--mountain of replacement parts."

"You don't really mean that, Dik," Alec Diger clamped a heavy black arm
across his shoulders. "Things aren't perfect now, we know that, but it's
certainly a lot better than the old days, we were just hunks of
machinery then. Used twenty-four hours a day until we were worn out and
then thrown in the junk pile. No thanks, I'll take my chances with
things as they are."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jon and Alec turned into the employment exchange, saying good-by to Dik
who went on slowly down the street. They pushed up the crowded ramp and
joined the line in front of the registration desk. The bulletin board
next to the desk held a scattering of white slips announcing job
openings. A clerk was pinning up new additions.

Venex scanned them with his eyes, stopping at one circled in red.

    ROBOTS NEEDED IN THESE CATEGORIES. APPLY AT ONCE TO CHAINJET, LTD.,
    1219 BROADWAY.

      Fasten
      Flyer
      Atommel
      Filmer
      Venex

Jon rapped excitedly on Alec Diger's neck. "Look there, a job in my own
specialty--I can get my old pay rate! See you back at the hotel
tonight--and good luck in your job hunting."

Alec waved good-by. "Let's hope the job's as good as you think, I never
trust those things until I have my credits in my hand."

Jon walked quickly from the employment exchange, his long legs eating up
the blocks. _Good old Alec, he didn't believe in anything he couldn't
touch. Perhaps he was right, but why try to be unhappy. The world wasn't
too bad this morning--his leg worked fine, prospects of a good job--he
hadn't felt this cheerful since the day he was activated._

Turning the corner at a brisk pace he collided with a man coming from
the opposite direction. Jon had stopped on the instant, but there wasn't
time to jump aside. The obese individual jarred against him and fell to
the ground. From the height of elation to the depths of despair in an
instant--he had injured a _human being_!

He bent to help the man to his feet, but the other would have none of
that. He evaded the friendly hand and screeched in a high-pitched voice.
