messenger withdrew. "It was just a summons to another meeting of the
council of scientists," he said to Carnes. "They'll have to get along
without me. All they'll do anyway will be to read a lot of dispatches
and wrangle about data and the relative accuracy of their observations.
Herriott will lecture for hours on celestial mechanics and propound some
fool theory about a hidden body, which doesn't exist, and its possible
influence, which would be nil, on the inclination of the earth's axis.
After wasting four hours without a single constructive idea being put
forward, they will gravely conclude that the sun rose fifty-three
seconds earlier at the fortieth north parallel than it did yesterday and
correspondingly later at the fortieth south parallel. I know that
without wasting time."

"Was it fifty-three seconds to-day, Doctor?"

"Yes. This is the twentieth of July. The sun should have risen at 4:52,
sixteen minutes later than it rose on June twentieth and fifty-three
seconds later than it rose yesterday. Instead it rose at 4:20, sixteen
minutes _earlier_ than it did on June twentieth and fifty-three seconds
earlier than yesterday."

"I don't understand what is causing it, Doctor. I have tried to follow
your published explanations, but they are a little too deep for me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"As to the real underlying cause, I am in grave doubts, Carnes, although
I can make a pretty shrewd guess. As to the reason for the unnatural
lengthening of the day, the explanation is simplicity itself. As you
doubtless know, the earth revolves daily on its axis. At the same time,
it is moving in a great ellipse about the sun, an ellipse which it takes
it a year to cover. If the axis of rotation of the earth were at right
angles to the plane of its orbit; in other words, if the earth's equator
lay in the plane of the earth's movement about the sun, each day would
be of the same length and there would be no seasons. Instead of this
being the case, the axis of rotation of the earth is tipped so that the
angle between the equator and the elliptic is 23-1/2 deg."

"I seem to remember something of the sort from my school days."

"This angle of tilt may be assumed to be constant, for I won't bother
with the precessions, nutations and other minor movements considered in
accurate computations. As the earth moves around the sun, this tilt
gives rise to what we call the sun's declination. You can readily see
that at one time in the year, the north pole will be at its nearest
point to the sun, speaking in terms of tilt and not in miles, while at
another point on the elliptic, it will be farthest from the sun and the
south pole nearest. There are two midway points when the two poles are
practically equidistant."

"Then the days and nights should be of equal length."

"They are. These are the periods of the equinoxes. The point at which
the sun is nearest to the south pole we call the winter solstice, and
the opposite point, the summer solstice. The summer solstice is on June
twenty-first. At that time the declination of the sun is 23-1/2 deg.
north of the equatorial line. It starts to decrease until, six months
later, it reaches a minus declination of 23-1/2 deg. and is that far
south of the line. The longest day in the northern hemisphere is
naturally June twenty-first."

"And the shortest day when the sun has the greatest minus declination."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Precisely, at the winter solstice. Now to explain what is happening.
The year went normally until June twenty-first. That day was of the
correct length, about fourteen hours and fifty minutes long. The
twenty-second should have been shorter. Instead, it was longer than the
twenty-first. Each day, instead of getting shorter as it should at this
time of year, is getting longer. We have already gained some thirty-two
minutes of sunlight at this latitude. The explanation is that the angle
between the equator and the elliptic is no longer 23-1/2 deg. as it has
been from time immemorial, but it is greater. If the continuing tilt
keeps up long enough, the obliquity will be 90 deg. When that happens,
there will be perpetual midday at the north pole and perpetual night at
the south pole. The whole northern hemisphere will be bathed in a
continuous flood of sunlight while the southern hemisphere will be a
region of cold and dark. The condition of the earth will resemble that
of Mercury where the same face of the planet is continually facing the
sun."

"I understand that all right, but I am still in the dark as to what is
causing this increase of tilt."

"No more than I am, old dear. Herriott keeps babbling about a hidden
body which is drawing the earth from its normal axial rotation, but the
fool ignores the fact that a body of a size sufficient to disturb the
earth would throw every motion of the solar system into a state of
chaos. Nothing of the sort has happened. Ergo, no external force is
causing it. I am positive that the force which is doing the work is
located on the earth itself. Furthermore, unless my calculations are
badly off, this force is located on or very near the surface of the
earth at approximately the sixty-fifth degree of north latitude."

"How can you tell that, Doctor?"

"It would take me too long to explain, Carnes. I will, however, qualify
my statement a little. Either a variable force is being used or else a
constant force located where I have said. The sixty-fifth parallel is a
long line. The exact location and the nature of that force, we have to
find. If it be man-made, and I'll bet my bottom dollar that it is, we
will also have to destroy it. If we fail, we'll see this world plunged
into such a riot of war and bloodshed as has never before been known. It
will be literally a fight of mankind for a place in the sun. Due to its
favorable location in the new position of the earth, it is more than
probable that Russia would emerge as the dominant power."

"Undertaking to destroy a thing that you don't know the location of and
of whose existence you aren't even sure is a pretty big contract."

       *       *       *       *       *

"We've tackled bigger ones, old dear. We have the President behind us. I
haven't made much headway selling my idea to that gang of old fossils
who call themselves the council of scientists, but I did to his nibs.
Just before that attempt at assassination, I had a chin-chin with him.
The fastest battle cruiser in the Navy, the _Denver_, is to be placed at
my service. It will carry a big amphibian plane, so be equipped to
assemble and launch it. Bolton will relieve you from the Presidential
guard to-day. We sail in the morning."

"Where for, Doctor?"

"I feel sure that the force is caused and controlled by men and I know
of but one man who has the genius and the will to do such a thing. That
man is Saranoff. Because he must be concealed and work free from
interruption, I fancy he is working in his own country. Does that answer
your question?"

"It does. We sail for Russia."

"Carnesy, old dear, at times you have flashes of such scintillating
brilliance that I have hopes for the future of the secret service. In
time they may even show human intelligence. Toddle along now and pay
your fond farewells to the bright lights of Washington. Meet me at the
Pennsy station at six. We'll sail from New York in the morning."

       *       *       *       *       *

With the famous scientist and his assistant as passengers, the _Denver_
steamed at her best speed across the Atlantic. As soon as New York
harbor was cleared, Dr. Bird charted the course. Captain Evans raised
his eyebrows when he saw the course laid out, but his orders had been
positive. Had Dr. Bird ordered him to steam at full speed against the
shore, he would have obeyed without question.

The _Denver_ avoided the usual lanes of traffic and bore to the north of
the summer lane. Not a vessel was sighted in the eight days which
elapsed before the Faroe Islands came in sight on the starboard bow. The
_Denver_ bore still more to the north and skirted around North Cape five
days later. At Cape Kanin she headed south into the White Sea.
Surprisingly little ice was encountered. When Captain Evans mentioned
this, Dr. Bird pointed out to him that it was August and that the days
were still lengthening. Once in the White Sea, the _Denver_ was made
ready for instant action. A huge amphibian plane was hoisted in sections
from the hold and mechanics started to assemble it. Dr. Bird spent most
of his time working on some instruments he had assembled in the radio
room.

"This is an ultra-short wave detector," he explained to Carnes. "It will
receive vibrations to the lowest limit of waves that we have ever been
able to measure. The X-ray is high on the scale and even the cosmic ray
is far above its lower limit of detection. We are hunting for an
electro-magnet, the largest and strangest electro-magnet that has ever
been constructed. Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that we are
seeking for a generator of magnetic force. It does not generate the
ordinary magnetism which attracts iron and steel, nor the special type
of magnetism which we call gravity, but something between the two. It
