
You got a tremendous thrill in just thinking: How dreadful if the glass
should not be there! How lucky I am to be alive, with a thing so deadly
and monstrous within striking distance of me!

For twenty-seven days now he had traveled without fear. Sometimes the
Time Observatory would pinpoint an age and hover over it while his
companions took painstaking historical notes. Sometimes it would retrace
its course and circle back. A new age would come under scrutiny and more
notes would be taken.

But a horrible thing that had happened to him, had awakened in him a
lonely nightmare of restlessness. Childhood fears he had thought buried
forever had returned to plague him and he had developed a sudden,
terrible dread of the fogginess outside the moving viewpane, the way the
machine itself wheeled and dipped when an ancient ruin came sweeping
toward him. He had developed a fear of Time.

There was no escape from that Time Fear. The instant it came upon him he
lost all interest in historical research. 1069, 732, 2407, 1928--every
date terrified him. The Black Plague in London, the Great Fire, the
Spanish Armada in flames off the coast of a bleak little island that
would soon mold the destiny of half the world--how meaningless it all
seemed in the shadow of his fear!

Had the human race really advanced so much? Time had been conquered but
no man was yet wise enough to heal himself if a stark, unreasoning fear
took possession of his mind and heart, giving him no peace.

Moonson lowered his eyes, saw that Rutella was watching him in the
manner of a shy woman not wishing to break in too abruptly on the
thoughts of a stranger.

Deep within him he knew that he had become a stranger to his own wife
and the realization sharply increased his torment. He stared down at her
head against his knee, at her beautiful back and sleek, dark hair.
Violet eyes she had, not black as they seemed at first glance but a
deep, lustrous violet.

He remembered suddenly that he was still a young man, with a young man's
ardor surging strong in him. He bent swiftly, kissed her lips and eyes.
As he did so her arms tightened about him until he found himself
wondering what he could have done to deserve such a woman.

She had never seemed more precious to him and for an instant he could
feel his fear lessening a little. But it came back and was worse than
before. It was like an old pain returning at an unexpected moment to
chill a man with the sickening reminder that all joy must end.

His decision to act was made quickly.

The first step was the most difficult but with a deliberate effort of
will he accomplished it to his satisfaction. His secret thoughts he
buried beneath a continuous mental preoccupation with the vain and the
trivial. It was important to the success of his plan that his companions
should suspect nothing.

The second step was less difficult. The mental block remained firm and
he succeeded in carrying on actual preparations for his departure in
complete secrecy.

The third step was the final one and it took him from a large
compartment to a small one, from a high-arching surface of metal to a
maze of intricate control mechanisms in a space so narrow that he had to
crouch to work with accuracy.

Swiftly and competently his fingers moved over instruments of science
which only a completely sane man would have known how to manipulate. It
was an acid test of his sanity and he knew as he worked that his
reasoning faculties at least had suffered no impairment.

Beneath his hands the Time Observatory's controls were solid shafts of
metal. But suddenly as he worked he found himself thinking of them as
fluid abstractions, each a milestone in man's long progress from the
jungle to the stars. Time and space--mass and velocity.

How incredible that it had taken centuries of patient technological
research to master in a practical way the tremendous implications of
Einstein's original postulate. Warp space with a rapidly moving object,
move away from the observer with the speed of light--and the whole of
human history assumed the firm contours of a landscape in space. Time
and space merged and became one. And a man in an intricately-equipped
Time Observatory could revisit the past as easily as he could travel
across the great curve of the universe to the farthest planet of the
farthest star.

The controls were suddenly firm in his hands. He knew precisely what
adjustments to make. The iris of the human eye dilates and contracts
with every shift of illumination, and the Time Observatory had an iris
too. That iris could be opened without endangering his companions in the
least--if he took care to widen it just enough to accommodate only one
sturdily built man of medium height.

Sweat came out in great beads on his forehead as he worked. The light
that came through the machine's iris was faint at first, the barest
glimmer of white in deep darkness. But as he adjusted controls the light
grew brighter and brighter, beating in upon him until he was kneeling in
a circle of radiance that dazzled his eyes and set his heart to
pounding.

I've lived too long with fear, he thought. I've lived like a man
imprisoned, shut away from the sunlight. Now, when freedom beckons, I
must act quickly or I shall be powerless to act at all.

He stood erect, took a slow step forward, his eyes squeezed shut.
Another step, another--and suddenly he knew he was at the gateway to
