"Let her fix you up too, boy, unless you want to become a graven
image," commanded Manthis. His voice, which started at the ordinary
pitch, went up like a siren at the end as the drug took effect.
Dazedly Jack held out his arm.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sting of the needle was followed by a roaring in his ears like a
hundred Niagaras. The room seemed to pitch and quiver. Staring down at
the watch he still clutched, Jack saw the hands slow down and at last
resume their accustomed pace. Gradually the unpleasant sensations died
away.

"That was a close shave," commented the doctor, drawing a long breath.
"I wouldn't have waited so long, except that I wanted to experience
the sensation of coming back from the edge of the infinite. Not very
nice! Like being pulled out of a whirlpool. It's 4:30 now. Took us an
hour to return to normal, although it seemed only minutes. We have an
hour and a half before the end. June, have you noticed anything
unusual on the streets?"

"Yes," whispered his daughter, her usually piquant face pinched and
white. "I've been watching from the balcony. It's dreadful. The people
creep about like things in a nightmare."

Manthis tried to reassure her. On his face was a great sadness which
was, however, overshadowed by a greater scientific curiosity.

"There's nothing we can do for them now," he said. "But we must learn
all we can. Let's go down and watch the city die."

They descended in an automatic elevator and hurried through the hotel
lobby. The lights of Fifth Avenue gleamed as brightly as ever. The
streets near the lower end of Central Park still were crowded. But
such crowds! They moved with infinite langour. Each step required many
seconds.

Yet the people apparently did not know that anything unusual was
happening. Many perhaps were puzzled because their watches seemed to
be misbehaving but this did not stop their conversation as they
traveled home from theaters or night clubs. Two white-haired men
passed by, engaged in a discussion of business affairs. Their voices
were pitched so low that they were almost inaudible to the trio of
watchers, while their gestures looked like the slow waving of the
antennae of deep sea plants.

       *       *       *       *       *

"My God, man!" cried Baron, at last awakening from his horror-stricken
silence. "Why didn't you warn the world? This is criminal. If what you
say is true, all these people will become rooted in their tracks at
six o'clock like--like characters from 'The Sleeping Beauty.'"

"I only discovered the danger a week ago while working out a chemical
formula." Manthis' eyes showed the strain he was enduring. "It was a
very delicate piece of work having to do with experiments I am making
on chlorophyl--quick adjustments, you know. I'd done the thing before
many times, but last week I couldn't mix the ingredients fast enough
to get the necessary reaction. Puzzled, I made further experiments.
The result was that I discovered my perception of time was slowing
down. I tested June and found the same thing. There was but one
conclusion."

"But the drug we are using. How did you hit on that?"

"I recalled that such drugs as hashish greatly speed up the time
sense. An addict is able to review his entire past life or plan an
elaborate crime between two heartbeats. So I collected a small supply
of the stuff."

"But hashish in large doses is deadly, and I've heard that users of it
sooner or later develop homicidal mania--run amuck as they say in
India."

"True enough," admitted the chemist, "but Andrev, the Russian, you
know, recently worked out a formula to neutralize the deadly effects
of the drug but retain its time-expanding effect for medical purposes.
I've added that to the pure drug. There isn't enough of it in New York
to keep all these people normal for five minutes. Why should I have
frightened the poor things?"

He relapsed into silence and the others found no heart to ask further
questions as they watched the coming of the end of a world. The
procession of passers-by had thinned somewhat by now. The street
lights had grown dim. There was a look of increasing puzzlement on the
faces of the people who remained. Something was wrong. They knew not
what.

       *       *       *       *       *

Floating along the sidewalk like a figure in a slow motion picture
came a tiny tot of three. She was sobbing. Great tears formed with
painful slowness and slid down her flushed cheeks.

"She's lost," exclaimed June. "Here, darling, I'll find your mama."

She picked up the child and looked up and down the street. The mother
was not in sight. Automatically she turned to a policeman who stood
nearby.

"Officer," she said quickly, "this girl is lost. Will you...?"

She stiffened in dismay. The policeman was staring through her as if
his eyes had not registered her approach. Slowly his gaze came into
focus. A puzzled look came over his Irish face. He spoke. It was only
a blurred rumble.

"What can I do for her, Father?" June cried, turning away from the
officer in despair. "She's dying. See? Couldn't we give her some of
the drug?"

"There's only enough for us," her father replied firmly.

"But she'll be quite dead in an hour!"

"I'm not so sure of that. Perhaps only in a state resembling
catalepsy. We must wait. Jack, take her into the lobby. Put her on a
sofa there."

Dawn was paling the blue-black sky as the radio engineer returned. The
street lights fluttered fitfully and at last died. The streets had
become deserted although groups still eddied slowly about the subway
kiosks.

"Five forty-five," whispered Manthis. "The end should come any
moment."

As he spoke a white-garbed street sweeper, who had been leaning on his
broom at the curb ever since the onlookers had reached the sidewalk,
decided to move on at last. With infinite slowness his foot came up.
He poised, swung forward, then, the universal paralysis overcoming
him, remained in a strangely ludicrous position for a moment before
crashing downward on his face.

As far as they could see in the semidarkness, others were falling. A
few, balanced with feet wide apart, remained standing like statues.
Those who collapsed writhed slowly a time or two and were still.

After the thudding of the bodies had ended the silence became ghastly.
Not an awakening bird twittered in the trees of Central Park. Not a
sheep bleated in the inclosure. Except for their own breathing and the
sighing of the wind, not a sound! Then a faraway clock boomed six
notes. The noise made them start and turn pale faces toward each
other.

"Come," said the doctor heavily. "It's all over. We might as well go
up. We'll have to walk. All power will be off. Twenty stories!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The lobby of the Hotel Atchison, on the roof of which the penthouse
apartment was located, was empty now except for a few clerks and
bellboys. These sat with bowed heads before their grills or on their
benches as if they had merely succumbed to the unpardonable sin of
sleeping on duty. But they did not breathe.

June clung to her father's arm as they crossed noiselessly over the
heavy carpet.

"The city will be a charnel house when these bodies start to
decompose." Baron hesitated. "Shouldn't we get out of town while there
is a chance?"

Manthis shook his head. "No. I'm convinced these people aren't dead.
They're simply outside of time. Change cannot affect them. If I'm not
mistaken they will remain just the same indefinitely."
