the watchbirds could stop only an estimated seventy per cent of
murders."

"I know that," Gelsen said, feeling extremely uncomfortable. "I believe
there might be a moral danger in allowing a machine to make decisions
that are rightfully Man's," he declared doggedly.

"Oh, come now, Gelsen," one of the corporation presidents said. "It's
nothing of the sort. The watchbird will only reinforce the decisions
made by honest men from the beginning of time."

"I think that is true," the representative agreed. "But I can understand
how Mr. Gelsen feels. It is sad that we must put a human problem into
the hands of a machine, sadder still that we must have a machine enforce
our laws. But I ask you to remember, Mr. Gelsen, that there is no other
possible way of stopping a murderer _before he strikes_. It would be
unfair to the many innocent people killed every year if we were to
restrict watchbird on philosophical grounds. Don't you agree that I'm
right?"

"Yes, I suppose I do," Gelsen said unhappily. He had told himself all
that a thousand times, but something still bothered him. Perhaps he
would talk it over with Macintyre.

As the conference broke up, a thought struck him. He grinned.

A lot of policemen were going to be out of work!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now what do you think of that?" Officer Celtrics demanded. "Fifteen
years in Homicide and a machine is replacing me." He wiped a large red
hand across his forehead and leaned against the captain's desk. "Ain't
science marvelous?"

Two other policemen, late of Homicide, nodded glumly.

"Don't worry about it," the captain said. "We'll find a home for you in
Larceny, Celtrics. You'll like it here."

"I just can't get over it," Celtrics complained. "A lousy little piece
of tin and glass is going to solve all the crimes."

"Not quite," the captain said. "The watchbirds are supposed to prevent
the crimes before they happen."

"Then how'll they be crimes?" one of the policeman asked. "I mean they
can't hang you for murder until you commit one, can they?"

"That's not the idea," the captain said. "The watchbirds are supposed to
stop a man before he commits a murder."

"Then no one arrests him?" Celtrics asked.

"I don't know how they're going to work that out," the captain admitted.

The men were silent for a while. The captain yawned and examined his
watch.

"The thing I don't understand," Celtrics said, still leaning on the
captain's desk, "is just how do they do it? How did it start, Captain?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The captain studied Celtrics' face for possible irony; after all,
watchbird had been in the papers for months. But then he remembered that
Celtrics, like his sidekicks, rarely bothered to turn past the sports
pages.

"Well," the captain said, trying to remember what he had read in the
Sunday supplements, "these scientists were working on criminology. They
were studying murderers, to find out what made them tick. So they found
that murderers throw out a different sort of brain wave from ordinary
people. And their glands act funny, too. All this happens when they're
about to commit a murder. So these scientists worked out a special
machine to flash red or something when these brain waves turned on."

"Scientists," Celtrics said bitterly.

"Well, after the scientists had this machine, they didn't know what to
do with it. It was too big to move around, and murderers didn't drop in
often enough to make it flash. So they built it into a smaller unit and
tried it out in a few police stations. I think they tried one upstate.
But it didn't work so good. You couldn't get to the crime in time.
That's why they built the watchbirds."

"I don't think they'll stop no criminals," one of the policemen
insisted.

"They sure will. I read the test results. They can smell him out before
he commits a crime. And when they reach him, they give him a powerful
shock or something. It'll stop him."

"You closing up Homicide, Captain?" Celtrics asked.

"Nope," the captain said. "I'm leaving a skeleton crew in until we see
how these birds do."

"Hah," Celtrics said. "Skeleton crew. That's funny."

"Sure," the captain said. "Anyhow, I'm going to leave some men on. It
seems the birds don't stop all murders."

"Why not?"

"Some murderers don't have these brain waves," the captain answered,
trying to remember what the newspaper article had said. "Or their glands
don't work or something."

"Which ones don't they stop?" Celtrics asked, with professional
curiosity.

"I don't know. But I hear they got the damned things fixed so they're
going to stop all of them soon."

"How they working that?"

"They learn. The watchbirds, I mean. Just like people."

"You kidding me?"

"Nope."

"Well," Celtrics said, "I think I'll just keep old Betsy oiled, just in
case. You can't trust these scientists."

"Right."

"Birds!" Celtrics scoffed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Over the town, the watchbird soared in a long, lazy curve. Its aluminum
hide glistened in the morning sun, and dots of light danced on its stiff
wings. Silently it flew.

Silently, but with all senses functioning. Built-in kinesthetics told
the watchbird where it was, and held it in a long search curve. Its eyes
and ears operated as one unit, searching, seeking.

And then something happened! The watchbird's electronically fast
reflexes picked up the edge of a sensation. A correlation center tested
it, matching it with electrical and chemical data in its memory files. A
relay tripped.

Down the watchbird spiraled, coming in on the increasingly strong
sensation. It _smelled_ the outpouring of certain glands, _tasted_ a
deviant brain wave.

Fully alerted and armed, it spun and banked in the bright morning
sunlight.

Dinelli was so intent he didn't see the watchbird coming. He had his gun
poised, and his eyes pleaded with the big grocer.

"Don't come no closer."

