not money, should be man's chief goal."

"What good is happiness," demanded Joyce, "if you can't buy money with
it?"

"Why hoard lucre?" I sniffed. "You can't take it with you."

"In that case," said Joyce flatly, "I'm not going. There's no use
arguing, Don. I've made up my mind--"

At this moment our dreary little impasse was ended by a sudden tumult
outside my office. There was a squealing shriek, the shuffle of
footsteps, the pounding of fists upon my door. And over all the shrill
tones of an old, familiar voice high-pitched in triumph.

"Let me in! I've got to see him instantaceously. This time I've got it;
I've absolutely _got_ it!"

Joyce and I gasped, then broke simultaneously for the door as it flew
open to reveal a tableau resembling the Laocoon group _sans_ snake and
party of the third part. Back to the door and struggling valiantly to
defend it stood the receptionist, Miss Thomas. Held briefly but volubly
at bay was a red-thatched, buck-toothed individual--and I _do_ mean
individual!--with a face like the map of Eire, who stopped wrestling as
he saw us, and grinned delightedly.

"Hello, Mr. Mallory," he said. "Hi, Miss Joyce."

"Pat!" we both cried at once. "Pat Pending!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Thomas, a relative newcomer to our bailiwick, seemed baffled by the
warmth of our greeting. She entered the office with our visitor, and as
Joyce and I pumphandled him enthusiastically she asked, "You--you _know_
this gentleman, Mr. Mallory?"

"I should say we do!" I chortled. "Pat, you old naughty word! Where on
earth have you been hiding lately?"

"Surely you've heard of the great Patrick Pending, Miss Thomas?" asked
Joyce.

"Pending?" faltered Miss Thomas. "I seem to have heard the name. Or seen
it somewhere--"

Pat beamed upon her companionably. Stepping to my desk, he up-ended the
typewriter and pointed to a legend in tiny letters stamped into the
frame: _Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.--Pat. Pending._

"Here, perhaps?" he suggested. "I invented this. And the airplane, and
the automobile, and--oh, ever so many things. You'll find my name
inscribed on every one.

"I," he announced modestly, "am Pat Pending--the greatest inventulator
of all time."

Miss Thomas stared at me goggle-eyed.

"_Is_ he?" she demanded. "I mean--_did_ he?"

I nodded solemnly.

"Not only those, but a host of other marvels. The bacular clock, the
transmatter, the predictograph--"

Miss Thomas turned on Pat a gaze of fawning admiration. "How wonderful!"
she breathed.

"Oh, nothing, really," said Pat, wriggling.

"But it is! Most of the things brought here are so absurd. Automatic
hat-tippers, self-defrosting galoshes, punching bags that defend
themselves--" Disdainfully she indicated the display collection of
screwball items we call our Chamber of Horrors. "It's simply marvelous
to meet a man who has invented things really worth while."

Honestly, the look in her eyes was sickening. But was Pat nauseated? Not
he! The big goon was lapping it up like a famished feline. His simpering
smirk stretched from ear to there as he murmured, "Now, Miss Thomas--"

"Sandra, Mr. Pending," she sighed softly. "To you just plain ... Sandy.
Please?"

"Well, Sandy--" Pat gulped.

I said disgustedly, "Look, you two--break it up! Love at first sight is
wonderful in books, but in a Federal office I'm pretty sure it's
unconstitutional, and it _may_ be subversive. Would you mind coming down
to earth? Pat, you barged in here squalling about some new invention. Is
that correct?"

With an effort Pat wrenched his gaze from his new-found admirer and
nodded soberly.

"That's right, Mr. Mallory. And a great one, too. One that will
revolutionate the world. Will you give me an applicaceous form, please?
I want to file it immediately."

"Not so fast, Pat. You know the routine. What's the nature of this
remarkable discovery?"

"You may write it down," said Pat grandiloquently, "as Pat Pending's
lightening rod."

