She shrugged faintly, put the Geiger counter on the table, and stood
there slumped.

He waited until the chanting had soothed his anger, before speaking
again. He said quietly, "I do suppose you still realize the sort of
world you're living in?"

       *       *       *       *       *

She nodded slowly, staring at nothingness. Oh, she realized, all right,
realized only too well. It was the world that hadn't realized. The world
that had gone on stockpiling hydrogen bombs. The world that had put
those bombs in cobalt shells, although it had promised it wouldn't,
because the cobalt made them much more terrible and cost no more. The
world that had started throwing those bombs, always telling itself that
it hadn't thrown enough of them yet to make the air really dangerous
with the deadly radioactive dust that came from the cobalt. Thrown them
and kept on throwing until the danger point, where air and ground would
become fatal to all human life, was approached.

Then, for about a month, the two great enemy groups had hesitated. And
then each, unknown to the other, had decided it could risk one last
gigantic and decisive attack without exceeding the danger point. It had
been planned to strip off the cobalt cases, but someone forgot and then
there wasn't time. Besides, the military scientists of each group were
confident that the lands of the other had got the most dust. The two
attacks came within an hour of each other.

After that, the Fury. The Fury of doomed men who think only of taking
with them as many as possible of the enemy, and in this case--they
hoped--all. The Fury of suicides who know they have botched up life for
good. The Fury of cocksure men who realize they have been outsmarted by
fate, the enemy, and themselves, and know that they will never be able
to improvise a defense when arraigned before the high court of
history--and whose unadmitted hope is that there will be no high court
of history left to arraign them. More cobalt bombs were dropped during
the Fury than in all the preceding years of the war.

After the Fury, the Terror. Men and women with death sifting into their
bones through their nostrils and skin, fighting for bare survival under
a dust-hazed sky that played fantastic tricks with the light of Sun and
Moon, like the dust from Krakatoa that drifted around the world for
years. Cities, countryside, and air were alike poisoned, alive with
deadly radiation.

The only realistic chance for continued existence was to retire, for the
five or ten years the radiation would remain deadly, to some well-sealed
and radiation-shielded place that must also be copiously supplied with
food, water, power, and a means of air-conditioning.

Such places were prepared by the far-seeing, seized by the stronger,
defended by them in turn against the desperate hordes of the dying ...
until there were no more of those.

After that, only the waiting, the enduring. A mole's existence, without
beauty or tenderness, but with fear and guilt as constant companions.
Never to see the Sun, to walk among the trees--or even know if there
were still trees.

Oh, yes, she realized what the world was like.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You understand, too, I suppose, that we were allowed to reclaim this
ground-level apartment only because the Committee believed us to be
responsible people, and because I've been making a damn good showing
lately?"

"Yes, Hank."

"I thought you were eager for privacy. You want to go back to the
basement tenements?"

_God, no! Anything rather than that fetid huddling, that shameless
communal sprawl. And yet, was this so much better? The nearness to the
surface was meaningless; it only tantalized. And the privacy magnified
Hank._

She shook her head dutifully and said, "No, Hank."

"Then why aren't you careful? I've told you a million times, Effie, that
glass is no protection against the dust that's outside that window. The
lead shutter must never be touched! If you make one single slip like
that and it gets around, the Committee will send us back to the lower
levels without blinking an eye. And they'll think twice before trusting
me with any important jobs."

"I'm sorry, Hank."

"Sorry? What's the good of being sorry? The only thing that counts is
never to make a slip! Why the devil do you do such things, Effie? What
drives you to it?"

She swallowed. "It's just that it's so dreadful being cooped up like
this," she said hesitatingly, "shut away from the sky and the Sun. I'm
just hungry for a little beauty."

"And do you suppose I'm not?" he demanded. "Don't you suppose I want to
get outside, too, and be carefree and have a good time? But I'm not so
damn selfish about it. I want my children to enjoy the Sun, and my
children's children. Don't you see that that's the all-important thing
and that we have to behave like mature adults and make sacrifices for
it?"

"Yes, Hank."

He surveyed her slumped figure, her lined and listless face. "You're a
fine one to talk about hunger for beauty," he told her. Then his voice
grew softer, more deliberate. "You haven't forgotten, have you, Effie,
that until last month the Committee was so concerned about your
sterility? That they were about to enter my name on the list of those
waiting to be allotted a free woman? Very high on the list, too!"

She could nod even at that one, but not while looking at him. She turned
away. She knew very well that the Committee was justified in worrying
about the birth rate. When the community finally moved back to the
