phfut about anything scientific, and yet he makes a horse's--"

"Captain Jason, I insist that you stop referring to--"

"Makes a--" Jason raised his voice, "horse's--"

"CAPTAIN JASON!"

Jason subsided.

"Captain, Annex has been most forbearing all these years. We've
overlooked your incomprehensible phobia--this--this confoundedly
unfounded impossible bias against such an irreproachable philanthropist
as Launcelot Raichi--because of the sterling quality of your ... ah ...
other work. However--"

On the desk, the Commissioner's fingers took up a measured tattoo.
"--should this fixed idea begin to encroach on--uh--uh--"

"All right ... Sir." Sullenly, Jason submitted. "I understand."

With a self-congratulatory smirk up at the ceiling that separated them
from Executive Level, the bland face of the Commissioner smoothed out.
"All right, Captain, as long as we understand each other ..."

Sourly, Jason got himself back to his own office. Drumming his own
fingers on his own desk and glaring at his own desk sergeant, he purged
his soul.

"--damned equipment would only work, I'd gather him in! They couldn't
stop me, then! But--" Jason choked. When he could speak again, "He's
never studied a lick in his life, I tell you! Yet he makes a he-cow's
behind out of the best man and the best scientific equipment Annex can
provide! How? How, I ask you! He doesn't know the first blasted thing
about any blasted thing in any blasted science!"

       *       *       *       *       *

That was true. Conversely, Jason didn't know about Lonnie's philosophy.

Nowadays, Lonnie called it a "philosophy." He told reporters it was
"based on a triple ethic." (Inside his skull, a small boy jumped up and
down in glee over the magnificent language he was able to use.) But he
always replied only with a superior smile when asked by reporters to put
the philosophy and the triple ethic into words. If pressed, he
paraphrased an Ancient Man: "You know my works. Judge by them."

He was referring, of course, to his having branched out into patronizing
the Arts. He'd even erected Raichi Museum just across the velvety green
circle of Gov-Park from Government's own Fane of Artifacts.

The reporters would go away and write more articles about his modesty
and the superlative treasures of Earth, Moon and Mars that were
gathered in the Raichi Galleries; protected, the papers always boasted,
by the same ultra-safety mechanisms that guarded the mile-long,
one-gallery-wide, glass-fronted Fane itself. Government affably made up
two of every anti-break-and-entry device nowadays. One for the Fane and
the other for Raichi Museum.

Despite occasional grumbles in the letters-to-the-editor columns, the
papers never seemed to inquire into why so many priceless trans-worlds
artifacts got into Lonnie's private ownership instead of Government's
public Fane. And while some artists and architects (unendowed by Lonnie)
succeeded in publicly proclaiming Raichi Museum gaudy, such carpings
were but to be expected, particularly from modernists.

Actually, Everyone Who Mattered felt Raichi Museum's granite walls were
much more dignified than the narrow, glass-faced arcade that was the
Fane, wide open to the most disrespectfully casual public inspection all
the time. Why, even late at night gawking loiterers pressed their noses
against the glass; black, clumsy images pinned to the blazing whiteness
hurled by radionic tubes against the back wall of snowy marble from
Mars' arctic quarries. Besides, that glass, proof though it was against
anything but an atomic explosion, still made every true art lover feel
disquietingly insecure.

No, on the whole, the papers and reporters and true art lovers who felt
the Public's treasures should be more secure than visible, never
questioned Lonnie's doing good to so much Art.

Thus, nowadays, nobody did anything but accept Lonnie. Except Jason. And
he, perforce, took out his disgust not on hounding the sacrosanct
Lonnie, but on that crackpot, mumchance, captive genius of Physlab Nine.
With the result that, late in 2007, Pol-Anx had an electronic
servo-tracer.

Pending construction of sufficient hundreds of thousands more for full
Anx use, Jason swore Lab Nine to secrecy and installed the pilot model
in his own office. He had enough authority for that.

It was a hellishly unbuildable and deceptively simple gadget, that
tracer. Simply tune it in on the encephalo-aura, the brain wave pattern
of any individual ... and monitor. It never let go until deliberately
switched off by the operator. It tracked; pinpointed the subject
accurately up to twenty thousand miles. It stopped humming and started
panting in proportionately ascending decibels when the subject became
tense, nervous, afraid. It also directed pocket-sized trackers of its
own Damoclean beam. It made it a cinch to gather in known criminals in
the very midst of their first subsequent flagrante delicto.

Jason latched the servo-tracer on Lonnie and settled down to wait.

At 10 p.m., local mean time, January 25, 2008, the tracer hiccupped and,
all by itself, _went to sleep_!

Jason blinked. Jiggled the gadget. Swore. Either the gadget was haywire
or Lonnie was up to something, and, as usual, was making a--

Jason bawled for four reliable squad men he'd mentally selected before.
If he could find Lonnie--catch Lonnie in actual performance of an
act--then Commissioner or no Commissioner, Executive Level or no
Executive Level...!

He roared from Pol-Anx with the men, past the flank of Government Fane,
across the Park and around the bulk of Raichi Museum to Lonnie's mansion
in its shadow. Leaped from the gyro-van, sweeping his men out into a fan
for the neighborhood.

Nothing. Placid. Tree-shadowed, lawn-swept streets, ebony and silver in
the light the moon reflected from solar space.

He'd missed. Too late. Lonnie was gone ... or was he?

Jason didn't give himself time to think; his men time to get even a
momentary hesitation started. He shoved his thumb hard against the door
chimes and his shield under the butler's nose.

Yes, Mr. Raichi was at home. Then, after an interval nicely calculated
to allow Jason to feel how acutely precarious his position stood, "Mr.
Raichi is accessible."

Lonnie was bland. Blandly accepting Jason's urgent story of a known ...
er ... jewel thief traced to the neighborhood. Blandly amenable to
Jason's suggestion that his men be permitted to go over the mansion
(once he'd started this damfool caper, he had to go through with it).
Lonnie so bland that Jason felt a skitter of perspiration down his
backbone while his men hustled up the soaring circle of the stair.


II

"Since I've been disturbed anyway," Lonnie offered, "I'll show you
around."

"Thanks," Jason shook his head stiffly. "I'll just wait."

"I think you should come."

Shrugging, Jason followed, eyes stubbornly downcast.

"... my library ... my den ... bar. Care for a drink? Well, suit
yourself." As the lights of the den dimmed and one wall swooshed
