He could no longer pretend, no longer deceive himself. He hated his
father because the elder Burnett had never known a moment of profound
self-distrust in his entire life.

He remembered his father's favorite line of reasoning with a sudden,
overwhelming resentment. "Fear can and must be controlled. If you have
your objective clearly in mind a new experience, no matter how
hazardous, will quickly become merely a routine obstacle to be
surmounted, a yardstick by which a man can measure his own maturity and
strength of purpose. You'll find peace of mind in doing your work ably
and well and by ignoring all danger to yourself."

It was so easy to say, so hard to live up to. How, for instance, could a
twenty-year-old kid on his _first_ mail run hope to completely outwit
fatigue, or even forget, for a single moment, that it _was_ his first
run. Fatigue had caused his undoing, but had he been completely fearless
he might have found a way to save himself, might have managed somehow to
prevent the small, navigational errors from piling up until they had
carried him past the point of no return.

A constant re-checking of every one of his instruments might have saved
him. But he had been too terrified to think straight, and too ashamed
of his "first-run" inexperience to send out a short wave message
requesting emergency instructions and advice. Now he was hopelessly off
his course and it was too late. Too late!

He could almost feel the steadily-growing pull of his mindless enemy in
the distant sky. Floating and kicking his way over to the Tele-screen,
he quickly switched the instrument on. Rotating the control dials, he
brought the blinding white image of the onrushing solar disk into
perfect focus. Automatically he adjusted the two superimposed polaroid
filters until the proper amount of light was transmitted to his viewing
screen. They really built ships and filters these days, he reflected
wryly. Now if they could only form a rescue squad just as easily--

Even through the viewing screen he could almost feel the hot blast of
white light hit his face with the physical impact of a baseball bat.
With what was almost a whimper of suppressed fear he rocked backward on
his heels.

The Sun's ghastly prominences seemed to reach beckoning fingers toward
him, as its flood of burning, radiant light seared through the
incalculable cold of space, and its living corona of free electrons and
energy particles appeared to swell and throb menacingly.

Fearfully he watched the flaming orb draw closer and closer, and as its
pull grew more pronounced he wondered if it were not, in some
nightmarishly fantastic fashion becoming malignantly aware of him. It
resembled nothing so much as a great festering sore; an infection of the
very warp-and-woof stuff of space.

He flipped off the power control on the Tele-screen and watched the
image fade away with a depleted whine of dying energy. That incandescent
inferno out there-- Grimly he tried to recall the name of the man who
had said that, philosophically, energy is not actually a real thing at
all.

He knew better than to waste time trying the pilot controls again. They
were hopelessly jammed by the great magnetic attraction of the Sun. They
had been jammed for hours now. He forced his way back to his bunk, and
securely lashed himself to it again. Sleep was his only hope now, his
only real escape from the growing, screaming hysteria within him.

He flung an arm across his tired face. His thin features trembled as he
remembered the continuous alterations in his trajectory that had brought
him within range of the Sun's mighty pull. He remembered also every
detail of the last and gravest of the series of miscalculations that had
swept him from the established route of the regular Venus-Mercury mail
run, and threatened him with a violent, flaming end.

Greatly off course, he had been approaching Mercury, a routine
thirty-six million miles from the Sun. On this, the final leg of his
long journey, he had deviated just far enough from the extreme limits of
safety to find himself and his ship gripped inexorably in the mighty
magnetic fields of the Sun's passage....

He remembered a name-- Josephine.

There would be no lover's meeting now on the green fields of Earth in
the dusk of a summer evening. There would be no such meeting now. Not
unless the prayers and dreams a boy and a girl had shared had followed
him, plunging senselessly into the cold glacial heart of interstellar
space.

His false bravado began to break and he began to weep quietly. He began
to wish with all his heart that he had never left home.

The sudden crackling of the almost static-jammed ultra-wave radio
snapped through to his mind. Quickly he began to free himself from the
bunk.

"MR4, come in, MR4."

An eternity seemed to pass as he floated across the room, deliberately
disregarding the strategically-placed hand-grips on the walls, floor,
and ceiling. It seemed aeons before he reached the narrow little control
compartment, and got the ultra-wave radio into action, nearly wrecking
it in his clumsy-fingered haste.

"MR4 to Earth. Over."

