fleeting passage of dreams and past memories had been a solace. But now
the shadows were withered and old, debilitated and desiccated. They had
been sucked dry of interest long ago.

But still they flitted through his mind on crippled wings, flapping
about briefly in the now-narrowed shell of his consciousness, then
fading back among the cobwebs. Every once in a while, one of them would
return to exercise its wings.

"Did she say, 'Happy New Year?'" he wondered. "New Year's?"

And, at the thought of it, there came shadows out of the past....

       *       *       *       *       *

Young Oliver Symmes laughed. The girl laughed, too. She was good to hold
in one's arms, soft like a furry animal, yielding and plush of mouth.

"I love you, Ollie," she said; the warmness of her body close against
his.

He laughed again and wrapped her in his arms. He owned her now, owned
her smile, her love for him, her mind and her wonderful body. She
belonged to him, and the thrill of ownership was strong and exciting.

"I'll always love you, Ollie. I'll love only you." She ran her fingers
in and out of his hair, caressing each strand as it went through her
fingers. "I love the strength of your arms, the firmness of your body."

Again he laughed, surrendering all his consciousness to the warm magic
of her spell.

"I love the shading of your hair and eyes, the smooth angularity of your
tallness, the red ecstasy of your mind." Her fingers slipped down the
back of his neck, playing little games with his flesh and hair. "I'll
always love you, Ollie."

He kissed her savagely.

During the daytime, there was his work at the anthropological
laboratories, the joy of poking among the cultures of the past. And at
night there was the joy of living with her, of sharing the tantalizing
stimulations of the culture of the present, the infinite varieties of
love mingling with passions.

For months there was this happiness of the closeness of her. And then
she was gone from him, for the moment. He still owned her, but they were
physically apart and there was the hunger of loneliness in him. The
months his work kept them apart seemed like centuries, until, finally,
he could return.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was walking through a happy, shouting crowd, walking back to her. It
was the eve of the new year, a time for beginnings, a time for looking
from the pleasures of the past to those waiting in the future. There was
a happy outcry inside him that matched the mood of the crowd.

"Happy New Year!"

Women stopped him on the street, asking for his affection. But he passed
them by, for she was waiting for him and he was hungry for the
possessive love of his slave.

He went eagerly into the building where they lived.

       *       *       *       *       *

The crowd was gone. A door was opening. The voice of his love, sudden,
full of naked surprise, bleated at him. And another voice, that of a man
standing behind her, croaked with hasty excuses and fear.

A change of hungers--it seemed no more complex than that.

He put his hand to his side and took out a piece of shaped metal,
pointing it at the man. A blast of light and the man was dead. He put
the weapon aside.

Young Oliver Symmes walked toward the girl. She backed away from him,
pleading with words, eyes, body. He noticed for the first time the many
small imperfections of her face and figure.

Cornered, she raised her arms to embrace him. He raised his arms to
answer the embrace, but his hands stopped and felt their way around the
whiteness of her neck. He pressed his hands together, thumbs tight
against each other.

Minutes later, he dropped her to the floor and stood looking at her. He
had owned her and then destroyed her when his ownership was in dispute.

He bent to kiss the lax lips.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shadows. As a man grows older, the weight and size of his brain
decrease, leaving cavities in his mind. The years that pass are a
digger, a giant excavator, scooping the mass of past experience up in
the maw of dissipation. The slow, sure evacuation of the passing decades
leaves wing-room in a man's head for stirring memories.

The withered man looked up again. The woman in the green uniform was
smiling at him through parted, almost twisted lips.

"I suppose that this time of year is the worst for you, isn't it?" she
asked sympathetically. The first requirement of a good geriatrician was
sympathy and understanding. She determined to try harder to understand.

The old man made no answer, only staring at her face. But his eyes were
blank--seeing, yet blind to all around him. She frowned for a moment as
she looked at him. The unnatural hairlessness of his body puzzled her,
making it difficult for her to understand him while the thought was in
her mind--that and the trouble she had getting through to him.
