them, yet by some infernal instinct the Earth Giants had become aware
that this was their feasting ground.

By some tacit compact, the guards who had annually brought their
victims to be devoured had been unmolested, the vast wall of
semi-human shapes withdrawing into the shelter of the surrounding
forests while the Chinese were staked out in rows. Death, which would
have been a mercy, had been denied them. It was living flesh that the
Earth Giants craved. And here, on the spot known as Golgotha, the
hideous sacrifice had been annually repeated.

That first year, when the chosen victims were transported to the fatal
spot, all America went mad. Frenzied parents attacked the offices of
the Federation in every city. The cry was raised that Spanish
Americans had been selected in preference to those of more northern
blood. Civil war loomed imminent.

And year after year these scenes must be repeated. Boys and girls,
from fifteen to twenty years of age, the flower of the Federation, a
hundred thousand of them, must die a hideous death to save humanity.
Now the choice of the second year's victims was at hand.

In their laboratory, removed to the heart of the Adirondacks
wilderness, Cliff and Kay were working frantically.

"It's the last chance, Kay," said Cliff. "If I've not solved the
secret this time, it means another year's delay. The secret of
dissolving organic forms as well as inorganic ones! What is this
mysterious power that enables organic forms to withstand the terrific
bombardment of the W-ray?"

The W-ray was the Millikan cosmic ray, imprisoned and adapted for
human use. It was a million times more powerful than the highest known
voltage of electricity. Beneath it, even the diamond, the hardest
substance known, dissolved into a puff of dust; and yet the most
fragile plant growth remained unaffected.

       *       *       *       *       *

The laboratory in the Adirondacks was open at one end. Here, against a
background of big forest trees, a curious medley of substances had
been assembled: old chairs, a couple of broken-down airplanes, a large
disused dynamo, a heap of discarded clothing, a miscellany of kitchen
utensils on a table, a gas stove, and a heap of metal junk of all
kinds. The place looked, in fact, like a junk heap.

The great top was set in a socket in a heavy bar of craolite, the new
metal that combined the utmost tensile strength with complete
infusibility, even in the electric furnace. About six feet in height,
it looked like nothing but what it was, a gyroscope in gimbals, with a
long and extremely narrow slit extending all around the central
bulge, but closed on the operator's side by a sliding cover of the
same craolite.

Within this top, which, by its motion, generated a field of electrical
force between the arms of an interior magnet, the W-rays were
generated in accordance with a secret formula; the speed of gyration,
exceeding anything known on earth, multiplied their force a
billionfold, converting them to wave-lengths shorter than the shortest
known to physical science. Like all great inventions, the top was of
the simplest construction.

"Well," said Cliff, "you'd better bring out Susie."

Kay left the laboratory and went to the cabin beside the lake that the
two men occupied. From her box in front of the stove a lady porcupine
looked up lazily and grunted. Kay raised the porcupine; in the box, of
course. Susie was constitutionally indolent, but one does not handle
porcupines, however smooth their quills may lie.

Kay brought her to the heap of junk and placed the box on top of it.
He went inside the laboratory. "I may as well tell you, Cliff. I
wouldn't have brought Susie if I'd thought the experiment had the
least chance of success," he said.

Cliff said nothing. He was bending over the wheel, adjusting a
micrometer. "All ready, Kay?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kay nodded and stepped back. He swallowed hard. He hated sacrificing
Susie to the cause of science; he almost hoped the experiment would
fail.

Cliff pressed a lever, and slowly the ponderous top began to revolve
upon its axis. Faster, faster, till it was nothing but a blur. Faster
yet, until only its outlines were visible. Cliff pressed a lever on
the other side.

Nothing happened apparently, except for a cloudy appearance of the air
at the open end of the laboratory. Cliff touched a foot lever. The top
began to grow visible, its rotations could be seen; it ran slower,
began to come to a stop.

The cloud was gone. Where the airplanes and other junk had been, was
nothing but a heap of grayish dust. It was this that had made the
cloud.

Nothing remained, except that impalpable powder against the background
of the trees.

Kay caught Cliff's arm. "Look out!" he shouted, pointing to the heap.
"Something's moving in there!"

Something was. A very angry lady porcupine was scrambling out, a
_quillless_ porcupine, with a white skin, looking like nothing so much
as a large, hairless rat. Cliff turned to Kay.

"We've failed," he said briefly. "Too late for this year now."

"But--the quills?"

"Inorganic material. But even the bones remain intact because there's
circulation in the marrow, you see. And the Earth Giants haven't even
bones. They're safe--this year!"

He flung himself down under a tree, staring up at the sky in abject
despair.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Look, Kay, I've got my number!" Ruth Meade smiled as she handed Kay
the ticket issued by the Government announcing the lottery number
provided for each citizen.

One hundred thousand young people between the ages of fifteen and
twenty would be drawn for the sacrifice, and Ruth, being nineteen, had
come within the limits, but this would be her last year. In a few
weeks the Government would announce the numbers--drawn by a second
lottery--of those who were condemned.

Then, before these had been made public, the victims would already
have been seized and hurried to the airship depots in a hundred
places, for conveyance to the hideous Golgotha of the pampas.

The chance that any individual would be among the fated ones was
reasonably small. It was the fashion to make a jest of the whole
business. Ruth smiled as she showed her ticket.

Kay stared at it. "Ruth, if--if anything happened to you I'd go
insane. I'd--"

"Why this sudden ardor, Kay?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Kay took Ruth's small hand in his. "Ruth, you mustn't play with me any
more. You know I love you. And the sight of that thing makes me almost
insane. You do care, don't you?" And, as Ruth remained silent, "Ruth,
it isn't Cliff Hymes, is it? I know you two are old friends. I'd
rather it were Cliff than anybody else, if it had to be some one,
but--tell me, Ruth!"

"It isn't Cliff," said Ruth slowly.

"Is it--some one else?"

"It's you, dear," answered Ruth. "It's always been you. It might have
been Cliff if you hadn't come along. But he knows now it can never be
he."

"Does he know it's me?" asked Kay, greatly relieved.

Ruth inclined her head. "He took it very finely," she said. "He said
just what you've said about him. Oh, Kay, if only your experiment had
succeeded, and the world could be free of this nightmare! What
happened? Why couldn't you and Cliff make it destroy life?"

"I don't know, dear," answered Kay. "Iron and steel melt into powder
at the least impact of the rays. They are so powerful that there was
even a leakage through the rubber and anelektron container. Even the
craolite socket was partly fused, and that is supposed to be an
impossibility. And there was a hole in the ground seven feet deep
where the very mineral water in the earth had been dissolved. But
against organic substances the W-ray is powerless.

"Next year, dear--next year we'll have solved our problem, and then
we'll free the world of this menace, this nightmare. Ruth--don't let's
talk about that now. I love you!"

They kissed. The Earth Giants faded out of their consciousness even
while Ruth held that ominous ticket in her hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kay said nothing to Cliff about it, but Cliff knew. Perhaps he had put
his fate to the test with Ruth and learned the truth from her. Ruth
made no reference to the matter when she saw Kay. But between the two
men, friends for years, a coolness was inexorably developing.

They had gone to work on the new machine. They were hopeful. When they
were working, they forgot their rivalry.

"You see, Kay," said Cliff, "we mustn't forget that the Millikan rays
have been bombarding Earth since Earth became a planet, out of the
depths of space. It is their very nature not to injure organic life,
otherwise all life on Earth would have been destroyed long ago. Now,
our process is only an adaptation of these cosmic rays. We haven't
changed their nature."

"No," agreed Kay. "What we want is a death-ray strong enough to
obliterate these monsters, without simply disintegrating them and
creating new fragments to bud into the complete being. Why do you
suppose they are so tenacious of life, Cliff?"

"They represent primeval man, life itself, striving to organize
itself, and nothing is more tenacious than the life principle,"
answered Cliff.

Meanwhile the fatal weeks were passing. A few days after the tickets
had been distributed, a Government notice was broadcasted and
published, ordaining that, in view of former dissensions, no
substitutes for the condemned persons would be permitted. Rich or
poor, each of the victims chosen by lot must meet his fate.

       *       *       *       *       *

And the monsters were growing active. There had been an extension of
their activities. Tongues had been creeping up the rivers that ran
into the Amazon. Suddenly a dense mass of the devils had appeared on
the north coast, near Georgetown. They had overleaped the Amazon; they
were overrunning British Guiana, eating up everything on their way.
Georgetown was abandoned; the monsters were in complete control.

"They will be cut off from the main herd," the optimistic reports
announced. "We shall deal with the main herd first. This year the
sacrifice will have to be made, but it will be the last. Scientists
have at last hit upon an infallible toxin which will utterly destroy
this menace within a few months."

Nobody believed that story, for everything had been tried and failed.
In their laboratory Cliff and Kay were working frantically. And now
the coldness that had developed between them was affecting their
collaboration too. Cliff was keeping something back from Kay.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kay knew it. Cliff had made some discovery that he was not sharing
with his partner. Often Kay, entering the laboratory, would find Cliff
furtively attempting to conceal some operation that he was in the
midst of. Kay said nothing, but a brooding anger began to fill his
heart. So Cliff was trying to get all the credit for the result of
their years of work together!

And always, in the back of his mind, there was a vision of the little
Government ticket in Ruth's hand, with the numbers in staring black
type. They had burned into his brain. He could never forget them.
Often at night, after a hard day's work, he would suddenly awaken out
of a hideous nightmare, in which he saw Ruth taken away by the agents
of the Government, to be thrown as a sacrifice to the monsters.

And Cliff was hiding something! That made the situation unbearable.

The coolness between the two men was rapidly changing into open
animosity. And then one day, quite by chance, in Cliff's absence, Kay
came upon evidence of Cliff's activities.

Cliff was no longer experimenting with the W-ray! He was using a new
type of ray altogether, the next series, the psenium electron
emanation discovered only a few years before, which had the peculiar
property of non-alternation, even when the psenium electron changed
its orbit around the central nucleus of the psenium atom.

Instead of discontinuity, the psenium electron had been found to emit
radiation steadily, and this had upset the classic theories of matter
for the ninth time in the past fifteen years.

       *       *       *       *       *

And Kay's wrath broke loose in a storm of reproaches when Cliff came
into the laboratory.

"You've been deliberately keeping me in the dark!" he shouted. "You're
a nice sort of partner to have! Here's where we split up the
combination, Hynes!"

"I've been thinking that for a long time," sneered Cliff. "The fact
is, Kay, you're a little too elementary in your ideas to suit me. It's
due to you that I kept hammering away on the wrong tack for years. The
sooner we part, the better."

"No time like now," said Kay. "Keep your laboratory. You put most of
the money into it, anyway. I'll build me another--where I can work
without being hampered by a partner who's out for himself all the
time. Good luck to you in your researches, and I hope you'll get all
the credit when you find a way of annihilating the Earth Giants."

And he stormed out of the laboratory, jumped into his plane, and
winged his way southward toward his apartment in New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Crowds in the streets of every town on the way. In villages and
hamlets, swarming like ants, and hurrying along the highways! Kay, who
flew one of the slow, old-fashioned planes, averaging little more than
a hundred miles an hour, winged his way methodically overhead, too
much absorbed in his anger against Cliff to pay much attention to this
phenomenon at first. But gradually it was borne in upon him that
something was wrong.

He flew lower, and now he was passing over a substantial town, and he
could hear the shouts of anger that came up to him. The whole town was
in a ferment, gathered in the town square.

Suddenly the reason came home to Kay. He saw the adjoining airport,
and dropped like a plummet, hovering down until his wheels touched the
ground. Without waiting to taxi into one of the public hangars, he
leaped out and ran through the deserted grounds into the square.

Groans, yells, shrieks of derision rent the air. The whole crowd had
gone maniacal. And it was as Kay had thought. Upon a white background
high up on the town ball building, the numbers of the local boys and
girls who had been picked for sacrifices were being shown.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eight boys and fifteen girls, already on their way into the wastes of
South America, to meet a hideous death.

"They took my Sally," screamed a wizened woman, the tears raining down
her checks. "Kidnapped her at the street corner after dark. I didn't
know why she hadn't come home last night. God, my Sally, my little
girl, gone--gone--"

"People, you must be patient," boomed the Government announcer. "The
President feels with you in your affliction. But by next year a means
will have been devised of destroying these monsters. Your children
will have their sacrifice recorded in the Hall of Fame. They are true
soldiers who--"

"To hell with the Government!" roared a man. "Stop that damn talk
machine! Break her, fellows! Then we'll hang President Bogart from the
top of the Capitol!"

Yells answered him, and the crowd surged forward toward the building.

"Stand back!" shrieked the announcer. "It's death to set foot on the
step. We are now electrified. Last warning!"

The first ranks of the mob recoiled as a charge of electricity at a
voltage just short of that required to take life coursed through their
bodies. Shrieks of agony rang out. Files of writhing forms covered the
