
It was a great pity, Space Marshal Wilbur Hennings reflected, as he
gazed through the one-way glass of the balcony door, that the local
citizens had insisted upon decorating the square before their capitol
with the hulk of the first spaceship ever to have landed on Pollux V.

A hundred and fifty years probably seemed impressive to them, amid the
explosive spread of Terran colonies and federations. Actually, in the
marshal's opinion, it was merely long enough to reveal such symbols as
more than antiquated but less than historically precious.

"I presume you plan to have me march past that heap!" he complained,
tugging at the extremely "historical" sword that completed the effect
of his dazzling white and gold uniform.

Commodore Miller, his aide, stiffened nervously.

"Around to the right of it, sir," he gestured. "As you see, the local
military are already keeping the route clear of onlookers. We thought
it would be most impressive if your party were to descend the outer
stairway from the palace balcony here ... to heighten the importance
of--"

"To draw out the pomp and circumstance of opening the conference?"

"Well, sir ... and then across the square to the conference hall of
the capitol, outside which you will pause for a few gracious words to
the crowd--"

"And that will probably be my last opportunity to enjoy the morning
sunlight. Oh, well, it seems much too bright here in any case."

The commodore absently reached out to adjust a fold of his chief's
sky-blue sash, and the marshal as absently parried the gesture.

"I shall be hardly less than half an hour crossing the square," he
predicted sourly. "With the cheering throngs they have undoubtedly
arranged, and the sunlight reflecting from all that imitation marble,
it will be no place to collect one's thoughts."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned back to the huge chamber constituting the "office" of the
suite supplied by his Polluxian hosts. The skeleton staff of men and
women remaining occupied chairs and benches along only one wall, since
the bulk of the delegation had been sent out to make themselves
popular with the local populace.

Hennings presumed the bulk of the local populace to consist of
Polluxians assigned to making themselves popular with his Ursan
Federation delegation. His people would be listening politely to
myriad reasons why the Polluxians had a natural right to occupy all
the star systems from here to Castor, a dozen light-years farther
from Terra. No one would mention the true motive--their illogical
choice in naming themselves the Twin Empire.

"Well, now!" he said crisply. "Once more over the main points of the
situation! No, commodore, not the schedule of experts that will
accompany me to the table; I rely upon you to have perfected that. But
have there been any unforeseen developments in the actual fighting?"

A cluster of aides, mostly in uniform but including a few in
discreetly elegant civilian attire, moved forward. Each was somehow
followed within arm's reach by an aide of his own, so that the advance
