shimmering diamonds. A bird chirped. Another. The city yawned.

Rows of houses lay like square ivory beads on patches of green felt. A
boy drove his bicycle down the middle of an elm-bordered avenue,
whistling loudly, while tightly rolled newspapers arced from his hand
and slapped against porches.

Lights snapped on in a thousand windows, shining yellowly against the
cool whiteness of dawn. Men blinked and touched beard-stubbled chins.
Women moved sleepily toward porcelain and chrome kitchens.

A truck roared and garbage pails rattled. There was a smell of sour
orange rinds and wet leaves and unfolding flowers. Over this came the
smell of toasting bread and frying bacon.

Doors swung open, slippered feet padded across porches and hands groped
for the rolled newspapers. The air was stricken with the blaring sound
of transcribed music and the excited voices of commercial announcers.
The doors swung shut and the sounds were muted.

A million people shifted and stretched and scratched. The sun rose above
the horizon.

Celebrity day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Doors slammed again, and half-consumed cups of coffee lay cooling
behind. Children wiped at sleepy eyes and mothers swept crumbs, touching
self-conscious fingers at their own bed-ruffled hair. Laborers and
clerks and lawyers and doctors strode down sidewalks and climbed into
automobiles and busses and sleek-nosed elevated trains. The city moved.

To the center of the city, where the tall buildings stretched to the
lighting sky, came the horde, like thousands of ants toward a comb of
honey. Wheels sang and whined. Horns blasted. Whistles blew.

And waiting, strung above the wide streets between the cold marquees and
the dead neon tubes, were the banners and the flags and the bunting.

The air warmed and the sun brightened. Voices chattered. Elbows nudged.
Mouths smiled, teeth shone, and there was the sound of laughter, rising
over the pushing throngs. The city was happy.

The bunting dipped and the banners fluttered and the flags whipped. At
the edge of the city, the airport tightened itself. Waiting, waiting for
the silver and blue rocket. The rocket of the Celebrity.

A large hotel, towering above the pulsing streets, began the quiver of
activity. As though a great electric current had been run through its
cubes and shafts and hollows, the hotel crackled. Desk clerks clicked
bells and bell boys hopped. Elevators rose and fell. In the cellar, wine
bottles were dusted by quick, nervous hands. In the kitchen, a towering
cake was frosted and decorated. Orders cracked. Hands flew and feet
chattered against tile. In one rich expansive suite a giant hoop of
