with his estimated speed, altitude and distance. It wasn't much to go on
as yet but he couldn't have much more on me, if as much; inwardly I
congratulated myself on the quick identification I'd managed.

He was near enough now for my visor screen to pick him up. At least he
was alone, that was something. My nearest squadron mate was a good
minute and a half away. It might as well have been a century.

Now, this is what is always hard to get over to a civilian; the time
element. Understand, it will take me a while to tell this but it all
took less than sixty seconds to happen.

He had guessed my evasion pattern already--either guessed it or had some
new calculator that was far and beyond anything our techs were turning
out. I could tell he'd anticipated me by the Bong-Sonic roll he slipped
into.

I quickly punched up a new pattern based on the little material I had in
the calculator. At least I'd caught the roll. I punched that up,
hurriedly, slipped it into the IBM, guessed that his next probability
was a pass, took a chance on that and punched it in.

I was wrong there. He didn't take his opportunity for a front-on pass.
He was either newly out of their academy or insultingly confident. My
lips felt tight as I canceled the frontal pass card, punched up two more
to take its place.

The base supervisor cut in on the phone. "It looks like old Dmitri
himself, Jerry, and he's flying one of the new K-12a models. Go get him,
boy!"

I felt like snapping back. He knew better than to break in on me at a
time like this. I opened my mouth, then shut it again. Did he say K-12a?
_Did he say K-12a?_

I squinted at the visor screen. The high tail, the canopy, the oddly
shaped wing tanks.

I'd gone off on the identification!

I slapped another evasion pattern into the controls, a standard set, I
had no time to punch up an improvisation. But he was on me like a wasp.
I rejected it, threw in another set. Reject. Another!

Even as I worked, I kicked the release on my own calculator, dumped it
all, selected like a flash an Ivar K-12a card, and what other
estimations I could make while my mind was busy with the full-time job
of evasion.

My hands were still making the motions, my fingers were flicking here,
there, my feet touching here, there. But my heart wasn't in it.

He already had such an advantage that it was all I could do to keep him
in my visor screen. He was to the left, to the right. I got him for a
