they had guarded.

The light stopped him for a moment. He puzzled over it; stared
wonderingly at a circle of glowing radiance in the roof of stone. It
reminded him of something ... the watch on his wrist ... yes, that was
the answer--some radio-active substance. His eyes came back to the
nearest chest, and he jammed the point of his corroded bar beneath the
flange of a tight-fitting lid.

       *       *       *       *       *

The hidden room was cool, but Garry Connell wiped the sweat from his
eyes when he ceased his frantic efforts. The metal bar clanged loudly
upon the floor beside him. He stood, breathing heavily, his eyes on
the metal cover that refused to move. And in the silence there came to
him again that strange, prickling apprehension. He caught himself
looking quickly behind him as if to find another person there.

His eyes were accustomed now to the pale light, and the sculptured
figures on the walls stood out with startling distinctness. Garry
turned to look at the nearer wall and the figure that was repeated
over and over again.

It was a man, tall and lean, his robes, undimmed by the years, blazed
in crimson and gold. But the face above! Garry shivered in spite of
himself at the devilish ugliness the artist had copied. It was dead
black in color, with slitted eyes that had been touched up artfully
to bring out their venomous stare. The head itself rose up to a
rounded point that added to the inhuman brutality of the face.

He was seated on a throne, Garry saw, and other figures, less
skilfully carved, were kneeling before him. Again, he was standing
above a prostrate enemy, a triple-pointed spear raised to deliver the
final blow.

Silently, Garry let his eyes follow around the room with its
repetition of the horrible being who was evidently a king. Then he
whistled softly. "Nice kind of hombre, he must have been," he said.
And, "Boy," he told the carved image familiarly, "whoever you were,
you've been dead a long time, and I don't mind telling you I'm glad of
it."

He was slowly circling the first casket. Beyond it was the slender rod
with its mushroom head that seemed more like a bell as he looked from
below. The head's inner surface was emblazoned, like the figures on
the wall, with crimson and gold in strange designs. He saw now that
the base of it was connected with a smaller box, placed like the two
beside it on a stone pedestal.

He came slowly beside it to study the box with narrowed eyes. He
expected the metal cover would be as immovable as the others, and he
started back and caught his breath sharply as the metal raised at his
touch and the green radiance from above flashed back from within the
box in a thousand scintillant lights. Then he stooped to see the
brilliant, silvery sheen of metal wheels that moved on jeweled
bearings.

       *       *       *       *       *

A mechanism of some sort--but what? he wondered. He had some knowledge
of the stream of electrons that discharged continuously from the light
above, and he knew how they could charge an electroscope that would
automatically discharge to produce motion. He nodded in
half-understanding as the fluttering gold-leaf fell and allowed a
tiny wheel to move one notch in its escapement.

"Clockworks!" he told himself--it was as near as he could come to a
name for the machine--"and it's been running here all this time....
What for, I wonder? What was it supposed to do?"

He stared again at the bell-shape towering above him, but its purpose
was beyond guessing: it was a part of the machine. His eyes came back
to the mechanism itself. There was a splinter of stone.... Garry
reached for it unthinkingly, but his hand was checked in mid-air.

The fragment was wedged beneath a tiny lever, holding it erect.
"That's the answer," Garry whispered. "The machine was left open,"--he
felt of the cover that had been dented by some heavy blow, and saw
sharp splinters of rock beneath his feet--"a rock fell from the roof,
flaked off and dropped onto the machine, and a splinter jammed this
little lever. But the machine has been ticking along...."

His fingers reached for the stone.

"Let's go!" he said, and grinned broadly at the thoughts that were in
his mind. "Let's see what the machine would have done!"

The fragment came away within his hand, and he saw the lever fall
slowly. There was motion within the case--wheels and shining spheres
that touched one upon another were spinning in gleaming circles of
silvery green--and from above he heard the first faint whisper of a
sound.

It came from the bell, and Garry drew back to stare upward. The first
soft humming of the clear bell-note was incredibly sweet. It rose in
pitch while the volume increased, till the musical note was lost in
the rising roar that resounded from walls and roof. Higher it rose; it
was a scream that was human in its agony, prodigious in its volume!

       *       *       *       *       *

Garry Connell stood trembling with unnamed fear. This sound was
unbearable; it beat upon his ears; it battered his whole body; it
searched out every quivering nerve and tore at it with fingers of
fire. Still higher!--and the scream was piercing and torturing his
brain. He felt the jerk of uncontrollable muscles.

The whirling machine was a blur of light, and he longed with every
fibre of his tortured mind to throw himself upon it--into
it!--anything to end the unbearable impact from on high. His body,
assailed by a clamor that was physical torment, could not move; the
vibrations beat him down with crushing force, while the shrieking
voice rose higher, then grew faint, and, with a final whisper, died to
nothingness.

And still Garry felt himself sinking; the room was blurred; the
excruciating agony of tortured nerves melted into a lethargy that
swept through him. Dimly he sensed that the monstrous, quivering,
bell-topped thing was still launching its devastating rain of
vibrations; they were above the range of hearing; but he felt his body
quivering in response to the unheard note. Then even these vague
fragments of understanding left him. The towering, soundless thing was
indistinct ... it vanished in the darkness that closed about....

He was upon the floor in a crouching heap when the tremors that shook
him ceased. His mind, in the same instant, was cleared, and he knew
that the soundless vibrations from the bell had ended. A wave of
thankfulness flooded through him, and he luxuriated in the utter
silence of the room--until that silence was broken by another sound.

It was hard and metallic, like the click of a withdrawn bolt, and came
first from the case at his side. A second sharp rap replied from the
other raised casket, then an echoing tattoo of metallic impacts
rattled and clattered in the resounding room. Each of the hundreds of
caskets was adding its voice to the clacking chorus.

       *       *       *       *       *

The paralysis that had held Garry's muscles was gone, and he came
slowly to his feet to see the edge of the cover he had tried vainly
to move, rising smoothly in the air. His eyes darted about; the second
casket was opening; beyond were countless others; the room was alive
with silent motion where metal lids lifted like petals of flowers
unfolding to the sun.

The machine had done it! The conviction came to him abruptly. Those
vibrations that had beaten him down had done this: some unlocking
mechanism within each case had been actuated when the vibrations
reached the proper pitch. Then the thoughts were driven from his mind
by a more thrilling conviction: The caskets were open! The treasure!
Who could know what some of them might contain? He took one quick step
toward the nearer of the two.

One step!--and his reaching hands stopped motionless above the open
case. The contents of the box were plain before him--and he stared in
horror at the black, half-naked figure of a man as silent and unmoving
as its counterpart upon the wall.

Black as a carving in ebony, it was the face that held Garry's eyes.
He saw the pointed head, the thin lips half-drawn from snarling teeth,
the expression of brutal savagery that even this frozen stillness
could not conceal.

The eyes were closed; Garry saw their slitted lids. He was looking at
them when they quivered and twitched. The lids opened slowly, drew
back from staring eyes that were cold and dead--eyes that came
suddenly to life, that turned and stared unwinkingly, horribly, into
his.

       *       *       *       *       *

Garry's lips were moving as he drew back in slow retreat, but he heard
no sound of his own voice, only a husky whisper that said over and
over again: "Mummies! Caskets of mummies! And they're coming back to
life!"

Suspended animation. He had heard of such things. Dim, fleeting
remembrance of what he had read came flashingly to him--toads that had
lived a thousand years sealed up in rock--but this, a human thing, a
man!--no, no!--it couldn't come to life; not after all this time!

The pointed head, the ugly, menacing face and the body of dead black
that rose slowly within the casket gave his argument the lie. In
dreadful, living reality he saw the thing before him as it stretched
its corded neck, extended and flexed its long, black arms and breathed
deeply through lips drawn thin. Then, with a bound of returning
energy, it leaped out and down to stand half-naked and black, towering
threateningly above his head.

And Garry, too stunned to feel a sense of fear, looked first at the
living face before him and then at the carvings done in stone. There
was too much here for instant comprehension; his reason could not
follow fast enough where facts were leading, and his mind seemed
groping for some certain, proven thing.

"It's the same one that's on the wall," he explained painstakingly to
himself. "It's the king, the old boy himself! I said he would be a bad
hombre; I said he was a bad one--"

He saw the other raise his hands threateningly, and he crouched to
meet the attack. But the black hands dropped, and the scowling face
turned, while Garry's eyes followed toward a sound of movement in the
second casket.

The green light flooded down, and Garry Connell glanced quickly at the
doorway. Too many of these blacks and this would be no safe place for
him. He was expecting another apparition like the first; he would have
thought himself prepared against any further surprise, but his gray
eyes opened wide at what the light disclosed.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was the casket, gray and lusterless on its low, stone base. Its
cover, like the others, stood erect, and above the nearer edge an arm
was raising. But it was a white arm, and it ended in a slim, white
hand!--its rounded softness held in clear outline against the back
ground of gray, until the arm fell that the hand might grip the metal
edge.

Garry's eyes held in wondering fascination upon those slender white
fingers. The hand of a woman--a girl!--what marvel of miracles was
this? He held his silent pose while he stared at the face that
appeared before him.

It was milk-white against the dull gray metal beyond, the white of
death itself, until returning circulation brought a flush of pink that
crept slowly to the rounded cheeks. Dark hair cascaded about the
shoulders to mingle with a lacy veil of golden threads. A film of
golden lace wrapped about her--her robes had gone to dust, vanished
with the vanished years--and only the threads of gold with which the
robe was shot remained, a futile concealment for the slim white of her
shoulders, the soft curves of rounded breasts. But Garry's eyes were
held by the eyes that looked and locked with his.

Dark eyes, deep and steady, yet glowing softly with the wonder of this
awakening. Windows, crystal clear, through which shone softly a light
that filled him through and through!

Alluring as was the rounded whiteness of the form so thinly veiled, it
was not this nor the childlike beauty of the face that held him
spellbound. Garry Connell's only love had been the desert, and now he
was filled and shaken by the glamour from within these thrilling eyes.

A rasping word made echoes in the silence, and Garry saw the girl's
eyes widen as she turned them upon the black one, who had spoken. He
saw her face lose its color and go dead white, and plainly her wide
eyes showed the fears that swept in upon her with returning
remembrance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Garry followed her gaze to the wild figure whose slitted eyes
glittered in savage triumph and possessiveness at the white beauty of
the trembling girl. The lean figure spoke again in that rasping,
unintelligible voice--he addressed the girl now--and the tone sent a
strange prickling of animosity through every fibre of the watching
man.

The black one took one stride forward; the girl, in a flash of white
and gold, sprang from her resting place to take shelter behind the
high casket. Her eyes came back to Garry's, and the call for help
though voiceless was none the less real.

Then her pale lips moved, and she called to him with a clear voice
that uttered unknown words.

Garry came from the spell that bound him, and with a quick rush made
between her and the advancing man. He landed tense and crouching, and
his voice was hoarse with excitement when he spoke.

"That'll be all from you," he told the black one.

His words could mean nothing to this savage, but the tone that rang
through them, and his crouching, ready pose, must have been plain. The
inky face beneath the high-pointed dome of head was twisted with rage;
the eyes glared at this being who dared to oppose him. But the black
one paused, then stepped backward to the casket where he had been.

Garry retreated a few slow steps to the end of the metal box that
sheltered the girl. "Can't you understand me?" he asked. "Am I
dreaming? What has happened? Who are you, and who is this black beast?
What does it all mean?"

Again he was sure that mere speech useless, but he felt that he had to
speak, to say something, anything, to prove the reality of his own
waking self and of the wild, nightmare experience.

He saw the crouching girl rise to her full height; he saw the movement
of her hand as she swept the dark hair away from her face, and the
film of gold lace clung closely about her as she came to his side.
One hand was outstretched to rest, light and cool, upon his forehead.

       *       *       *       *       *

He heard her voice, so soft and liquid yet so charged with terror. She
spoke meaningless words and phrases, but at the touch of her hand upon
his face he started abruptly.

Did the words themselves take on meaning and coherence, or was it
something within himself?--Garry could not have told. But, with the
startling clarity of a radio switched full on, he got the impress of
her thoughts, and his own brain took them and put them into words that
he knew.

"You will help me, you will save me," the words were saying. "You are
one of us, I know. You are a stranger, but your skin is white; you are
not of the tribe of Horab."

Garry was motionless and listening. He knew he was sensing her
thoughts--she was communicating with him by some telepathic magic--and
he knew, as he caught the words, that Horab was the black one there
before him, reaching and feeling within the casket where he had slept.
Horab--a savage king of a savage land--

"He captured me," the words continued in breathless haste. "I am from
Zahn: do you know the good land of Zahn? I am Luhra. Horab captured
me; carried me here to this island; it was yesterday he brought me
here. He put me to sleep, and he put his men to sleep, hundreds of his
chosen warriors. He worked his magic, and he said we would sleep for
one hundred summers. But it was yesterday. And now you will save me;
my father is a great man; he will reward you--"

The sentences flashed almost incoherently into his mind, but ceased at
a sound and stirring from the room at their backs.

Garry needed a moment for the substance of the message to register. He
had heard it as truly as if she had spoken: Horab had captured
her--yesterday!... And his own lips that had been loose with
astonishment closed to a grim smile.

"Yesterday!" She thought it was yesterday that her long night had
begun. Did Horab know the truth? Garry was suddenly certain that he
did. Horab's plans had miscarried; he could not know how far in a
distant past was that day when he had placed himself and this girl in
their caskets, safe in their mountain tomb.

       *       *       *       *       *

Only an instant for these thoughts to form--then his eyes were steady
upon the tall savage who had found what he sought in the big metal
case. Horab, king of a vanished race, turned now with a heavy scepter
in his hand; and its jeweled head flashed brilliantly as he raised it
high in air and shouted an echoing command into the room. A white hand
was tugging at Garry's shoulder, a soft body clinging close, to turn
him where new danger threatened.

The other caskets! He had forgotten them, and he saw the nearer ones
alive with struggling forms. A black man-shape, with sullen, animal
face and pointed head, came slowly erect and staggered upon the floor.
Another--and another! There were scores of the black, naked men who
scrambled from the nearer caskets and swayed drunkenly upon their
feet.

Garry stood tense, his mind a chaos of half-formed plans. This one
brute he might handle, but the whole tribe--that was too large an
order. Yet he knew with an unshakable conviction that he would carry
this girl from their evil clutches or die in the trying.

Feminine charms had failed to interest Garry in that world outside,
but now the message of these soft eyes, the appealing beauty of this
lovely face, proud and unafraid despite her fears, the hand so soft
and trusting upon his face!--there had something entered into Garry
Connell's lonely life that struck deep within him and found a ready
