host, who appeared to be the wealthy overlord of this portion of the
planet. The meal was delicious--tender, inch-thick steaks served with
delicate wine sauce and half a dozen of the planet's exotic vegetables,
topped off by a cool fruit dessert.

"My recommendation will be of considerable importance to you," said
Tardo as they ate. "If it is favorable, there is certain technical aid
aboard ship which will be made available to you at once. Of course, you
will not receive advanced equipment from the Solar Council until there
is a more thorough investigation."

"I'm afraid our culture is too simple and agrarian to win your
approval," said Saranta modestly.

"That isn't a major consideration. The Council understands the
difficulties that have faced colonies in other star systems. There are
certain fundamental requirements, of course: no abnormal religious
practices, no slavery ... well, you understand what I mean."

"We really feel that we have done well since we ... our ancestors, that
is ... colonized our world a thousand years ago," said Saranta, toying
with a wineglass. A smiling servant filled the glasses of Tardo and Peo.
"You see, there was no fuel for the ship to explore other planets in the
system, and the ship just rusted away. Since we are some distance from
the solar system, yours is the first ship that has landed here since
colonization."

"You seem to have been lucky, though," said Peo. He was navigator of the
Council ship, and had asked to accompany Tardo on the brief inspection
trip. "You could have landed on a barren planet."

"Well, no, the colonizers knew it was liveable, from the first
exploration expedition," said Saranta. "There were difficulties, of
course. Luxuriant vegetation, but no animal life, so we had no animals
to domesticate. Pulling a plow is hard work for a man."

"But you were able to solve this situation in a humanitarian way?" asked
Tardo, peering at him keenly. "That is to say, you didn't resort to
slavery?"

Saranta smiled and spread his hands slightly.

"Does this look like a slave society to you?" he countered. "The
colonists were anxious to co-operate to make the planet liveable. No one
objected to work."

"It's true we've seen no slaves, that we know about," said Tardo. "But
two days is a short time for inspection. I must draw most of my
conclusions from the attitudes of you and the others who are our hosts.
How about the servants here?"

"They are paid," answered Saranta, and added ruefully: "There are those
of us who think they are paid too well. They have a union, you know."

Tardo laughed.
