of colors sparkle deep within it. This creature's skin was like that,
Judd decided.

"If we could get enough of them," Lindy was saying, "I'd have the most
unusual coat! Do you think we could find enough, Judd?"

"I doubt it. Never saw anything like it before, never heard of anything
like it. You'd need fifty of 'em, anyway. Let's forget about it--too
small to shoot, anyway."

"No, Judd. I want it."

"Well, I'm not going to stalk a five-pound--hey, wait a minute! I taught
you how to use this rifle, so why don't you bag it?"

Lindy grinned. "That's a fine idea. I was a little scared of some of
those big lizards and cats and everything, but now I'm going to take you
up on it. Here, give me your gun."

Judd removed the leather thong from his shoulder and handed the weapon
to her. She looked at it a little uncertainly, then took the clip of
shells which Judd offered and slammed it into the chamber. The little
creature sat unmoving.

"Isn't it peculiar that it doesn't run away, Judd?"

"Sure is. Nothing formidable about that animal, so unless it has a
hidden poison somewhere, just about anything in this swamp could do it
in. To survive it would have to be fast as hell and it would have to
keep running all the time. Beats me, Lindy."

"Well, I'm going to get myself one pelt toward that coat, anyway. Watch,
Judd: is this the way?" She lifted the rifle to her shoulder and
squinted down the sights toward the shining creature.

"Yeah, that's the way. Only relax. Relax. Shoulder's so tense you're
liable to dislocate it with the kick. There--that's better."

Now Lindy's finger was wrapped around the trigger and she remembered
Judd had told her to squeeze it, not to pull it. If you pulled the
trigger you jerked the rifle and spoiled your aim. You had to squeeze it
slowly....

The animal seemed politely interested.

Suddenly, a delicious languor stole over Lindy. It possessed her all at
once and she had no idea where it came from. Her legs had been stiff and
tired from the all-morning trek through the swamp, but now they felt
fine. Her whole body was suffused in a warm, satisfied glow of
well-being. And laziness. It was an utterly new sensation and she could
even feel it tingling at the roots of her hair. She sighed and lowered
the rifle.

"I don't want to shoot it," she said.

"You just told me you did."

"I know, but I changed my mind. What's the matter, can't I change my
mind?"

"Of course you can change your mind. But I thought you wanted a coat of
those things."

"Yes, I suppose I do. But I don't want to shoot it, that's all."

Judd snorted. "I think you have a streak of softness someplace in that
pretty head of yours!"

"Maybe. I don't know. But I'd still like the pelt. Funny, isn't it?"

"Okay, okay! But don't ask to use the gun again." Judd snatched it from
her hands. "If you don't want to shoot it, then I will. Maybe we can
make you a pair of gloves or something from the pelt."

And Judd pointed his ancient rifle at the little animal preparing to
snap off a quick shot. It would be a cinch at this distance. Even Lindy
wouldn't have missed, if she hadn't changed her mind.

Judd yawned. He'd failed to realize he was so tired. Not an aching kind
of tiredness, but the kind that makes you feel good all over. He yawned
again and lowered the rifle. "Changed my mind," he said. "I don't want
to shoot it, either. What say we head back for camp?"

Lindy gripped his hand impulsively. "All right, Judd--but I had a
brainstorm! I want it for a pet!"

"A pet?"

"Yes. I think it would be the cutest thing. Everyone would look and
wonder and I'll adore it!"

"We don't know anything about it. Maybe Earth would be too cold, or too
dry, or maybe we don't have anything it can eat. There are liable to be
a hundred different strains of bacteria that can kill it."

"I said I want it for a pet. See? Look at it! We can call it Black
Eyes."

"Black Eyes--" Judd groaned.

"Yes, Black Eyes. If you don't do this one thing for me, Judd--"

"Okay--okay. But I'm not going to do anything. You want it, you take
it."

Lindy frowned, looked at him crossly, then sloshed across the swamp
toward Black Eyes. The creature waited on its stump until she came quite
close, and then, with a playful little bound, it hopped onto her
shoulder, still squatting on its haunches. Lindy squealed excitedly and
began to stroke its silvery fur.

