The Coroner said, "Mr. Cole, this inquest has been called to look into
the death of one Sanford Smith, who was found near your home with a gun
in his hand and a bullet in his brain. The theory of suicide has been--"

"--rather hard to rationalize?"

The Coroner blinked. "You could put it that way."

"I would put it even stronger. The theory is obviously ridiculous. It
was a weak cover-up. The best I could do under the circumstances."

"You are saying that you killed Sanford Smith?"

"Of course."

The Coroner glanced at his six-man jury, at the two police officers, at
the scattering of spectators. They all seemed stunned. Even the reporter
sent to cover the hearing made no move toward the telephone. The Coroner
could think of only the obvious question: "Why did you kill him?"

"He was dangerous to us."

"Whom do you mean by _us_?"

"We Martians, who plan to take over your world."

The Coroner was disappointed. A lunatic. But a lunatic can murder. Best
to proceed, the Coroner thought. "I was not aware that we have Martians
to contend with."

"If I'd had the right weapon to use on Smith, you wouldn't be aware of
it now. We still exercise caution."

The Coroner felt a certain pity. "Why did you kill Smith?"

"We Martians have found science-fiction writers to be our greatest
danger. Through the medium of imaginative fiction, such writers have
more than once revealed our plans. If the public suddenly realized
that--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Coroner broke in. "You killed Smith because he revealed something in
his writings?"

"Yes. He refused to take my word that it was unsalable. He threatened to
submit it direct. It was vital material."

"But there are many other such writers. You can't control--"

"We control ninety percent of the output. We have concentrated on the
field and all of the science-fiction agencies are in our hands. This
control was imperative."

"I see." The Coroner spoke in the gentle tones one uses with the insane.
"Any writing dangerous to your cause is deleted or changed by the
