"8000," the other replied. "Name's Broyk, from VII Galaxy."

"I'm from out XIX way myself," Kial said. "Just a country boy. But
8000--that's only a period ahead of my own time. Maybe you could tell
me ..."

"Ah, ah!" the other admonished. "Remember the First Law of Thek!"

"Oh, Center," Kial grumbled. "I know: 'One may not divulge any
scientific, technical or social information to anyone from his own past
whom he may meet at an equidistant point in a Thek-travel.' I forgot."

"Bad," Broyk said. Then he added, almost jokingly: "You wouldn't want to
be marooned in this dismal era, would you?"

Kial shuddered. "Of course not. But the Laws seem so ridiculous."

"Not a bit," Broyk said, warming up to the subject. "It's very simple,
really. Same principle that doesn't allow anyone to Thek-travel into the
future.

"Look. I'm from 8000. Say that I went into 12,000, where I memorized as
much information as I could on some subject such as medicine. So I
return to 8000, retaining all such knowledge in my mind that's been
learned in four periods. Therefore, I'd have knowledge that wasn't
dreamed of in my own time, but was discovered sometime during the next
four periods. But then it couldn't be discovered, because I'd brought
it back to 8000 and--well, I'm no Logician, but you see my point."

"Oh, it's reasonable, I suppose," Kial admitted. "I realize the Laws are
really for our own good. By the way--I'm here on a field trip to gather
material for my thesis on Advanced Therapeutical Psychology and its
development since the Twentieth Century. What phase of this era are you
here to study?"

"I--I'm afraid I couldn't tell you that," Broyk said. "It's of rather a
secret nature and ..."

"You mean we might violate a Law and be stuck here for good--is that
it?"

"Yes--in a way."

Frightened, Kial let the matter drop. His gaze wandered through the
coach, examining the other passengers with interest. As time-travelers
from a different space-time plane from their 20th Century ancestors, he
and Broyk were naturally invisible to their fellow travelers.

Two pompous old gentlemen were lighting cigars and Kial was about to
remark on the habit of smoking when he noticed an even more remarkable
phenomenon. A few seats ahead of them sat a good-looking young couple,
oblivious to others about them.

"Look!" Kial cried excitedly. "Lovers! Honeymooners! I've read about
such things! Isn't it disgusting?"

