us flashing out!"

Randall could never recall but dimly afterward how that tense hour
passed. It was an hour in which Milton and Nelson went with anxious
faces and low-voiced comments from one to another of the pieces of
apparatus in the room, inspecting each carefully, from the great
dynamos to the transmitting and receiving chambers, while Lanier
quickly got out and made ready the rough khaki suits and equipment
they were to take.

It lacked but a quarter-hour of midnight when they had finally donned
those suits, each making sure that he was in possession of the small
personal kit Milton had designated. This included for each a heavy
automatic, a small supply of concentrated foods, and a small case of
drugs chosen to counteract the rarer atmosphere and lesser gravity
which Milton had been warned to expect on the red planet. Each had
also a strong wrist-watch, the three synchronized exactly with the
big laboratory clock.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they had finished checking up on this equipment the clock's
longer hand pointed almost to the figure twelve, and the physicist
gestured expressively toward the transmitting chamber. Lanier, though,
strode for a moment to one of the laboratory's doors and flung it
open. As Randall gazed out with him they could see far out over the
tossing sea, dimly lit by the great canopy of the summer stars
overhead. Right at the zenith among those stars shone brightest a
crimson spark.

"Mars," said Lanier, his voice a half-whisper. "And they're waiting
out there for us now--out there where we'll be in minutes!"

"And if they shouldn't be waiting--their receiving chamber not
ready--"

But Milton's calm voice came across the room to them: "Zero hour," he
said, stepping up into the big transmitting chamber.

Lanier and Randall slowly followed, and despite himself a slight
shudder shook the latter's body as he stepped into the mechanism that
in moments would send him flashing out through the great void as
impalpable ether-vibrations. Milton and Lanier were standing silent
beside him, their eyes on Nelson, who stood watchfully now at the big
switchboard beside the chambers, his own gaze on the clock. They saw
him touch a stud, and another, and the hum of the great dynamos at the
room's end grew loud as the swarming of angry bees.

The clock's longer hand was crawling over the last space to cover the
smaller hand. Nelson turned a knob and the battery of great glass
tubes broke into brilliant white light, a crackling coming from them.
Randall saw the clock's pointer clicking over the last divisions, and
as he saw Nelson grip a great switch there came over him a wild
impulse to bolt from the transmitting chamber. But then as his
thoughts whirled maelstromlike there came a clang from the clock and
Nelson flung down the switch in his grasp. Blinding light seemed to
break from all the chamber onto the three; Randall felt himself hurled
into nothingness by forces titanic, inconceivable, and then knew no
more.

       *       *       *       *       *

Randall came back to consciousness with a humming sound in his ears
and with a sharp pain piercing his lungs at every breath. He felt
himself lying on a smooth hard surface, and heard the humming stop and
be succeeded by a complete silence. He opened his eyes, drawing
himself to his feet as Milton and Lanier were doing, and stared about
him.

He was standing with his two friends inside a cubical metal chamber
almost exactly the same as the one they had occupied in Milton's
laboratory a few moments before. But it was not the same, as their
first astounded glance out through its open side told them.

For it was not the laboratory that lay around them, but a vast
conelike hall that seemed to Randall's dazed eyes of dimensions
illimitable. Its dull-gleaming metal walls slanted up for a thousand
feet over their heads, and through a round aperture at the tip far
above and through great doors in the walls came a thin sunlight. At
the center of the great hall's circular floor stood the two cubical
chambers in one of which the three were, while around the chambers
were grouped masses of unfamiliar-looking apparatus.

       *       *       *       *       *

To Randall's untrained eyes it seemed electrical apparatus of very
strange design, but neither he nor Milton nor Lanier paid it but small
attention in that first breathless moment. They were gazing in
fascinated horror at the scores of creatures who stood silent amid the
apparatus and at its switches, gazing back at them. Those creatures
were erect and roughly man-like in shape, but they were not human
men. They were--the thought blasted to Randall's brain in that
horror-filled moment--crocodile-men.

Crocodile-men! It was only so that he could think of them in that
moment. For they were terribly like great crocodile shapes that had
learned in some way to carry themselves erect upon their hinder limbs.
The bodies were not covered with skin, but with green bony plates. The
limbs, thick and taloned at their paw-ends, seemed greater in size and
stronger, the upper two great arms and the lower two the legs upon
which each walked, while there was but the suggestion of a tail. But
the flat head set on the neckless body was most crocodilian of all,
with great fanged, hinged jaws projecting forward, and with dark
unwinking eyes set back in bony sockets.

Each of the creatures wore on his torso a gleaming garment like a coat
of metal scales, with metal belts in which some had shining tubes.
They were standing in groups here and there about the mechanisms, the
nearest group at a strange big switch-panel not a half-dozen feet from
the three men. Milton and Lanier and Randall returned in a tense
silence the unwinking stare of the monstrous beings around them.

"The Martians!" Lanier's horror-filled exclamation was echoed in the
next instant by Randall's.

"The Martians! God, Milton! They're not like anything we know--they're
reptilian!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Milton's hand clutched his shoulder. "Steady, Randall," he muttered.
"They're terrible enough, God knows--but remember we must seem just as
grotesque to them."

The sound of their voices seemed to break the great hall's spell of
silence, and they saw the crocodilian Martians before them turning and
speaking swiftly to each other in low hissing speech-sounds that were
quite unintelligible to the three. Then from the small group nearest
them one came forward, until he stood just outside the chamber in
which they were.

Randall felt dimly the momentousness of the moment, in which beings of
earth and Mars were confronting each other for the first time in the
solar system's history. The creature before them opened his great jaws
and uttered slowly a succession of sounds that for the moment puzzled
them, so different were they from the hissing speech of the others,
though with the same sibilance of tone. Again the thing repeated the
sounds, and this time Milton uttered an exclamation.

"He's speaking to us!" he cried. "Trying to speak the English that I
taught them in our communication! I caught a word--listen...."

As the creature repeated the sounds, Randall and Lanier started to
hear also vaguely expressed in that hissing voice familiar words:
"You--are Milton and--others from--earth?"

Milton spoke very clearly and slowly to the creature: "We are those
from earth," he said. "And you are the Martians with whom we have
communicated?"

"We are those Martians," said the other's hissing voice slowly.
"These"--he waved a taloned paw toward those behind him--"have charge
of the matter-transmitter and receiver. I am of our ruler's council."

"Ruler?" Milton repeated. "A ruler of all Mars?"

"Of all Mars," the other said. "Our name for him would mean in your
words the Martian Master. I am to take you to him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Milton turned to the other two with face alight with excitement.
"These Martians have some supreme ruler they call the Martian Master,"
he said quickly; "and we're to go before him. As the first visitors
from earth we're of immense importance here."

As he spoke, the Martian official before them had uttered a hissing
call, and in answer to it a long shape of shining metal raced into
the vast hall and halted beside them. It was like a fifty-foot
centipede of metal, its scores of supporting short legs actuated by
some mechanism inside the cylindrical body. There was a
transparent-walled control room at the front end of that body, and in
it a Martian at the controls who snapped open a door from which a
metal ladder automatically descended.

The Martian official gestured with a reptilian arm toward the ladder,
and Milton and Lanier and Randall moved carefully out of the
cube-chamber and across the floor to it, each of their steps being
made a short leap forward by the lesser gravity of the smaller planet.
They climbed up into the centipede-machine's control room, their guide
following, and then as the door snapped shut, the operator of the
thing pulled and turned the knob in his grasp and the long machine
scuttled forward with amazing smoothness and speed.

In a moment it was out of the building and into the feeble sunlight of
a broad metal-paved street. About them lay a Martian city, seen by
their eager eyes for the first time. It was a city whose structures
were giant metal cones like that from which they had just come, though
none seemed as large as that titanic one. Throngs of the hideous
crocodilian Martians were moving busily to and fro in the streets,
while among them there scuttled and flashed numbers of the
centipede-machines.

       *       *       *       *       *

As their strange vehicle raced along, Randall saw that the conelike
structures were for the most part divided into many levels, and that
inside some could be glimpsed ranks of great mechanisms and hurrying
Martians tending them. Away to their right across the vast forest of
cones that was the city the sun's little disk was shining, and he
glimpsed in that direction higher ground covered with a vast tangle of
bright crimson jungle that sloped upward from a great, half-glimpsed
waterway.

The Martian beside them saw the direction of his gaze and leaned
toward him. "No Martians live there," he hissed slowly. "Martians live
only in cities where canals meet."

"Then there's no life in those crimson jungles?" Randall asked,
repeating the question a moment later more slowly.

"No Martians there, but life--living things," the other told him,
searching for words. "But not intelligent, like Martians and you."

He turned to gaze ahead, then pointed. "The Martian Master's cone," he
hissed.

The three saw that at the end of the broad metal street down which
their vehicle was racing there loomed another titanic cone-structure,
fully as large as the mighty one in which they first found themselves.
As the centipede-machine swept up to its great door-opening and
halted, they descended to the metal paving and then followed their
reptilian guide through the opening.

       *       *       *       *       *

They found themselves in a great hall in which scores of the Martians
were coming and going. At the hall's end stood a row of what seemed
guards, Martians grasping shining tubes such as they had already
glimpsed. These gave way to allow their passage when their conductor
uttered a hissing order, and then they were moving down a shorter hall
at whose end also were guards. As these sprang aside before them, a
great door of massive metal they guarded moved softly upward,
disclosing a mighty circular hall or room inside. Their crocodilian
guide turned to them.

"The hall of the Martian Master," he hissed.

They passed inside with him. The great hall seemed to extend upward to
the giant cone's tip, thin light coming down from an opening there.
Upon the dull metal of its looming walls were running friezes of
lighter metal, grotesque representations of reptilian shapes that they
could but vaguely glimpse. Around the walls stood rank after rank of
guards.

At the hall's center was a low dias, and in a semicircle around and
behind it stood a half-hundred great crocodilian shapes. Randall
guessed even at the moment that they were the council of which their
conductor had named himself a member. But like Milton and Lanier, he
had eyes in that first moment only for the dais itself. For on it
was--the Martian Master.

Randall heard Milton and Lanier choke with the horror that shook his
own heart and brain as he gazed. It was not simply another great
crocodilian shape that sat upon that dais. It was a monstrous thing
formed by the joining of three of the great reptilian bodies! Three
distinct crocodile-like bodies sitting close together upon a metal
seat, that had but a single great head. A great, grotesque crocodilian
head that bulged backward and to either side, and that rested on the
three thick short necks that rose from the triple body! And that head,
that triple-bodied thing, was living, its unwinking eyes gazing at the
three men!

       *       *       *       *       *

The Martian Master! Randall felt his brain reel as he gazed at that
mind-shattering thing. The Martian Master--this great head with three
bodies! Reason told Randall, even as he strove for sanity, that the
thing was but logical, that even on earth biologists had formed
multiple-headed creatures by surgery, and that the Martians had done
so to combine in one great head, one great brain, the brains of three
bodies. Reason told him that the great triple brain inside that
bulging head needed the bloodstreams of all three bodies to nourish
it, must be a giant intellect indeed, one fitted to be the supreme
Martian Master. But reason could not overcome the horror that choked
him as he gazed at the awful thing.

A hissing voice sounding before him made him aware that the Martian
Master was speaking.

"You are the Earth-beings with whom we communicated, and whom we
instructed to build a matter-transmitter and receiver on earth?" the
slow voice asked. "You have come safely to Mars by means of that
station?"

"We have come safely." Milton's voice was shaken and he could find no
other words.

"That is well. Long had we desired to have such a station built on
earth, since with it there to flash back and forth between the two
worlds is easy. You have come, then, to learn of this world and to
take back what you learn to your races?"

"That is why we came." Milton said, more steadily. "We want to stay
only hours on this first visit, and then flash back to earth as we
came."

       *       *       *       *       *

The head's awful eyes seemed to consider them. "But when do you intend
to go back?" its strange voice asked. "Unless the one at your earth
station has its receiver operating at the right moment you will simply
flash on endlessly as radio waves--will be annihilated."

Milton found the courage to smile. "We started from earth at our
midnight exactly, and at midnight exactly twenty-four earth hours
later, we are to flash back and the receiver will be awaiting us."

There was silence when he had said that, a silence that seemed to
Randall's strained mind to have become suddenly tense, sinister. The
great triple-bodied creature before them considered them again, its
eyes moving over them, and when it again spoke the hissing words came
very slowly.

"Twenty-four earth hours," it said; "and then your receiver on earth
will be awaiting you. That time we can measure to the moment, and that
is well. For it is not you three Earth-beings who will flash back to
earth when that moment comes! It will be Martians, the first of our
Martian masses who have waited for ages for that moment and who will
begin then our conquest of the earth!

"Yes, Earth-beings, our great plan comes to its end now at last! At
last! Age on age, prisoned on this dying, arid world, we have desired
the earth that by right of power shall be ours, have sought for ages
to communicate with its beings. You finally heard us, you hearkened to
us, you built the matter-transmitting and receiving station on earth
that was the one thing needed for our plan. For when the
matter-receiver of that station is turned on in twenty-four of your
hours, and ready to receive matter flashes from here, it will be the
first of our millions who will flash at last to earth!

"I, the Martian Master, say it. Those first to go shall seize that
matter-receiver on earth when first they appear there, shall build
other and larger receivers, and through them within days all our
Martian hordes shall have been flashed to earth! Shall have poured out
over it and conquered with our weapons your weak races of
Earth-beings, who cannot stand before us, and whose world you have
delivered at last into our hands!"

For a moment, when the great monster's hissing voice had ceased,
Milton and Randall and Lanier gazed toward it as though petrified, the
whole unearthly scene spinning about them. And then, through the thick
silence, the thin sound of Milton's voice:

"Our world--our earth--delivered to the Martians, and by us! God--no!"

With that last cry of agonized comprehension and horror, Milton did
what surely had never any in the great hall expected, leaped onto the
dais with a single spring toward the Martian Master! Randall heard a
hundred wild hissing cries break from about him, saw the crocodilian
forms of guards and council rushing forward even as he and Lanier
sprang after Milton, and then glimpsed shining tubes levelled from
which brilliant shafts of dazzling crimson light or force were
stabbing toward them!

       *       *       *       *       *

To Randall the moment that followed was but a split-second flash and
whirl of action. As his earthly muscles took him forward with Lanier
after Milton in a great leap to the dais, he was aware of the
brilliant red rays stabbing behind him closely, and knew that only the
