Doc Prouty was holding up a small syringe, eying the little bit of
fluid within it. "We've got him," he said in a flat voice. "I'll have
the lab run an analysis. We're well within the time limit. All we have
to do is separate the girl's blood type from that of the spermatic
fluid. You boys find your man, and I can identify him for you." He
put the syringe in its special case. "I'll let you know the exact
cause of death in a couple of hours."

"O.K., Doc. Thanks," said Inspector Kleek, closing his notebook. He
turned to one of the other men. "Thompson, you notify the parents. Get
'em down here to make a positive identification, and send it along to
my office with the print identification." Then he looked at me.
"Anything extra you want, Roy?"

I shook my head. "Nope. Let's go check the files, huh?"

"Sure. Can I ride with you? I rode in with Thompson; he'll have to
stay."

"Come along," I told him.

       *       *       *       *       *

By ten fifteen that evening, we had narrowed the field down
considerably. We fed all the data we had into the computer, including
the general type number of the spermatic fluid, which Dr. Prouty had
given us, and watched while the machine sorted through the
characteristics of all the known criminals in its memory.

Kleek and I were sitting at a desk drinking hot, black coffee when the
computer technician came over and handed Kleek the results at ten
fifteen. "Quite a bunch of 'em, Inspector," he said, "but the
geographic compartmentalization will help."

Kleek glanced over the neatly-printed sheaf of papers that the
computer had turned out, then handed them to me. "There we are, Roy.
One of those zanies is our boy."

I looked at the list. Every person on it was either a confirmed or
suspected psychopath, and each one of them conformed to the set of
specifications we had fed the computer. They were listed in four
different groups, according to the distance they lived from the scene
of the crime--half a mile, two miles, five miles, and "remainder," the
rest of the city.

"All we got to do," Kleek said complacently, "is start rounding 'em
up."

"You make it sound easy," I said tightly.

He put down his coffee cup. "Hell, Roy, it _is_ easy! We've got all
these characters down on the books, don't we? We know what they are,
don't we? Look at 'em! Once in a while a new one pops up, and we put
him on the list. Once in a while we catch one and send him up.
Practically cut and dried, isn't it?"

"Sure," I said.

"Look, Roy," he went on, "we got it down to a fine art now--have for
years." He waved in the general direction of the computer. "We got the
advantage that it's easier to sort 'em out now, and faster--but the
old tried-and-true technique is just the same. Cops have been catching
these goons in every civilized country on Earth for a hundred years by
this technique."

"Sam," I said wearily, "are you going to give me a lecture on police
methods?"

He picked up his cup, held it for a moment, then set it down again,
his eyes hardening. "Yes, Roy, I am! I'm older than you are, I've got
more years on the Force, I've been working with Homicide longer, and I
outrank you in grade by two and a half years! Yes, I figure it's about
time I lectured you! You want to listen?"

I looked at him. Kleek is a good cop, I was thinking, and he deserves
to be listened to, even if I don't agree with him.

"O.K., Sam," I said, "I'll listen."

       *       *       *       *       *

"O.K., then." He took a breath. "Now, we got a system here that works.
The nuts always show themselves up, one way or another. Most of 'em
have been arrested by the time they're fourteen, fifteen years old.
Maybe we can't nail 'em down and pin anything on 'em, but we got 'em
down on the books. We know they have to be watched. We got ninety per
cent of the queers and hopheads and stew-bums and firebugs and the
rest of the zanies down on our books"--he waved toward the computer
again--"and down in the memory bank of the computer. We know we're
gonna get 'em eventually, because we know they're gonna goof up
eventually, and then we'll have 'em. We'll have 'em"--he made a
clutching gesture with his right hand--"right where it hurts!

"You take this Donahue killer. We know where he is. We can be pretty
sure we got him down on the books." He tapped the sheaf of papers from
the computer with a firm forefinger. "We can be pretty sure that he's
one of those guys right down there!"

He waved his hand again, but, this time, he took in the whole
city--the whole outside world. "Like clock-work. The minute they
goof, we nab 'em."

"Sam," I said, "just listen to me a minute. We know that ninety per
cent of the men on that list right there are going to be convicted of
a crime of violence inside the next five years, right?"

"That's what I've been tellin' you. The minute--"

"Wait a minute; wait a minute. Just listen. Why don't we just go out
and arrest them all right now? Look at all the trouble that would save
us."

"Hell, Roy! You can't arrest a man unless he's done something! What
would you charge 'em with? Loitering with intent to commit a
nuisance?"

"No. But we _can_--"

I was cut off by a uniformed cop who stuck his head in the door and
said: "Inspector Royall, Dr. Brownlee called. Says they picked up
Hammerlock Smith. He's at the 87th Precinct. Wants you to come down
right away if you can."

I stood up and grabbed my hat. "Sam, you can sit on this one for a
while, huh? I've been waiting for Hammerlock Smith to fall for two
months."

Sam Kleek looked disgusted. "And you'll see that he gets psycho
treatment and a suspended sentence. A few days in the looney ward, and
then right back out on the street. Hammerlock Smith! _There's_ a case
for you! Built like a gorilla and has a passion for Irish whisky and
sixteen-year-old boys--and you think you can cure him in three days!
Nuts!"

I didn't feel like arguing with him. "We might as well let him go now
as lock him up for three or four months and then let him go, Sam. Why
fool around with assault and battery charges when we can wait for him
to murder somebody and then lock him up for good, eh, Sam? What's
another victim more or less, as long as we get the killer?"

"That's what we're here for," he said stolidly. "To get killers." He
scratched at his balding head. "I don't get you, Roy. I'd think you'd
_want_ these maniacs put away, after your--"

He stopped himself, wet his lips, and said: "O.K. You go ahead and
take care of Smith. Get some sleep. I'm going to. I'll leave orders to
call us both if anything breaks in the Donahue case."

I just nodded and walked out. I didn't want to hear any more.

But the door didn't close tightly, and I heard Kleek's voice as he
spoke to the computer tech. "I just don't figure Roy. His wife died in
a fire set by an arson bug, and he wants to--"

I kept on walking as the door clicked shut.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was in my office at nine the next morning, after seven and a half
hours of sleep on one of the bunks in the ready room. The business
with Hammerlock Smith had taken more time than I had thought it would.
The big, stupid ape had been in a vicious mood, reeking of whisky and
roaring insults at everyone. His cursing was neither inventive nor
colorful, consisting of only four unlovely words used over and over
again in various combinations with ordinary ones, a total vocabulary
of maybe a dozen words.

It had taken four cops, using night-sticks, to get him into the paddy
wagon, and Dr. Brownlee had finally had to give him a blast of
super-tranquilizer with a hypogun.

"Boy, Inspector," one of the officers had said, "don't let anyone ever
tell you some of these guys aren't tough!"

I was looking over the written report. "What about this kid he
accosted in the bar? Hurt bad?"

"Cracked rib, sprained wrist, and a bloody nose, sir. The doc said
he'd be O.K."

"According to the report here, the kid was twenty-two years old. Smith
usually picks 'em younger."

The cop grinned. "Smith had to get his eventually, sir. This guy looks
pretty young, but he was a boxer in college. He probably couldn't've
whipped Smith, but he had guts enough to try."

"Think he'll testify?"

"Said he would, sir. We already got his signature on the complaint
while he was at the hospital. He's pretty mad."

Smith's record was long and ugly. Of the eight complaints made by
young boys who had managed to brush off or evade Hammerlock's
advances, six hadn't come to trial because there were no corroborating
witnesses, and the charges had been dismissed. Two of the cases had
come before a jury--and had resulted in acquittals. Cold sober, Smith
presented a fairly decent picture. It was hard to convince a jury of
ordinary citizens that so masculine-looking a specimen was homosexual.

The odd thing was that the psychopathic twist which got Hammerlock
Smith into trouble had been able to get him out of it again. Both
times, Smith's avowal that he had done no such disgusting thing had
been corroborated by a lie detector test. Smith--when he was
sober--had no recollection of his acts when drunk, and apparently
honestly believed that he was incapable of doing what we knew he _had_
done.

This time, though, we had him dead to rights. He had never made his play
in a bar before, and we had three witnesses, plus an assault and battery
charge. As Inspector Kleek had said, we get 'em eventually....

... _But at what cost? How many teenage boys had been frightened or
whipped into doing as he told them and then been too ashamed and sick
with themselves to say anything? How many young lives had been
befouled by Smith's abnormal lust?_

And if Smith spent a year or two in Sing Sing, how many more would
there be between the time he was released and the time he was caught
again? And how long would it be before he obligingly hammered the life
out of his young victim so that we could put him away permanently?

That was the "system" that Kleek--and a lot of other men on the Force
swore by. That was the "system" that the boys in Homicide and in the
Vice Squad thought I was trying to foul up by "babying" the zanies.

It's a hell of a great system, isn't it?

       *       *       *       *       *

I called the hospital and talked to the doctor who had taken care of
Smith's victim. Then I called Kleek to see if there had been any break
in the Donahue case. There hadn't.

Finally, I called my son, Steve, at the apartment we shared, told him
I wouldn't be home that night, and sacked out in the ready room.

By nine o'clock, I was ready to go back to work.

At nine thirty, Kleek called. His saggy face looked sleepier and more
bored than ever. "No rest for the weary, Roy. I got a call on a
killing on the Upper East Side. Some rich gal with too much time on
her hands was having an all-night party, and she got herself shot to
death. It looks like her husband did it, but there's plenty of money
involved, and the Deputy Commissioner wants me to handle it
personally, all the way through. I'm putting Lieutenant Shultz in
charge of the Homicide end of the Donahue case, but I told him you
were the man to listen to. He'll report directly to you if there's any
new leads. O.K.?"

"O.K. with me, Sam." As I said, Kleek is a good cop in spite of his
"system."
