you told me? Like a big, black bird, flapping its wings in your chest.
Didn't that mean something to you, Mr. Monk?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The industrialist paled. "All right. Get to the point," he said
quietly. "What did that gadget tell you?"

"Bad news," said the doctor. "Your heart's been strained almost to
bursting. It's working on will power, Mr. Monk; hardly anything else."

"_Get to the point!_" Monk shouted.

"That _is_ the point," Rostov said stiffly. "You have a serious heart
condition. A dangerous condition. You've ignored eight years of my
advice, and now your heart is showing the effects."

"What can it do to me?"

"Kill you," said the doctor bluntly. "Frankly, I can't even promise
that the usual precautions will do any good. But we have no other
choice than to take them. The human body is a miraculous affair, and
even the most desperate damages sometimes can't prevent it from going
on living. But I won't mince words with you, Mr. Monk. You're a direct
sort of person, so I'm telling you directly. Your chances are slim."

Monk sat down and put his black tie on distractedly. He sat deep in
thought for a while, and then said:

"How much would it cost to fix it?"

"What?"

"Money!" the big man cried. "How much money would it take to get me
repaired?"

"But it's not a matter of money--"

"Don't give me that!" Monk put his jacket on with a violent motion.
"I've learned better than that in my fifty years, Dr. Rostov. Money
fixes everything. Everything! I could curdle your milk by telling you
some of the things I've fixed with money!"

The physician shrugged. "Money doesn't buy health."

"Doesn't it?" The patient gave an abrupt laugh. "Money buys people,
Dr. Rostov. It buys loyalty and disloyalty. It buys friends and sells
enemies. All these are commodities, Doctor. I found that out--the hard
way."

"Mr. Monk, you don't know what I'm telling you. Your heart action is
unreliable, and no amount of dollars can bring it back to normal--"

The industrialist stood up. "You think the heart is incorruptible,
eh?" He snorted. "Well, I think different. Someplace on earth there's
a man or a method that can fix me up. It'll take money to find the
answer, that's for sure. But I'll find it!"

Rostov put out his hand helplessly. "You're being unreasonable, Mr.
Monk. There is nothing on earth--"

"_All right!_" Fletcher Monk shouted. "So maybe there's nothing on
Earth!" His body trembled with his emotion. "Then I'll go to the
stars, if I have to!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Rostov started. "If you mean this gravity business--"

"What's that?" Monk froze. "What's that you said?"

"This gravity thing," the doctor said. "This silly story about the
Mars Colony they've been spreading--"

"What silly story?" asked Monk, narrowing his eyes. "I haven't heard
it. What do you mean?"

Rostov regretted his words. But he knew it was too late to stop the
industrialist from extracting the details from him. He made a
despairing gesture and went over to his desk. From the top drawer, he
withdrew a folded sheet torn from the pages of a daily newspaper that
specialized in lurid articles and wild imaginings.

       *       *       *       *       *

Monk snatched it from the doctor's hand. "Let me see that!" he said.
He turned the paper over in his hand until he found the red-pencilled
article the doctor had referred to.

"MARS BOON TO HEART CASES, SAYS SPACE DOCTOR." Monk read the headline
aloud, and then looked at Rostov.

"It's a misquotation," the physician said. "Dr. Feasley never made
such a bald statement. They've taken something out of context to make
a sensational story--"

"Let me see for myself," snapped Monk.

He began to read. "... 'Space Medicine Association ... Dr. Samuel
Feasley, renowned' ... here it is!... 'the effects of Earth's
gravitational pull on the body versus the relatively light gravitation
encountered by the members of the Martian Colony ... two-fifths the
pull of Earth ... interesting speculation on the heart action...!'" He
crushed the paper in his hands. "By God!" he cried. "Here's my answer,
you gloomy old fool!"

"No, no!" said Rostov hurriedly. "You don't know what you're saying--"

Fletcher Monk laughed loudly. "I always know what I'm saying, Doctor
Rostov. Here it is in black and white! Why should I die on Earth--when
I can live on Mars?"

"But it's impossible! There are so many problems--"

"Money solves problems!"

"Not this one!" said the doctor heatedly. "Not the problem of
acceleration! You'll never reach Mars alive!"
