receptionist had gone. The robot secretary, like most working robots,
was functional in form--circuits and wires, mike, speaker, extension
arms to type and to reach any file in the room, wheels for intra-office
mobility.

"Thanks, hon," said Ben. Nevertheless, robot secretaries were all
programmed and rated female--and it was wise to be polite to them. After
all, they could think and had feelings. There were a lot of important
things they could do for a salesman--or, sometimes, not do. This one,
being helpful, stretched out a long metal arm to open the door to the
inner office for Ben. He smiled his appreciation and went in.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Old Man, Amalgamated's grand old salesman, was billiard bald, aging,
a little stout and a little slower now. But he was still a fine sales
manager. He sat at his huge, old fashioned oak desk as Ben walked across
the office.

"Evening, sir." No response. Louder, "Good evening, Mr. Robb. Mr. Robb,
it's Ben, sir. Ben Tilman. You memo'd me to come--" Still no sign. The
eyes, under the great, beetling brows, seemed closed.

Ben grinned and reached out across the wide desk toward the small,
plastic box hanging on the Old Man's chest. The Old Man glanced up as
Ben tapped the plastic lightly with his fingernail.

"Oh, Ben. It's you." The Old Man raised his hand to adjust the ancient
style hearing aid he affected as Ben sank into a chair. "Sorry Ben. I
just had old Brannic Z-IX in here. A fine old robot, yes, but like most
of that model, long-winded. So--" He gestured at the hearing aid.

Ben smiled. Everyone knew the Old Man used that crude old rig so he
could pointedly tune out conversations he didn't care to hear. Any time
you were talking to him and that distant look came into his half closed
eyes, you could be sure that you were cut off.

"Sorry, Ben. Well now. I simply wanted to check with you, boy.
Everything all set for tonight?"

"Well, yes, sir. Everything is set and programmed. Betty and I will play
it all evening for the suspense, let them wonder, build it up--and then,
instead of the big pitch they'll be looking for, we'll let it go easy."

"A new twist on the old change-up. Ben, boy, it's going to go. I feel
it. It's in the air, things are just ripe for a new, super-soft-sell
pitch. Selling you've got to do by feel, eh Ben? By sales genius and the
old seat of the pants. Good. After tonight I'm going all out, a
hemisphere-wide, thirty day campaign. I'll put the top sales artist of
every regional office on it. They can train on your test pattern tapes.
I believe we can turn over billions before everybody picks up the signal
and it senilesces. You give an old man a new faith in sales, Ben! You're
a _salesman_."

"Well, sir--" But the Old Man's knack with the youthful-enthusiasm
approach was contagious. For the moment Ben caught it and he felt pretty
good about the coming night's work. He and Betty together would put the
deal over. That would be something.

Sure it would...

"How do you and your wife like the place, Ben?" It was some place, for
sure, the brand new house that Amalgamated had installed Ben, Betty and
Bennie in the day after he had signed up.

"It's--uh--just fine, sir. Betty likes it very much, really. We both
do." He hoped his tone was right.

"Good, Ben. Well, be sure to stop by in the morning. I'll have the
tapes, of course, but I'll want your analysis. Might be a little
vacation bonus in it for you, too."

"Sir, I don't know how to thank you."

The Old Man waved a hand. "Nothing you won't have earned, my boy. Robots
can't sell." That was the set dismissal.

"Yes, sir. Robots can't manage sales, or--" He winked. The Old Man
chuckled. An old joke was never too old for the Old Man. The same old
bromides every time; and the same hearty chuckle. Ben left on the end of
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dialing home on his new, Company-owned, convertible soar-kart, he felt
not too bad. Some of the old lift in spirits came as the kart-pilot
circuits digested the directions, selected a route and zipped up into a
north-north-west traffic pattern. The Old Man was a wonderful sales
manager and boss. The new house-warming pitch that he and Betty would
try tonight was smart. He could feel he had done something.

Exercising his sales ability with fair success, he fed himself this
pitch all along the two hundred mile, twenty-minute hop home from the
city. The time and distance didn't bother him. "Gives me time to think,"
he had told Betty. Whether or not this seemed to her an advantage, she
didn't say. At least she liked the place, "Amalgamated's Country
Gentleman Estate--Spacious, Yet fully Automated."

"We are," the Old Man told Ben when he was given the Company-assigned
quarters, "starting a new trend. With the terrific decline in birth rate
during the past 90 to 100 years, you'll be astonished at how much room
there is out there. No reason for everyone to live in the suburban
centers any more. With millions of empty apartments in them, high time
we built something else, eh? Trouble with people today, no initiative in
obsolescing. But we'll move them."

Home, Ben left the kart out and conveyed up the walk. The front door
opened. Betty had been watching for him. He walked to the family
vueroom, as usual declining to convey in the house. The hell with the
conveyor's feelings, if so simple a robot really had any. He _liked_ to
walk.
