
Dan stood a long time, watching the purple ring upon the silver
towers, with the shining white needle hanging below it. He stared at
Mars, glowing like a red and sinister eye above the incredible
mechanism.

His mind was in a wild storm of wonder shot with fear. What was the
meaning of the gleaming ring and needle? What connection did this
great device have with the signal of distress from the cliff, and the
green fire that had destroyed the _Virginia_? And why did the glowing
needle point at Mars?

       *       *       *       *       *

He did not know when he first began to hear the sound. For a time it
was merely part of the strange mystery of the island, only another
element in the atmosphere of fear and wonder that surrounded him. Then
it rose a little, and he became suddenly sharply conscious of it as an
additional menace. The sound was not loud, but deep and vibrant. A
whir or hum, like that of a powerful, muffled motor, but deeper than
the sound of any motor man has ever made. It came down the gorge, from
the direction of the machine on the mountain.

That deep, throbbing noise frightened Dan as none of his previous
experiences had done. Shivering from fear as much as from cold, he
crouched down beside a huge boulder in the edge of the tangle of brush
that covered the bottom of the ravine. His heart pounded wildly. He
was in the clutches of an unreasoning fear that some terrible Thing
had seen him, and was about to seek him out. For a moment he had to
use all his will to keep himself from panic flight through the brush.
The unknown is always terrible, and he had invaded the domain of a
force he could not understand.

In a moment, however, he recovered himself. He would be as safe there
in the jungle, he thought, as anywhere on the island. He thought of
starting a fire, then realized that he had no matches, and that he
would not dare to make a light if he were able. He pulled a few
handfuls of dry grass to make a sort of bed, upon which he huddled up,
thanking his lucky stars that the island was in semi-tropical
latitudes.

His mind returned again to the riddles that confronted him: the green
flash and the strange mechanism on the peak. He recalled fantastic
stories he had read, of hermit scientists conducting amazing
experiments in isolated parts of the world. Presently he decided that
something of the kind must be on foot here.

"The green flash is a sort of a death ray," he summed up, aloud. "And
they shoot it from that bright needle. No wonder they don't want to be
bothered! Somebody may be fixing to upset civilization!

"But it's queer that the needle points at Mars...."

Of this last fact, which might have been a clue to the most reasonable
solution of the mystery, if a rather astounding one, he was able to
make nothing. In fact, huddled up on his pile of grass in some degree
of comfort, he presently went to sleep, still pondering in vain upon
this last clue.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was awakened by a soft, insistent purring sound, rather like that
of a small electric motor run without load at very high speed.
Recollection of the night's events came abruptly to him, and he sprang
to his feet in alarm, finding his muscles sore and stiff from his
cramped position.

From one side Dan heard the rumble of thunder, and, glancing up, saw
that the sky above the sea was overcast with a rolling mass of dark,
menacing clouds. There was a strange portentous blackness about these
storm clouds that filled him with a nameless fear.

Suddenly he was struck with the thought that it was not thunder that
had wakened him. The noise he had heard had not the rumbling or
booming quality of thunder. As he stood there he again became
conscious of the low, whirring sound, behind him. He whirled around to
face it. The shock of what he saw left him momentarily dizzy and
trembling--though undoubtedly his surroundings had much to do with its
effect upon him.

The sound came from a glistening metal machine which stood half-hidden
in the brush a dozen yards away _looking at him_!

The thing was made of a lustrous, silvery metal, which Dan afterwards
supposed to be aluminum, or some alloy of that metal. Its gleaming
case was shaped more like a coffin, or an Egyptian mummy-case, than
any other object with which he was familiar, though rather larger than
either.

That is, it was an oblong metal box, tapering toward the ends, with
the greatest width forward of the middle. Twin tubes projected from
the end of it, lenses in them glistening like eyes. Just below them
sprang out steely, glistening tentacles several feet long, writhing
and twitching as if they were alive. The tangle of green brush hid the
thing's legs, so that Dan could not see them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly it sprang toward him, rising ten feet high and covering half
the distance between them. It alighted easily upon the two long,
jointed metal limbs upon which it had leapt, and continued to keep the
lens-tubes turned toward Dan, so he knew that the grotesque metal
thing was _watching him_.

The limbs, he observed, were similar to the hind legs of a
grasshopper, both in shape and position. And evidently the thing leapt
upon them in about the same way. Then he noticed another curious thing
about it.

Three little bars of metal projected above the thickest part of its
case, on the upper side. Their ends were joined by a little ring,
three inches across. The tiny metal ring glowed with purple
luminosity. A purple haze seemed to cling about it, as to the huge
ring Dan had seen on the towers above the peak. And suspended inside
this ring was a tiny metal needle, shimmering with pulsating white
fire.

On the back of this metal monster was a miniature replica of the
strange mechanism upon the pinnacle. The little needle pointed up the
canyon. A glance that way showed Dan that it pointed at the great
device upon the mountain, which looked even more brilliant on this
gloomy morning than in the uncertain radiance of the moon. The
colossal ring was shrouded in a splendid mantle of purple flame; and
the long, slender needle, which seemed to have swung on down to follow
Mars below the horizon, still throbbed with scintillating white fire.

For several minutes the two stood there, studying each other. A naked
man, tense and bewildered in the presence of mysterious forces--and a
grotesque machine, cased in gleaming white metal, whose parts seemed
to duplicate most of the functions of a living creature.

Then one of the writhing tentacles that shot from the "head" of the
machine reached back under the metal case, and reappeared grasping
what appeared to be a flat disk of emerald, two inches across and half
an inch thick.

This green disk it held up, with a flat side toward Dan. There was no
sound, but a flash of green light came from it, cutting a wide swath
into the jungle, and littering its path with smoking and flaming
debris.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Dan, expecting something of the kind, had flung himself sidewise
into the shelter of the boulder beside which he had slept. Behind it,
he gathered his feet under him, picked up a rock of convenient size
for throwing, and waited, ready and alert.

He heard the soft humming sound on the other side of the boulder. A
glittering object flashed above him. Crashing through the brush the
metal monster came to earth on the same side of the boulder with him.

But the metal thing had not turned in its flight: consequently its
rear end was toward Dan. As it began cumberously to turn about, he
hurled his rock with an accuracy that came of a boyhood on the farm.
Instinct had made him try for the little ring and needle on the back
of the monster, apparently its most vulnerable part.

Whether by luck or skill, the rock struck the gleaming ring, crushing
it against the needle--and instant paralysis overtook the metal thing.
Its tentacles and limbs became fixed and rigid, and it toppled over in
the brush.

Dan walked over to it, and examined it briefly. The green disk had
fallen on the ground, and he picked it up. It was made of emerald
crystal, it had a little knob of glistening metal set in one side.
Rather afraid of it, Dan forebore to twist the knob. But he still
clutched it in his hand a few moments later, when, partly for fear
that others of its kind would come to succor the fallen monster, and
partly to secure shelter from the threatening rain, he retired into
the shadows of the tangled jungle.

He spent perhaps half an hour in creeping back to what he supposed a
place of comparative safety. For some time he lay there in the cool
gloom, brushing occasional insects off his bare skin, wishing by turns
that he had a cup of coffee and a good beefsteak, and that he could
puzzle out a logical solution of all the astounding things he had met
in the island. After the encounter with the metal monster, he felt his
theory of the hermit scientists a bit inadequate.

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently his attention was attracted by the unmistakable mew of a
kitten. Then he heard the padding sound of cautious human footsteps,
and a clear feminine voice calling "Kitty, kitty," in low tones. The
steps and the voice seemed coming toward him; since there was no sound
of crackling brush, he supposed there was a trail which he had not
found.

"Hello," he ventured, when the voice seemed only a few yards away
through the green tangle.

At the same instant a gray kitten appeared out of the underbrush, and
frisked trustfully across to him. He put out a hand, caressed it,
picked it up. In a moment the feminine voice replied, "Hello yourself.
Who are you?"

A crackling sound came from the brush, as if the speaker were starting
toward him. Dan, abruptly conscious of his lack of attire, said
quickly, "Wait a minute! I haven't anything on, you see. I'm Dan
McNally. I owned the schooner that something happened to off the
island last night."

A delicious, trilling laugh greeted the panic of his first words. Then
the clear, sweet voice, serious again, replied, "So you swam ashore
from the boat I signaled?"

"Yes."

"Gee, but I'm glad to find you! And you say you haven't any clothes? I
wonder what...." The voice paused reflectively, then resumed, "Here's
a sheet that I got to signal with in the daytime, if I had a chance.
You might wrap it around you until we find something better."

The low, liquid laugh rang out again; again there was a rustling in
the brush, and presently an arm appeared, holding a rolled-up sheet.

"All right," he called. "Throw it this way."

       *       *       *       *       *

In a moment, with the sheet draped around him like a Roman toga, and
the kitten on his arm, he advanced to meet the owner of the beautiful
voice.

At the trail he met a trim, active-looking young woman, clad in
out-of-door attire and with a canvas knapsack on her back. Bareheaded,
she wore her brown hair closely shingled. Her face, Dan recognized
from the photograph he had seen five years before, though it was more
lovely than the splotched newspaper picture had hinted. Her brown eyes
were filled with laughter at his predicament and his present unusual
garb.

He bowed with mock gravity and said, "How do you do, Miss Helen
Hunter?"

Brown eyes widened in surprise. "You know me?" she asked.

"Not half so well as I hope to," he grinned.

Then, handing her the kitten, he spoke seriously. "What about this
island? The green flashes? The big machine on the mountain? The metal
thing that jumps about like a grasshopper? What's it all about? You
know anything about it?"

"Yes, I know a good deal about it," she told him soberly. "It's rather
a terrible story. And one you may not believe--no, you've seen them!
But the kitten is hungry, and you must be, too, if you swam ashore."

"Well, yes, I am." Dan admitted.

The storm clouds were drifting out to sea; the sun was beginning to
assert itself, and it now lighted up the scene with a cheerful
brightness. She slung off her pack and sat down cross-legged at the
side of the trail. Dan sat down opposite her as she opened the
knapsack and produced a can of condensed milk, one of sardines, a
can-opener, and half a loaf of bread.

"I had to select my supplies rather at random," she said, "and you'll
have to make the best of them."

She started to open the sardines. "You'd better give it to me," Dan
advised. "You might cut your hand."

"You think so?" she asked, deftly lifting the lid, fishing out a fish
for the kitten, and presenting the can to Dan. Then with capable
hands she broke off a large chunk of bread, which she handed him.

"Go ahead and finish this up," she said. "I've already had breakfast."
She punched two holes in the end of the milk can, and poured some of
the thick yellow fluid into the palm of her left hand, from which she
let the kitten lap it.

"And now for the mystery of the island," Dan demanded, forgetting
bread and sardines in his eagerness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl turned her face to him. "I'm Helen Hunter, as you seem to
know," she began. "I came here with my father five years ago to
observe an eclipse of the sun. When it was all over, and the ship
called to take us off, he decided to send the results of our
observations by one of the other men. He wanted to stay here to carry
on another experiment--the one that led to that machine on the hill.
Part of the other men were willing to stay. The yacht left us here,
and has been back from San Francisco every six months since, with mail
and supplies."

"And what was the experiment?" Dan demanded eagerly.

"Have you ever looked at Mars through a good telescope?" she
countered. "Then you must have seen the canals--straight dark lines
running from the white polar caps to the equatorial zone. All
scientists did not agree as to what they were, but nobody could
suggest a natural origin for them.

"My father was one of those who thought that the canals were fertile,
cultivated strips, irrigated with water brought down from the melting
ice-caps. Irrigation systems meant intelligent life upon the planet,
and his experiment was an attempt to communicate with that
intelligence."

"And he succeeded?" Dan was astounded.

"Yes. The means was simple enough: other men had suggested it years
before, in fact. Any fairly bright light on Mars--such as the beam of
a searchlight directed toward earth--would be visible in a good
telescope, when the planet is favorably situated: it follows that such
a light on earth should be visible to an observer with a similar
instrument on Mars.

"It was possible, of course, but unlikely, that Mars would have
intelligent inhabitants still ignorant of the telescope. It was also
possible that their senses would be different from ours--that, if they
saw at all, it would be with a different part of the spectrum. Father
took the chance. And he succeeded.

"The call was simple: merely three flashes of light, repeated again
and again. We used a portable searchlight, mounted on a motor-truck,
such as is used in the army. The three flashes meant that we were on
the third planet of the solar system. The answering call, from the
fourth planet, should be four flashes, of course.

"For three nights we kept signaling. One of the men watched the
motor-generator, and I operated the searchlight, swinging it on Mars
and off again, to make the flashes. Dad kept his eye screwed to the
telescope. Nothing happened and he got discouraged. I persuaded him to
keep on for another night, in case they hadn't seen us at first; or
needed more time to get their searchlight ready.

"And on the fourth night poor Dad came out of the observatory,
shouting that he had seen four flashes."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dan gasped, speechless with astonishment. "Then that machine, with the
needle pointing at Mars, and the green flashes, and the thing that
jumped at me--"

Helen waved a white hand for silence. "Just keep cool a minute! I'm
coming to them.

"The four flashes just began it. In a few days Dad and the Martians
were communicating by a sort of television process. He would mark off
a sheet of paper into squares, blacken some of the squares to make a
picture or design, then have me send a flash for each black square,
and miss an interval for each white one, taking them in regular order.
The Martians seemed to catch on pretty soon; in a few days Dad was
receiving pictures of the same sort.

