holding more biscuits.

The deckhands and Grundy, the mate, were almost at the door, and I had
just time enough to slam it shut and lock it in their faces. I meant
to enjoy seeing the cook taken down without any interruption.

Sam let out a final yell, and Bullard broke free, making a mess of it
without weight. He was sputtering out bits of the biscuit. Hal Lomax
reached out a big hand, stained with the chemicals that had been his
life's work, and pushed the cook back.

And suddenly fat little Bullard switched from quaking fear to a blind
rage. The last of the biscuit sailed from his mouth and he spat at
Hal. "You damned hi-faluting black devil. You--_you_ sneering at my
cooking. I'm a white man, I am--I don't have to work for no black
ni...."

       *       *       *       *       *

I reached him first, though even Sam started for him then. You can
deliver a good blow in free-fall, if you know how. His teeth against
my knuckles stopped my leap, and the back of his head bounced off the
wall. He was unconscious as he drifted by us, moving upwards. My
knuckles stung, but it had been worth it. Anyhow, Jenny's look more
than paid for the trouble.

The door shattered then, and the big hulk of Mate Grundy tumbled in,
with the two deckhands and the pair from the engine room behind him.
Sam let out a yell that sounded like protest, and they headed for
us--just as gravity came on.

I pulled myself off the floor and out from under Bullard to see the
stout, oldish figure of Captain Muller standing in the doorway, with
Engineer Wilcox slouched easily beside him, looking like the typical
natty space officer you see on television. Both held gas guns.

"All right, break it up!" Muller ordered. "You men get back to your
work. And you, Dr. Pietro--my contract calls for me to deliver you to
Saturn's moon, but it doesn't forbid me to haul you the rest of the
way in irons. I won't have this aboard my ship!"

Pietro nodded, his little gray goatee bobbing, his lean body coming
upright smoothly. "Quite right, Captain. Nor does it forbid me to let
you and your men spend the sixteen months on the moon--where _I_
command--in irons. Why don't you ask Sam what happened before you make
a complete fool of yourself, Captain Muller?"

Sam gulped and looked at the crew, but apparently Pietro was right;
the little guy had been completely disgusted by Bullard. He shrugged
apologetically. "Bullard insulted Dr. Lomax, sir. I yelled for someone
to help me get him out of here, and I guess everybody got all mixed up
when gravity went off, and Bullard cracked his head on the floor. Just
a misunderstanding, sir."

Muller stood there, glowering at the cut on my knuckles, and I could
feel him aching for a good excuse to make his threat a reality. But
finally, he grunted and swung on his heel, ordering the crew with him.
Grundy threw us a final grimace and skulked off behind him. Finally
there was only Wilcox, who grinned, shrugged, and shut the door
quietly behind him. And we were left with the mess free-fall had made
of the place.

I spotted Jenny heading across the room, carefully not seeing the
fatuous glances Pietro was throwing her way, and I swung in behind.
She nodded back at me, but headed straight for Lomax, with an odd look
on her face. When she reached him, her voice was low and businesslike.

"Hal, what did those samples of Hendrix's show up?"

Hendrix was the Farmer, in charge of the hydroponics that turned the
carbon dioxide we breathed out back to oxygen, and also gave us a bit
of fresh vegetables now and then. Technically, he was a crewman, just
as I was a scientist; but actually, he felt more like one of us.

Lomax looked surprised. "What samples, Jenny? I haven't seen Hendrix
for two weeks."

"You--" She stopped, bit her lip, and frowned. She swung on me. "Paul,
have you seen him?"

I shook my head. "Not since last night. He was asking Eve and Walt to
wake him up early, then."

"That's funny. He was worried about the plants yesterday and wanted
Hal to test the water and chemical fertilizer. I looked for him this
morning, but when he didn't show up, I thought he was with you, Hal.
And--the plants are dying!"

"All of them?" The half smile wiped off Hal's face, and I could feel
my stomach hit my insteps. When anything happens to the plants in a
ship, it isn't funny.

She shook her head again. "No--about a quarter of them. I was coming
for help when the fight started. They're all bleached out. And it
looks like--like chromazone!"

That really hit me. They developed the stuff to fight off fungus on
Venus, where one part in a billion did the trick. But it was tricky
stuff; one part in ten-million would destroy the chlorophyll in
plants in about twenty hours, or the hemoglobin in blood in about
fifteen minutes. It was practically a universal poison.

Hal started for the door, then stopped. He glanced around the room,
turned back to me, and suddenly let out a healthy bellow of seeming
amusement. Jenny's laugh was right in harmony. I caught the drift, and
tried to look as if we were up to some monkey business as we slipped
out of the room. Nobody seemed suspicious.

Then we made a dash for hydroponics, toward the rear of the ship. We
scrambled into the big chamber together, and stopped. Everything
looked normal among the rows of plant-filled tanks, pipes and
equipment. Jenny led us down one of the rows and around a bend.

The plants in the rear quarter weren't sick--they were dead. They were
bleached to a pale yellow, like boiled grass, and limp. Nothing would
save them now.

"I'm a biologist, not a botanist--" Jenny began.

Hal grunted sickly. "Yeah. And I'm not a life hormone expert. But
there's one test we can try."

He picked up a pair of rubber gloves from a rack, and pulled off some
wilted stalks. From one of the healthy tanks, he took green leaves. He
mashed the two kinds together on the edge of a bench and watched. "If
it's chromazone, they've developed an enzyme by now that should eat
the color out of those others."

       *       *       *       *       *

In about ten seconds, I noticed the change. The green began to bleach
before my eyes.

Jenny made a sick sound in her throat and stared at the rows of
healthy plants. "I checked the valves, and this sick section is
isolated. But--if chromazone got into the chemicals.... Better get your
spectroanalyzer out, Hal, while I get Captain Muller. Paul, be a dear
and find Hendrix, will you?"

I shook my head, and went further down the rows. "No need, Jenny," I
called back. I pointed to the shoe I'd seen sticking out from the edge
of one of the tanks. There was a leg attached.

I reached for it, but Lomax shoved me back. "Don't--the enzymes in the
corpse are worse than the poison, Paul. Hands off." He reached down
with the gloves and heaved. It was Hendrix, all right--a corpse with a
face and hands as white as human flesh could ever get. Even the lips
were bleached out.

Jenny moaned. "The fool! The stupid fool. He _knew_ it was dangerous
without gloves; he suspected chromazone, even though none's supposed
to be on board. And I warned him . . ."

"Not against this, you didn't," I told her. I dropped to my knees and
took another pair of gloves. Hendrix's head rolled under my grasp. The
skull was smashed over the left eye, as if someone had taken a
sideswipe at Hendrix with a hammer. No fall had produced that. "You
should have warned him about his friends. Must have been killed, then
dumped in there."

"Murder!" Hal bit the word out in disgust. "You're right, Paul. Not
too stupid a way to dispose of the body, either--in another couple of
hours, he'd have started dissolving in that stuff, and we'd never have
guessed it was murder. That means this poisoning of the plants wasn't
an accident. Somebody poisoned the water, then got worried when there
wasn't a report on the plants; must have been someone who thought it
worked faster on plants than it does. So he came to investigate, and
Hendrix caught him fooling around. So he got killed."

"But who?" Jenny asked.

I shrugged sickly. "Somebody crazy enough--or desperate enough to turn
back that he'll risk our air and commit murder. You'd better go after
the captain while Hal gets his test equipment. I'll keep watch here."

It didn't feel good in hydroponics after they left. I looked at those
dead plants, trying to figure whether there were enough left to keep
us going. I studied Hendrix's body, trying to tell myself the murderer
had no reason to come back and try to get me.

I reached for a cigarette, and then put the pack back. The air felt
almost as close as the back of my neck felt tense and unprotected. And
telling myself it was all imagination didn't help--not with what was
in that chamber to keep me company.


II

Muller's face was like an iceberg when he came down--but only after he
saw Hendrix. Before then I'd caught the fat moon-calf expression on
his face, and I'd heard Jenny giggling. Damn it, they'd taken enough
time. Hal was already back, fussing over things with the hunk of tin
and lenses he treated like a newborn baby.

Doc Napier came in behind them, but separately. I saw him glance at
them and look sick. Then both Muller and Napier began concentrating on
business. Napier bent his nervous, bony figure over the corpse, and
stood up almost at once. "Murder all right."

"So I guessed, Dr. Napier," Muller growled heavily at him. "Wrap him
up and put him between hulls to freeze. We'll bury him when we land.
Tremaine, give a hand with it, will you?"

"I'm not a laborer, Captain Muller!" Napier protested. I started to
tell him where he could get off, too.

But Jenny shook her head at us. "Please. Can't you see Captain Muller
is trying to keep too many from knowing about this? I should think
you'd be glad to help. Please?"

Put that way, I guess it made sense. We found some rubber sheeting in
one of the lockers, and began wrapping Hendrix in it; it wasn't
pleasant, since he was beginning to soften up from the enzymes he'd
absorbed. "How about going ahead to make sure no one sees us?" I
suggested to Jenny.

Muller opened his mouth, but Jenny gave one of her quick little laughs
and opened the door for us. Doc looked relieved. I guessed he was
trying to kid himself. Personally, I wasn't a fool--I was just hooked;
I knew perfectly well she was busy playing us off against one another,
and probably having a good time balancing the books. But hell, that's
the way life runs.

"Get Pietro up here!" Muller fired after us. She laughed again, and
nodded. She went with us until we got to the 'tween-hulls lock, then
went off after the chief. She was back with him just as we finished
stuffing Hendrix through and sealing up again.

Muller grunted at us when we got back, then turned to Lomax again. The
big chemist didn't look happy. He spread his hands toward us, and
hunched his shoulders. "A fifty-times over-dose of chromazone in those
tanks--fortunately none in the others. And I can't find a trace of it
in the fertilizer chemicals or anywhere else. Somebody deliberately
put it into those tanks."

"Why?" Pietro asked. We'd filled him in with the rough details, but it
still made no sense to him.

"Suppose you tell me, Dr. Pietro," Muller suggested. "Chromazone is a
poison most people never heard of. One of the new _scientific_
nuisances."

Pietro straightened, and his goatee bristled. "If you're hinting . . ."

