
"I don't doubt your willingness, Fra Rafael," I said. "But it's
necessary to be practical. It's dangerous and it's cold up there. Your
presence would only handicap me. Alone, I can go faster--remember, I
don't know how far I'll have to travel."

The priest sighed. "I suppose you are right. When--"

"Now. My burro's packed."

"Your porters?"

"They won't go," I said wryly. "They've been talking to your
villagers. It doesn't matter. I'll go it alone." I put out my hand,
and Fra Rafael gripped it strongly.

"_Vaya con Dios_," he said.

I went out into the bright Peruvian sunlight. The Indios were standing
in straggling knots, pretending not to watch me. My porters were
nowhere in evidence. I grinned, yelled a sardonic goodbye, and started
to lead the burro toward the Pass.

The fog vanished as the sun rose, but it still lay in the mountain
canyons toward the west. A condor circled against the sky. In the
thin, sharp air the sound of a distant rock-fall was distinctly
audible.

White Huascan towered far away. A shadow fell on me as I entered the
Pass. The burro plodded on, patient and obedient. I felt a little
chill; the fog began to thicken.

Yes, the Indios had talked to me. I knew their language, their old
religion. Bastard descendants of the Incas, they still preserved a
deep-rooted belief in the ancient gods of their ancient race, who had
fallen with Huayna Capac, the Great Inca, a year before Pizarro came
raging into Peru. I knew the Quichua--the old tongue of the mother
race--and so I learned more than I might have otherwise.

Yet I had not learned much. The Indios said that _something_ had come
into the mountains near Huascan. They were willing to talk about it,
but they knew little. They shrugged with apathetic fatalism. _It_
called the young virgins, no doubt for a sacrifice. _Quien sabe?_
Certainly the strange, thickening fog was not of this earth. Never
before in the history of mankind had there been such a fog. It was, of
course, the earthquake that had brought the--the Visitant. And it was
folly to seek it out.

Well, I was an anthropologist and knew the value of even such slight
clues as this. Moreover, my job for the Foundation was done. My
specimens had been sent through to Callao by pack-train, and my notes
were safe with Fra Rafael. Also, I was young and the lure of far
places and their mysteries was hot in my blood. I hoped I'd find
something odd--even dangerous--at Huascan.

I was young. Therefore, somewhat of a fool....

The first night I camped in a little cave, sheltered from the wind and
snug enough in my fleece-lined sleeping-bag. There were no insects at
this height. It was impossible to make a fire for there was no wood. I
worried a bit about the burro freezing in the night.

But he survived, and I repacked him the next morning with rather
absurd cheerfulness. The fog was thick, yes, but not impenetrable.

There were tracks in the snow where the wind had not covered them. A
girl had left the village the day before my arrival, which made my
task all the easier. So I went up into that vast, desolate silence,
the fog closing in steadily, getting thicker and thicker, the trail
getting narrower until at last it was a mere track.

And then I was moving blind. I had to feel my way, step by step,
leading the burro. Occasional tracks showed through the mist, showed
that the native girl had walked swiftly--had run in places--so I
assumed that the fog was less dense when she had come by this way. As
it happened, I was quite wrong about that....

We were on a narrow path above a gorge when I lost the burro. I heard
a scrambling and clashing of hoofs on rock behind me. The rope jerked
out of my hand and the animal cried out almost articulately as it went
over. I stood frozen, pressing against the stone, listening to the
sound of the burro's fall. Finally the distant noise died in a faint
trickling of snow and gravel that faded into utter silence. So thick
was the fog that I had seen nothing.

I felt my way back to where the path had crumbled and rotten rock had
given way under the burro's weight. It was possible for me to retrace
my steps, but I did not. I was sure that my destination could not be
much further. A lightly clad native girl could not have gone so far as
Huascan itself. No, probably that day I would reach my goal.

So I went on, feeling my way through the thick silent fog. I was able
to see only a few inches ahead of me for hours. Then, abruptly the
trail grew clearer. Until, at last I was moving in the shadowless,
unearthly mist over hard-packed snow, following the clearly marked
footprints of a girl's sandals.

Then they vanished without warning, those prints, and I stood
hesitant, staring around. I could see nothing, but a brighter glow in
the misty canopy overhead marked the sun's position.

I knelt and brushed away the snow with my hands, hoping to undo the
wind's concealing work. But I found no more footprints. Finally I took
my bearings as well as I could and ploughed ahead in the general
direction the girl had been traveling.

My compass told me I was heading due north.

The fog was a living, sentient thing now, secretive, shrouding the
secret that lay beyond its gray wall.

Suddenly I was conscious of a change. An electric tingle coursed
through my body. Abruptly the fog-wall brightened. Dimly, as through a
translucent pane, I could make out vague images ahead of me.

I began to move toward the images--and suddenly the fog was gone!

Before me lay a valley. Blue-white moss carpeted it except where
reddish boulders broke the blueness. Here and there were trees--at
least I assumed they were trees, despite their unfamiliar outline.
They were like banyans, having dozens of trunks narrow as bamboo.
Blue-leafed, they stood like immense bird-cages on the pallid moss.
The fog closed in behind the valley and above it. It was like being in
a huge sun-lit cavern.

I turned my head, saw a gray wall behind me. Beneath my feet the snow
was melting and running in tiny, trickling rivulets among the moss.
The air was warm and stimulating as wine.

