traversed half a mile or so when suddenly the sound was repeated, still
behind me, but louder and more menacing than before.  My heart stood
still within me as it flashed across me that the beast, whatever it
was, must surely be after ME.   My skin grew cold and my hair rose at
the thought.  That these monsters should tear each other to pieces was
a part of the strange struggle for existence, but that they should turn
upon modern man, that they should deliberately track and hunt down the
predominant human, was a staggering and fearsome thought.  I remembered
again the blood-beslobbered face which we had seen in the glare of Lord
John's torch, like some horrible vision from the deepest circle of
Dante's hell.  With my knees shaking beneath me, I stood and glared
with starting eyes down the moonlit path which lay behind me.  All was
quiet as in a dream landscape.  Silver clearings and the black patches
of the bushes--nothing else could I see.  Then from out of the silence,
imminent and threatening, there came once more that low, throaty
croaking, far louder and closer than before.  There could no longer be
a doubt.  Something was on my trail, and was closing in upon me every
minute.

I stood like a man paralyzed, still staring at the ground which I had
traversed.  Then suddenly I saw it.  There was movement among the
bushes at the far end of the clearing which I had just traversed.  A
great dark shadow disengaged itself and hopped out into the clear
moonlight.  I say "hopped" advisedly, for the beast moved like a
kangaroo, springing along in an erect position upon its powerful hind
legs, while its front ones were held bent in front of it.  It was of
enormous size and power, like an erect elephant, but its movements, in
spite of its bulk, were exceedingly alert.  For a moment, as I saw its
shape, I hoped that it was an iguanodon, which I knew to be harmless,
but, ignorant as I was, I soon saw that this was a very different
creature.  Instead of the gentle, deer-shaped head of the great
three-toed leaf-eater, this beast had a broad, squat, toad-like face
like that which had alarmed us in our camp.  His ferocious cry and the
horrible energy of his pursuit both assured me that this was surely one
of the great flesh-eating dinosaurs, the most terrible beasts which
have ever walked this earth.  As the huge brute loped along it dropped
forward upon its fore-paws and brought its nose to the ground every
twenty yards or so.  It was smelling out my trail.  Sometimes, for an
instant, it was at fault.  Then it would catch it up again and come
bounding swiftly along the path I had taken.

Even now when I think of that nightmare the sweat breaks out upon my
brow.  What could I do?  My useless fowling-piece was in my hand.  What
help could I get from that?  I looked desperately round for some rock
or tree, but I was in a bushy jungle with nothing higher than a sapling
within sight, while I knew that the creature behind me could tear down
an ordinary tree as though it were a reed.  My only possible chance lay
in flight.  I could not move swiftly over the rough, broken ground, but
as I looked round me in despair I saw a well-marked, hard-beaten path
which ran across in front of me.  We had seen several of the sort, the
runs of various wild beasts, during our expeditions.  Along this I
could perhaps hold my own, for I was a fast runner, and in excellent
condition.  Flinging away my useless gun, I set myself to do such a
half-mile as I have never done before or since.  My limbs ached, my
chest heaved, I felt that my throat would burst for want of air, and
yet with that horror behind me I ran and I ran and ran.  At last I
paused, hardly able to move.  For a moment I thought that I had thrown
him off.  The path lay still behind me.  And then suddenly, with a
crashing and a rending, a thudding of giant feet and a panting of
monster lungs the beast was upon me once more.  He was at my very
heels.  I was lost.

Madman that I was to linger so long before I fled!  Up to then he had
hunted by scent, and his movement was slow.  But he had actually seen
me as I started to run.  From then onwards he had hunted by sight, for
the path showed him where I had gone.  Now, as he came round the curve,
he was springing in great bounds.  The moonlight shone upon his huge
projecting eyes, the row of enormous teeth in his open mouth, and the
gleaming fringe of claws upon his short, powerful forearms.  With a
scream of terror I turned and rushed wildly down the path.  Behind me
the thick, gasping breathing of the creature sounded louder and louder.
His heavy footfall was beside me.  Every instant I expected to feel his
grip upon my back.  And then suddenly there came a crash--I was falling
through space, and everything beyond was darkness and rest.

As I emerged from my unconsciousness--which could not, I think, have
lasted more than a few minutes--I was aware of a most dreadful and
penetrating smell.  Putting out my hand in the darkness I came upon
something which felt like a huge lump of meat, while my other hand
closed upon a large bone.  Up above me there was a circle of starlit
sky, which showed me that I was lying at the bottom of a deep pit.
Slowly I staggered to my feet and felt myself all over.  I was stiff
and sore from head to foot, but there was no limb which would not move,
no joint which would not bend.  As the circumstances of my fall came
back into my confused brain, I looked up in terror, expecting to see
that dreadful head silhouetted against the paling sky.  There was no
sign of the monster, however, nor could I hear any sound from above.  I
began to walk slowly round, therefore, feeling in every direction to
find out what this strange place could be into which I had been so
opportunely precipitated.

It was, as I have said, a pit, with sharply-sloping walls and a level
bottom about twenty feet across.  This bottom was littered with great
gobbets of flesh, most of which was in the last state of putridity.
The atmosphere was poisonous and horrible.  After tripping and
stumbling over these lumps of decay, I came suddenly against something
hard, and I found that an upright post was firmly fixed in the center
of the hollow.  It was so high that I could not reach the top of it
with my hand, and it appeared to be covered with grease.

Suddenly I remembered that I had a tin box of wax-vestas in my pocket.
Striking one of them, I was able at last to form some opinion of this
place into which I had fallen.  There could be no question as to its
nature.  It was a trap--made by the hand of man.  The post in the
center, some nine feet long, was sharpened at the upper end, and was
black with the stale blood of the creatures who had been impaled upon
it.  The remains scattered about were fragments of the victims, which
had been cut away in order to clear the stake for the next who might
blunder in.  I remembered that Challenger had declared that man could
not exist upon the plateau, since with his feeble weapons he could not
hold his own against the monsters who roamed over it.  But now it was
clear enough how it could be done.  In their narrow-mouthed caves the
natives, whoever they might be, had refuges into which the huge
saurians could not penetrate, while with their developed brains they
were capable of setting such traps, covered with branches, across the
paths which marked the run of the animals as would destroy them in
spite of all their strength and activity.  Man was always the master.

The sloping wall of the pit was not difficult for an active man to
climb, but I hesitated long before I trusted myself within reach of the
dreadful creature which had so nearly destroyed me.  How did I know
that he was not lurking in the nearest clump of bushes, waiting for my
reappearance?  I took heart, however, as I recalled a conversation
between Challenger and Summerlee upon the habits of the great saurians.
Both were agreed that the monsters were practically brainless, that
there was no room for reason in their tiny cranial cavities, and that
if they have disappeared from the rest of the world it was assuredly on
account of their own stupidity, which made it impossible for them to
adapt themselves to changing conditions.

To lie in wait for me now would mean that the creature had appreciated
what had happened to me, and this in turn would argue some power
connecting cause and effect.  Surely it was more likely that a
brainless creature, acting solely by vague predatory instinct, would
give up the chase when I disappeared, and, after a pause of
astonishment, would wander away in search of some other prey?  I
clambered to the edge of the pit and looked over.  The stars were
fading, the sky was whitening, and the cold wind of morning blew
pleasantly upon my face.  I could see or hear nothing of my enemy.
Slowly I climbed out and sat for a while upon the ground, ready to
spring back into my refuge if any danger should appear.  Then,
reassured by the absolute stillness and by the growing light, I took my
courage in both hands and stole back along the path which I had come.
Some distance down it I picked up my gun, and shortly afterwards struck
the brook which was my guide.  So, with many a frightened backward
glance, I made for home.

And suddenly there came something to remind me of my absent companions.
In the clear, still morning air there sounded far away the sharp, hard
note of a single rifle-shot.  I paused and listened, but there was
nothing more.  For a moment I was shocked at the thought that some
sudden danger might have befallen them.  But then a simpler and more
natural explanation came to my mind.  It was now broad daylight.  No
doubt my absence had been noticed.  They had imagined, that I was lost
in the woods, and had fired this shot to guide me home.  It is true
that we had made a strict resolution against firing, but if it seemed
to them that I might be in danger they would not hesitate.  It was for
me now to hurry on as fast as possible, and so to reassure them.

I was weary and spent, so my progress was not so fast as I wished; but
at last I came into regions which I knew.  There was the swamp of the
pterodactyls upon my left; there in front of me was the glade of the
iguanodons.  Now I was in the last belt of trees which separated me
from Fort Challenger.  I raised my voice in a cheery shout to allay
their fears.  No answering greeting came back to me.  My heart sank at
that ominous stillness.  I quickened my pace into a run.  The zareba
rose before me, even as I had left it, but the gate was open.  I rushed
in.  In the cold, morning light it was a fearful sight which met my
eyes.  Our effects were scattered in wild confusion over the ground; my
comrades had disappeared, and close to the smouldering ashes of our
fire the grass was stained crimson with a hideous pool of blood.

I was so stunned by this sudden shock that for a time I must have
nearly lost my reason.  I have a vague recollection, as one remembers a
bad dream, of rushing about through the woods all round the empty camp,
calling wildly for my companions.  No answer came back from the silent
shadows.  The horrible thought that I might never see them again, that
I might find myself abandoned all alone in that dreadful place, with no
possible way of descending into the world below, that I might live and
die in that nightmare country, drove me to desperation.  I could have
torn my hair and beaten my head in my despair.  Only now did I realize
how I had learned to lean upon my companions, upon the serene
self-confidence of Challenger, and upon the masterful, humorous
coolness of Lord John Roxton.  Without them I was like a child in the
dark, helpless and powerless.  I did not know which way to turn or what
I should do first.

After a period, during which I sat in bewilderment, I set myself to try
and discover what sudden misfortune could have befallen my companions.
The whole disordered appearance of the camp showed that there had been
some sort of attack, and the rifle-shot no doubt marked the time when
it had occurred.  That there should have been only one shot showed that
it had been all over in an instant.  The rifles still lay upon the
ground, and one of them--Lord John's--had the empty cartridge in the
breech.  The blankets of Challenger and of Summerlee beside the fire
suggested that they had been asleep at the time.  The cases of
ammunition and of food were scattered about in a wild litter, together
with our unfortunate cameras and plate-carriers, but none of them were
missing.  On the other hand, all the exposed provisions--and I
remembered that there were a considerable quantity of them--were gone.
They were animals, then, and not natives, who had made the inroad, for
surely the latter would have left nothing behind.

But if animals, or some single terrible animal, then what had become of
my comrades?  A ferocious beast would surely have destroyed them and
left their remains.  It is true that there was that one hideous pool of
blood, which told of violence.  Such a monster as had pursued me during
the night could have carried away a victim as easily as a cat would a
mouse.  In that case the others would have followed in pursuit.  But
then they would assuredly have taken their rifles with them.  The more
I tried to think it out with my confused and weary brain the less could
I find any plausible explanation.  I searched round in the forest, but
could see no tracks which could help me to a conclusion.  Once I lost
myself, and it was only by good luck, and after an hour of wandering,
that I found the camp once more.

Suddenly a thought came to me and brought some little comfort to my
heart.  I was not absolutely alone in the world.  Down at the bottom of
the cliff, and within call of me, was waiting the faithful Zambo.  I
went to the edge of the plateau and looked over.  Sure enough, he was
squatting among his blankets beside his fire in his little camp.  But,
to my amazement, a second man was seated in front of him.  For an
instant my heart leaped for joy, as I thought that one of my comrades
had made his way safely down.  But a second glance dispelled the hope.
The rising sun shone red upon the man's skin.  He was an Indian.  I
shouted loudly and waved my handkerchief.  Presently Zambo looked up,
waved his hand, and turned to ascend the pinnacle.  In a short time he
was standing close to me and listening with deep distress to the story
which I told him.

"Devil got them for sure, Massa Malone," said he.  "You got into the
devil's country, sah, and he take you all to himself.  You take advice,
Massa Malone, and come down quick, else he get you as well."

"How can I come down, Zambo?"

"You get creepers from trees, Massa Malone.  Throw them over here.  I
make fast to this stump, and so you have bridge."

"We have thought of that.  There are no creepers here which could bear
us."

"Send for ropes, Massa Malone."

"Who can I send, and where?"

"Send to Indian villages, sah.  Plenty hide rope in Indian village.
Indian down below; send him."

"Who is he?

"One of our Indians.  Other ones beat him and take away his pay.  He
come back to us.  Ready now to take letter, bring rope,--anything."

To take a letter!  Why not?  Perhaps he might bring help; but in any
case he would ensure that our lives were not spent for nothing, and
that news of all that we had won for Science should reach our friends
at home.  I had two completed letters already waiting.  I would spend
the day in writing a third, which would bring my experiences absolutely
up to date.  The Indian could bear this back to the world.  I ordered
Zambo, therefore, to come again in the evening, and I spent my
miserable and lonely day in recording my own adventures of the night
before.  I also drew up a note, to be given to any white merchant or
captain of a steam-boat whom the Indian could find, imploring them to
see that ropes were sent to us, since our lives must depend upon it.
These documents I threw to Zambo in the evening, and also my purse,
which contained three English sovereigns.  These were to be given to
the Indian, and he was promised twice as much if he returned with the
ropes.

So now you will understand, my dear Mr. McArdle, how this communication
reaches you, and you will also know the truth, in case you never hear
again from your unfortunate correspondent.  To-night I am too weary and
too depressed to make my plans.  To-morrow I must think out some way by
which I shall keep in touch with this camp, and yet search round for
any traces of my unhappy friends.




                           CHAPTER XIII

               "A Sight which I shall Never Forget"

Just as the sun was setting upon that melancholy night I saw the lonely
figure of the Indian upon the vast plain beneath me, and I watched him,
our one faint hope of salvation, until he disappeared in the rising
mists of evening which lay, rose-tinted from the setting sun, between
the far-off river and me.

It was quite dark when I at last turned back to our stricken camp, and
my last vision as I went was the red gleam of Zambo's fire, the one
point of light in the wide world below, as was his faithful presence in
my own shadowed soul.  And yet I felt happier than I had done since
this crushing blow had fallen upon me, for it was good to think that
the world should know what we had done, so that at the worst our names
should not perish with our bodies, but should go down to posterity
associated with the result of our labors.

It was an awesome thing to sleep in that ill-fated camp; and yet it was
even more unnerving to do so in the jungle.  One or the other it must
be.  Prudence, on the one hand, warned me that I should remain on
guard, but exhausted Nature, on the other, declared that I should do
nothing of the kind.  I climbed up on to a limb of the great gingko
tree, but there was no secure perch on its rounded surface, and I
should certainly have fallen off and broken my neck the moment I began
to doze.  I got down, therefore, and pondered over what I should do.
Finally, I closed the door of the zareba, lit three separate fires in a
triangle, and having eaten a hearty supper dropped off into a profound
sleep, from which I had a strange and most welcome awakening.  In the
early morning, just as day was breaking, a hand was laid upon my arm,
and starting up, with all my nerves in a tingle and my hand feeling for
a rifle, I gave a cry of joy as in the cold gray light I saw Lord John
Roxton kneeling beside me.

It was he--and yet it was not he.  I had left him calm in his bearing,
correct in his person, prim in his dress.  Now he was pale and
wild-eyed, gasping as he breathed like one who has run far and fast.
His gaunt face was scratched and bloody, his clothes were hanging in
rags, and his hat was gone.  I stared in amazement, but he gave me no
chance for questions.  He was grabbing at our stores all the time he
spoke.

"Quick, young fellah!  Quick!" he cried.  "Every moment counts.  Get
the rifles, both of them.  I have the other two.  Now, all the
cartridges you can gather.  Fill up your pockets.  Now, some food.
Half a dozen tins will do.  That's all right!  Don't wait to talk or
think.  Get a move on, or we are done!"

Still half-awake, and unable to imagine what it all might mean, I found
myself hurrying madly after him through the wood, a rifle under each
arm and a pile of various stores in my hands.  He dodged in and out
through the thickest of the scrub until he came to a dense clump of
brush-wood.  Into this he rushed, regardless of thorns, and threw
himself into the heart of it, pulling me down by his side.

"There!" he panted.  "I think we are safe here.  They'll make for the
camp as sure as fate.  It will be their first idea.  But this should
puzzle 'em."

"What is it all?" I asked, when I had got my breath.  "Where are the
professors?  And who is it that is after us?"

"The ape-men," he cried.  "My God, what brutes!  Don't raise your
voice, for they have long ears--sharp eyes, too, but no power of scent,
so far as I could judge, so I don't think they can sniff us out.  Where
have you been, young fellah?  You were well out of it."

In a few sentences I whispered what I had done.

"Pretty bad," said he, when he had heard of the dinosaur and the pit.
"It isn't quite the place for a rest cure.  What?  But I had no idea
what its possibilities were until those devils got hold of us.  The
man-eatin' Papuans had me once, but they are Chesterfields compared to
this crowd."

"How did it happen?" I asked.

"It was in the early mornin'.  Our learned friends were just stirrin'.
Hadn't even begun to argue yet.  Suddenly it rained apes.  They came
down as thick as apples out of a tree.  They had been assemblin' in the
dark, I suppose, until that great tree over our heads was heavy with
them.  I shot one of them through the belly, but before we knew where
we were they had us spread-eagled on our backs.  I call them apes, but
they carried sticks and stones in their hands and jabbered talk to each
other, and ended up by tyin' our hands with creepers, so they are ahead
of any beast that I have seen in my wanderin's.  Ape-men--that's what
they are--Missin' Links, and I wish they had stayed missin'.  They
carried off their wounded comrade--he was bleedin' like a pig--and then
they sat around us, and if ever I saw frozen murder it was in their
faces.  They were big fellows, as big as a man and a deal stronger.
Curious glassy gray eyes they have, under red tufts, and they just sat
and gloated and gloated.  Challenger is no chicken, but even he was
cowed.  He managed to struggle to his feet, and yelled out at them to
have done with it and get it over.  I think he had gone a bit off his
head at the suddenness of it, for he raged and cursed at them like a
lunatic.  If they had been a row of his favorite Pressmen he could not
have slanged them worse."

"Well, what did they do?"  I was enthralled by the strange story which
my companion was whispering into my ear, while all the time his keen
eyes were shooting in every direction and his hand grasping his cocked
rifle.

"I thought it was the end of us, but instead of that it started them on
a new line.  They all jabbered and chattered together.  Then one of
them stood out beside Challenger.  You'll smile, young fellah, but 'pon
my word they might have been kinsmen.  I couldn't have believed it if I
hadn't seen it with my own eyes.  This old ape-man--he was their
chief--was a sort of red Challenger, with every one of our friend's
beauty points, only just a trifle more so.  He had the short body, the
big shoulders, the round chest, no neck, a great ruddy frill of a
beard, the tufted eyebrows, the 'What do you want, damn you!' look
about the eyes, and the whole catalogue.  When the ape-man stood by
Challenger and put his paw on his shoulder, the thing was complete.
Summerlee was a bit hysterical, and he laughed till he cried.  The
ape-men laughed too--or at least they put up the devil of a
cacklin'--and they set to work to drag us off through the forest.  They
wouldn't touch the guns and things--thought them dangerous, I
expect--but they carried away all our loose food.  Summerlee and I got
some rough handlin' on the way--there's my skin and my clothes to prove
it--for they took us a bee-line through the brambles, and their own
hides are like leather.  But Challenger was all right.  Four of them
carried him shoulder high, and he went like a Roman emperor.  What's
that?"

It was a strange clicking noise in the distance not unlike castanets.

"There they go!" said my companion, slipping cartridges into the second
double barrelled "Express."  "Load them all up, young fellah my lad,
for we're not going to be taken alive, and don't you think it!  That's
the row they make when they are excited.  By George! they'll have
something to excite them if they put us up.  The 'Last Stand of the
Grays' won't be in it.   'With their rifles grasped in their stiffened
hands, mid a ring of the dead and dyin',' as some fathead sings.  Can
you hear them now?"

"Very far away."

