home should be called "Nina's Hive."

The first care of Captain Servadac was to ascertain how he could make
the best possible use of the heat which nature had provided for them
so opportunely and with so lavish a hand. By opening fresh vents in the
solid rock (which by the action of the heat was here capable of fissure)
the stream of burning lava was diverted into several new channels, where
it could be available for daily use; and thus Mochel, the _Dobryna's_
cook, was furnished with an admirable kitchen, provided with a permanent
stove, where he was duly installed with all his culinary apparatus.

"What a saving of expense it would be," exclaimed Ben Zoof, "if every
household could be furnished with its own private volcano!"

The large cavern at the general junction of the galleries was fitted up
as a drawing-room, and arranged with all the best furniture both of the
gourbi and of the cabin of the _Dobryna_. Hither was also brought the
schooner's library, containing a good variety of French and Russian
books; lamps were suspended over the different tables; and the walls of
the apartment were tapestried with the sails and adorned with the flags
belonging to the yacht. The curtain of fire extending over the opening
of the cavern provided it, as already stated, with light and heat.

The torrent of lava fell into a small rock-bound basin that had no
apparent communication with the sea, and was evidently the aperture of
a deep abyss, of which the waters, heated by the descent of the eruptive
matter, would no doubt retain their liquid condition long after the
Gallian Sea had become a sheet of ice.

A small excavation to the left of the common hall was allotted for
the special use of Servadac and the count; another on the right was
appropriated to the lieutenant and Ben Zoof; whilst a third recess,
immediately at the back, made a convenient little chamber for Nina. The
Spaniards and the Russian sailors took up their sleeping-quarters in the
adjacent galleries, and found the temperature quite comfortable.

Such were the internal arrangements of Nina's Hive, the refuge where
the little colony were full of hope that they would be able to brave
the rigors of the stern winter-time that lay before them--a winter-time
during which Gallia might possibly be projected even to the orbit of
Jupiter, where the temperature would not exceed one twenty-fifth of the
normal winter temperature of the earth.

The only discontented spirit was Isaac Hakkabut. Throughout all the
preparations which roused even the Spaniards to activity, the Jew,
still incredulous and deaf to every representation of the true state of
things, insisted upon remaining in the creek at Gourbi Island; nothing
could induce him to leave his tartan, where, like a miser, he would keep
guard over his precious cargo, ever grumbling and growling, but with his
weather-eye open in the hope of catching sight of some passing sail. It
must be owned that the whole party were far from sorry to be relieved
of his presence; his uncomely figure and repulsive countenance was
a perpetual bugbear. He had given out in plain terms that he did not
intend to part with any of his property, except for current money, and
Servadac, equally resolute, had strictly forbidden any purchases to be
made, hoping to wear out the rascal's obstinacy.

Hakkabut persistently refused to credit the real situation; he could
not absolutely deny that some portions of the terrestrial globe had
undergone a certain degree of modification, but nothing could bring him
to believe that he was not, sooner or later, to resume his old line of
business in the Mediterranean. With his wonted distrust of all with whom
he came in contact, he regarded every argument that was urged upon him
only as evidence of a plot that had been devised to deprive him of his
goods. Repudiating, as he did utterly, the hypothesis that a fragment
had become detached from the earth, he scanned the horizon for hours
together with an old telescope, the case of which had been patched up
till it looked like a rusty stove-pipe, hoping to descry the passing
trader with which he might effect some bartering upon advantageous
terms.

At first he professed to regard the proposed removal into
winter-quarters as an attempt to impose upon his credulity; but the
frequent voyages made by the _Dobryna_ to the south, and the repeated
consignments of corn and cattle, soon served to make him aware that
Captain Servadac and his companions were really contemplating a
departure from Gourbi Island.

The movement set him thinking. What, he began to ask himself--what
if all that was told him was true? What if this sea was no longer
the Mediterranean? What if he should never again behold his German
fatherland? What if his marts for business were gone for ever? A vague
idea of ruin began to take possession of his mind: he must yield
to necessity; he must do the best he could. As the result of his
cogitations, he occasionally left his tartan and made a visit to the
shore. At length he endeavored to mingle with the busy group, who were
hurrying on their preparations; but his advances were only met by jeers
and scorn, and, ridiculed by all the rest, he was fain to turn his
attention to Ben Zoof, to whom he offered a few pinches of tobacco.

"No, old Zebulon," said Ben Zoof, steadily refusing the gift, "it is
against orders to take anything from you. Keep your cargo to yourself;
eat and drink it all if you can; we are not to touch it."

Finding the subordinates incorruptible, Isaac determined to go to the
fountain-head. He addressed himself to Servadac, and begged him to tell
him the whole truth, piteously adding that surely it was unworthy of a
French officer to deceive a poor old man like himself.

"Tell you the truth, man!" cried Servadac. "Confound it, I have told
you the truth twenty times. Once for all, I tell you now, you have left
yourself barely time enough to make your escape to yonder mountain."

"God and Mahomet have mercy on me!" muttered the Jew, whose creed
frequently assumed a very ambiguous character.

"I will tell you what," continued the captain--"you shall have a few men
to work the _Hansa_ across, if you like."

"But I want to go to Algiers," whimpered Hakkabut.

"How often am I to tell you that Algiers is no longer in existence? Only
say yes or no--are you coming with us into winter-quarters?"

"God of Israel! what is to become of all my property?"

"But, mind you," continued the captain, not heeding the interruption,
"if you do not choose voluntarily to come with us, I shall have the
_Hansa_, by my orders, removed to a place of safety. I am not going
to let your cursed obstinacy incur the risk of losing your cargo
altogether."

"Merciful Heaven! I shall be ruined!" moaned Isaac, in despair.

"You are going the right way to ruin yourself, and it would serve you
right to leave you to your own devices. But be off! I have no more to
say."

And, turning contemptuously on his heel, Servadac left the old man
vociferating bitterly, and with uplifted hands protesting vehemently
against the rapacity of the Gentiles.

By the 20th all preliminary arrangements were complete, and everything
ready for a final departure from the island. The thermometer stood on
an average at 8 degrees below zero, and the water in the cistern was
completely frozen. It was determined, therefore, for the colony to
embark on the following day, and take up their residence in Nina's Hive.

A final consultation was held about the _Hansa_. Lieutenant Procope
pronounced his decided conviction that it would be impossible for the
tartan to resist the pressure of the ice in the harbor of the Shelif,
and that there would be far more safety in the proximity of the
volcano. It was agreed on all hands that the vessel must be shifted; and
accordingly orders were given, four Russian sailors were sent on board,
and only a few minutes elapsed after the _Dobryna_ had weighed anchor,
before the great lateen sail of the tartan was unfurled, and the
"shop-ship," as Ben Zoof delighted to call it, was also on her way to
the southward.

Long and loud were the lamentations of the Jew. He kept exclaiming that
he had given no orders, that he was being moved against his will, that
he had asked for no assistance, and needed none; but it required no very
keen discrimination to observe that all along there was a lurking gleam
of satisfaction in his little gray eyes, and when, a few hours later, he
found himself securely anchored, and his property in a place of safety,
he quite chuckled with glee.

"God of Israel!" he said in an undertone, "they have made no charge; the
idiots have piloted me here for nothing."

For nothing! His whole nature exulted in the consciousness that he was
enjoying a service that had been rendered gratuitously.

Destitute of human inhabitants, Gourbi Island was now left to the
tenancy of such birds and beasts as had escaped the recent promiscuous
slaughter. Birds, indeed, that had migrated in search of warmer shores,
had returned, proving that this fragment of the French colony was the
only shred of land that could yield them any sustenance; but their life
must necessarily be short. It was utterly impossible that they could
survive the cold that would soon ensue.

The colony took possession of their new abode with but few formalities.
Everyone, however, approved of all the internal arrangements of Nina's
Hive, and were profuse in their expressions of satisfaction at finding
themselves located in such comfortable quarters. The only malcontent
was Hakkabut; he had no share in the general enthusiasm, refused even
to enter or inspect any of the galleries, and insisted on remaining on
board his tartan.

"He is afraid," said Ben Zoof, "that he will have to pay for his
lodgings. But wait a bit; we shall see how he stands the cold out there;
the frost, no doubt, will drive the old fox out of his hole."

Towards evening the pots were set boiling, and a bountiful supper, to
which all were invited, was spread in the central hall. The stores of
the _Dobryna_ contained some excellent wine, some of which was broached
to do honor to the occasion. The health of the governor general was
drunk, as well as the toast "Success to his council," to which Ben Zoof
was called upon to return thanks. The entertainment passed off merrily.
The Spaniards were in the best of spirits; one of them played the
guitar, another the castanets, and the rest joined in a ringing chorus.
Ben Zoof contributed the famous Zouave refrain, well known throughout
the French army, but rarely performed in finer style than by this
_virtuoso:_

     _"Misti goth dar dar tire lyre!
     Flic! floc! flac! lirette, lira!
               Far la rira,
               Tour tala rire,
               Tour la Ribaud,
                 Ricandeau,
     Sans repos, repit, repit, repos, ris pot, ripette!
        Si vous attrapez mon refrain,
              Fameux vous etes."_


The concert was succeeded by a ball, unquestionably the first that had
ever taken place in Gallia. The Russian sailors exhibited some of their
national dances, which gained considerable applause, even although they
followed upon the marvelous fandangos of the Spaniards. Ben Zoof, in
his turn, danced a _pas seul_ (often performed in the Elysee Montmartre)
with an elegance and vigor that earned many compliments from Negrete.

It was nine o'clock before the festivities came to an end, and by that
time the company, heated by the high temperature of the hall, and by
their own exertions, felt the want of a little fresh air. Accordingly
the greater portion of the party, escorted by Ben Zoof, made their way
into one of the adjacent galleries that led to the shore. Servadac,
with the count and lieutenant, did not follow immediately; but shortly
afterwards they proceeded to join them, when on their way they were
startled by loud cries from those in advance.

Their first impression was that they were cries of distress, and they
were greatly relieved to find that they were shouts of delight, which
the dryness and purity of the atmosphere caused to re-echo like a volley
of musketry.

Reaching the mouth of the gallery, they found the entire group pointing
with eager interest to the sky.

"Well, Ben Zoof," asked the captain, "what's the matter now?"

"Oh, your Excellency," ejaculated the orderly, "look there! look there!
The moon! the moon's come back!"

And, sure enough, what was apparently the moon was rising above the
mists of evening.



CHAPTER XXII. A FROZEN OCEAN


The moon! She had disappeared for weeks; was she now returning? Had
she been faithless to the earth? and had she now approached to be a
satellite of the new-born world?

"Impossible!" said Lieutenant Procope; "the earth is millions and
millions of leagues away, and it is not probable that the moon has
ceased to revolve about her."

"Why not?" remonstrated Servadac. "It would not be more strange than the
other phenomena which we have lately witnessed. Why should not the moon
have fallen within the limits of Gallia's attraction, and become her
satellite?"

"Upon that supposition," put in the count, "I should think that it would
be altogether unlikely that three months would elapse without our seeing
her."

"Quite incredible!" continued Procope. "And there is another thing which
totally disproves the captain's hypothesis; the magnitude of Gallia
is far too insignificant for her power of attraction to carry off the
moon."

"But," persisted Servadac, "why should not the same convulsion that tore
us away from the earth have torn away the moon as well? After wandering
about as she would for a while in the solar regions, I do not see why
she should not have attached herself to us."

The lieutenant repeated his conviction that it was not likely.

"But why not?" again asked Servadac impetuously.

"Because, I tell you, the mass of Gallia is so inferior to that of the
moon, that Gallia would become the moon's satellite; the moon could not
possibly become hers."

"Assuming, however," continued Servadac, "such to be the case--"

"I am afraid," said the lieutenant, interrupting him, "that I cannot
assume anything of the sort even for a moment."

Servadac smiled good-humoredly.

"I confess you seem to have the best of the argument, and if Gallia had
become a satellite of the moon, it would not have taken three months to
catch sight of her. I suppose you are right."

While this discussion had been going on, the satellite, or whatever it
might be, had been rising steadily above the horizon, and had reached a
position favorable for observation. Telescopes were brought, and it was
very soon ascertained, beyond a question, that the new luminary was not
the well-known Phoebe of terrestrial nights; it had no feature in common
with the moon. Although it was apparently much nearer to Gallia than the
moon to the earth, its superficies was hardly one-tenth as large, and
so feebly did it reflect the light of the remote sun, that it scarcely
emitted radiance enough to extinguish the dim luster of stars of the
eighth magnitude. Like the sun, it had risen in the west, and was now
at its full. To mistake its identity with the moon was absolutely
impossible; not even Servadac could discover a trace of the seas,
chasms, craters, and mountains which have been so minutely delineated
in lunar charts, and it could not be denied that any transient hope
that had been excited as to their once again being about to enjoy the
peaceful smiles of "the queen of night" must all be resigned.

Count Timascheff finally suggested, though somewhat doubtfully, the
question of the probability that Gallia, in her course across the zone
of the minor planets, had carried off one of them; but whether it
was one of the 169 asteroids already included in the astronomical
catalogues, or one previously unknown, he did not presume to determine.
The idea to a certain extent was plausible, inasmuch as it has been
ascertained that several of the telescopic planets are of such small
dimensions that a good walker might make a circuit of them in four and
twenty hours; consequently Gallia, being of superior volume, might be
supposed capable of exercising a power of attraction upon any of these
miniature microcosms.

The first night in Nina's Hive passed without special incident; and
next morning a regular scheme of life was definitely laid down. "My lord
governor," as Ben Zoof until he was peremptorily forbidden delighted to
call Servadac, had a wholesome dread of idleness and its consequences,
and insisted upon each member of the party undertaking some special
duty to fulfill. There was plenty to do. The domestic animals required
a great deal of attention; a supply of food had to be secured and
preserved; fishing had to be carried on while the condition of the sea
would allow it; and in several places the galleries had to be further
excavated to render them more available for use. Occupation, then, need
never be wanting, and the daily round of labor could go on in orderly
routine.

A perfect concord ruled the little colony. The Russians and Spaniards
amalgamated well, and both did their best to pick up various scraps
of French, which was considered the official language of the place.
Servadac himself undertook the tuition of Pablo and Nina, Ben Zoof being
their companion in play-hours, when he entertained them with enchanting
stories in the best Parisian French, about "a lovely city at the foot of
a mountain," where he always promised one day to take them.

The end of March came, but the cold was not intense to such a degree
as to confine any of the party to the interior of their resort; several
excursions were made along the shore, and for a radius of three or
four miles the adjacent district was carefully explored. Investigation,
however, always ended in the same result; turn their course in whatever
direction they would, they found that the country retained everywhere
its desert character, rocky, barren, and without a trace of vegetation.
Here and there a slight layer of snow, or a thin coating of ice arising
from atmospheric condensation indicated the existence of superficial
moisture, but it would require a period indefinitely long, exceeding
human reckoning, before that moisture could collect into a stream and
roll downwards over the stony strata to the sea. It seemed at present
out of their power to determine whether the land upon which they were
so happily settled was an island or a continent, and till the cold was
abated they feared to undertake any lengthened expedition to ascertain
the actual extent of the strange concrete of metallic crystallization.

By ascending one day to the summit of the volcano, Captain Servadac
and the count succeeded in getting a general idea of the aspect of the
country. The mountain itself was an enormous block rising symmetrically
to a height of nearly 3,000 feet above the level of the sea, in the
form of a truncated cone, of which the topmost section was crowned by a
wreath of smoke issuing continuously from the mouth of a narrow crater.

Under the old condition of terrestrial things, the ascent of this steep
acclivity would have been attended with much fatigue, but as the effect
of the altered condition of the law of gravity, the travelers performed
perpetual prodigies in the way of agility, and in little over an hour
reached the edge of the crater, without more sense of exertion than if
they had traversed a couple of miles on level ground. Gallia had its
drawbacks, but it had some compensating advantages.

Telescopes in hand, the explorers from the summit scanned the
surrounding view. Their anticipations had already realized what they
saw. Just as they expected, on the north, east, and west lay the Gallian
Sea, smooth and motionless as a sheet of glass, the cold having, as it
were, congealed the atmosphere so that there was not a breath of wind.
Towards the south there seemed no limit to the land, and the volcano
formed the apex of a triangle, of which the base was beyond the reach of
vision. Viewed even from this height, whence distance would do much
to soften the general asperity, the surface nevertheless seemed to
be bristling with its myriads of hexagonal lamellae, and to present
difficulties which, to an ordinary pedestrian, would be insurmountable.

"Oh for some wings, or else a balloon!" cried Servadac, as he gazed
around him; and then, looking down to the rock upon which they were
standing, he added, "We seem to have been transplanted to a soil strange
enough in its chemical character to bewilder the _savants_ at a museum."

"And do you observe, captain," asked the count, "how the convexity
of our little world curtails our view? See, how circumscribed is the
horizon!"

Servadac replied that he had noticed the same circumstance from the top
of the cliffs of Gourbi Island.

"Yes," said the count; "it becomes more and more obvious that ours is a
very tiny world, and that Gourbi Island is the sole productive spot upon
its surface. We have had a short summer, and who knows whether we
are not entering upon a winter that may last for years, perhaps for
centuries?"

"But we must not mind, count," said Servadac, smiling. "We have agreed,
you know, that, come what may, we are to be philosophers."

"Ay, true, my friend," rejoined the count; "we must be philosophers
and something more; we must be grateful to the good Protector who has
hitherto befriended us, and we must trust His mercy to the end."

