anywhere; but there is no object in doing this unless we can kill
him, especially as there is no deep stream, such as would have
delayed the mastodon in reaching us, to protect us here.  We must
spread out so as to divert his attention from one to another."

After some consultation it was decided that Cortlandt, who had
only a shot-gun, should remain where they were, while Bearwarden
and Ayrault moved some distance to the right and left.  At a
signal from Cortlandt, who was to attract the monster's
attention, the wings were to advance simultaneously.  These
arrangements they carried out to the letter.  When Bearwarden and
Ayrault had gone about twenty-five yards on either side, the
doctor imitated the peculiar grunting sound of an alligator, at
which the colossal monster turned and faced him, while Bearwarden
and Ayrault moved to the attack.  The plan of this was good, for,
with his attention fixed on three objects, the dinosaur seemed
confused, and though Bearwarden and Ayrault had good angles from
which to shoot, there was no possibility of their hitting each
other.  They therefore advanced steadily with their rifles half
up.  Though their own danger increased with each step, in the
event of their missing, the chance of their shooting wild
decreased, the idea being to reach the brain through the eye.
Cortlandt's part had also its risks, for, being entirely
defenceless with his shot-gun against the large creature, whose
attention it was his duty to attract, he staked all on the
marksmanship of his friends.  Not considering this, however, he
stood his ground, having the thumb-piece on his Winchester
magazine shoved up and ready to make a noisy diversion if
necessary in behalf of either wing.  Having aroused the monster's
curiosity, Cortlandt sprang up, waving his arms and his gun.  The
dinosaur lowered his head as if to charge, thereby bringing it to
a level with the rifles, either of which could have given it the
fatal shot.  But as their fingers pressed the triggers the
reptile soared up thirty feet in the air.  Ayrault pulled for his
first sight, shooting through the lower jaw, and shivering that
member, while Bearwarden changed his aim and sighted straight for
the heart.  In an instant the monster was down again, just
missing Ayrault's head as he stepped back, and Bearwarden's rifle
poured a stream of explosive balls against its side, rending and
blowing away the heavy scales.  Having drawn the dinosaur's
attention to himself, he retreated, while Ayrault renewed the
attack.  Cortlandt, seeing that the original plan had miscarried,
poured showers of small shot against the huge beast's face.
Finally, one of Ayrault's balls exploded in the brain, and all
was over.

"We have killed it at last," said Bearwarden "but the first
attack, though artistic, had not the brilliant results we
expected.  These creatures' mode of fighting is doubtless
somewhat similar to that of the kangaroo, which it is said puts
its forepaws gently, almost lovingly, on a man's shoulders, and
then disembowels him by the rapid movement of a hind leg.  But we
shall get used to their method, and can do better next time."

They then reloaded their weapons and, while Cortlandt examined
their victim from a naturalist's point of view, Bearwarden and
Ayrault secured the heart, which they thought would be the most
edible part, the operation being rendered possible by the amount
of armour the explosive balls had stripped off.

"To-morrow," said Bearwarden, "we must make it a point to get
some well-fed birds; for I can roast, broil, or fricassee them to
a turn.  Life is too short to live on this meat in such a
sportsman's paradise.  In any case there can be no end of
mastodons, mammoths, woolly rhinoceroses, moa birds, and all such
shooting."

As the sun was already near the horizon, they chose a dry, sandy
place, to secure as much immunity as possible from nocturnal
visits, and, after procuring a supply of water from a pool,
proceeded to arrange their camp for the night.  They first laid
out the protection- wires, setting them while the sun still
shone.  Next they built a fire and prepared their evening meal.
While they ate it, twilight became night, and the fire-flies,
twinkling in legions in the neighbouring valley, seemed like the
lamps of a great city.

"Their lights," said Bearwarden, pointing to them, "are not as
fine as the jelly-fish Will-o'-the wisps were last night, but
they are not so dangerous.  No gymnotus or electric eel that I
have ever seen compared with them, and I am convinced that any
one of us they might have touched would have been in kingdom
come."

The balmy air soothed the travellers' brows as they reclined
against mounds of sand, while the flowers in the valley sent up
their dying notes.  One by one the moons arose, till four--among
them the Lilliputian, discovered by Prof. Barnard in 1893--were
in the sky, flooding the landscape with their silvery light, and
something in the surroundings touched a sympathetic cord in the
men.

"Oh that I were young again," said Cortlandt, "and had life
before me!  I should like to remain here and grow up with this
planet, in which we already perceive the next New World.  The
beauties of earth are barren compared with the scenes we have
here."

"You remember," replied Bearwarden, "how Cicero defends old age
in his De Senectute, and shows that while it has almost
everything that youth has, it has also a sense of calm and many
things besides."

"Yes," answered Cortlandt, "but, while plausible, it does not
convince.  The pleasures of age are largely negative, the old
being happy when free from pain."

"Since the highest joy of life," said Ayrault, "is coming to know
our Creator, I should say the old, being further advanced, would
be the happier of the two.  I should never regard this material
life as greatly to be prized for itself.  You remember the old
song:
           "'O Youth!  When we come to consider
               The pain, the toil, and the strife,
           The happiest man of all is
               The one who has finished his life.'


"I suspect," continued Ayrault, "that the man who reaches even
the lowest plane in paradise will find far more beautiful visions
than any we have here."

As they had but little rest the night before, they were all
tired.  The warm breeze swayed the long dry grass, causing it to
give out a soft rustle; all birds except the flitting bats were
asleep among the tall ferns or on the great trees that spread
their branches towards heaven.  There was nothing to recall a
picture of the huge monsters they had seen that day, or of the
still more to be dreaded terror these had borne witness to.  Thus
night closes the activities of the day, and in its serene
grandeur the soul has time to think.  While they thought,
however, drowsiness overcame them, and in a little while all were
asleep.

The double line of protection-wires encircled them like a silent
guard, while the methodical ticking of the alarm-clock that was
to wake them at the approach of danger, and register the hour of
interruption, formed a curious contrast to the irregular cries of
the night-hawks in the distance.  Time and again some huge
iguanodon or a hipsohopus would pass, shaking the ground with its
tread; but so implicit was the travellers' trust in the vigilance
of their mechanical and tireless watch, that they slept on as
calmly and unconcernedly as though they had been in their beds at
home, while the tick was as constant and regular as a sentry's
march.  The wires of course did not protect them from creatures
having wings, and they ran some risk of a visitation from the
blood-sucking bats.  The far-away volcanoes occasionally sent up
sheets of flame, which in the distance were like summer
lightning; the torrents of lava and crashes that had sounded so
thunderous when near, were now like the murmur of the ocean's ebb
tide, lulling the terrestrials to deeper sleep.  The pale moons
were at intervals momentarily obscured by the rushing clouds in
the upper air, only to reappear soon afterwards as serene as
before.  All Nature seemed at rest.

Shortly before dawn there was an unusually heavy step.  A moment
later the ever-vigilant batteries poured forth their current, and
the clang of the alarm-bell made the still night ring.  In an
instant the three men were awake, each resting on one knee, with
their backs towards the centre and their polished barrels raised.
It was not long before they perceived the intruder by the
moonlight.  A huge monster of the Triceratops prorsus species had
entered the camp.  It was shaped something like an elephant, but
had ten or twelve times the bulk, being over forty feet in
length, not including the long, thick tail.  The head carried two
huge horns on the forehead and one on the nose.

"A plague on my shot-gun!" said Cortlandt.  "Had I known how much
of this kind of game we should see, I too should have brought a
rifle."

The monster was entangled in the wires, and in another second
would have stepped on the batteries that were still causing the
bell to ring.

"Aim for the heart," said Bearwarden to Ayrault.  "When you show
me his ribs, I will follow you in the hole."

Ayrault instantly fired for a point just back of the left
foreleg.  The explosion had the same effect as on the mastodon,
removing a half-barrel of hide, etc; and the next second
Bearwarden sent a bullet less than an inch from where Ayrault's
had stopped.  Before the colossus could turn, each had caused
several explosions in close proximity to the first.  The creature
was of course terribly wounded, and several ribs were cracked,
but no ball had gone through.  With a roar it made straight for
the woods, and with surprising agility, running fully as fast as
an elephant.  Bearwarden and Ayrault kept up a rapid fire at the
left hind leg, and soon completely disabled it.  The dinosaur,
however, supported itself with its huge tail, and continued to
make good time.  Knowing they could not give it a fatal wound at
the intervening distance, in the uncertain light, they stopped
firing and set out in pursuit.  Cortlandt paused to stop the bell
that still rang, and then put his best foot foremost in regaining
his friends.  For half a mile they hurried along, until, seeing
by the quantity of blood on the ground that they were in no
danger of losing the game, they determined to save their
strength.  The trail entered the woods by a narrow ravine, passed
through what proved to be but a belt of timber, and then turned
north to the right.  Presently in the semi-darkness they saw the
monster's head against the sky.  He was browsing among the trees,
tearing off the young branches, and the hunters succeeded in
getting within seventy-five yards before being discovered.  Just
as he began to run, the two rifles again fired, this time at the
right hind leg, which they succeeded in hamstringing.  After that
the Triceratops prorsus was at their mercy, and they quickly put
an end to its suffering.

"The sun is about to rise," said Bearwarden; "in a few minutes we
shall have enough light."

They cut out a dozen thick slices of tenderloin steak, and soon
were broiling and eating a substantial breakfast.

"There are not as many spectators to watch us eat here," said
Cortlandt, "as in the woods.  I suggest that, after returning to
camp for our blankets and things, we steer for the Callisto, via
this Triceratops, to see what creatures have been attracted by
the body."

On finishing their meal they returned to the place at which they
had passed the night.  Having straightened the protection-wires,
which had become twisted, and arranged their impedimenta, they
set out, and were soon once more beside their latest victim.



                           CHAPTER IX.

                       THE HONEY OF DEATH.

At first nothing seemed to have been disturbed, when they
suddenly perceived that both forelegs were missing.  On further
examination they found that the ponderous tail, seven feet in
diameter, was cut through in two places, the thicker portion
having disappeared, and that the heavy bones in this extremity of
the vertebral column had been severed like straws.  The cut
surfaces were but little cooler than the interior of the body,
showing how recently the mutilation had been effected.

"By all the gods!" exclaimed Bearwarden, "it is easy to see the
method in this; the hunters have again cut off only those parts
that could be easily rolled.  These Jovian fellows must have
weapons compared with which the old scythe chariots would be but
toys, with which they amputate the legs of their victims.  We
must see to it that their scimitars do not come too near to us,
and I venture to hope that in our bullets they will find their
match.  What say you, doctor?"

"I see no depression such as such heavy bodies would necessarily
have made had they been rolled along the ground, neither does it
seem to me that these curious tracks in the sand are those of
men."

The loose earth looked as if the cross-ties of some railroad had
been removed, the space formerly occupied having been but partly
filled, and these depressions were across the probable direction
of motion.

"Whatever was capable of chasing mastodons and carrying such
weights," said Ayrault, "will, I suspect, have little to fear
from us.  Probably nothing short of light artillery would leave
much effect."

"I dare say," replied Bearwarden, "we had better give the unknown
quantity a wide berth, though I would give a year's salary to see
what it is like.  The absence of other tracks shows that his
confreres leave 'Scissor- jaw' alone."

Keeping a sharp lookout in all directions, they resumed their
march along the third side of the square which was to bring them
back to the Callisto.  Their course was parallel to the stream,
and on comparatively high ground.  Cortlandt's gun did good
service, bringing down between fifty and sixty birds that usually
allowed them to get as near as they pleased, and often seemed
unwilling to leave their branches.  By the time they were ready
for luncheon they saw it would be dark in an hour.  As the
rapidity of the planet's rotation did not give them a chance to
become tired, they concluded not to pitch their camp, but to
resume the march by moonlight, which would be easy in the high,
open country they were traversing.

While in quest of fire-wood, they came upon great heaps of bones,
mostly those of birds, and were attracted by the tall,
bell-shaped flowers growing luxuriantly in their midst.  These
exhaled a most delicious perfume, and at the centre of each
flower was a viscous liquid, the colour of honey.

"If this tastes as well as it looks," said Bearwarden, "it will
come in well for dessert"; saying which he thrust his finger into
the recesses of the flower, intending to taste the essence.
Quietly, but like a flash, the flower closed, his hand being
nearly caught and badly scratched by the long, sharp thorns that
now appeared at the edges.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, "a sensitive and you may almost say a
man-eating plant.  This doubtless has been the fate of these
birds, whose bones now lie bleaching at its feet after they have
nourished its lips with their lives.  No doubt the plant has use
for them still, since their skeletons may serve to fertilize its
roots."

Wishing to investigate further, Bearwarden placed one of the
birds they had shot within the bell of another flower, which
immediately contracted with such force that they saw drops of
blood squeezed out.  After some minutes the flower opened, as
beautiful as ever, and discharged an oblong ball compressed to
about the size of a hen's egg, though the bird that was placed
within it had been as large as a small duck.  Towards evening
these flowers sent up their most beautiful song, to hear which
flocks of birds came from far and near, alighting on the trees,
and many were lured to death by the siren strains and the honey.

Before resuming their journey, the travellers paid a parting
visit to the bell-shaped lilies on their pyramids of bones.  The
flowers were closed for the night, and the travellers saw by the
moonlight that the white mounds were simply alive with
diamond-headed snakes.  These coiled themselves, flattened their
heads, and set up such a hissing on the explorers' approach that
they were glad to retire, and leave this curious contrast of
hideousness and beauty to the fire-flies and the moons.  Marching
along in Indian file, the better to avoid treading on the
writhing serpents that strewed the ground, they kept on for about
two hours.  They frequently passed huge heaps or mounds of bones,
evidently the remains of bears or other large animals.  The
carnivorous plants growing at their centre were often like hollow
trees, and might easily have received the three travellers in one
embrace.  But as before, the mounds were alive with serpents that
evidently made them their homes, and raised an angry hiss
whenever the men approached.

"The wonder to me," said Bearwarden, "is, that these snakes do
not protect the game, by keeping it from the life-devouring
plants.  It may be that they do not show themselves by day or
when the victims are near, or that the quadrupeds on which these
plants live take a pleasure, like deer, in killing them by
jumping with all four feet upon their backs or in some other way,
and after that are entrapped by the flowers."

Shortly after midnight they rested for a half hour, but the dawn
found them trudging along steadily, though somewhat wearily, and
having about completed the third side of their square.
Accordingly, they soon made a right-angle turn to the left, and
had been picking their way over the rough ground for nearly two
hours, with the sun already high in the sky, when they noticed a
diminution of light.  Glancing up, they saw that one of the moons
was passing across the sun, and that they were on the eve of a
