distrust.

Then, suddenly, came the years of spaceflight and the expanding
frontiers. Luna was passed. Mars and Venus and the Jovian Moons felt the
tread of living beings for the first time since the dawn of time. The
larger asteroids were taken and even the cold moonlets of Saturn and
Uranus trembled under the blast of Terran rockets. But the Iron Curtain
still existed. It was extended out into the gulf of space, an intangible
wall of fear and suspicion. Thus was born the Wall Decade.

Jaq Merril was made for that epoch. Ever in human history there are
those who profit from the stupidity of their fellows. Jaq Merril so
profited. He dredged up the riches of space and took them for his own.
And his weapon was man's fear of his brothers.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was in Yakki, down-canal from the Terran settlement at Canalopolis,
that Merril's plan was born. His ship, the _Arrow_, stood on the red
sands of Syrtis Major, waiting for a payload to the Outer System. It
stood among a good many like it: the _Moonmaid_, the _Gay Lady_, the
_Argonaut_, and my own vessel, the _Starhound_.

We, the captains, had gathered in the Spaceman's Rest--a tinkling
gin-mill peopled with human wrecks and hungry-eyed, dusty-skinned women
who had come out to Mars hoping for riches and had found only the same
squalor they had left behind. I remember the look in Merril's eyes as he
spoke of the treasures of space that would never be ours, of the gold
and sapphires, the rubies and unearthly gems of fragile beauty and great
price. All the riches of the worlds of space, passing through our hands
and into the vaults of the stay-at-homes who owned our ships and our
very lives. It seemed to me that Merril suffered as though from physical
pain as he spoke of riches. He was nothing if not rapacious. Greedy,
venal, ruthless. All of that.

"Five of us," he said in a hard voice, "Captains all--with ships and
men. We carry the riches of the universe and let it slip through our
fingers. What greater fools could there be?"

Oh, he was right enough. We had the power to command in our hands
without the sense to grasp it firmly and take what we chose.

"And mark you, my friends," Merril said, "A wall has been built around
Mars. A wall that weakens rather than strengthens. A wonderful, stupid,
wall...." He laughed and glanced around the table at our faces, flushed
with wine and greed. "With all space full of walls," he said softly,
"Who could unite against us?"

The question struck home. I thought of the five ships standing out there
on the rusty desert across the silted canal. Five tall ships--against
the stars. We felt no kinship to those at home who clung to creature
comforts while we bucketed among the stars risking our lives and more.
We, the spacemen, had become a race apart from that of the home planet.
And Merril saw this in our faces that night so long ago, and he knew
that he had spoken our thoughts.

Thus was born the Compact.

Gods of space, but I must laugh when I read what history has recorded of
the Compact.

    "_Merril, filled with the wonder of his great dream, spoke his mind
    to the Captains. He told them of the sorrow in his heart for his
    divided fellow men, and his face grew stern when he urged them to
    put aside ideology and prejudice and join with him in the Compact._"

So speaks Quintus Bland, historian of the Age of Space. I imagine that I
hear Merril's laughter even as I write. Oh, we put aside ideology and
prejudice, all right! That night in Yakki the five Captains clasped
hands over the formation of the first and only compact of space-piracy
in history!

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an all or nothing venture. Our crews were told nothing, but their
pockets were emptied and their pittances joined with ours. We loaded the
five ships with supplies and thundered off into the cobalt Martian sky
to seek a stronghold. We found one readily enough. The chronicles do not
record it accurately. They say that the fleet of the Compact based
itself on Eros. This is incorrect. We wanted no Base that would bring us
so close to the home planet every year. The asteroid we chose was
nameless, and remained so. We spoke of it seldom aspace, but it was ever
in our minds. There was no space wall, there to divide us one from the
other. It was a fortress against the rest of mankind, and in it we were
brothers.

When we struck for the first time, it was not at a Russian missile post
as the histories say. It was at the _Queen of Heaven_, an undefended and
unsuspecting merchantman. The records of Earth say the _Queen_ was lost
in space between Uranus and Mars, and this is so. But she was listed
lost only because no Russian or American patrol found her gutted hulk. I
imagine that at this very moment she hangs out beyond Pluto, rounding
the bend of the long ellipse we sent her on that day we stripped her
