very well clog up the operation with a lot of questions. But there was
the possibility that James Holden, operating through the agency of an
adult, would switch his method. He could even go so far as to bring
Brennan to lawsuit to have Brennan stopped from his interference. Child
or not, James Holden had been running a checking account by mail for a
number of years which could be used as evidence of his good faith and
ability.

Indeed, the position of James Holden was so solid that Brennan could only
plead personal interest and personal responsibility in the case for
securing a writ of habeas corpus to have the person of James Holden
returned to his custody and protection. And this of itself was a bit on
the dangerous side. A writ of habeas corpus will, by law, cause the
delivery of the person to the right hands, but there is no part of the
writ that can be used to guarantee that the person will remain
thereafter. If Brennan tried to repeat this program, James Holden was
very apt to suggest either the rather rare case of Barratry or
Maintenance against Brennan. Barratry consists of the constant harassment
of a citizen by the serial entry of lawsuit after lawsuit against him,
each of which he must defend to the loss of time and money--and the tying
up of courts and their officials. Maintenance is the re-opening of the
same suit and its charges time after time in court after court. One need
only be sure of the attitude of the plaintiff to strike back; if he is
interested in heckling the defendant and this can be demonstrated in
evidence, the heckler is a dead duck. Such a response would surely damage
Paul Brennan's overt position as a responsible, interested, affectionate
guardian of his best friends' orphaned child.

Then to put the top on the bottle, James Holden had crossed state lines
in his flight from home. This meant that the case was not the simple
proposition of appearing before a local magistrate and filing an
emotional appeal. It was interstate. It smacked of extradition, and James
Holden had committed no crime in either state.

To Paul Brennan's qualifications for his henchmen, he now added the need
for flouting the law if the law could not be warped to fit his need.

Finding a man with ambition, with a casual disregard for ethics, is not
hard in political circles. Paul Brennan found his man in Frank Manison,
a rising figure in the office of the District Attorney. Manison had
gubernatorial ambitions, and he was politically sharp. He personally
conducted only those cases that would give him ironclad publicity; he
preferred to lower the boom on a lighter charge than chance an acquittal.
Manison also had a fine feeling for anticipating public trends, a sense
of the drama, and an understanding of public opinion.

He granted Brennan a conference of ten minutes, and knowing from long
experience that incoming information flows faster when it is not
interrupted, he listened attentively, oiling and urging the flow by
facial expressions of interest and by leaning forward attentively
whenever a serious point was about to come forth. Brennan explained about
James Holden, his superior education, and what it had enabled the lad to
do. He explained the education not as a machine but as a "system of
study" devised by James Holden's parents, feeling that it was better to
leave a few stones lying flat and unturned for his own protection.
Manison nodded at the end of the ten-minute time-limit, used his desk
interphone to inform his secretary that he was not to be disturbed until
further notice (which also told Paul Brennan that he was indeed
interested) and then said:

"You know you haven't a legal leg to stand on, Brennan."

"So I find out. It seems incredible that there isn't any law set up to
control the activity of a child."

"Incredible? No, Brennan, not so. To now it hasn't been necessary. People
just do not see the necessity of laws passed to prevent something that
isn't being done anyway. The number of outmoded laws, ridiculous laws,
and laws passed in the heat of public emotion are always a subject for
public ridicule. If the state legislature were to pass a law stating that
any child under fourteen may not leave home without the consent of his
parents, every opposition newspaper in the state would howl about the
waste of time and money spent on ridiculous legislation passed to govern
activities that are already under excellent control. They would poll the
state and point out that for so many million children under age fourteen,
precisely zero of them have left home to set up their own housekeeping.
One might just as well waste the taxpayer's money by passing a law that
confirms the Universal Law of Gravity.

"But that's neither here nor there," he said. "Your problem is to figure
out some means of exerting the proper control over this intelligent
infant."

"My problem rises higher than that," said Brennan ruefully. "He dislikes
me to the point of blind, unreasonable hatred. He believes that I am the
party responsible for the death of his parents and furthermore that the
act was deliberate. Tantamount to a charge of first-degree murder."

"Has he made that statement recently?" asked Manison.

"I would hardly know."

"When last did you hear him say words to that effect?"

"At the time, following the accidental death of his parents, James Holden
ran off to the home of his grandparents. Puzzled and concerned, they
called me as the child's guardian. I went there to bring him back to his
home. I arrived the following morning and it was during that session that
James Holden made the accusation."

"And he has not made it since, to the best of your knowledge?"

"Not that I know of."

"Hardly make anything out of that. Seven years ago. Not a formal charge,
only a cry of rage, frustration, hysterical grief. The complaint of a
five-year-old made under strain could hardly be considered slanderous.
It is too bad that the child hasn't broken any laws. Your success in
collecting him the first time was entirely due to the associations he'd
made with this automobile thief--Caslow, you said his name was. We can't
go back to that. The responsibility has been fixed, I presume, upon Jake
Caslow in another state. Brennan, you've a real problem: How can you be
sure that this James Holden will disclose his secret system of study even
if we do succeed in cooking up some legal means of placing him and keep
him in your custody?"

Brennan considered, and came to the conclusion that now was the time to
let another snibbet of information go. "The system of study consists of
an electronic device, the exact nature of which I do not understand. The
entire machine is large and cumbersome. In it, as a sort of 'heart,' is a
special circuit. Without this special circuit the thing is no more than
an expensive aggregation of delicate devices that could be used elsewhere
in electronics. One such machine stands unused in the Holden Home because
the central circuit was destroyed beyond repair or replacement by young
James Holden. He destroyed it because he felt that this secret should
remain his own, the intellectual inheritance from his parents. There is
one other machine--undoubtedly in full function and employed daily--in
the house on Martin's Hill under James Holden's personal supervision."

"Indeed? How, may I ask?"

"It was rebuilt by James Holden from plans, specifications, and
information engraved on his brain by his parents through the use of their
first machine. Unfortunately, I have every reason to believe that this
new machine is so booby-trapped and tamper-protected that the first
interference by someone other than James Holden will cause its
destruction."

"Um. It might be possible to impound this machine as a device of high
interest to the State," mused Manison. "But if we start any proceeding
as delicate as that, it will hit every newspaper in the country and our
advantage will be lost."

"Technically," said Paul Brennan, "you don't know that such a machine
exists. But as soon as young Holden realizes that you know about his
machine, he'll also know that you got the information from me." Brennan
sat quietly and thought for a moment. "There's another distressing angle,
too," he said at last. "I don't think that there is a soul on earth who
knows how to run this machine but James Holden. Steal it or impound it or
take it away legally, you've got to know how it runs. I doubt that we'd
find a half-dozen people on the earth who'd willingly sit in a chair with
a heavy headset on, connected to a devilish aggregation of electrical
machinery purported to educate the victim, while a number of fumblers
experimented with the dials and the knobs and the switches. No sir, some
sort of pressure must be brought to bear upon the youngster."

"Um. Perhaps civic pride? Might work. Point out to him that he is in
control of a device that is essential to the security of the United
States. That he is denying the children of this country the right to
their extensive education. Et cetera?"

"Could be. But how are you going to swing it, technically in ignorance of
the existence of such a machine?"

"Were I a member of the Congressional Committee on Education, I could
investigate the matter of James Holden's apparent superiority of
intellect."

"And hit Page One of every newspaper in the country," sneered Brennan.

"Well, I'm not," snapped Manison angrily. "However, there is a way,
perhaps several ways, once we find the first entering wedge. After all,
Brennan, the existence of a method of accelerating the course of
educational training is of the utmost importance to the future of not
only the United States of America, but the entire human race. Once I can
locate some plausible reason for asking James Holden the first question
about anything, the remainder of any session can be so slanted as to
bring into the open any secret knowledge he may have. We, to make the
disclosure easier, shall hold any sessions in the strictest of secrecy.
We can quite readily agree with James Holden's concern over the
long-range effectiveness of his machine and state that secrecy is
necessary lest headstrong factions take the plunge into something that
could be very detrimental to the human race instead of beneficial.
Frankly, Mr. Brennan," said Manison with a wry smile, "I should like to
borrow that device for about a week myself. It might help me locate some
of the little legal points that would help me." He sighed. "Yes," he said
sadly, "I know the law, but no one man knows all of the finer points.
Lord knows," he went on, "if the law were a simple matter of behaving as
it states, we'd not have this tremendous burden. But the law is subject
to interpretation and change and argument and precedent--Precedent? Um,
here we may have an interesting angle, Brennan. I must look into it."

"Precedent?"

"Yes, indeed. Any ruling that we were to make covering the right of a
seven, eight, or nine year old to run his own life as he sees fit will be
a ruling that establishes precedent."

"And--?"

"Well, up to now there's no ruling about such a case; no child of ten has
ever left home to live as he prefers. But this James Holden is apparently
capable of doing just that--and any impartial judge deliberating such a
case would find it difficult to justify a decision that placed the
competent infant under the guardianship and protection of an adult who is
less competent than the infant."

Brennan's face turned dark. "You're saying that this Holden kid is
smarter than I am?"

"Sit down and stop sputtering," snapped Manison. "What were you doing at
six years old, Brennan? Did you have the brains to leave home and protect
yourself by cooking up the plausible front of a very interesting
character such as the mythical Hermit of Martin's Hill? Were you writing
boys' stories for a nationwide magazine of high circulation and
accredited quality? Could you have planned your own dinner and prepared
it, or would you have dined on chocolate bars washed down with strawberry
pop? Stop acting indignant. Start thinking. If for no other reason than
that we don't want to end up selling pencils on Halstead Street because
we're not quite bright, we've got to lay our hands on that machine. We've
got to lead, not follow. Yet at the present time I'll wager that your
James Holden is going to give everybody concerned a very rough time. Now,
let me figure out the angles and pull the wires. One thing that nobody
can learn from any electronic machine is how to manipulate the component
people that comprise a political machine. I'll be in touch with you,
Brennan."

       *       *       *       *       *

The ring at the door was Chief of Police Joseph Colling and another
gentleman. Janet Fisher answered the door, "Good evening, Mr. Colling.
Come in?"

"Thank you," said Colling politely. "This is Mr. Frank Manison, from the
office of the State Department of Justice."

"Oh? Is something wrong?"

"Not that we know of," replied Manison. "We're simply after some
information. I apologize for calling at eight o'clock in the evening, but
I wanted to catch you all under one roof. Is Mr. Fisher home? And the
children?"

"Why, yes. We're all here." Janet stepped aside to let them enter the
living room, and then called upstairs. Mr. Manison was introduced around
and Tim Fisher said, cautiously, "What's the trouble here?"

"No trouble that we know of," said Manison affably. "We're just after
some information about the education of James Holden, a legal minor, who
seems never to have been enrolled in any school."

"If you don't mind," replied Tim Fisher, "I'll not answer anything
without the advice of my attorney."

Janet Fisher gasped.

Tim turned with a smile. "Don't you like lawyers, honey?"

"It isn't that. But isn't crying for a lawyer an admission of some sort?"

"Sure is," replied Tim Fisher. "It's an admission that I don't know all
of my legal rights. If lawyers come to me because they don't know all
there is to know about the guts of an automobile, I have every right to
the same sort of consultation in reverse. Agree, James?"

James Holden nodded. "The man who represents himself in court has a fool
for a client," he said. "I think that's Daniel Webster, but I'm not
certain. No matter; it's right. Call Mr. Waterman, and until he arrives
we'll discuss the weather, the latest dope in high-altitude research, or
nuclear physics."

Frank Manison eyed the lad. "You're James Holden?"

"I am."

Tim interrupted. "We're not answering _anything_," he warned.

"Oh, I don't mind admitting my identity," said James. "I've committed no
crime, I've broken no law. No one can point to a single act of mine that
shows a shred of evidence to the effect that my intentions are not
honorable. Sooner or later this whole affair had to come to a showdown,
and I'm prepared to face it squarely."

"Thank you," said Manison. "Now, without inviting comment, let me explain
one important fact. The state reserves the right to record marriages,
births, and deaths as a simple matter of vital statistics. We feel that
we have every right to the compiling of the census, and we can justify
our feeling. I am here because of some apparent irregularities, records
of which we do not have. If these apparent irregularities can be
explained to our satisfaction for the record, this meeting will be ended.
Now, let's relax until your attorney arrives."

"May I get you some coffee or a highball?" asked Janet Fisher.

"Coffee, please," agreed Frank Manison. Chief Colling nodded quietly.
They relaxed over coffee and small talk for a half hour. The arrival of
Waterman, Tim Fisher's attorney, signalled the opening of the discussion.

"First," said Manison, his pencil poised over a notebook, "Who lives here
in permanent residence, and for how long?" He wrote rapidly as they told
him. "The house is your property?" he asked Tim, and wrote again. "And
you are paying a rental on certain rooms of this house?" he asked James,
who nodded.

"Where did you attend school?" he asked James.

"I did not."

"Where did you get your education?"

"By a special course in home study."

"You understand that under the state laws that provide for the education
of minor children, the curriculum must be approved by the state?"

"I do."

"And has it?"

Waterman interrupted. "Just a moment, Mr. Manison. In what way must the
curriculum be approved? Does the State study all textbooks and the manner
in which each and every school presents them? Or does the State merely
insist that the school child be taught certain subjects?"

"The State merely insists that certain standards of education be
observed."

"In fact," added James, "the State does not even insist that the child
_learn_ the subjects, realizing that some children lack the intellect to
be taught certain subjects completely and fully. Let's rather say that
the State demands that school children be exposed to certain subjects in
the hope that they 'take.' Am I not correct?"

"I presume you are."

"Then I shall answer your question. In my home study, I have indeed
followed the approved curriculum by making use of the approved textbooks
in their proper order. I am aware of the fact that this is not the same
State, but if you will consult the record of my earlier years in
attendance at a school selected by my legal guardian, you'll find that I
passed from preschool grade to Fourth Grade in a matter of less than half
a year, at the age of five-approaching-six. If this matter is subject to
question, I'll submit to any course of extensive examination your
educators care to prepare. The law regarding compulsory education in this
state says that the minor child must attend school until either the age
of eighteen, or until he has completed the standard eight years of
grammar school and four years of high school. I shall then stipulate that
the suggested examination be limited to the schooling of a high school
graduate."

"For the moment we'll pass this over. We may ask that you do prove your
contention," said Manison.

"You don't doubt that I can, do you?" asked James.

Manison shook his head. "No, at this moment I have no doubt."

"Then why do you bother asking?"

"I am here for a rather odd reason," said Manison. "I've told you the
reservations that the State holds, which justify my presence. Now, it is
patently obvious that you are a very competent young man, James Holden.
The matter of making your own way is difficult, as many adults can
testify. To have contrived a means of covering up your youth, in addition
to living a full and competent life, demonstrates an ability above and
beyond the average. Now, the State is naturally interested in anything
that smacks of acceleration of the educational period. Can you understand
that?"

"Naturally. None but a dolt would avoid education."

"Then you agree with our interest?"

"I--"

"Just a moment, James," said Waterman. "Let's put it that you understand
their interest, but that you do not necessarily agree."

"I understand," said James.

"Then you must also understand that this 'course of study' by which you
claim the equal of a high-school education at the age of ten or eleven
(perhaps earlier) must be of high importance."

"I understand that it might," agreed James.

"Then will you explain why you have kept this a secret?"

"Because--"

"Just a moment," said Waterman again. "James, would you say that your
method of educating yourself is completely perfected?"

"Not completely."

"Not perfected?" asked Manison. "Yet you claim to have the education of a
high-school graduate?"

"I so claim," said James. "But I must also point out that I have acquired
a lot of mish-mash in the course of this education. For instance, it is
one thing to study English, its composition, spelling, vocabulary,
construction, rules and regulations. One must learn these things if he is
to be considered literate. In the course of such study, one also becomes
acquainted with English literature. With literature it is enough to
merely be acquainted with the subject. One need not know the works of
Chaucer or Spenser intimately--unless one is preparing to specialize in
the English literature of the writers of that era. Frankly, sir, I should
hate to have my speech colored by the flowery phrases of that time, and
the spelling of that day would flunk me out of First Grade if I made use
of it. In simple words, I am still perfecting the method."

"Now, James," went on Waterman, "have you ever entertained the idea of
not releasing the details of your method?"

"Occasionally," admitted James.

"Why?"

"Until we know everything about it, we can not be certain that its
ultimate effect will be wholly beneficial."
