"Your question," he replied in his odd, unfamiliar accent, "is not
unnatural, under the circumstances. I assure you that I am of sound
mind; of very sound mind." He smiled, rather a ghastly smile, and made
a vague, slight gesture with one hand. "Will you be good enough to
answer my question? What year is this?"

"Earth year, you mean?"

He stared at me, his eyes flickering.

"Yes," he said. "Earth year. There are other ways of ... figuring time
now?"

"Certainly. Each inhabited world has its own system. There is a master
system for the Universe. Who are you, what are you, that you should
ask me a question the smallest child should know?"

"First," he insisted, "tell me what year this is, Earth reckoning."

I told him, and the light flickered up in his eyes again--a cruel,
triumphant light.

"Thank you," he nodded; and then, slowly and softly, as though he
spoke to himself, he added, "Less than half a century off. Less than a
half a century! And they laughed at me. How--how I shall laugh at
them, presently!"

"You choose to be mysterious, sir?" I asked impatiently.

"No. Presently you shall understand, and then you will forgive me, I
know. I have come through an experience such as no man has ever known
before. If I am shaken, weak, surprising to you, it is because of that
experience."

       *       *       *       *       *

He paused for a moment, his long, powerful fingers gripping the arms
of the chair.

"You see," he added, "I have come out of the past into the present. Or
from the present into the future. It depends upon one's viewpoint. If
I am distraught, then forgive me. A few minutes ago, I was Jacob
Harbauer, in a little laboratory on the edge of a mountain park, near
Denver; now I am a nameless being hurtled into the future, pausing
here, many centuries from my own era. Do you wonder now that I am
unnerved?"

"Do you mean," I said slowly, trying to understand what he had babbled
forth, "that you have come out of the past? That you ... that you...."
It was too monstrous to put into words.

"I mean," he replied, "that I was born in the year 2028. I am
forty-three years old--or I was a few minutes ago. But,"--and his eyes
flickered again with that strange, mad light--"I am a scientist! I
have left my age behind me for a time; I have done what no other human
being has ever done: I have gone centuries into the future!"

"I--I do not understand." Could he, after all, be a madman? "How can
a man leave his own age and travel ahead to another?"

"Even in this age of yours they have not discovered that secret?"
Harbauer exulted. "You travel the Universe, I gather, and yet your
scientists have not yet learned to move in time? Listen! Let me
explain to you how simple the theory is.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I take it you are an intelligent man; your uniform and its insignia
would seem to indicate a degree of rank. Am I correct?"

"I am John Hanson, Commander of the _Ertak_, of the Special Patrol
Service," I informed him.

"Then you will be capable of grasping, in part at least, what I have
to tell you. It is really not so complex. Time is a river, flowing
steadily, powerful, at a fixed rate of speed. It sweeps the whole
Universe along on its bosom at that same speed. That is my conception
of it; is it clear to you?"

"I should think," I replied, "that the Universe is more like a great
rock in the middle of your stream of time, that stands motionless
while the minutes, the hours, and the days roll by."

"No! The Universe travels on the breast of the current of time. It
leaves yesterday behind, and sweeps on towards to-morrow. It has
always been so until I challenged this so-called immutable law. I said
to myself, why should a man be a helpless stick upon the stream of
time? Why need he be borne on this slow current at the same speed? Why
cannot he do as a man in a boat, paddle backwards or forwards; back to
a point already passed; ahead, faster than the current, to a point
that, drifting, he would not reach so soon? In other words, why can he
not slip back through time to yesterday; or ahead to to-morrow? And if
to to-morrow, why not to next year, next century?

       *       *       *       *       *

"These are the questions I asked myself. Other men have asked
themselves the same questions, I know; they were not new.
But,"--Harbauer drew himself far forward in his chair, and leaned
close to me, almost as though he prepared himself to spring--"no other
man ever found the answer! That remained for me.

"I was not entirely correct, of course. I found that one could not go
back in time. The current was against one. But to go ahead, with the
current at one's back, was different. I spent six years on the
problem, working day and night, handicapped by lack of funds,
ridiculed by the press--Look!"

Harbauer reached inside his antiquated costume and drew forth a flat
packet which he passed to me. I unfolded it curiously, my fingers
clumsy with excitement.

I could hardly believe my eyes. The thing Harbauer had handed me was a
folded fragment of newspaper, such as I had often seen in museums. I
recognized the old-fashioned type, and the peculiar arrangement of the
columns. But, instead of being yellow and brittle with age, and
preserved in fragments behind sealed glass, this paper was fresh and
white, and the ink was as black as the day it had been printed. What
this man said, then, must be true! He must--

"I can understand your amazement," said Harbauer. "It had not occurred
to me that a paper which, to me, was printed only yesterday, would
seem so antique to you. But that must appear as remarkable to you as
fresh papyrus, newly inscribed with the hieroglyphics of the ancient
Egyptians, would seem to one of my own day and age. But read it; you
will see how my world viewed my efforts!" There was a sharpness, a
bitterness, in his voice that made me vaguely uneasy; even though he
had solved the riddle of moving in time as men have always moved in
space, my first conjecture that I had a madman to deal with might not
be so far from the truth. Ridicule and persecution have unseated the
reason of all too many men.

       *       *       *       *       *

The type was unfamiliar to me, and the spelling was archaic, but I
managed to stumble through the article. It read, as nearly as I can
recall it, like this:

                       Harbauer Says Time

                       Is Like Great River

     Jacob Harbauer, local inventor, in an exclusive interview,
     propounds the theory that man can move about in time exactly
     as a boat moves about on the surface of a swift-flowing
     river, save that he cannot go back into time, on account of
     the opposition of the current.

     That is very fortunate, this writer feels; it would be a
     terrible thing for example, if some good-looking scamp from
     our present Twenty-first Century were to dive into the past
     and steal Cleopatra from Antony, or start an affair with
     Josephine and send Napoleon scurrying back from the front
     and let the Napoleonic wars go to pot. We'd have to have all
     our histories rewritten!

     Harbauer is well-known in Denver as the eccentric inventor
     who, for the last five or six years, has occupied a lonely
     shack in the mountains, guarded by a high fence of barbed
     wire. He claims that he has now perfected equipment which
     will enable him to project himself forward in time, and
     expects to make the experiment in the very near future.

     This writer was permitted to view the equipment which
     Harbauer says will shoot him into the future. The apparatus
     is housed in a low, barn-like building in the rear of his
     shack.

     Along one side of the room is a veritable bank of electrical
     apparatus with innumerable controls, many huge tubes of
     unfamiliar shape and appearance, a mighty generator of some
     kind and an intricate maze of gleaming copper bus-bar.

     In the center of the room is a circle of metal, about a foot
     in thickness, insulated from the flooring by four truncated
     cones of fluted glass. This disc is composed of two
     unfamiliar metals, arranged in concentric circles.

     Above this disc, at a height of about eight feet, is
     suspended a sort of grid, composed of extremely fine silvery
     wires, supported on a frame-work of black insulating
     material.

     Asked for a demonstration of his apparatus, Harbauer finally
     consented to perform an experiment with a dog--a white,
     short-haired mongrel that, Harbauer informed us, he kept to
     warn him of approaching strangers.

     He bound the dog's legs together securely, and placed the
     struggling animal in the center of the heavy metal disc.
     Then the inventor hurried to the central control panel and
     manipulated several switches, which caused a number of
     things to happen almost at once.

     The big generator started with a growl, and settled
     immediately into a deep hum; a whole row of tubes glowed
     with a purplish brilliancy. There was a crackling sound in
     the air, and the grid above the disc seemed to become
     incandescent, although it gave forth no apparent heat. From
     the rim of the metal disc, thin blue streamers of electric
     flame shot up toward the grid, and the little white dog
     began to whine nervously.

     "Now watch!" shouted Harbauer. He closed another switch,
     and the space between the disc and the grid became a
     cylinder of livid light, for a period of perhaps two
     seconds. Then Harbauer pulled all the switches, and pointed
     triumphantly to the disc. It was empty.

     We looked around the room for the dog, but he was not
     visible anywhere.

     "I have sent him nearly a century into the future," said
     Harbauer. "We will let him stay there a moment, and then
     bring him back."

     "You mean to say," we asked, "that the pup is now roaming
     around somewhere in the Twenty-second Century?" Harbauer
     said he meant just that, and added that he would now bring
     the dog back to the present time. The switches were closed
     again, but this time it was the metal plate that seemed
     incandescent, and the grid above that shot out the streaks
     of thin blue flame. As he closed the last switch, the
     cylinder of light appeared again, and when the switches were
     opened, there was the dog in the center of the disc, howling
     and struggling against his bonds.

     "Look!" cried Harbauer. "He's been attacked by another dog,
     or some other animal, while in the future. See the blood on
     his shoulders?"

     We ventured the humble opinion that the dog had scratched or
     bit himself in struggling to free himself from the cords
     with which Harbauer had bound him, and the inventor flew
     into a terrible rage, cursing and waving his arms as though
     demented. Feeling that discretion was the better part of
     valor, we beat a hasty retreat, pausing at the barbed-wire
     gate only long enough to ask Mr. Harbauer if he would be
     good enough, sometime when he had a few minutes of leisure,
     to dash into next week and bring back some stock market
     reports to aid us in our investment efforts.

     Under the circumstances, we did not wait for a response, but
     we presume we are persona non grata at the Harbauer
     establishment from this time on.

     All in all, we are not sorry.

I folded the paper and passed it back to him; some of the allusions I
did not understand, but the general tone of the article was very clear
indeed.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You see?" said Harbauer, his voice grating with anger. "I tried to be
courteous to that man; to give him a simple, convincing demonstration
of the greatest scientific achievement in centuries. And the fool
returned to write _this_: to hold me up to ridicule, to paint me as a
crack-brained, wild-eyed fanatic."

"It's hard for the layman to conceive of a great scientific
achievement," I said soothingly. "All great inventions and inventors
have been laughed at by the populace at large."

"True. True." Harbauer nodded his head solemnly. "But just the same--"
He broke off suddenly, and forced a smile. I found myself wishing that
he had completed that broken sentence, however; I felt that he had
almost revealed something that would have been most enlightening.

"But enough of that fool and his babblings," he continued. "I am here
as living proof that my experiment is a success, and I have a
tremendous curiosity about the world in which I find myself. This, I
take it, is a ship for navigating space?"

"Right! The _Ertak_, of the Special Patrol Service. Would you care to
look around a bit?"

"I would, indeed." There was a tremendous eagerness in the man's
voice.

"You're not too tired?"

"No; I am quite recovered from my experience." Harbauer leaped to his
feet, those abnormally long, slitted eyes of his glowing. "I am a
scientist, and I am most curious to see what my fellows have created
since--since my own era."

I picked up my dressing gown and tossed it to him.

"Slip this on, then, to cover your clothing. You would be an object of
too much curiosity to those men who are on duty," I suggested.

I was taller than he, and the garment came within a few inches of the
floor. He knotted the cincture around his middle and thrust his hands
into the pockets, turning to me for approval. I nodded, and motioned
for him to precede me through the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

As an officer of the Special Patrol Service, it has often been my duty
to show parties and individuals through my ship. Most of these parties
are composed of females, who have only exclamations to make instead of
intelligent comment, and who possess an unbounded capacity for asking
utterly asinine questions. It was, therefore, a real pleasure to show
Harbauer through the ship.

He was a keen, eager listener. When he asked a question, and he asked
many of them, he showed an amazing grasp of the principles involved.
My knowledge of our equipment was, of course, only practical, save for
the rudimentary theoretical knowledge that everyone has of present-day
inventions and devices.

The ethon tubes which lighted the ship, interested him but little. The
atomic generators, the gravity pads, their generators, and the
disintegrator-ray, however, he delved into with that frenzied ardor of
which only a scientist, I believe, is capable.

Questions poured out of him, and I answered them as best I could:
sometimes completely, and satisfactorily, so that he nodded and said,
"I see! I see!" and sometimes so poorly that he frowned, and
cross-questioned me insistently until he obtained the desired
information.

In the big, sound-proof navigating room, I explained the operation of
the numerous instruments, including the two three-dimensional charts,
actuated by super-radio reflexes, the television disc, the attraction
meter, the surface-temperature gauge and the complex control system.

"Forward," I added, "is the operating room. You can see it through
