and shed full of appliances for her, that was a sad day, all right.
She has lived a fearful life ever since, too proud of her dishwasher
and automatic this and that to consider selling them, but scared stiff
of the noises they make and the vibrations and all the mysterious
dials and lights, etc.

So this Friday afternoon when the oil-burner blew out from the high
wind, she got terrified, sent the kids over to their grandmother's in
a cab and sat for two hours trying to make up her mind whether to call
the fire department or the plumber.

Meanwhile, this blasted oil stove was overflowing into the fire pot.

"Well, turn it off!" I yelled. "I'll be in right away!"

I ducked into the garage and got a big handful of rags and a hunk of
string and a short stick. This I have been through before. I went in
and kissed her pretty white face, and a couple of worry lines
disappeared.

"Get me a pan or something," I said and started dismantling the front
of the heater.

These gravity-flow oil heaters weren't built to make it easy to drain
off excess oil. There's a brass plug at the inlet, but no one in
history has been able to stir one, the oil man told me. I weigh 200
pounds stripped, but all I ever did was ruin a tool trying.

The only way to get out the oil was to open the front, stuff rags down
through the narrow fire slot, sop up the stuff and fish out the rags
with the string tied around one end of the bundle. Then you wring out
the rags with your bare hands into a pan.

"Hey, Lottie," I yelled, "this is your roaster! It'll be hard to
clean out the oil smell!"

But, of course, it was too late. I had squeezed a half-pint of oil
into it already. So I went on dunking and wringing and thinking how
lousy my cigarettes were going to taste all evening and feeling glad
that I delivered beer instead of oil for a living.

       *       *       *       *       *

I got the stove bailed out and lit with only one serious blast of soot
out the "Light Here" hole. Then I dumped the oil out in the alley and
set the roaster pan in the sink. Lottie was peeling potatoes for
dinner, and she snuggled her yellow curls on my shoulder kind of
apologetically for the mess she had caused me. I scrubbed the soot and
oil off my hands and told her it was all right, only next time, for
gosh sakes, please turn the stove off at least.

The water I was splashing into the roaster gathered up in little
shrinking drops and reminded me that the pig-hocks I brought home for
Sunday dinner were going to rate throwing out unless we got the oil
smell out of the pan.

"Tell you what you do," I said to Lottie. "Get me all your cleaning
soaps and stuff and let's see what we got."

Lottie is always trying out some new handy-dandy little kitchen helper
compound, so she hefted up quite an armload. Now, when I was in high
school, I really liked chemistry. "Charlie, Boy Scientist," my pals
used to sneer at me. But I was pretty good at it, and I been reading
the science magazines right along ever since. So I know what a
detergent is supposed to do, and all about how soaps act, and stuff
that most people take the advertisers' word for.

"This one," I told Lottie, "has a lot of caustic in it, see?"

She nodded and said that's the one that ruined her aluminum coffee
pot. She remembered it specially.

I poured some very hot tap water into the roaster and shook in the
strong soap powder. "This is to saponify the oil," I explained.

"What's saponify?" Lottie asked.

"That means to make soap. Soap is mainly a mixture of some caustic
with fat or oil. It makes sudsy soap."

"But we got soap," she said. "Why don't you just use the soap we got?"

We went into the business of soap-making pretty deep. Meanwhile, I
read some more labels and added pinches of this and that detergent and
a few squirts of liquid "wonder-cleaners" that didn't say what was in
them.

In her crisp Scotch way, Lottie got across to me that she thought I
was wasting soap powder and my time and cluttering up the sink while
she was busy there, so I wound up with half a cup of Doozey soap
flakes, filled the pan to the brim and set the concoction at the back
of the drain board to do its business.

