test flight!"

Barret glared at Strong. "I suggest that you let go of my arm, Captain,"
he threatened, "or I will be forced to bring charges of assault against
you!"

Realizing an open fight would be useless, Strong released his grip on
the man's arm and turned away quickly. Barret's mocking laugh echoed in
his ears as he stepped on the slidewalk and glided away toward the
Academy. Behind him, the big hangar buzzed with the sound of men working
in high gear again. The mighty ship and its specially designed equipment
seemed at last to be ready for testing. But Strong felt none of the
excitement. It mattered little to the Solar Guard captain whether the
project was a success or failure. His thoughts were of the three cadets
in his unit, who were, first and foremost, his responsibility.

With double guards around the hangar area and even tighter security
restrictions than before, the unknown saboteur was unable to attack the
precious ship again. But he struck elsewhere. The single track monorail
that Barret had run into the area was blocked by an explosion in the
mouth of the tunnel. Nearly a thousand tons of rock and earth had fallen
on the hangar side, blocking delivery of vital equipment.

With powerful earth-moving machinery, the tunnel was cleared of the
heavy rocks and dirt, and all that remained was a general cleaning up,
and the enlisted man's work gangs had been assigned to that job.

Nearly a hundred tough, battle-scarred spacemen from the enlisted ranks
of the Solar Guard worked in the area, stripped to the waist, their
bodies burned brown from the sun. Sent to the work gang for petty
offenses, rather than for criminal acts, the enlisted men as a whole did
not mind the work. They were under guard, watched by a squad of Space
Marines armed with paralo-ray guns, but there was no attempt to make the
men feel as if they were criminals. Most of the sentences were short,
usually running from five to thirty days, with some extreme cases
serving as long as three months. But no one had ever remembered a Space
Cadet working on the squad, and particularly for six months! It was an
extraordinary situation and the guards, as well as the men on the work
details, sympathized with Roger and Astro. They realized that nothing
really serious had been done, or the boys would have been sent to the
prison asteroid, where all true criminals were sent. So a true spirit of
comradeship developed between the cadets and the enlisted men.

When Captain Strong arrived to speak to Roger and Astro, he found them
in the tunnel, working as a team of a shoveler and a sweeper. Roger
would sweep up a little pile of dirt and Astro would shovel it into a
handcart nearby.

"All right, you Venusian pug!" bawled Roger. "Police the joint!"

Astro scooped up the little pile of dirt neatly and deposited it in the
truck.

"Manning, what made the spaceship cross to Pluto?" he asked.

"To get to the other side of the universe," said Roger.

"All right," interrupted Strong. "If you two will cut out the comedy,
I'd like to talk to you."

"Captain Strong!" yelled Roger. "Hey, fellas! Look!" He turned to the
other men on the work gang. "We're special characters! See? We have
visitors during working hours!"

Strong laughed with the others, and then motioning for Roger and Astro
to follow him, walked to an isolated corner of the tunnel.

"How is it going?" he asked.

"Fine, sir," said Roger. "We have no complaints."

"Yeah," chimed in Astro with a grin. "The food is better here than at
the Academy!"

"Give this Venusian bum a good kitchen and he'd go to the Rock!" Roger
laughed.

Strong noted their lean, brown bodies and decided that a little work in
the sun with a pick and shovel had done them good. But six months of it
would interfere with their work at the Academy and could hold them back.

He told them of the work he had been doing to have their case renewed by
the Solar Guard Review Board and asked them for any special details in
their relationship with Barret that might lend weight to his plea for
outright pardon, rather than just a commutation of sentence. He wanted
it clear on their records that they had been accused unjustly, and that,
therefore, their sentence was an error.

But neither Astro nor Roger could add anything to what the young captain
already knew. He finally turned to leave, cautioning them both to stay
out of trouble, especially Roger.

"Manning," he warned, "your mouth is your big weakness. I'm detailing
Astro to make sure it stays closed!"

"You see?" gloated Astro. "You see who the captain trusts!"

"Listen, you big bum!" began Roger angrily, then stopped and grinned.
"O.K., Captain Strong, I'll keep on the ball."

"You'd better," Astro interrupted, "or I'll stand you on your head!"

With a pat on the back, Strong left them. Just as he was about to leave
the tunnel, Roger called after him:

"Have you heard anything about Tom, sir?"

"Not a word," replied Strong grimly. "So far as I know, he's still on
Mars."

"A--a fugitive?" asked Astro.

"Yes, Astro. The Solar Guard is still looking for him."

Strong watched the two cadets turn back to their work dejectedly, and
then, sighing with weariness, he headed back to the slidewalk. In the
morning he would check the reports of the Security Section for word of
Tom. Then he squared his shoulders determinedly. He would check them
now!

He could not go to bed yet. Not while Tom was still missing and while
Astro and Roger were on the work gang. He would not sleep until they
were free and the _Polaris_ unit was together again out in space!

       *       *       *       *       *

Tom Corbett was also unable to sleep. He had spent the night in the
village hotel tossing and turning, his mind seething with plans to aid
Roger and Astro.

Finally, at dawn, he got up and sneaked out of the hotel. Avoiding the
convenience of the monorail, he struck out on foot over the rugged
countryside for Space Academy. He had a plan, but the plan required that
he talk to Roger and Astro first, and then to Captain Strong, but it had
to be done secretly. He realized that his knowledge of the identity of
the saboteur would be a more effective weapon if everyone still believed
he was on Mars.

After getting close enough to the Academy to use the slidewalk system
crisscrossing the huge area, he loitered on the crowded platforms which
connected the hangar, the Academy, and the spaceport. He kept his coat
collar high and his civilian hat pulled low over his eyes.

He was on the main slidewalk, moving toward the Tower building, when his
eyes picked out the familiar close-cropped blond hair of Roger and the
unmistakable bulk of Astro on the walk leading to the hangar. Changing
at the slidewalk intersection, he took off after them, hoping he would
not be noticed in the crowd of civilian workers. Roger and Astro were
carrying tools over their shoulders and were lagging behind the main
body of workers moving toward a huge tunnel opening. Tom saw his chance
and moved up quickly beside them.

"Keep walking and don't show surprise!" he whispered sharply.

But it was too much to ask. Astro and Roger jumped in surprise and let
out involuntary shouts of joy, which attracted the attention of the
guards. They noticed the stranger in civilian clothes and stared at
him.

"Tom!" exclaimed Roger. "What the devil are you--?"

"Sh!" hissed Tom. "We haven't got much time." He saw one of the guards
turn and stare at him. "Listen to me," he continued quickly. "I've got
important dope about the saboteur!"

"How?" gasped Astro.

"Never mind," replied Tom. "Now, to nail him, I've got to get him into
the act! I need proof!"

"But who is it?" asked Roger.

"I can't tell you now. Here comes the guard. Are you going to be working
around here long?"

"At least another three days," said Roger. "But who--?"

Roger noticed the guard move up to them and he suddenly straightened up
and snorted derisively, "Yeah. But why a guy should want to join the
Solar Guard is more than I can see. You must be wacky, mister!"

He and Astro walked away, and after a hesitant look at Tom, the guard
followed the two cadets. Tom boarded the slidewalk heading back toward
the Academy. So far, so good. He knew where his unit mates were, but up
ahead, in the gleaming Tower of Galileo, was his second target, Captain
Strong. His skipper had to listen to him, had to be sympathetic and help
him catch the saboteur. It was the only way Tom could clear his own name
and free Roger and Astro.




CHAPTER 15


"Scott!"

"Here!" bellowed a grizzled spaceman in reply to Major Connel's call.

"Augutino!"

"Here!"

"Jones!

"Present!"

"Smith!"

"Here!"

"Albert!"

"Here!"

Connel checked the last name on the clipboard and turned to Professor
Hemmingwell standing beside him at the base of the ship. "All present
and ready, sir."

"Fine!" said the professor. He turned and looked around. "Where is
Dave?"

"Here he comes now," said Connel.

They both watched Barret stride toward them, his arms loaded with gear.

"This is the stuff I told you about, Professor," he said as Hemmingwell
looked at it curiously.

"What stuff?" asked Connel.

"Portable heaters for the crew's space suits, just in case--" Barret
paused meaningfully.

"In case of what?" growled Connel.

"Why, ask them!" replied Barret, gesturing toward the group of civilian
crewmen who had been selected for the test flight of the spaceship.

Connel turned to look at them, then back at Barret. "Ask them what?" he
barked.

"How they feel about making this flight," said Barret.

Connel scowled and turned to the men. "Is there anything to what he
says?" he demanded.

The men shuffled their feet nervously but did not reply.

"Well?" exploded Connel.

"See, they're afraid of you, Connel," said Barret, deliberately omitting
the courtesy of using the major's title.

Ignoring Barret's thrust, Connel continued to face the men. "Is that
right, men?" he shouted. "Are you afraid of me?"

There was a mumble from the group and then the man named Scott, a
thick-set individual with black flashing eyes, stepped forward.

"Speaking for myself," he said, looking straight at the major, "I'm not
afraid of anything that walks. And that includes you, Major Connel. No
offense meant, it's just a statement of fact." He paused and drew a deep
breath. Then he added, "But I am afraid of this ship."

"Why?" demanded Connel, who could not help admiring the man for his
straightforward approach.

"She's junk-jinxed," said the man, using the expression of spacemen who
believed a ship with a suspicious accident record should be junked
because it was jinxed.

"Junk-jinxed!" cried Connel, amazed.

"Preposterous," snorted Professor Hemmingwell. "Why, you helped build
this ship, Scotty! Do you doubt the work you've put into her? Or the
work of your friends?"

"That has nothing to do with it," replied Scott stubbornly. "The others
feel the same way I do."

Barret stepped forward. Arrogantly and before Connel could stop him, he
began addressing the men. "Listen, you men!" he shouted. "You're being
childish! Why, you built this ship! How can you possibly allow
yourselves to be so stupid as to believe in an idiotic thing like a
jinx. Now, why don't you just get aboard and stop being so ridiculously
superstitious!"

Connel could have reached out with one of his big hands and squeezed
Barret's neck to shut him up. Instead of allaying their fears, which
even he would admit were real enough, the man was creating further
resentment with his attack on their pride as thinking, reasoning men.

"All right, all right!" he bellowed. "That's enough for now, _Mister_
Barret!" He turned to the men and he could tell by the expressions on
their faces that he had lost them. They would not take the ship aloft.
But he had to try.

"Now listen," he growled. "This is a very important project and someone
has been trying to get us to wash out the whole idea. If you don't come
through, he'll succeed. You are the best men in your fields, and if
each of you attend to your particular job, then the ship will blast off
and be a success! Now, how about it?"

He was met with the stony faces of men who were afraid. Nothing he could
say or offer them would get them to take the ship off the ground. He
tried a new tack. "I'm offering you _double wages_!" he roared.

The men were silent.

"Double wages _and_ a bonus!"

Silence.

"All right! Beat it!" he growled. "Don't ever show your faces around
here again!"

Connel turned to Professor Hemmingwell. "I'll see if I can't muster a
crew from the ranks of the Solar Guard," he said.

"Major," said the professor, his face worn and haggard from the long
ordeal of completing the project, "I wouldn't want men _ordered_ to man
this vessel."

"They're in the Solar Guard and they take orders," said Connel.

"No," persisted Hemmingwell. "I will not let a man on that ship that
does not want to go. Remember, Major, it is still my personal property."

"All right," said Connel grimly. "I'll see if I can recruit a crew from
the civilian workers around the Academy."

But Major Connel encountered the same superstitious dread everywhere.
The word had spread that the projectile ship was jinxed. Old tales of
other ships that had gone out into space, never to be heard of again,
were recalled, and the men found instances of similar prelaunching
happenings on the projectile ship. Very little of it was true, of
course. The stories were half-truths and legends that had been handed
down through generations of spacemen, but they seemed to have special
significance now.

