The fear of one who sees how his haste and breed can be called
punishable criminal negligence, was in his face. The things that had
been human, sprawled stiff before him, accusing him. But the worst was
the presence of those grim, silent men, who might add him forcibly to
the death-list. That moment held crystallized in it the conflict of an
urge to win vast profits, with the payment in human lives that had
been exacted this time.

Near-dead Titan was the present step in mankind's outward march of
colonial dominion toward the stars. Titan itself was rich in the
radioactive ores that has become the fuel, the moving force, not only
of the rockets of Earth's expanding space-commerce, but of the wheels
of industry and comfort at home. And richer in those elements were the
Rings of Saturn, nearby, those stupendous, whirling bands of dust,
wreckage of a broken satellite in which, as in any other planet or
moon most of those heaviest, costliest metals had originally sunk to
its center, far out of reach of mining operations. But in the Rings,
all this incalculable wealth of uranium, radium, osmium, and so forth,
not to mention millions of tons of useless gold, was uniquely exposed
as easily accessible dust.

Oh, yes. And the S.C.S.--Space Colonists' Supply--wanted its cut for
providing equipment, as received elsewhere in the past. Bert Kraskow
knew that this must remain dapper Trenton Lauren's aim, in spite of a
vast and possibly ruinous investment in manufactured goods that could
turn out to be obsolete and unmarketable, in addition to its poor
quality.

Bert studied Lauren from between narrowed eyelids, weighing his
qualities further, judging, ever predicting. Trenton Lauren might hate
himself some for the deaths that were his responsibility. Yet Bert bet
that he hated himself more for having to explain the failure of one of
his airdomes to these crude colonists. It hurt his ego. Lauren was
full of fear; he was a stuffy, visionless conservative, but he was
wily, too.

Bert saw his lips tighten, as he marshalled his forces to smooth down
the fury of the men before him.

"I'm deeply sorry that these people had to die," he said in his
high-pitched voice. "But chance-taking is part of any new
space-venture. And all who use airdomes, spacesuits, or other S.C.S.
equipment, are insured against its defective performance. Ten thousand
dollars, paid in case of death, is still a lot of money. S.C.S. has
made fine products for over forty years. No dangerous, new-fangled
ideas can yet replace them. Considering the risk inherent in space
colonization, occasional mishaps can hardly be avoided. You all know
that. Business--life--everything--is a gamble."

Sure. About chance-taking there was truth in his pompous words. But
did one buy a life with a few thousand dollars, or call money a just
penalty for obvious and deadly neglect?

Knots of muscle gathered at the angles of Lawler's square jaw. Old
Stan Kraskow stared at Lauren as if he didn't believe that anybody
could talk so stupidly.

Bert Kraskow's savage blood seethed. But when he was really sore his
tendency was to be coldly and quietly logical in his speech and
actions. The plans to change things were made. He was in on them. And
what was the use of getting into arguments that might give the enemy a
hint? Or set off violence that might spoil everything?

"Easy," he whispered. "Dad! Lawler! Don't talk. Don't start anything."

But Alice Leland Kraskow, Bert's wife, had arrived on the scene. She
was little and dark and fiery, one of the few feminine colonists yet
on Titan. In another airdome, where Bert and she had their cottage,
she had been awakened by the shouts of those who had seen the accident
take place. Donning a spacesuit, she had followed the crowd.

Being at a little distance from her, Bert had no chance to shush her
outspoken comments. And to try might have done no good, anyway. She
had truth to tell, and a woman's tongue to tell it.

"Yes, Mr. Lauren," she said pointedly. "We're all gamblers. Granted.
But you started to cheat even before you were afraid of losing. Maybe
it's time we did something about it."

Trenton Lauren looked more scared than before. But now, as two Space
Patrolmen in their silvery armor, arrived from their quarters and
stood beside him, he smiled a little.

"Madam," he drawled, "maybe I know what you mean. You want to defy the
law. Someone around here has been hoping for word from Earth that an
okay has been granted by the Safe Products Approval Board, for, shall
we say, a radically new product? Well, the optimists will wait a long
time for such approval at the S.P.A.B. The action of this invention
is, to say the least, extremely dangerous. So, if they're that
foolish, those optimists might as well go ahead with their alternate
course: To bring their deadly and spectacular innovation dramatically
into use without the stamp of safety!"

Bert's concern about his wife's outspoken challenge to Lauren was thus
suddenly diverted. His jaw hardened further. A nagging suspicion that
Trenton Lauren had found things out, was confirmed. It meant, perhaps,
that Lauren had already taken counteraction secretly.

Bert Kraskow longed to beat up Lauren in spite of the presence of the
two space policemen. But the need for immediate and better action
denied him this extravagant luxury. He went to his wife's side and
took her arm.

"Lauren," he said. "I've got a brother to bury. So discussions are
out, for now. Guys, will you bring Nick's body to my cottage? Come on,
Allie...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bert was trying very hard to slip away unobtrusively when Lauren
grinned mockingly. "Hold on, Kraskow," he snapped. "You're tangled up
in this matter, somehow. I've learned that you've already broken a
minor law by landing a ship quietly out in the deserts of Titan
without declaring its presence; a ship that can be assumed reasonably
to be freighted with lethal materials. As a dangerous individual, you
can be put under an arrest of restraint. Legal technicalities can be
disregarded in a raw colonization project where people are apt to show
hysteria, and where something like military law must be enforced for
general protection. The say-so of an old and honorable firm like S. C.
S. that you are a menace, can, I am sure, be accepted. Patrolmen, take
him!"

The cops were puzzled. They offered no immediate objection as Bert,
leading his wife, tried to pass them. But Lauren got in Bert's way to
prevent him from slipping into the glowering crowd.

Against a man in space-armor, fists weren't very effective; still Bert
had the satisfaction of giving Lauren a mighty shove that sent him
sprawling. A terrible fury was behind it. The desperation of a last
chance. Here was where he had to become completely outlaw.

Alice and he threaded their way through the crowd where the cops could
use neither their blasters nor their paralyzers, in spite of Lauren's
