force and carry it all off. Gracious, but this is a lucky night. We can
reprovision the whole fleet from this room."

"I thought it singular," I said, "that with the exception of the girl
whom we have rescued no women were seen in the house. Evidently the
lights over yonder indicate the location of a considerable town, and it
is quite probable that this building, without windows, and so strongly
constructed, is the common storehouse, where the provisions for the town
are kept. The fellows we killed must have been the watchmen in charge
of the storehouse, and they were treating themselves to a little music
from the slave girl when we happened to come upon them."


A New Food Supply.

With the utmost haste several of the other electrical ships, waiting
above the cloud curtain, were summoned to descend, and, with more than a
hundred men, we returned to the building, and this time almost entirely
exhausted its stores, each man carrying as much as he could stagger under.

Fortunately our proceedings had been conducted without much noise,
and the storehouse being situated at a considerable distance from other
buildings, none of the Martians, except those who would never tell the
story, had known of our arrival or of our doings on the planet.

"Now, we'll return and surprise Edison with the news," said Colonel Smith.

Our ship was the last to pass up through the clouds, and it was a strange
sight to watch the others as one after another they rose toward the
great dome, entered it, though from below it resembled a solid vault of
grayish-pink marble, and disappeared.


Sunshine Again.

We quickly followed them, and having penetrated the enormous curtain,
were considerably surprised on emerging at the upper side to find that
the sun was shining brilliantly upon us. It will be remembered that it
was night on this side of Mars when we went down, but our adventure had
occupied several hours, and now Mars had so far turned upon its axis
that the portion of its surface over which we were had come around into
the sunlight.

We knew that the squadron which we had left besieging the Lake of the Sun
must also have been carried around in a similar manner, passing into the
night while the side of the planet where we were was emerging into day.

Our shortest way back would be by travelling westward, because then
we should be moving in a direction opposite to that in which the
planet rotated, and the main squadron, sharing that rotation, would be
continually moving in our direction.

But to travel westward was to penetrate once more into the night side
of the planet.

The prows, if I may so call them, of our ships were accordingly turned
in the direction of the vast shadow which Mars was invisibly projecting
into space behind it, and on entering that shadow the sun disappeared
from our eyes, and once more the huge hidden globe beneath us became a
black chasm among the stars.

Now that we were in the neighborhood of a globe capable of imparting
considerable weight to all things under the influence of its attraction
that peculiar condition which I have before described as existing in
the midst of space, where there was neither up nor down for us, had
ceased. Here where we had weight "up" and "down" had resumed their old
meanings. "Down" was toward the centre of Mars, and "up" was away from
that centre.


The Two Moons of Mars.

Standing on the deck, and looking overhead as we swiftly ploughed our
smooth way at a great height through the now imperceptible atmosphere
of the planet, I saw the two moons of Mars meeting in the sky exactly
above us.

Before our arrival at Mars, there had been considerable discussion among
the learned men as to the advisability of touching at one of their moons,
and when the discovery was made that our provisions were nearly exhausted,
it had been suggested that the Martian satellites might furnish us with
an additional supply.

But it had appeared a sufficient reply to this suggestion that the moons
of Mars are both insignificant bodies, not much larger than the asteroid
we had fallen in with, and that there could not possibly be any form of
vegetation or other edible products upon them.

This view having prevailed, we had ceased to take an interest in the
satellites, further than to regard them as objects of great curiosity
on account of their motions.

The nearer of these moons, Phobos, is only 3,700 miles from the surface
of Mars, and we watched it travelling around the planet three times in
the course of every day. The more distant one, Deimos, 12,500 miles away,
required considerably more than one day to make its circuit.

It now happened that the two had come into conjunction, as I have said,
just over our heads, and, throwing myself down on my back on the deck
of the electrical ship, for a long time I watched the race between the
two satellites, until Phobos, rapidly gaining upon the other, had left
its rival far behind.

Suddenly Colonel Smith, who took very little interest in these
astronomical curiosities, touched me, and pointing ahead, said:

"There they are."


Rejoining the Fleet.

I looked, and sure enough there were the signal lights of the principal
squadron, and as we gazed we occasionally saw, darting up from the vast
cloud mass beneath, an electric bayonet, fiercely thrust into the sky,
which showed that the siege was still actively going on, and that the
Martians were jabbing away at their invisible enemies outside the curtain.

In a short time the two fleets had joined, and Colonel Smith and I
immediately transferred ourselves to the flagship.

"Well, what have you done?" asked Mr. Edison, while others crowded around
with eager attention.

"If we have not captured their provision train," said Colonel Smith, "we
have done something just about as good. We have foraged on the country,
and have collected a supply that I reckon will last this fleet for at
least a month."

"What's that? What's that?"

"It's just what I say," and Colonel Smith brought out of his pocket one
of the square cakes of compressed food. "Set your teeth in that, and see
what you think of it, but don't take too much, for it's powerful strong."

"I say," he continued, "we have got enough of that stuff to last us all
for a month, but we've done more than that; we have got a surprise for
you that will make you open your eyes. Just wait a minute."


Caring for the Rescued Girl.

Colonel Smith made a signal to the electrical ship which we had just
quitted to draw near. It came alongside, so that one could step from
its deck onto the flagship. Colonel Smith disappeared for a minute in
the interior of his ship, then re-emerged, leading the girl whom we had
found upon the planet.

"Take her inside, quick," he said, "for she is not used to this thin air."

In fact, we were at so great an elevation that the rarity of the
atmosphere now compelled us all to wear our air-tight suits, and the girl,
not being thus attired, would have fallen unconscious on the deck if we
had not instantly removed her to the interior of the car.

There she quickly recovered from the effects of the deprivation of air
and looked about her, pale, astonished, but yet apparently without fear.

Every motion of this girl convinced me that she not only recognized
us as members of her own race, but that she felt that her only hope
lay in our aid. Therefore, strange as we were to her in many respects,
nevertheless she did not think that she was in danger while among us.

The circumstances under which we had found her were quickly explained. Her
beauty, her strange fate and the impenetrable mystery which surrounded
her excited universal admiration and wonder.


How Came She on Mars?

"How did she get on Mars?" was the question that everybody asked, and
that nobody could answer.

But while all were crowding around and overwhelming the poor girl with
their staring, suddenly she burst into tears, and then, with arms
outstretched in the same appealing manner which had so stirred our
sympathies when we first saw her in the house of the Martians, she broke
forth in a wild recitation, which was half a song and half a wail.

As she went on I noticed that a learned professor of languages
from the University of Heidelberg was listening to her with intense
attention. Several times he appeared to be on the point of breaking in
with an exclamation. I could plainly see that he was becoming more and
more excited as the words poured from the girl's lips. Occasionally
he nodded and muttered, smiling to himself. Her song finished, the
girl sank half-exhausted upon the floor. She was lifted and placed in
a reclining position at the side of the car.

Then the Heidelberg professor stepped to the centre of the car, in the
sight of all, and in a most impressive manner said:

"Gentlemen, our sister."

"I have her tongue recognized! The language that she speaks, the roots
of the great Indo-European, or Aryan stock, contains."

"This girl, gentlemen, to the oldest family of the human race
belongs. Her language every tongue that now upon the earth is spoken
antedates. Convinced am I that it that great original speech is from
which have all the languages of the civilized world sprung."

"How she here came, so many millions of miles from the earth, a great
mystery is. But it shall be penetrated, and it is from her own lips that
we the truth shall learn, because not difficult to us shall it be the
language that she speaks to acquire since to our own it is akin."


The Professor's Astonishing Statement.

This announcement of the Heidelberg professor stirred us all most
profoundly. It not only deepened our interest in the beautiful girl
whom we had rescued, but, in a dim way, it gave us reason to hope that
we should yet discover some means of mastering the Martians by dealing
them a blow from within.

It had been expected, the reader will remember, that the Martian whom we
had made prisoner on the asteroid, might be of use to us in a similar way,
and for that reason great efforts had been made to acquire his language,
and considerable progress had been effected in that direction.

But from the moment of our arrival at Mars itself, and especially after
the battles began, the prisoner had resumed his savage and uncommunicative
disposition, and had seemed continually to be expecting that we would
fall victims to the prowess of his fellow beings, and that he would
be released. How an outlaw, such as he evidently was, who had been
caught in the act of robbing the Martian gold mines, could expect to
escape punishment on returning to his native planet it was difficult
to see. Nevertheless, so strong are the ties of race we could plainly
perceive that all his sympathies were for his own people.

In fact, in consequence of his surly manner, and his attempts to escape,
he had been more strictly bound than before and to get him out of the
way had been removed from the flagship, which was already overcrowded,
and placed in one of the other electric ships, and this ship--as it
happened--was one of those which were lost in the great battle beneath
the clouds. So after all, the Martian had perished, by a vengeful stroke
launched from his native globe.

But Providence had placed in our hands a far better interpreter than he
could ever have been. This girl of our own race would need no urging,
or coercion, on our part in order to induce her to reveal any secrets
of the Martians that might be useful in our further proceedings.

But one thing was first necessary to be done.

We must learn to talk with her.


Learning Her Language.

But for the discovery of the store of provisions it would have been
impossible for us to spare the time needed to acquire the language of
the girl, but now that we had been saved from the danger of starvation,
we could prolong the siege for several weeks, employing the intervening
time to the best advantage.

The terrible disaster which we had suffered in the great battle above
the Lake of the Sun, wherein we had lost nearly a third of our entire
force, had been quite sufficient to convince us that our only hope of
victory lay in dealing the Martians some paralyzing stroke that at one
blow would deprive them of the power of resistance. A victory that cost
us the loss of a single ship would be too dearly purchased now.

How to deal that blow, and first of all, how to discover the means of
dealing it, were at present the uppermost problems in our minds.

The only hope for us lay in the girl.

If, as there was every reason to believe, she was familiar with the
ways and secrets of the Martians, then she might be able to direct our
efforts in such a manner as to render them effective.

"We can spare two weeks for this," said Mr. Edison. "Can you fellows of
many tongues learn to talk with the girl in that time?"

"We'll try it," said several.

"It shall we do," cried the Heidelberg professor more confidently.

"Then there is no use of staying here," continued the commander. "If we
withdraw the Martians will think that we have either given up the contest
or been destroyed. Perhaps they will then pull off their blanket and
let us see their face once more. That will give us a better opportunity
to strike effectively when we are again ready."


Preparing a Rendezvous.

"Why not rendezvous at one of the moons?" said an astronomer. "Neither
of the two moons is of much consequence, as far as size goes, but still
it would serve as a sort of anchorage ground, and while there, if we were
careful to keep on the side away from Mars, we should escape detection."

This suggestion was immediately accepted, and the squadron having been
signalled to assemble quickly bore off in the direction of the more
distant moon of Mars, Deimos. We knew that it was slightly smaller than
Phobos but its greater distance gave promise that it would better serve
our purpose of temporary concealment. The moons of Mars, like the earth's
moon, always keep the same face toward their master. By hiding behind
Deimos we should escape the prying eyes of the Martians, even when they
employed telescopes, and thus be able to remain comparatively close at
hand, ready to pounce down upon them again after we had obtained, as we
now had good hope of doing, information that would make us masters of
the situation.




Chapter XIII.


On One of Mars' Moons.

Deimos proved to be, as we had expected, about six miles in diameter. Its
mean density is not very great so that the acceleration of gravity did
not exceed one two-thousandths of the earth's. Consequently the weight
of a man turning the scales at 150 pounds at home was here only about
one ounce.

The result was that we could move about with greater ease than on the
golden asteroid, and some of the scientific men eagerly resumed their
interrupted experiments.

But the attraction of this little satellite was so slight that we had to
be very careful not to move too swiftly in going about lest we should
involuntarily leave the ground and sail out into space, as, it will be
remembered, happened to the fugitives during the fight on the asteroid.

Not only would such an adventure have been an uncomfortable experience,
but it might have endangered the success of our scheme. Our present
distance from the surface of Mars did not exceed 12,500 miles, and we had
reason to believe that Martians possessed telescopes powerful enough to
enable them not merely to see the electrical ships at such a distance,
but to also catch sight of us individually. Although the cloud curtain
still rested on the planet it was probable that the Martians would send
some of their airships up to its surface in order to determine what
our fate had been. From that point of vantage, with their exceedingly
powerful glasses, we feared that they might be able to detect anything
unusual upon or in the neighborhood of Deimos.


The Ships are Moored.

Accordingly strict orders were given, not only that the ships should be
moored on that side of the satellite which is perpetually turned away
from Mars, but that, without orders, no one should venture around on
the other side of the little globe, or even on the edge of it, where he
might be seen in profile against the sky.

Still, of course, it was essential that we, on our part, should keep a
close watch, and so a number of sentinels were selected, whose duty it
was to place themselves at the edge of Deimos, where they could peep over
the horizon, so to speak, and catch sight of the globe of our enemies.

The distance of Mars from us was only about three times its own diameter,
consequently it shut off a large part of the sky, as viewed from our
position.

But in order to see its whole surface it was necessary to go a little
beyond the edge of the satellite, on that side which faced Mars. At the
suggestion of Colonel Smith, who had so frequently stalked Indians that
devices of this kind readily occurred to his mind, the sentinels all
wore garments corresponding in color to that of the soil of the asteroid,
which was of a dark, reddish brown hue. This would tend to conceal them
from the prying eyes of the Martians.

The commander himself frequently went around the edge of the planet in
order to take a look at Mars, and I often accompanied him.


Marvellous Discoveries.

The Martians Were the Builders of the Great Sphinx and the
Pyramids.

I shall never forget one occasion, when, lying flat on the ground,
and cautiously worming our way around on the side toward Mars, we had
just begun to observe it with our telescopes, when I perceived, against
the vast curtain of smoke, a small, glinting object, which I instantly
suspected to be an airship.

I called Mr. Edison's attention to it, and we both agreed that it was,
undoubtedly, one of the Martians' aerial vessels, probably on the lookout
for us.

A short time afterward a large number of airships made their appearance
at the upper surface of the clouds, moving to and fro, and although,
with our glasses, we could only make out the general form of the ships,
without being able to discern the Martians upon them, yet we had not the
least doubt but they were sweeping the sky in every direction in order
to determine whether we had been completely destroyed or had retreated
to a distance from the planet.

Even when that side of Mars on which we were looking had passed into
night, we could still see the guardships circling above the clouds,
their presence being betrayed by the faint twinkling of the electric
lights that they bore.

Finally, after about a week had passed, the Martians evidently made up
their minds that they had annihilated us, and that there was no longer
danger to be feared. Convincing evidence that they believed we should
not be heard from again was furnished when the withdrawal of the great
curtain of cloud began.


A Great Phenomenon.

This phenomenon first manifested itself by a gradual thinning of the
vaporous shield, until, at length, we began to perceive the red surface
of the planet dimly shining through it. Thinner and rarer it became, and,
after the lapse of about eighteen hours, it had completely disappeared,
and the huge globe shone out again, reflecting the light of the sun
from its continents and oceans with a brightness that, in contrast with
the all-enveloping night to which we had so long been subjected, seemed
unbearable to our eyes.

Indeed, so brilliant was the illumination which fell upon the surface of
Deimos that the number of persons who had been permitted to pass around
upon the exposed side of the satellite was carefully restricted. In
the blaze of light which had been suddenly poured upon us we felt
somewhat like malefactors unexpectedly enveloped in the illumination of
a policeman's dark lantern.

Meanwhile, the object which we had in view in retreating to the satellite
