superficial differences as crest and tail. In fact, as a
smooth-skinned thinking biped, with a well-developed moral sense, he
fit The Visitor's definition of a human. It wasn't just the loneliness
of seven thousand years of isolation, either. When he had first
analyzed these people, just after that disastrous forced landing so
long ago, he had classified them as human. Not _homo sapiens_, of
course, but human all the same.

"Okay," he said, somewhat querulously. "Get up, get up. You've got
some questions for me, I hope? I don't get many people up here asking
questions any more. Mostly I'm all alone except for the ceremonial
visits." He paused. "Well, speak up, young man. Have you got something
to ask me?"

Garth scrambled to his feet "Yes, my Lord Visitor," he said. "I have
several questions."

The Visitor chuckled reedily. "You may find the answers just a little
bit hard to understand."

Garth smiled, some of his fear vanishing. The Visitor sounded a little
like his senile grandfather, back home. "That is why you are asked so
few questions these days, my Lord," he said. "Our scientists have
about as much trouble figuring out what your answers mean as they do
in solving the problems without consulting you at all."

"Of course." The head of The Visitor bobbed affirmatively several
times as he propelled his wheelchair a few inches forward. "If I gave
you the answers to all your problems for you, so you could figure them
out too easily, you'd never be developing your own thinking powers.
But I've never failed to answer any questions you asked. Now have I?
And accurately, too." The thin voice rang with pride. "You've never
stumped me yet, and you never will."

[Illustration]

"No, my Lord," answered Garth. "So perhaps you'll answer my questions,
too, even though they're a little different from the kind you're
accustomed to. I'm a newspaper reporter, and I want to verify some of
our traditions about you."

       *       *       *       *       *

As The Visitor remained silent, Garth paused and looked around him at
the small, bare, naked-walled room. "This _is_ a spaceship, isn't it?"

The huddled figure in the wheelchair cackled in a brief laugh. "I've
been hoping that somebody would get up enough nerve someday to ask
that kind of question," it said. "Yep, this is a spaceship. And a
darned big one."

"How did you happen to land on this planet?"

"Had an accident. Didn't want to land here, but there wasn't any
choice. Made a mighty good landing, considering everything. It was a
little rough, though, in spots."

"How many people were there in the ship, in addition to yourself?"

The Visitor's voice turned suddenly soft. "There were three thousand,
nine hundred and forty-eight passengers and twenty-seven in the crew
when the accident happened."

"My Lord," asked Garth, "did any survive, aside from you?"

The Visitor was silent for many minutes, and his answer, when he
spoke, was a faint whisper, filled with the anguish of seven thousand
years. "Not one survived. Not one. They were all dead, most of them,
long before the ship touched ground, in spite of everything I could
do. I was as gentle as I could be, but we touched a hundred _g_ a
couple of times on on the way down. Flesh and blood just weren't made
to take shocks like that. I did all I could."

"You were the pilot, then? You landed the ship?" asked Garth.

"I landed the ship," said The Visitor.

"If I may ask, my Lord, how did you manage to survive when all the
others died?"

"It's a question I've asked myself many times, sitting here on this
mountaintop these seven thousands of your years. I was just enough
tougher, that's all. Built to take it, you might say, and I had a job
to do. But I was badly hurt in the landing. Mighty badly hurt."

"You were always in a wheelchair, then? Even before--"

