_Choco-Bite_!" There was a sobbing female whine: "I _wish_ I had a
Feckle Freezer! I'd do _anything_ for a Feckle Freezer!" Burckhardt
reached his floor and left the elevator in the middle of the last one.
It left him a little uneasy. The commercials were not for familiar
brands; there was no feeling of use and custom to them.

But the office was happily normal--except that Mr. Barth wasn't in.
Miss Mitkin, yawning at the reception desk, didn't know exactly why.
"His home phoned, that's all. He'll be in tomorrow."

"Maybe he went to the plant. It's right near his house."

She looked indifferent. "Yeah."

A thought struck Burckhardt. "But today is June 15th! It's quarterly
tax return day--he has to sign the return!"

Miss Mitkin shrugged to indicate that that was Burckhardt's problem,
not hers. She returned to her nails.

Thoroughly exasperated, Burckhardt went to his desk. It wasn't that he
couldn't sign the tax returns as well as Barth, he thought
resentfully. It simply wasn't his job, that was all; it was a
responsibility that Barth, as office manager for Contro Chemicals'
downtown office, should have taken.

       *       *       *       *       *

He thought briefly of calling Barth at his home or trying to reach him
at the factory, but he gave up the idea quickly enough. He didn't
really care much for the people at the factory and the less contact he
had with them, the better. He had been to the factory once, with
Barth; it had been a confusing and, in a way, a frightening
experience. Barring a handful of executives and engineers, there
wasn't a soul in the factory--that is, Burckhardt corrected himself,
remembering what Barth had told him, not a _living_ soul--just the
machines.

According to Barth, each machine was controlled by a sort of computer
which reproduced, in its electronic snarl, the actual memory and mind
of a human being. It was an unpleasant thought. Barth, laughing, had
assured him that there was no Frankenstein business of robbing
graveyards and implanting brains in machines. It was only a matter, he
said, of transferring a man's habit patterns from brain cells to
vacuum-tube cells. It didn't hurt the man and it didn't make the
machine into a monster.

But they made Burckhardt uncomfortable all the same.

He put Barth and the factory and all his other little irritations out
of his mind and tackled the tax returns. It took him until noon to
verify the figures--which Barth could have done out of his memory and
his private ledger in ten minutes, Burckhardt resentfully reminded
himself.

He sealed them in an envelope and walked out to Miss Mitkin. "Since
Mr. Barth isn't here, we'd better go to lunch in shifts," he said.
"You can go first."

"Thanks." Miss Mitkin languidly took her bag out of the desk drawer
and began to apply makeup.

Burckhardt offered her the envelope. "Drop this in the mail for me,
will you? Uh--wait a minute. I wonder if I ought to phone Mr. Barth to
make sure. Did his wife say whether he was able to take phone calls?"

"Didn't say." Miss Mitkin blotted her lips carefully with a Kleenex.
"Wasn't his wife, anyway. It was his daughter who called and left the
message."

"The kid?" Burckhardt frowned. "I thought she was away at school."

"She called, that's all I know."

Burckhardt went back to his own office and stared distastefully at the
unopened mail on his desk. He didn't like nightmares; they spoiled his
whole day. He should have stayed in bed, like Barth.

       *       *       *       *       *

A funny thing happened on his way home. There was a disturbance at the
corner where he usually caught his bus--someone was screaming
something about a new kind of deep-freeze--so he walked an extra
block. He saw the bus coming and started to trot. But behind him,
someone was calling his name. He looked over his shoulder; a small
harried-looking man was hurrying toward him.

Burckhardt hesitated, and then recognized him. It was a casual
acquaintance named Swanson. Burckhardt sourly observed that he had
already missed the bus.

He said, "Hello."

Swanson's face was desperately eager. "Burckhardt?" he asked
inquiringly, with an odd intensity. And then he just stood there
silently, watching Burckhardt's face, with a burning eagerness that
dwindled to a faint hope and died to a regret. He was searching for
something, waiting for something, Burckhardt thought. But whatever it
was he wanted, Burckhardt didn't know how to supply it.

Burckhardt coughed and said again, "Hello, Swanson."

Swanson didn't even acknowledge the greeting. He merely sighed a very
deep sigh.

"Nothing doing," he mumbled, apparently to himself. He nodded
abstractedly to Burckhardt and turned away.

Burckhardt watched the slumped shoulders disappear in the crowd. It
was an _odd_ sort of day, he thought, and one he didn't much like.
Things weren't going right.

Riding home on the next bus, he brooded about it. It wasn't anything
terrible or disastrous; it was something out of his experience
entirely. You live your life, like any man, and you form a network of
impressions and reactions. You _expect_ things. When you open your
medicine chest, your razor is expected to be on the second shelf; when
you lock your front door, you expect to have to give it a slight extra
tug to make it latch.

It isn't the things that are right and perfect in your life that make
it familiar. It is the things that are just a little bit wrong--the
sticking latch, the light switch at the head of the stairs that needs
an extra push because the spring is old and weak, the rug that
unfailingly skids underfoot.

It wasn't just that things were wrong with the pattern of Burckhardt's
life; it was that the _wrong_ things were wrong. For instance, Barth
hadn't come into the office, yet Barth _always_ came in.

Burckhardt brooded about it through dinner. He brooded about it,
despite his wife's attempt to interest him in a game of bridge with
the neighbors, all through the evening. The neighbors were people he
liked--Anne and Farley Dennerman. He had known them all their lives.
But they were odd and brooding, too, this night and he barely listened
to Dennerman's complaints about not being able to get good phone
service or his wife's comments on the disgusting variety of television
commercials they had these days.

Burckhardt was well on the way to setting an all-time record for
continuous abstraction when, around midnight, with a suddenness that
surprised him--he was strangely _aware_ of it happening--he turned
over in his bed and, quickly and completely, fell asleep.


II

On the morning of June 15th, Burckhardt woke up screaming.

[Illustration]

It was more real than any dream he had ever had in his life. He could
still hear the explosion, feel the blast that crushed him against a
wall. It did not seem right that he should be sitting bolt upright in
bed in an undisturbed room.

His wife came pattering up the stairs. "Darling!" she cried. "What's
the matter?"

He mumbled, "Nothing. Bad dream."

She relaxed, hand on heart. In an angry tone, she started to say: "You
gave me such a shock--"

But a noise from outside interrupted her. There was a wail of sirens
and a clang of bells; it was loud and shocking.

The Burckhardts stared at each other for a heartbeat, then hurried
fearfully to the window.

There were no rumbling fire engines in the street, only a small panel
truck, cruising slowly along. Flaring loudspeaker horns crowned its
top. From them issued the screaming sound of sirens, growing in
intensity, mixed with the rumble of heavy-duty engines and the sound
of bells. It was a perfect record of fire engines arriving at a
four-alarm blaze.

Burckhardt said in amazement, "Mary, that's against the law! Do you
know what they're doing? They're playing records of a fire. What are
they up to?"

"Maybe it's a practical joke," his wife offered.

"Joke? Waking up the whole neighborhood at six o'clock in the
morning?" He shook his head. "The police will be here in ten minutes,"
he predicted. "Wait and see."

But the police weren't--not in ten minutes, or at all. Whoever the
pranksters in the car were, they apparently had a police permit for
their games.

The car took a position in the middle of the block and stood silent
for a few minutes. Then there was a crackle from the speaker, and a
giant voice chanted:

 "Feckle Freezers!
  Feckle Freezers!
  Gotta have a
  Feckle Freezer!
