might not be armed. Even if they were, they would be less ready for
trouble than the guards. Perhaps he could hold one of the officers at
gunpoint; perhaps he could take over the ship.

It was worth trying. It had to be tried.

At the end of the corridor he came to a staircase. He climbed past a
dozen deserted levels, and came at last to a stenciled sign on one of
the walls. It read CONTROL SECTION, and an arrow pointed the way.
Barrent took the plastic needlebeam out of his pocket and staggered
down the corridor. He was beginning to lose consciousness. Black shadows
formed and dissipated on the edges of his vision. He was experiencing
vague hallucinations, flashes of horror in which he felt the corridor
walls falling in on him. He found that he was on his hands and knees,
crawling toward a door marked CONTROL ROOM--_No Admittance except to
Ship's Officers._

       *       *       *       *       *

The corridor seemed to be filled with gray fog. It cleared momentarily,
and Barrent realized that his eyes were not focusing properly. He pulled
himself to his feet and turned the door handle. It began to open. He
took a firm grip on the needlebeam and tried to prepare himself for
action.

But, as the door opened, darkness closed irrevocably around him. He
thought he could see startled faces, hear a voice shouting, "Watch out!
He's armed!" And then the blackness closed in completely, and he fell
endlessly forward.




Chapter Twenty-Two


Barrent's return to consciousness was sudden and complete. He sat up and
saw that he had fallen inside the control room. The metal door was
closed behind him, and he was breathing without difficulty. He could see
no sign of the crew. They must have gone after the guards, assuming he
would stay unconscious.

He scrambled to his feet, instinctively picking up his needlebeam. He
examined the weapon closely, then frowned and put it away. Why, he
wondered, would the crew leave him alone in the control room, the most
important part of the ship? Why would they leave him armed?

He tried to remember the faces he had seen just before he collapsed.
They were indistinct memories, vague and unfocused figures with hollow,
dreamlike voices. Had there really been people in here?

The more he thought about it, the more certain he was that he had
conjured those people out of his fading consciousness. There had been no
one here. He was alone in the ship's nerve center.

He approached the main control board. It was divided into ten stations.
Each section had its rows of dials, whose slender indicators pointed to
incomprehensible readings. Each had its switches, wheels rheostats, and
levers.

Barrent walked slowly past the stations, watching the patterns of
flashing lights that ran to the ceiling and rippled along the walls. The
last station seemed to be some kind of overall control for the rest. A
small screen was marked: _Coordination_, _Manual/Automatic_. The
_Automatic_ part was lighted. There were similar screens for navigation,
lookout, collision control, subspace entry and exit, normal space entry
and exit, and landing. All were automatic. Further on he found the
programming screen, which clicked off the progress of the flight in
hours, minutes, and seconds. Time to Checkpoint One was now 29 hours, 4
minutes, 51 seconds. Stop-over time, three hours. Time from Checkpoint
to Earth, 480 hours.

The control board flashed and hummed to itself, serene and
self-sufficient. Barrent couldn't help feeling that the presence of a
human in this temple of the machine was sacrilege.

He checked the air ducts. They were set for automatic feed, giving just
enough air to support the room's present human population of one.

But where was the crew? Barrent could understand the necessity of
operating a starship largely on an automatic programming system. A
structure as huge and complex as this had to be self-sufficient. But men
had built it, and men had punched out the programs. Why weren't men
present to monitor the switchboards, to modify the program when
necessary? Suppose the guards had needed more time on Omega? Suppose it
became necessary to by-pass the checkpoint and return directly to Earth?
Suppose it was imperative to change destination altogether? Who reset
the programs, who gave the ship its orders, who possessed the guiding
intelligence that directed the entire operation?

Barrent looked around the control room. He found a storage bin filled
with oxygen respirators. He put one on, tested it, and went into the
corridor.

After a long walk, he reached a door marked CREW'S QUARTERS. Inside, the
room was neat and bare. The beds stood in neat rows, without sheets or
blankets. There were no clothes in the closets, no personal possessions
of any kind. Barrent left and inspected the officers' and captain's
quarters. He found no sign of recent human habitation.

He returned to the control room. It was apparent now that the ship had
no crew. Perhaps the authorities on Earth felt so certain of their
schedules and of the reliability of their ship that they had decided a
crew was superfluous. Perhaps....

But it seemed to Barrent a reckless way of doing things. There was
something very strange about an Earth that allowed starships to run
without human supervision.

He decided to suspend further judgment until he had acquired more facts.
For the time being, he had to think about the problems of his own
survival. There was concentrated food in his pockets, but he hadn't been
able to carry much water. Would the crewless ship have supplies? He had
to remember the detachment of guards, down below in their assembly
room. And he had to think about what was going to happen at the
checkpoint, and what he would do about it.

Barrent found that he did not have to use his own food supplies. In the
officers' mess, machines still dispensed food and drink at the push of a
button. Barrent didn't know if these were natural or chemically
reconstituted foods. They tasted fine and seemed to nourish him, so he
really didn't care.

He explored part of the ship's upper levels. After becoming lost several
times, he decided not to take any more unnecessary risks. The
life-center of the ship was its control room, and Barrent spent most of
his time there.

He found a viewport. Activating the switch that opened the shutters,
Barrent was able to look out on the vast spectacle of stars glowing in
the blackness of space. Stars without end stretched past the furthest
limits of his imagination. Looking at this, Barrent felt a strong surge
of pride. This was where he belonged, and those unknown stars were his
heritage.

The time to the checkpoint dwindled to six hours. Barrent watched new
portions of the control board come to life, checking and altering the
forces governing the ship, preparing for a landing. Three and a half
hours before landing, Barrent made an interesting discovery. He found
the central communication system for the entire ship. By turning on the
receiving end, he could overhear conversations in the guardroom.

He didn't learn much that was useful to him. Either through caution or
lack of concern, the guards didn't discuss politics. Their lives were
spent on the checkpoint, except for periods of service on the prison
ship. Some of the things they said Barrent found incomprehensible. But
he continued to listen, fascinated by anything these men of Earth had to
say.

"You ever go swimming in Florida?"

"I never liked salt water."

"The year before I was called to the Guards, I won third prize at the
Dayton Orchid Fair."

"I'm buying a retirement villa in Antarctica."

"How much longer for you?"

"Eighteen years."

"Well, someone's got to do it."

"But why me? And why no Earth leaves?"

"You've watched the tapes, you know why. Crime is a disease. It's
infectious."

"So what?"

"So if you work around criminals, you run the danger of infection. You
might contaminate someone on Earth."

"It isn't fair...."

"Can't be helped. Those scientists know what they're talking about.
Besides, checkpoint's not so bad."

"If you like everything artificial ... air, flowers, food...."

"Well, you can't have everything. Your family there?"

"They want to get back Earthside."

"After five years on the checkpoint, they say you can't take Earth. The
gravity gets you."

"I'll take gravity. Any time...."

From these conversations, Barrent learned that the grim-faced guards
were human beings, just like the prisoners on Omega. Most of the guards
didn't seem to like the work they were doing. Like Omegans, they longed
for a return to Earth.

He stored the information away. The ship had reached the checkpoint, and
the giant switchboard flashed and rippled, making its final adjustments
for the intricacies of docking.

At last the maneuver was completed and the engines shut down to
stand-by. Through the communications system, Barrent heard the guards
leave their assembly room. He followed them down the corridors to the
landing stage. He heard the last of them, as he left the ship, say,
"Here comes the check squad. Whatcha say, boys?"

There was no answer. The guards were gone, and there was a new sound in
the corridors: the heavy marching feet of what the guard called the
check squad.

There seemed to be a lot of them. Their inspection began in the engine
rooms, and moved methodically upward. From the sounds, they seemed to be
opening every door on the ship and searching every room and closet.

Barrent held the needlebeam in his perspiring hand and wondered where,
in all the territory of the ship, he could hide. He would have to assume
that they were going to look everywhere. In that case, his best chance
lay in evading them and hiding in a section of the ship already
searched.

He slipped a respirator over his head and moved into the corridor.




Chapter Twenty-Three


Half an hour later, Barrent still hadn't figured out a way of getting
past the check squad. They had finished inspecting the lower levels and
were moving up to the control room deck. Barrent could hear them
marching down the hallways. He kept on walking, a hundred yards in
front, trying to find some way of hiding.

There should be a staircase at the end of this passageway. He could take
it down to a different level, a part of the ship which had already been
searched. He hurried on, wondering if he were wrong about the location
of the staircase. He still had only the haziest idea of the layout of
the ship. If he were wrong, he would be trapped.

He came to the end of the corridor, and the staircase was there. The
footsteps behind him sounded closer. He started down, peering backwards
over his shoulder.

And ran headfirst into a man's huge chest.

Barrent flung himself back, bringing his plastic gun to bear on the
enormous figure. But he stopped himself from firing. The thing that
stood in front of him was not human.

It stood nearly seven feet high, dressed in a black uniform with
INSPECTION TEAM--ANDROID B212 stenciled on its front. Its face was a
stylization of a human's, cleverly sculptured out of putty-colored
plastic. Its eyes glowed a deep, impossible red. It swayed on two legs,
balancing carefully, looking at Barrent, moving slowly toward him.
Barrent backed away, wondering if a needlebeam could stop it.

He never had a chance to find out, for the android walked past him and
continued up the stairs. Stenciled on the back of its uniform were the
words RODENT CONTROL DIVISION. This particular android, Barrent
realized, was programmed only to look for rats and mice. The presence of
a stowaway had made no impression on it. Presumably the other androids
were similarly specialized.

He stayed in an empty storage room on a lower level until he heard the
sounds of the androids leaving. Then he hurried back to the control
room. No guards came aboard. Exactly on schedule, the big ship left the
checkpoint. Destination: Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rest of the journey was uneventful. Barrent slept and ate and,
before the craft entered subspace, watched the endless spectacle of the
stars through the viewport. He tried to visualize the planet he was
coming to, but no pictures formed in his mind. What sort of a people
built huge starships but failed to equip them with a crew? Why did they
send out inspection teams, then give those teams the narrowest and most
specialized sort of vision? Why did they have to deport a sizable
portion of their population--and then fail to control the conditions
under which the deportees lived and died? Why was it necessary for them
to wipe the prisoners' minds clean of all memory of Earth?

Barrent couldn't think of any answers.

The control room clocks moved steadily on, counting off the minutes and
hours of the trip. The ship entered, then emerged from subspace and went
into deceleration orbit around a blue and green world which Barrent
observed with mixed emotions. He found it hard to realize that he was
returning at last to Earth.




Chapter Twenty-Four


The starship landed at noon on a brilliant sunlit day, somewhere on
Earth's North American continent. Barrent had planned on waiting for
darkness before leaving; but the control room screens flashed an ancient
and ironic warning: _All passengers and crew must disembark at once.
Ship rigged for full decontamination procedure. Twenty minutes._

He didn't know what was meant by full decontamination procedure. But
since the crew was emphatically ordered to leave, a respirator might not
provide much safety. Of the two dangers, leaving the ship seemed the
lesser.

The members of Group Two had given a good deal of thought to the
clothing Barrent would wear upon debarkation. Those first minutes on
Earth might be crucial. No cunning could help him if his clothing was
obviously strange, outlandish, alien. Typical Earth clothing was the
answer; but the Group wasn't sure what the citizens of Earth wore. One
part of the Group had wanted Barrent to dress in their reconstructed
approximation of civilian dress. Another part felt that the guard's
uniform he had worn on board would see him through his arrival on Earth
as well. Barrent himself had agreed with a third opinion, which felt
that a mechanic's one-piece coverall would be least noticeable around a
spacefield, and suffer the least change of style over the years. In the
towns and cities, this disguise might put him at a disadvantage; but he
had to meet one problem at a time.

He quickly stripped off his guard's uniform. Underneath he wore the
lightweight coveralls. His needlebeam concealed, a collapsible lunchbox
in his hand, Barrent walked down the corridor to the landing stage. He
hesitated for a moment, wondering if he should leave the weapon on the
ship. He decided not to part with it. An inspection would reveal him
anyhow; with the needlebeam he would have a chance of breaking away from
police.

He took a deep breath and marched out of the ship and down the landing
stage.

There were no guards, no inspection party, no police, no army units and
no customs officials. There was no one at all. Far to one side of the
wide field he could see rows of starcraft glistening in the sun.
Straight ahead of him was a fence, and in it was an open gate.

