
"Don't do it, boy. If the time ever comes when _you_ go so soft on me as
to quit laying it on the line and start sifting out your language...."
Garlock paused. For one of the very few times in his life, he was at a
loss for words. He thrust his hands into his pockets and shrugged his
shoulders. "Hell, I don't want to get maudlin, either ... so ... well,
how many men, do you think, could have gone the route with me on this
hellish job without killing me or me killing them?"

"Oh, that's not...."

"Lay it on the line, Jim. I know what I am. Just one. You. One man in
six thousand million. Okay; how many women could live with me for a year
without going crazy?"

"Lots of 'em; but, being masochists, they'd probably drive _you_ nuts.
And you can't stand 'stupidity'; which, by definition, lets _everybody_
out. Nope, it's a tough order to fill."

"Check. She'd have to be strong enough and hard enough not to be afraid
of me, by any trace. Able and eager to stand up to me and slug it out.
To pin my ears back flat against my skull whenever she thinks I'm off
the beam. Do it with skill and precision and nicety, with power and
control; yet without doing herself any damage and without changing her
basic feeling for me. In short, a female Jim James Nine."

"Huh? Hell's blowtorches! You think _I'm_ like Belle Bellamy?"

"Not by nine thousand megacycles. Like Belle Bellamy could be and should
be. Like I hope she will be. I'd have to give, too, of course--maybe we
can make Christians out of each other. It's quite a dream, I admit, but
it'll be Belle or nobody. But I'm not used to slopping over this
way--let's go."

"I'm glad you did, big fellow--once in a lifetime is good for the soul.
I'd say you were in love with her right now--except that if you were,
you couldn't possibly dissect her like a specimen on the table, the way
you've just been doing. Are you or aren't you?"

"I'll be damned if I know. You and Brownie believe that the poets'
concept of love is valid. In fact, you make a case for its validity. I
never have, and don't now ... but under certain conditions ... I simply
don't know. Ask me again sometime; say in about a month?"

"That's the surest thing you know. Oh, _brother! This_ is a thing I'm
going to watch with my eyes out on stalks!"

        *           *           *

For the next week, Belle locked her door every night. For another few
nights, she did not lock it. Then, one night, she left it ajar. The
following evening, the two again walked together to their doors.

"I left my door open last night."

"I know you did."

"Well?"

"And have you scream to high heaven that I opened it? And put me on a
tape for willful inurbanity? For deliberate intersexual invasion of
privacy?"

        *           *           *

"Blast and damn! You know perfectly well, Clee Garlock, I wouldn't pull
such a dirty, lousy trick as that."

"Maybe I should apologize, then, but as a matter of fact I have no idea
whatever as to what you wouldn't do." He stared at her, his face hard in
thought. "As you probably know, I have had very little to do with women.
That little has always been on a logical level. You are such a
completely new experience that I can't figure out what makes you tick."

"So you're afraid of me," she sneered. "Is that it?"

"Close enough."

"And I suppose it's you that cartoonist what's-his-name is using as a
model for 'Timorous Timmy'?"

"Since you've guessed it, yes."

"You ... you _weasel_!" She took three quick steps up the corridor, then
back. "You say my logic is cockeyed. What system are you using now?"

"I'm trying to develop one to match yours."

"Oh ... I invited that one, I guess, since I know you aren't afraid of
God, man, woman, or devil ... and you're big enough so you don't have to
be proving it all the time." She laughed suddenly, her face softening
markedly. "Listen, you big lug. Why don't you ever knock me into an
outside loop? If I were you and you were me, I'd've busted me loose from
my front teeth long ago."

"I'm not sure whether I know better or am afraid to. Anyway, I'm not
rocking any boat so far from shore."

"Says you. You're wonderful, Clee--simply priceless. Do you know you're
the only man I ever met that I couldn't make fall for me like a rock
falling down a cliff? And that the falling is altogether too apt to be
the other way?"

"The first, I have suspected. The second is chemically-pure rocket-oil."

"I _hope_ it is.... I wish I could be as certain of it as you are....
You see, Clee, I really expected you to come in, last night, and there
really _wasn't_ any bone in it. Surely, you don't think I'm going to
_invite_ you into my room, do you?"

"I can't see why not. However, since no valid system of logic seems to
apply, I accept your decision as a fact. By the same reasoning--however
invalid--if I ask you again you will again refuse. So all that's left, I
guess, is for me to drag you into my room by force."

He put his left arm around her and applied a tiny pressure against her
side; under which she began to move slowly toward his door.

"You admit that you're using force?" she asked. Her face was unreadable;
her mental block was at its fullest force. "That I'm being coerced?
Definitely?"

"Definitely," he agreed. "At least ten dynes of sheer brute force. Not
enough to affect a tape, but enough, I hope, to affect you. If it isn't,
I'll use more."

"Oh, ten dynes is enough. Just so it's force."

She raised her face toward his and threw both arms around his neck. His
right arm went into action with his left, and Cleander Garlock forgot
all about dynes and tapes.

After a time she disengaged one arm; reached out; opened his door. He
gathered her up and, lips still locked to lips, carried her over the
threshold.

        *           *           *

A few jumps later they met their first really old Arpalone. This
Inspector was so old that his skin, instead of the usual bright, clear
cobalt blue, was dull and tending toward gray. The old fellow was
strangely garrulous, for a Guardian; he wanted them to pause a while and
gossip.

"Yes, I am lonesome," he admitted. "It has been a long time since I
exchanged thoughts with anyone. You see, nobody has visited this
planet--Groobe, its name is--since almost all our humanity was killed, a
few periods ago...."

"Killed? How?" Garlock asked sharply. "Not Dilipic?"

"Oh, you have seen them? I never have, myself. No, nothing nearly that
bad. Merely the Ozobes. The world itself was scarcely harmed at all.
Rehabilitation will be a simple matter, so there's no real reason why
some of those Engineers...."

"The beast!" Lola shot a tight-beam thought at her husband. "Who cares
anything about the rock and dirt of a _planet_? It's the people that
count and his are dead and he's perfectly _complaisant_ about it--just
_lonesome_!"

"Don't let it throw you, pet," James soothed. "He's an Arpalone, you
know; not a sociological anthropologist."

"... shouldn't come out here and spend a few hours once in a while, but
they don't. Too busy with their own business, they say. But while you
are physically human, mentally you are not. You're all too ... too ... I
can't put my thought exactly on it, but ... more as though you were
human fighters, if such a thing could be possible."

"We are fighters. Where we come from, most human beings are fighters."

"Oh? I never heard of such a thing. Where can you be from?"

This took much explanation, since the Arpalone had never heard of
inter-galactic travel. "You are willing, then, to fight side by side
with us Arpalones against the enemies of humanity? You have actually
done so, at times, and won?"

"We certainly have."

"I am glad. I am expecting a call for help any time now. Will you please
give me enough of your mental pattern, Doctor Garlock, so that I can
call you in case of need? Thank you."

"What makes you think you're going to get an S.O.S. so soon? Where
from?"

"Because these Ozobe invasions come in cycles, years apart, but there
are always several planets attacked at very nearly the same time. We
were the first, this time; so there will be one or two others very
shortly."

"Do they always ... kill all the people?" Lola asked.

"Oh, no. Scarcely half of the time. Depends on how many fighters the
planet has, and how much outside help can get there soon enough."

"Your call could come from any of the other solar systems in this
neighborhood, then?" Garlock asked.

"Yes. There are fifteen inhabited planets within about six light-years
of us, and we form a close-knit group."

"What are these Ozobes?"

"Animals. Warm-blooded, but egg-layers, not mammals. Like this," and the
Inspector spread in their minds a picture of a creature somewhat like
the flying tigers of Hodell, except that the color was black, shading
off to iridescent green at the extremities. Also, it was armed with a
short and heavy, but very sharp, sting.

"They say that they come from space, but I don't believe it," the old
fellow went on. "What would a warm-blood be doing out in space? Besides,
they couldn't find anybody to lay their eggs in out there. No, sir, I
think they live right here on Groobe somewhere, maybe holed up in caves
or something for ten or thirteen years ... but that wouldn't make sense,
either, would it? I just don't know...."

        *           *           *

Garlock finally broke away from the lonesome Inspector and the
_Pleiades_ started down.

"That's the most utterly _horrible_ thing I ever heard of in my life!"
Lola burst out. "Like wasps--only worse--_people_ aren't bugs! Why don't
all the planets get together and develop something to kill every Ozobe
in every system of the group?"

"That one has got too many bones in it for me to answer," James said.

"I'm going to get hold of that Engineer as soon as we land," Lola said,
darkly, "and stick a pin into him."

They found the Engineering Office easily enough, in a snug camp well
outside a large city. They grounded the starship and went out on foot;
enjoying contact with solid ground. The Head Engineer was an Arpalone,
too--Engineers were not a separate race, but dwellers on a planet of
extremely high technology--but he did know anything about space-drives.
His specialty was rehabilitation; he was top boss of a rehab crew....

        *           *           *

Then Lola pushed Garlock aside. Yes, the Ozobes came from space. He was
sure of it. Yes, they laid eggs in human bodies. Yes, they probably
stayed alive quite a while--or might, except for the rehab crew. No, he
didn't _know_ what would hatch out--he'd never let one live that long,
but what the hell else _could_ hatch except Ozobes? No, not one. Not one
single damn one. If just one ever did, on any world where he bossed the
job, he'd lose his job as boss and go to the mines for half a year....

"Ridiculous!" Lola snapped. "If Ozobes hatched, they couldn't possibly
have come from space. If they _did_ come from space, the adult form
would have to be something able to get back into space, some way or
other. _That_ is simple elementary biology. Don't you see that?"

He didn't see it. He didn't give a damn, either. It was none of his
business; he was a rehab man.

Lola ran back to the ship in disgust.

"Something else is even more ridiculous, and _is_ your business," James
told the Head Engineer. "Garlock and I are both engineers--top ones. We
know definitely that a one-hundred-percent clean-up on such a job as
this--millions--simply can't be done. Ever. Under any conditions. Are
you lying in your teeth or are you dumb enough to believe it yourself?"

"Neither one," the Engineer insisted, stubbornly. "I've wondered,
myself, at how I could get 'em all, but I always do--every time so far.
That's why they give me the big job. I'm good at it."

"Oh--Lola's right, Jim," Garlock said. "It's the adult form that
hatches; something so different they don't even recognize it. Something
able to get into space. Enough survivors to produce the next
generation."

"Sure. I'll tell Brownie--she'll be tickled."

"She'll be more than tickled--she'll want to hunt up somebody around
here with three brain cells working and give 'em an earful." Then, to
the Engineer, "Do you know how they rehab a planet that's been leveled
flat by the golop?"

"You've _seen_ one? I never have, but of course I've studied it. Slow,
but not too difficult. After killing, the stuff weathers down in a few
years--wonderful soil it makes--what makes it slow is that you have to
wait fifty or a hundred years for the mountains to get built up again
and for the earthquakes to quit...."

"Excuse me, please--I've got a call--we have to leave, right now."

The call was from the Inspector. The nearest planet, Clamer, was being
invaded by the Ozobes and needed all the help they could get.

        *           *           *

In seconds the _Pleiades_ was at the Port of Entry.

"Where is this Clamer?" Garlock asked.

The Inspector pointed a thought; all four followed it.

"Let's go, Jim. Maybe...."

"Just a minute!" Lola snapped. She was breathing hard, her eyes were
almost shooting sparks as she turned to the old Arpalone and drove a
thought so forcibly that he winced.

"Do you so-called 'Guardians of Humanity' care at all about the humanity
you're supposed to be protecting?" she demanded viciously, the thought
boring in and twisting, "or are you just loafing on the job and doing as
little as you possibly can without getting fired?"
