Manchester, Hudson; Vermont,--western part of the state throughout, not
common; abundant at Smoke mountain at an altitude of 1300 feet, and
along the western flank of the Green mountains, at least in Addison
county; Massachusetts,--eastern sections, Sterling, Lancaster, Russell,
Middleboro, rare in Medford and Sudbury, frequent on the Blue hills;
Rhode Island,--locally common; Connecticut,--common.

     South to Delaware and along the mountains to Georgia, extending
     nearly to the summit of Mt. Pisgah in North Carolina; west to
     Kentucky, Tennessee, and Alabama.

=Habit.=--A small or medium-sized tree, 25-50 feet high, with a trunk
diameter of 1-2-1/2 feet, assuming noble proportions southward, often
reaching a height of 75-100 feet and trunk diameter of 5-6 feet; trunk
tall, straight, continuous to the top of the tree, scarcely tapering to
the point of ramification, surmounted by a spacious, open head.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and large branches deep gray to dark brown or
blackish, in firm, broad, continuous ridges, with small, close surface
scales; bark of young trees and of branchlets smooth, brown, and more or
less lustrous; season's shoots light brown.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds ovate to cylindrical, mostly acute,
brownish. Leaves simple, alternate, 5-8 inches long, 2-5 inches wide,
dark green and smooth above, paler and more or less downy beneath;
outline obovate to oval, undulate-crenate; apex blunt-pointed; base
wedge-shaped, obtuse or slightly rounded, often unequal-sided; veins
straight, parallel, prominent beneath; leafstalk 1/2-1-1/2 inches long;
stipules linear, soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Sterile catkins 2-3 inches long; calyx
5-9-parted, yellow, hairy; divisions oblong, densely pubescent; stamens
5-9; anthers yellow, glabrous: pistillate flowers with hairy scales and
dark red stigmas.

=Fruit.=--Seldom abundant, maturing the first season, variable in size,
on stems usually equal to or shorter than the leaf-stems: cup thin,
hemispheric or somewhat top-shaped, deep; scales small, knobby-thickened
at the base: acorns 3/4-1-1/2 inches long, ovoid-conical, sweet.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a light
gravelly or stony soil; rapid-growing and free from disease; more easily
and safely transplanted than most oaks; occasionally offered by
nurserymen, who propagate it from the seed. Its vigorous, clean habit of
growth and handsome foliage should give it a place in landscape
gardening and street use.

[Illustration: PLATE XLI.--Quercus Prinus.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower, back view.
  4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Fertile flowers.
  6. Fruiting branch.
  7. Variant leaf.


=Quercus Muhlenbergii, Engelm.=

_Quercus acuminata, Sarg._

CHESTNUT OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--Dry hillsides, limestone ridges, rich bottoms.

     Ontario.

Vermont,--Gardner's island, Lake Champlain; Ferrisburg (Pringle);
Connecticut,--frequent (J. N. Bishop, 1895); on the limestone formation
in the neighborhood of Kent (Litchfield county, C. K. Averill); often
confounded by collectors with _Q. Prinus_; probably there are other
stations. Not authoritatively reported from the other New England
states.

     South to Delaware and District of Columbia, along the mountains to
     northern Alabama; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, Indian
     territory, and Texas.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized tree, 30-40 feet high, with a trunk diameter of
1-2 feet, attaining much greater dimensions in the basins of the Ohio,
Mississippi, and their tributaries; trunk in old trees enlarged at the
base, erect, branches rather short for the genus, forming a narrow
oblong or roundish head.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and large branches grayish or pale ash-colored,
comparatively thin, flaky; branchlets grayish-brown; season's shoots in
early summer purplish-green with pale dots.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds ovate, acute to obtuse, brownish. Leaves
simple, alternate; in the typical form as recognized by Muhlenburg, 3-6
inches long, 1-1/2-2 inches wide, glossy dark green above, pale and
minutely downy beneath; outline lanceolate or lanceolate-oblong, with
rather equal, coarse, sharp, and often inflexed teeth; apex acuminate;
base wedge-shaped or acute; stipules soon falling. There is also a form
of the species in which the leaves are much larger, 5-7 inches in length
and 3-5 inches in width, broadly ovate or obovate, with rounded teeth;
distinguishable from _Q. Prinus_ only by the bark and fruit.

=Inflorescence.=--May. Appearing with the leaves; sterile catkins 2-4
inches long; calyx yellow, hairy, segments 5-8, ciliate; stamens 5-8,
anthers yellow: pistillate flowers sessile or on short spikes; stigma
red.

=Fruit.=--Maturing the first season, sessile or short-peduncled: cup
covering about half the nut, thin, shallow, with small, rarely much
thickened scales: acorn ovoid or globose, about 3/4 inch long.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England; grows in all good dry or
moist soils, in open or partly shaded situations; maintains a nearly
uniform rate of growth till maturity, and is not seriously affected by
insects. It forms a fine individual tree and is useful in forest
plantations. Propagated from seed.

[Illustration: PLATE XLII.--Quercus Muhlenbergii.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Fertile flowers.
  5. Fruiting branch.


=Quercus prinoides, Willd.=

SCRUB WHITE OAK. SCRUB CHESTNUT OAK.

More or less common throughout the states east of the Mississippi;
westward apparently grading into _Q. Muhlenbergii_, within the limits of
New England mostly a low shrub, rarely assuming a tree-like habit. The
leaves vary from rather narrow-elliptical to broadly obovate, are rather
regularly and coarsely toothed, bright green and often lustrous on the
upper surface.


=Quercus rubra, L.=

RED OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--Growing impartially in a great variety of soils,
but not on wet lands.

     Nova Scotia and New Brunswick to divide west of Lake Superior.

Maine,--common, at least south of the central portions; New
Hampshire,--extending into Coos county, far north of the
White mountains; Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and
Connecticut,--common; probably in most parts of New England the most
common of the genus; found higher up the slopes of mountains than the
white oak.

     South to Tennessee, Virginia, and along mountain ranges to Georgia;
     reported from Florida; west to Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, and
     Texas.

=Habit.=--The largest of the New England oaks, 50-85 feet high, with a
diameter of 2-6 feet above the swell of the roots; occasionally
attaining greater dimensions; trunk usually continuous to the top of the
tree, often heavily buttressed; point of branching higher than in the
white oak; branches large, less contorted, and rising at a sharper
angle, the lower sometimes horizontal; branchlets rather slender; head
extremely variable, in old trees with ample space for growth, open,
well-proportioned, and imposing; sometimes oblong in outline, wider near
the top, and sometimes symmetrically rounded, not so broad, however, as
the head of the white oak; conspicuous in summer by its bright green,
abundant foliage, which turns to dull purplish-red in autumn.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and lower parts of branches in old trees dark
gray, firmly, coarsely, and rather regularly ridged, smooth elsewhere;
in young trees greenish mottled gray, smooth throughout; season's shoots
at first green, taking a reddish tinge in autumn, marked with pale,
scattered dots.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds ovate, conical, sharp-pointed. Leaves
simple, alternate, 4-8 inches long, 3-5 inches broad, bright green
above, paler beneath, dull brown in autumn; outline oval or obovate,
sometimes scarcely distinguishable by the character of its lobing from
_Q. tinctoria_; in the typical form, lobes broadly triangular or oblong,
with parallel sides bristle-pointed; leafstalks short; stipules linear,
soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--Earliest of the oaks, appearing in late April or early
May, when the leaves are half-grown; sterile catkins 3-5 inches long;
calyx mostly 4-lobed; lobes rounded; stamens mostly 4; anthers yellow:
pistillate flowers short-stemmed; calyx lobes mostly 3 or 4; stigmas
long, spreading.

=Fruit.=--Maturing in the second year, single or in pairs, sessile or
short-stalked: cup sometimes turbinate, usually saucer-shaped with a
flat or rounded base, often contracted at the opening and surmounted by
a kind of border; scales closely imbricated, reddish-brown, more or less
downy, somewhat glossy, triangular-acute to obtuse, pubescent: acorn
nearly cylindrical or ovoid, tapering to a broad, rounded top.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in all
well-drained soils, but prefers a rich, moist loam; more readily
obtainable than most of our oaks; in common with other trees of the
genus, nursery trees must be transplanted frequently to be moved with
safety; grows rapidly and is fairly free from disfiguring insects; the
oak-pruner occasionally lops off its twigs. When once established, it
grows as rapidly as the sugar maple, and is worthy of much more extended
use in street and landscape plantations. Propagated from the seed.

[Illustration: PLATE XLIII.--Quercus rubra.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Fertile flowers, side view.
  5. Fruiting branch.


=Quercus coccinea, Wang.=

SCARLET OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--Most common in dry soil.

     Ontario.

Maine,--valley of the Androscoggin, southward; New Hampshire and
Vermont,--not authoritatively reported by recent observers;
Massachusetts,--more common in the eastern than western sections,
sometimes covering considerable areas; Rhode Island and
Connecticut,--common.

     South to the middle states and along the mountains to North
     Carolina and Tennessee; reported from Florida; west to Minnesota,
     Nebraska, and Missouri.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized tree, 30-50 feet high and 1-3 feet in trunk
diameter; attaining greater dimensions southward; trunk straight and
tapering, branches regular, long, comparatively slender, not contorted,
the lower nearly horizontal, often declined at the ends; branchlets
slender; head open, narrow-oblong or rounded, graceful; foliage deeply
cut, shining green in summer and flaming scarlet in autumn; the most
brilliant and most elegant of the New England oaks.

=Bark.=--Trunk in old trees dark gray, roughly and firmly ridged; inner
bark red; young trees and branches smoothish, often marked with dull red
seams and more or less mottled with gray.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, reddish-brown, ovate to oval,
acutish, partially hidden by enlarged base of petiole. Leaves simple,
alternate, extremely variable, more commonly 3-6 inches long, two-thirds
as wide, bright green and shining above, paler beneath, smooth on both
sides but often with a tufted pubescence on the axils beneath, turning
scarlet in autumn, deeply lobed, the rounded sinuses sometimes reaching
nearly to the midrib; lobes 5-9, rather slender and set at varying
angles, sparingly toothed and bristly tipped; apex acute; base truncate
to acute; leafstalk 1-1-1/2 inches long, slender, swollen at base.

=Inflorescence.=--Early in May. Appearing when the leaves are half
grown; sterile catkins 2-4 inches long; calyx most commonly 4-parted;
pubescent; stamens commonly 4, exserted; anthers yellow, glabrous:
pistillate flowers red; stigmas long, spreading, reflexed.

=Fruit.=--Maturing in the autumn of the second year, single or in twos
or threes, sessile or on rather short footstalks: cup top-shaped or
cup-shaped, about half the length of the acorn, occasionally nearly
enclosing it, smooth, more or less polished, thin-edged; scales closely
appressed, firm, elongated, triangular, sides sometimes rounded,
homogeneous in the same plant: acorn 1/2-3/4 inch long, variable in
shape, oftenest oval to oblong: kernel white within; less bitter than
kernel of the black oak.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in any
light, well-drained soil, but prefers a fertile loam. Occasionally
offered by nurserymen, but as it is disposed to make unsymmetrical young
trees it is not grown in quantity, and it is not desirable for streets.
Its rapid growth, hardiness, beauty of summer foliage, and its brilliant
colors in autumn make it desirable in ornamental plantations. Propagated
from the seed.

[Illustration: PLATE XLIV.--Quercus coccinea.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Sterile flowers, side view.
  4. Fertile flower, side view.
  5. Fruiting branch.


=Quercus velutina, Lam.=

_Quercus tinctoria, Bartram. Quercus coccinea_, var. _tinctoria, Gray._

BLACK OAK. YELLOW OAK.

=Habitat and Range.=--Poor soils; dry or gravelly uplands; rocky ridges.

     Southern and western Ontario.

Maine,--York county; New Hampshire,--valley of the lower Merrimac and
eastward, absent on the highlands, reappearing within three or four
miles of the Connecticut, ceasing at North Charlestown;
Vermont,--western and southeastern sections; Massachusetts,--abundant
eastward; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--frequent.

     South to the Gulf states; west to Minnesota, Kansas, Indian
     territory, and Texas.

=Habit.=--One of our largest oaks, 50-75 feet high and 2-4 feet in
diameter, exceptionally much larger, attaining its maximum in the Ohio
and Mississippi basins; resembling _Q. coccinea_ in the general
disposition of its mostly stouter branches; head wide-spreading,
rounded; trunk short; foliage deep shining green, turning yellowish or
reddish brown in autumn.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk dark gray or blackish, often lighter near the
seashore, thick, usually rough near the ground even in young trees, in
old trees deeply furrowed, separating into narrow, thick, and firmly
adherent block-like strips; inner bark thick, yellow, and bitter;
branches and branchlets a nearly uniform, mottled gray; season's shoots
