fuel. Unless I can break the franchise for Atom-Star, it may be a
hundred years before we switch to the atom drive in space."

"What the hell difference does that make to you?" asked Baat bluntly.

"Hydrazine's expensive," replied Jonner. "Reaction mass isn't, and you
use less of it. I was born on Mars, Russo. Mars is my home, and I want
to see my people get the supplies they need from Earth at a reasonable
transport cost, not pay through the nose for every packet of vegetable
seed."

They reached the wardroom door.

"Too bad I have to degrav my old chief," said Baat, chuckling. "But I'm
a rocket man, myself, and I say to hell with your hot-rod atom drive.
I'm sorry you got deflected into this run, Jonner; you'll never break
Marscorp's orbit."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Marsward XVIII_ was a huge vessel, the biggest the Mars Corporation
ever had put into space. It was a collection of spheres and cylinders,
joined together by a network of steel ties. Nearly 90% of its weight was
fuel, for the one-way trip to Mars.

Its competitor, the _Radiant Hope_, riding ten miles away in orbit
around the Earth, was the strangest looking vessel ever to get clearance
from a space station. It looked like a tug towing a barge. The tug was
the atomic power plant. Two miles behind, attached by a thin cable, was
the passenger compartment and cargo.

On the control deck of the _Radiant Hope_, Jonner gripped a microphone
and shouted profane instructions at the pilot of a squat ground-to-space
rocket twenty miles away. T'an Li Cho, the ship's engineer, was peering
out the port at the speck of light toward which Jonner was directing his
wrath, while Qoqol, the Martian astrogator, worked at his charts on the
other side of the deck.

"I thought all cargo was aboard, Jonner," said T'an.

"It is," said Jonner, laying the mike aside. "That G-boat isn't hauling
cargo. It's going with us. I'm not taking any chances on Marscorp
refusing to ferry our cargo back and forth at Mars."

"Is plotted, Jonner," boomed Qoqol, turning his head to peer at them
with huge eyes through the spidery tangle of his thin, double-jointed
arms and legs. He reached an eight-foot arm across the deck and handed
Jonner his figures. Jonner gave them to T'an.

"Figure out power for that one, T'an," ordered Jonner, and took his seat
in the cushioned control chair.

T'an pulled a slide rule from his tunic pocket, but his black almond
eyes rested quizzically on Jonner.

"It's four hours before blastoff," he reminded.

"I've cleared power for this with Space Control," replied Jonner. "That
planet-loving G-boat jockey missed orbit. We'll have to swing out a
little and go to him."

On a conventional space craft, the order for acceleration would have
sent the engineer to the engine deck to watch his gauges and report by
intercom. But the _Radiant Hope_'s "engine deck" was the atomic tug two
miles ahead, which T'an, in heavy armor, would enter only in
emergencies. He calculated for a moment, then called softly to Jonner:

"Pile One, in ten."

"In ten," confirmed Jonner, pulling a lever on the calibrated gauge of
the radio control.

"Pile Two, in fifteen."

"In fifteen."

"Check. I'll have the length of burst figured for you in a jiffy."

A faint glow appeared around the atomic tug far ahead, and there was the
faintest shiver in the ship. But after a moment, Qoqol said in a puzzled
tone:

"No Gs, Jonner. Engine not work?"

"Sure, she's working," said Jonner with a grin. "You'll never get any
more G than we've got now, Qoqol, all the way to Mars. Our maximum
acceleration will be 1/3,000th-G."

"One three-thousandth?" exclaimed T'an, shaken out of his Oriental calm.
"Jonner, the _Marsward_ will blast away at one or two Gs. How do you
expect to beat that at 1/3,000th?"

"Because they have to cut off and coast most of the way in an elliptic
orbit, like any other rocket," answered Jonner calmly. "We drive
straight across the system, under power all the time. We accelerate half
way, decelerate the other half."

"But 1/3,000th!"

"You'll be surprised at what constant power can do. I know Baat, and I
know the trick he's going to use. It's obvious from the blastoff time
they arranged. He's going to tack off the Moon and use his power right
to cut 20 days off that regular 237-day schedule. But this tug-boat will
make it in 154 days!"

They took aboard the 200-ton landing boat. By the time they got it
secured, the radio already was sounding warnings for blastoff.

Zero hour arrived. Again Jonner pulled levers and again the faint glow
appeared around the tail of their distant tug. Across space the exhaust
of the _Marsward XVIII_ flared into blinding flame. In a moment, it
began to pull ahead visibly and soon was receding like a meteor.

Near the _Radiant Hope_, the space station seemed not to have changed
position at all.

"The race is not always to the swift," remarked Jonner philosophically.

"And we're the tortoise," said T'an. "How about filling us in on this
jaunt, Jonner?"

"Is should, Jonner," agreed Qoqol. "T'an know all about crazy new
engine, I know all about crazy new orbit. Both not know all. You tell."

"I planned to, anyway," said Jonner. "I had figured on having Serj in on
it, but he wouldn't understand much of it anyhow. There's no use in
waking him up."

Serj was the ship's doctor-psychologist and fourth member of the crew.
He was asleep below on the centerdeck.

"For your information, Qoqol," said Jonner, "the atomic engine produces
