
Vorongil said, unruffled, "Why, so they are. They do, you know; they
have intelligence of a sort. Though I've never actually _seen_ them move
before, I know they shift places overnight. I wonder what's going on?"
They were edging back, the path widening and changing. "Oh, well, maybe
they're going to do some more landscaping for us. I once knew a captain
who swore they could read his mind."

Bart saw the slow, inexorable deepening of his badge--he _had_ to get
away. He tensed, impatient; gripped by fists of panic. Somewhere on this
world, Montano and his men were setting up their lethal radiations....

_Think of this: a Lhari ship of our own to study, to know how it works,
to see the catalyst and find out where it comes from, to read their
records and star routes. Now we know we can use it without dying in the
warp-drive...._

_Think of this: to be human again, yet to travel the stars with men of
my own race!_

_It's worth a few deaths!_

Even Vorongil? Standing here, talking to him, he might--_say it! You
talked to him as if he'd been your father! Oh, Dad, Dad, what would you
do?_

His voice was steady, as he said, "It's very good of you to show me all
this, sir, but the other men will call me a slacker. Hadn't I better get
to a work detail?"

"Hm, maybe so, feathertop," Vorongil said. "Let me see--well, down this
way is the last row of bunkers. See the humps? You can check inside to
see if they're full or empty and save us the trouble of exploring if
they're all empty. Have a look round inside if you care to--the robot
machinery's interesting."

Bart tensed; he had wondered how he'd get hidden inside, but he asked,
"Not locked?"

"Locked?" The old Lhari's short, yellowed crest bobbed in surprise.
"Why? Who ever comes here but our ships? And what could we do with the
stuff but take it back with us? Why locked? You've been on the drift too
long--among those thieving humans! It's time you got back to live among
decent folk again. Well, go along."

The sting of the words stiffened Bart as he took his leave. The color of
the badge seemed deeper orange....

_When it's red, you're dead._

_It's true. The Lhari don't steal. They don't even seem to understand
dishonesty._

_But they lied--lied to us all...._

_Knowing what we were like, maybe! That we'd steal their ships, their
secrets, their lives!_

The deepening color of the badge seemed the one visible thing in a
strange glaring world. He walked along the row of bunkers, realizing he
need not check if they were full or empty--the Lhari wouldn't live long
enough to harvest their better-than-graphite lubricant. They'd be dead.

The last bunker was empty. He looked at his orange badge and stepped
inside, heart pounding so loudly he thought it was an external sound--it
_was_ an external sound, a step.

"Don't move one inch," said a voice in Universal, and Bart froze,
trembling. He looked cautiously round.

Montano stood there, spacesuited, his head bare, dark contact lenses
blurring his eyes. And in his hand a drawn blaster was held
level--trained straight at Bart's heart.




CHAPTER TWELVE


After the first moment of panic, Bart realized Montano could not tell
him from a Lhari. He remained motionless. "It's me, Montano--Bart
Steele."

The man lowered the weapon and put it away. "You nearly got yourself cut
down," he said. "Did you make it all right?" He crossed behind Bart,
inspecting the fastenings of the bunker.

"It's just luck I didn't shoot you first and ask questions afterward."
Montano drew a deep breath and sat down on the concrete floor. "Anyway,
we're safe in here. We've got about half an hour before the radiation
will reach lethal intensity. It has a very short half-life, though; only
about twelve minutes. If we spend an hour in here, we'll be safe enough.
Did you have any trouble putting the radiation counter out of
commission?"

So in half an hour they would all be dead. Ringg, Rugel, Captain
Vorongil. Two dozen Lhari, all dead so that Montano could have a Lhari
ship to play with.

And what then? More killing, more murder? Would Montano start killing
everyone who tried to get the secret of the drive from him? The Lhari
had the star-drive; maybe it belonged to them, maybe not. Maybe humans
had a right to have it, too. But this wasn't the right way. Maybe they
didn't deserve it.

He turned to look at Montano. The man was leaning back, whistling softly
through his teeth. He felt like telling Montano that he couldn't go
through with it. He started to speak, then stopped, his blood icing
over.

_If I try to argue with him, I'll never get out of here alive. It means
too much to him._

_Do I just salve my conscience with that then? Sit here and let them
die?_

With a shock of remembrance, it came to Bart that he had a weapon. He
was armed, this time, with the energon-beam that was part of his
uniform. Montano had evidently forgotten it. _Could_ he kill Montano?
Even to save two dozen Lhari?

He reached hesitantly toward the beam-gun, quickly thumbed the catch
down to the lowest point, which was simple shock. He froze as Montano
looked in his direction, hand out of sight under his cloak.

"How many Lhari on board?"

"Twenty-three, and three Mentorians."

"Anyone apt to be behind shielding--say, in the drive chamber?"

"No, I think they're all outside."

Montano nodded, idly. "Then we won't have to worry."

Bart slipped his hand toward his weapon. Montano saw the movement,
cocked his head in question; then, as understanding flashed over his
face, his hand darted to his own gun. But Bart had pressed the charge of
his, and Montano slumped over without a cry. He looked so limp that Bart
gasped. Was he dead? Hastily he fumbled the lax hand for a pulse. After
a long, endless moment he saw Montano's chest twitch and knew the man
was breathing.

Well, Montano would be safe here in the bunker. Hastily, Bart looked at
his timepiece. Half an hour before the radiation was lethal--_for the
Lhari_. Was it already, for him? Shakily, he unfastened the door. He ran
out into the glare, seeing as he ran that his badge was tinged with an
ever-darkening, gold, orange....

Montano had said there was a safety margin, but maybe he was wrong,
maybe all Bart would accomplish would be his own death! He ran back
along the line of bunkers, his heart pounding with his racing feet. Two
crewmen came along the line, young white-crested Lhari from the other
watch. He gasped, "Where is the captain?"

"Down that way--what's wrong, Bartol?" But Bart was gone, his muscles
aching with the unaccustomed effort inside gravity. Putting on speed, he
saw the tall, austere shape of Vorongil, his banded cloak dark against
the glaring light. Vorongil turned, startled, at the sound of his
running feet.

Suddenly, Bart realized that he was still holding his energon-ray. In
shock and revulsion, he dropped it at Vorongil's feet.

"Captain, go warn the men! They'll all be dead in half an hour! There
are lethal radiations--"

"_What?_ Are you sunstruck?"

Bart stopped cold. Never once had it crossed his mind what he would say
to Vorongil or how he would make the captain believe his story, without
revealing Montano. He started to hold up his badge, realized the Lhari
captain could not see color, and dropped it again, while Vorongil bent
over to pick up the fallen gun. "Are you sunstruck or mad, Bartol?
What's this babble?"

"Captain, everybody on the _Swiftwing_--"

"And speak Lhari!" Vorongil demanded, and Bart realized that in his
excitement he had been shouting in Universal. He drew a long, deep
breath.

"Captain, there are lethal radiations being released here," he said.
"You have just barely half an hour to gather all the men and get them
behind shielding."

"The radiation counter is out of order," Vorongil remarked, unruffled.
"How can you possibly know--"

Bart stood in despair. Could he say, _A ship has landed here?_ Could he
say, _Check that bunker?_ Even if Montano was a would-be murderer, he
was human, and Bart could not betray him to the Lhari. There had been
too much betrayal. His voice rose in sudden hysteria.

"Captain, there's no time! I tell you, you'll all be dead if you don't
believe me! Get the men into the ship! Get them behind shielding and
_then_ check my story! I'm not--" he had gone this far, he might as well
go the whole way--"_I'm not a Lhari!_"

_"What?"_

One of the crewmen came dashing up, his crest sweat-streaked. "Captain!
Rugel has collapsed! We don't know what's wrong with him."

"Radiation sickness," said Bart, and Vorongil reached out, catching his
shoulder in a cruel taloned grip. Bart said desperately "I'm not a
Lhari! I signed on in disguise--I knew they meant to take the ship, but
I can't let you all die.

"How can I make you believe me? Here--" In desperation, Bart reached up.
Pain stabbed his eyeballs, fierce, blinding, as he pulled out one of the
contact lenses. He could not see the captain's face through the light,
but suddenly two Lhari were holding his arms. The fear of death was on
Bart, but it no longer mattered. He saw through watering eyes the
ever-deepening orange of the badge disappearing.

"Here," he said, tearing at it, "radiation. You must be able to see how
dark it is. Even if it's just darkness...."

Suddenly Vorongil was shouting, but Bart could not hear. Two men were
dragging him along. They hustled him up the ramp of the ship. He could
see again, but his eyes were blurred, and he felt sick, colors spinning
before his eyes, a nauseated ringing in his head.

At first he thought it was his ears ringing; then he made out the
rising, shrieking wail and fall of the emergency siren, steps running,
shouting voices, the slow clang of the doors. Someone was pushing at
him, babbling words in Lhari, but he heard them through an
ever-increasing distance: Vorongil's face bent over his, only a blurred
crimson blob that flashed away like a vanishing star in the viewport. It
flamed out into green darkness, vanished, and Bart fell through what
seemed to be a bottomless chasm of starless night.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he woke, acceleration had its crushing hand on his chest. He tried
to move, discovered that he was strapped hard into a bunk, and fainted
again.

Suddenly the pressure was gone and he was lying at ease on the smooth
sheets of a hospital bunk. His eyes were covered with a light bandage,
and there was a sharp pain in his left arm. He tried to move it and
found it was tied down.

"I think he's coming round," said Vorongil's voice.

"Yes, and a lot too soon for me," said a bitter voice which Bart
recognized as that of the ship's medic. "Freak!"

"Listen, Baldy," said Vorongil, "whoever he is, he could have been
blinded or killed. You wouldn't be alive now if it wasn't for that
_freak_, as you call him. Bartol, can you hear me? How much light can
your eyes stand?"

"As much as any Mentorian." Bart found he could move his right arm, and
twitched the bandage away. Vorongil and the medic stood over him; in the
other infirmary bunk a form was lying, covered with a white sheet.
Sickly, Bart wondered if they had found Montano. Vorongil followed the
direction of his eyes.

"Yes," he said, and his voice held deep bitterness, "poor old Rugel is
dead. He didn't get much of the radiation, but his heart wouldn't stand
it, and gave out." He bowed his head. "He was bald in the service of the
ships when my crest was new-sprouted," he said in deep grief.

Bart felt the shock of that, even through his own fear. He looked down
at his left arm. It was strapped to a splint, and fluid was dripping
slowly into the vein there.

Vorongil nodded. "I expect you feel pretty sick. You got a good dose of
radiation yourself, but we've given you a couple of transfusions--one of
the Mentorians matched your blood type, fortunately. It was a close
call."

The medic was looking down in ill-disguised curiosity. "Fantastic," he
said. "I don't suppose you'd tell me who changed your looks. I admit I
wouldn't believe it until I had a look at your foot bones under the
fluoroscope."

Vorongil said quietly, "Bartol--I don't suppose that's your real
name--why did you do it?"

"I couldn't see you all die, sir," Bart said, not expecting them to
believe him. "No more than that."

The medic said roughly in Lhari, "It's a trick, sir, no more. A trick to
make us trust him!"

"Why would he risk his own life then?" Vorongil asked. "No, it's more
than that." He hesitated. "We checked the bunkers--in radiation
suits--before we took off. We found a man in one of them."

"Was he dead?" Bart whispered.

"No," Vorongil said quietly.

"Thank God!" It was a heartfelt explosion. Then, apprehensively, "Or did
you kill him?"

"What do you think we are?" Vorongil said incredulously. "Indeed no. His
own men have probably found him by now. I don't imagine he got half as
much radiation as you did."

Bart surveyed the needle in his arm. "Why are you taking all this
trouble if I'm going to be put out of the way?"

