
This expedition was an expedition of exploration. They were prepared to
meet any conditions on those other worlds--no atmosphere, no water, no
heat, or even an atmosphere of poisonous gases they could rectify, for
their transmutation apparatus would permit them to change those gases,
or modify them; they knew well how to supply heat, but they knew too,
that that sun would warm some of its planets sufficiently for their
purposes.

Taj Lamor sent his little machine darting through the great airlock in
the side of the gigantic interstellar ship and lowered it gently to the
floor. A man stepped forward, opened the door for the leader, saluting
him briskly as he stepped out; then the car was run swiftly aside, to be
placed with thousands of others like it. Each of these cars was to be
used by a separate investigator when they reached those other worlds,
and there were men aboard who would use them.

Taj Lamor made his way to a door in the side of a great metal tube that
threaded the length of the huge ship. Opening the door he sat down in
another little car that shot swiftly forward as the double door shut
softly, with a low hiss of escaping air. For moments the car sped
through the tube, then gently it slowed and came to rest opposite
another door. Again came the hissing of gas as the twin doors opened,
and Taj Lamor stepped out, now well up in the nose of the cruiser. As he
stepped out of the car the outer and inner doors closed, and, ready now
for other calls, the car remained at this station. On a ship so long,
some means of communication faster than walking was essential. This
little pneumatic railway was the solution.

As Taj Lamor stepped out of the tube, a half-dozen men, who had been
talking among themselves, snapped quickly to attention. Following the
plans of the long-gone armies of their ancestors, the men of the
expedition had been trained to strict discipline; and Taj Lamor was
their technical leader and the nominal Commander-in-Chief, although
another man, Kornal Sorul, was their actual commander.

Taj Lamor proceeded at once to the Staff Cabin in the very nose of the
great ship. Just above him there was another room, walled on all sides
by that clear, glass-like material, the control cabin. Here the pilot
sat, directing the motions of the mighty ship of space.

Taj Lamor pushed a small button on his desk and in a moment a gray disc
before him glowed dimly, then flashed into life and full, natural color.
As though looking through a glass porthole, Taj Lamor saw the interior
of the Communications Room. The Communications Officer was gazing at a
similar disc in which Taj Lamor's features appeared.

"Have they reported from Ohmur, Lorsand, and Throlus, yet, Morlus Tal?"
asked the commander.

"They are reporting now, Taj Lamor, and we will be ready within two and
one half minutes. The plans are as before; we are to proceed directly
toward the Yellow Star, meeting at Point 71?"

"The plans are as before. Start when ready."

The disc faded, the colors died, and it was gray again. Taj Lamor pulled
another small lever on the panel before him, and the disc changed,
glowed, and was steady; and now he saw the preparations for departure,
as from an eye on the top of the great ship. Men streamed swiftly in
ordered columns all about and into the huge vessels. In an incredibly
short time they were in, and the great doors closed behind them.
Suddenly there came a low, dull hum through the disc, and the sound
mounted quickly, till all the world seemed humming to that dull note.
The warning!

Abruptly the city around him seemed to blaze in a riot of colored light!
The mighty towering bulks of the huge metal buildings were polished and
bright, and now, as the millions of lights, every color of the spectrum,
flashed over all the city from small machines in the air, on the ground,
in windows, their great metal walls glistening with a riot of flowing
color. Then there was a trembling through all the frame of the mighty
ship. In a moment it was gone, and the titanic mass of glistening metal
rose smoothly, quickly to the great roof of their world above them. On
an even keel it climbed straight up, then suddenly it leaped forward
like some great bird of prey sighting its victim. The ground beneath
sped swiftly away, and behind it there came a long line of ships,
quickly finding their position in the formation. They were heading
toward the giant airlock that would let them out into space. There was
but one lock large enough to permit so huge a ship to pass out, and they
must circle half their world to reach it.

On three other worlds there were other giant ships racing thus to meet
beyond their solar system. There were fifty ships coming from each
planet; two hundred mighty ships in all made up this Armada of Space,
two hundred gargantuan interstellar cruisers.

One by one the giant ships passed through the airlock and out into
space. Here they quickly reformed as they moved off together, each ship
falling into its place in the mighty cone formation, with the flagship
of Taj Lamor at the head. On they rushed through space, their speed ever
mounting. Suddenly there seemed to leap out of nowhere another mass of
shining machines that flew swiftly beside them. Like some strange,
shining ghosts, these ships seemed to materialize instantly beside and
behind their fleet. They fell in quickly in their allotted position
behind the Flagship's squadron. One--two more fleets appeared thus
suddenly in the dark, and together the ships were flashing on through
space to their goal of glowing fire ahead!

Hour after hour, day after day the ships flashed on through the awful
void, the utter silence relieved by the communications between
themselves and the slowly weakening communications from the far-off home
planets.

But as those signals from home grew steadily weaker, the sun before them
grew steadily larger. At last the men began to feel the heat of those
rays, to realize the energy that that mighty sea of flame poured forth
into space, and steadily they watched it grow nearer.

Then came a day when they could make out clearly the dim bulk of a
planet before them, and for long hours they slowed down the flying speed
of the ships. They had mapped the system they were approaching; there
were nine planets of varying sizes, some on the near and some on the
far side of the sun. There were but three on the near side; one that
seemed the outermost of the planets, about 35,000 miles in diameter, was
directly in their path, while there were two more much nearer the sun,
about 100,000,000 and 70,000,000 miles distant from it, each about seven
to eight thousand miles in diameter, but they were on opposite sides of
the sun. These more inviting and more accessible worlds were numbers two
and three of the planetary system. It was decided to split the
expedition into two parts; one part was to go to planet two, and the
other to three. Taj Lamor was to lead his group of a hundred ships to
the nearer planet at once.

In a very brief time the great ships slanted down over what seemed to be
a mighty globe of water. They were well in the northern hemisphere, and
they had come near the planet first over a vast stretch of rolling
ocean. The men had looked in wonder at such vast quantities of the
fluid. To them it was a precious liquid, that must be made artificially,
and was to be conserved, yet here they saw such vast quantities of
natural water as seemed impossible. Still, their ancient books had told
of such things, and of other strange things, things that must have been
wondrously beautiful, though they were so old now, these records, that
they were regarded largely as myths.

Yet here were the strange proofs! They saw great masses of fleecy water
vapor, huge billowy things that seemed solid, but were blown lightly in
the wind. And natural air! The atmosphere extended for hundreds of miles
off into space; and now, as they came closer to the surface of this
world the air was dense, and the sky above them was a beautiful blue,
not black, even where there were stars. The great sun, so brilliantly
incandescent when seen from space, and now a glowing globe of
reddish-yellow.

And as they came near land, they looked in wonder at mighty masses of
rock and soil that threw their shaggy heads high above the surrounding
terrain, huge masses that rose high, like waves in the water, till they
towered in solemn grandeur miles into the air! What a sight for these
men of a world so old that age long erosion had washed away the last
traces of hills, and filled in all of the valleys!

In awe they looked down at the mighty rock masses, as they swung low
over the mountains, gazing in wonder at the green masses of the strange
vegetation; strange, indeed, for they for uncounted ages had grown only
mushroom-like cellulose products, and these mainly for ornament, for all
their food was artificially made in huge factories.

Then they came over a little mountain lake, a body of water scarcely
large enough to berth one of their huge ships, but high in the clear air
of the mountains, fed by the melting of eternal snows. It was a
magnificent sapphire in a setting green as emerald, a sparkling lake of
clear water, deep as the sea, high in a cleft in the mountains.

In wonder the men looked down at these strange sights. What a marvelous
home!

Steadily the great machines proceeded, and at last the end of the giant
mountain was reached, and they came to a great plain. But that plain was
strangely marked off with squares, as regularly as though plotted with a
draftsman's square. This world must be inhabited by intelligent beings!

Suddenly Taj Lamor saw strange specks off in the far horizon to the
south, specks that seemed to grow in size with terrific velocity; these
must be ships, the ships of these people, coming to defend their home.
The strangely pallid face of Taj Lamor tightened into lines of grim
resolution. This was a moment he had foreseen and had dreaded. Was he to
withdraw and leave these people unmolested, or was he to stand and fight
for this world, this wonderfully beautiful home, a home that his race
could live in for millions of years to come? He had debated this
question many times before in his mind, and he had decided. There would
never, never be another chance for his people to gain a new home. They
must fight.

Swiftly he gave his orders. If resistance came, if an attack were made,
they were to fight back at once, with every weapon at their disposal.

The strangers' ships had grown swiftly larger to the eye, but still,
though near now, they seemed too small to be dangerous. These giant
interstellar cruisers were certainly invulnerable to ships so small;
their mere size would give them protection! These ships were scarcely as
long as the diameter of the smaller of the interstellar ships--a bare
two hundred and fifty feet for the largest.

The interstellar cruisers halted in their course, and waited for the
little ships to approach. They were fast, for they drew alongside
quickly, and raced to the front of the flagship. There was one small one
that was painted white, and on it there was a large white banner,
flapping in the wind of its passage. The rest of the ships drew off as
this came forward, and stopped, hanging motionless before the control
room of the giant machine. There were men inside--three strange men,
short and oddly pink-skinned--but they were gesturing now, motioning
that the giant machine settle to the ground beneath. Taj Lamor was
considering whether or not to thus parley with the strangers, when
suddenly there leaped from the white craft a beam of clear white--a beam
that was directed toward the ground, then swung up toward the great
cruiser in a swift arc!

As one, a dozen swift beams of pale red flared out from the giant and
bathed the pigmy craft. As they reached it, the white ray that had been
sweeping up suddenly vanished, and for an instant the ship hung poised
in the air; then it began to swing crazily, like the pendulum of a
clock--swung completely over--and with a sickening lurch sped swiftly
for the plain nearly five miles below. In moments there came a brief
flare, then there remained only a little crater in the soft soil.

But the red beams had not stopped with the little ship; they had darted
out to the other machines, trying to reach them before they could bring
those strange white rays into play. The cruisers obviously must win, for
they carried dozens of projectors, but they might be damaged, their
flight delayed. They must defeat those strangers quickly. The rays of
Taj Lamor's ship lashed out swiftly, but almost before they had
started, all the other ships, a full hundred, were in action, and the
flagship was darting swiftly up and away from the battle. Below, those
pale red rays were taking a swift toll of the little ships, and nearly
twenty of them rolled suddenly over, and dashed to destruction far
below.

But now the little ships were in swift darting motion. Because of their
small size, they were able to avoid the rays of the larger interstellar
cruisers, and as their torpedo-shaped hulls flashed about with
bewildering speed, they began to fight back. They had been taken utterly
by surprise, but now they went into action with an abandon and swiftness
that took the initiative away from the gigantic interstellar liners.
They were in a dozen places at once, dodging and twisting, unharmed, out
of the way of the deadly red beams, and were as hard to hit as so many
dancing feathers suspended over an air jet.

And if the pilots were skillful in avoiding enemy rays, their ray men
were as accurate in placing theirs. But then, with a target of such vast
size, not so much skill was necessary.

These smaller vessels were the ships of Earth. The people of the dark
star had entered the solar system quite unannounced, except that they
had been seen in passing the orbit of Mars, for a ship had been out
there in space, moving steadily out toward Neptune, and the great
interstellar cruisers, flashing in across space, away from that frigid
planet, had not seen the tiny wanderer. But he had seen those mighty
hulks, and had sent his message of danger out on the ether, warning the
men of Earth. They had relayed it to Venus, and the ships that had gone
there had received an equally warm reception, and were even now finding
their time fully occupied trying to beat off the Interplanetary Patrol.

The battle ended as swiftly as it began, for Taj Lamor, in his machine
high above, saw that they were outclassed, and ordered them to withdraw
at once. Scarcely ten minutes had elapsed, yet they had lost twenty-two
of their giant ships.

The expedition that had gone to Venus reported a similarly active
greeting. It was decided at once that they should proceed cautiously to
the other planets, to determine which were inhabited and which were not,
and to determine the chemical and physical conditions on each.

The ships formed again out in space, on the other side of the sun,
however, and started at once in compact formation for Mercury.

Their observations were completed without further mishap, and they set
out for their distant home, their number depleted by forty-one ships,
for nineteen had fallen on Venus.




I


The Terrestrian and Venerian governments had met in conference, a grim,
businesslike discussion with few wasted words. Obviously, this was to be
a war of science, a war on a scale never before known on either world.
Agreements were immediately drawn up between the two worlds for a
concerted, cooperative effort. A fleet of new and vastly more powerful
ships must be constructed--but first they must have a complete report on
the huge invading craft that had fallen in western Canada, and on Venus,
for they might conceivably make their secrets their own.

They called for the scientists whose work had made possible their
successful resistance of the marauders: Arcot, Morey and Wade. They
found them working in the Arcot Laboratories.

"Wade," called Arcot tensely as he snapped the switch of the
televisophone, "bring Morey and meet me at the machine on the roof at
once. That was a call from Washington. I'll explain as soon as you get
there."

On the roof Arcot opened the hangar doors, and entered the
five-passenger molecular motion ship inside. Its sleek, streamlined
sides spoke of power and speed. This was a special research model,
designed for their experiments, and carrying mechanisms not found in
commercial crafts. Among these were automatic controls still in the
laboratory stage, but permitting higher speed, for no human being could
control the ship as accurately as these.

It took the trio a little less than a quarter of an hour to make the
5,000 mile trip from New York to the battlefield of Canada. As they sped
through the air, Arcot told them what had transpired. The three were
passed through the lines at once, and they settled to the ground beside
one of the huge ships that lay half buried in the ground. The force of
the impact had splashed the solid soil as a stone will splash soft mud,
and around the ship there was a massive ridge of earth. Arcot looked at
the titanic proportions of this ship from space, and turned to his
friends:

"We can investigate that wreck on foot, but I think it'll be far more
sensible to see what we can do with the car. This monster is certainly a
mile or more long, and we'd spend more time in walking than in
investigation. I suggest, we see if there isn't room for the car inside.
This beats even those huge Kaxorian planes for size." Arcot paused, then
grinned. "I sure would have liked to mix in the fight they must have had
here--nice little things to play with, aren't they?"

"It would make a nice toy," agreed Wade as he looked at the rows of
wicked-looking projectors along the sides of the metal hull, "and I
wonder if there might not be some of the crew alive in there? If there
are, the size of the ship would prevent their showing themselves very
quickly, and since they can't move the ship, it seems to me that they'll
let us know shortly that they're around. Probably, with the engines
stopped, their main weapons are useless, but they would doubtless have
some sort of guns. I'm highly in favor of using the car. We carry a
molecular director ray, so if the way is blocked, we can make a new
one."

Wade's attention was caught by a sudden flare of light a few miles
across the plain. "Look over there--that ship is still flaming--reddish,
but almost colorless. Looks like a gas flame, with a bit of calcium in
it. Almost as if the air in the ship were combustible. If we should do
any exploring in this baby, I suggest we use altitude suits--they can't
do any harm in any case."

Three or four of the great wrecks, spread over a wide area, were burning
now, hurling forth long tongues of colorless, intensely hot flame.
Several of the ships had been only slightly damaged; one had been
brought down by a beam that had torn free the entire tail of the ship,
leaving the bow in good condition. Apparently this machine had not
fallen far; perhaps the pilot had retained partial control of the ship,
his power failing when he was only a comparatively short distance from
Earth. This was rather well to one side of the plain, however, and they
decided to investigate it later.

The ship nearest them had crashed nose first, the point being crushed
and shattered. Arcot maneuvered his craft cautiously toward the great
hole at the nose of the ship, and they entered the mighty vessel slowly,
a powerful spotlight illuminating the interior. Tremendous girders,
twisted and broken by the force of impact, thrust up about them. It soon
became evident that there was little to fear from any living enemies,
and they proceeded more rapidly. Certainly no creature could live after
the shock that had broken these huge girders! Several times metal beams
blocked their path, and they were forced to use the molecular director
ray to bend them out of the way.

"Man," said Arcot as they stopped a moment to clear away a huge member
that was bent across their path, "but those beams do look as if they
were built permanently! I'd hate to ram into one of them! Look at that
one--if that has anywhere near the strength of steel, just think of the
force it took to bend it!"

At last they had penetrated to the long tube that led through the length
of the ship, the communication tube. This admitted the small ship
easily, and they moved swiftly along till they came to what they
believed to be about the center of the invader. Here Arcot proposed that
they step out and see what there was to be seen.

The others agreed, and they at once put on their altitude suits of heavy
rubberized canvas, designed to be worn outside the ship when at high
altitude, or even in space. They were supplied with oxygen tanks that
would keep the wearer alive for about six hours. Unless the atmosphere
remaining in the alien ship was excessively corrosive, they would be
safe. After a brief discussion, they decided that all would go, for if
they met opposition, there would be strength in numbers.

They met their first difficulty in opening the door leading out of the
communication tube. It was an automatic door, and resisted their every
effort--until finally they were forced to tear it out with a ray. It was
impossible to move it in any other way. The door was in what was now the
floor, since the ship seemed to have landed on one side rather than on
its keel.

They let themselves through the narrow opening one at a time, and landed
on the sloping wall of the corridor beyond.

"Lucky this wasn't a big room, or we'd have had a nice drop to the far
wall!" commented Wade. The suits were equipped with a thin vibrating
diaphragm that made speech easy, but Wade's voice came through with a
queerly metallic ring.

Arcot agreed somewhat absently, his attention directed toward their
surroundings. His hand light pierced the blackness, finally halting at a
gaping opening, apparently the entrance to a corridor. As they examined
it, they saw that it slanted steeply downward.

"It seems to be quite a drop," said Wade as he turned his light into it,
"but the surface seems to be rather rough. I think we can do it. I
notice that you brought a rope, Morey; I think it'll help. I'll go
first, unless someone else wants the honor."

"You go first?" Arcot hesitated briefly. "But I don't know--if we're
all going, I guess you had better, at that. It would take two ordinary
men to lower a big bulk like you. On the other hand, if anybody is going
to stay, you're delegated as elevator boy!

"Hold everything," continued Arcot. "I have an idea. I think none of us
will need to hold the weight of the others with the rope. Wade, will you
get three fairly good-sized pieces of metal, something we can tie a rope
to? I think we can get down here without the help of anyone else. Morey,
will you cut the rope in three equal pieces while I help Wade tear loose
that girder?"

Arcot refused to reveal his idea till his preparations were complete,
but worked quickly and efficiently. With the aid of Wade, he soon had
three short members, and taking the rope that Morey had prepared, he
tied lengths of cord to the pieces of metal, leaving twenty foot lengths
hanging from each. Now he carefully tested his handiwork to make sure
the knots would not slip.

"Now, let's see what we can do." Arcot put a small loop in one end of a
cord, thrust his left wrist through this, and grasped the rope firmly
with his hand. Then he drew his ray pistol, and adjusted it carefully
