the great black bodies ahead.

Aware that some strange enemy was on their track, the killers had become
panicky and were darting away at their full speed, which was only
slightly under that of the torpoon's humming motors, and which at times
even surpassed it. Ken saw that it looked like a long chase, and settled
his lean body as comfortably as he could.

His mind was not concentrated on the task ahead, for the first part was
mere routine and he could follow his quarry almost mechanically. And so,
as his steel shell drove through the ever-shadowed, icy sea, he began to
think about the disappearance of Chan Beddoes, the _Narwhal's_ second
torpooner.

Dead, now Beddoes; it was a week since he had set out on the chase from
which he had never returned. Ken could only conjecture as to what had
stricken him down. There were countless possibilities: perhaps a blow
from a dying killer whale's flukes bursting his torpoon's seams; perhaps
a crash into underwater ice. Whatever it was, it had been sudden, for
not even a faint radioed S.O.S. had trembled into the ear-phones of the
_Narwhal's_ radio-man. For two days they had held hopes that the second
torpooner still lived, as the sea-suit stored in each torp contained
air-units sufficient for thirty-six hours. But a whole week's passing
told them that that vast stretch of glacial sea was now Chan Beddoes'
grave.

Ken's reflections brought an urge to get the present job over with as
quickly as possible. He squeezed another ounce of speed from the
torpoon, taxing it to the limit and setting up a slight vibration; then
he fondled the nitro-shell gun's trigger and studied the huge fish
bodies ahead.

"Seems as if they're going to run forever," he muttered indignantly.
"We'll be to the Pole if they keep it up!"

      *      *      *      *      *

Already the _Narwhal_ was miles behind. Through the torp's vision-plate
a scene of ever increasing mystery and gloom met his gaze. The killers'
course had brought them beneath a wide sheet of ice, apparently, for
there were no more columns of pale sunlight piercing through. The
quarter-light monotone was unbroken, save by deeper drifts of shadow,
and as he drummed through it the torpooner wondered at its lifelessness.
He discerned no more of the ghostly fish-schools that usually abounded.
Some enemy possibly had driven them from the region; but not the whale
he was pursuing, for they scorned such fare.

He was scanning the surrounding murk apprehensively, when, of a sudden,
his brain and body tensed.

Off to one side, far to the right, he thought he had glimpsed a figure.
It was hanging motionless, level with him; and at first it looked like a
seal. But the flippers seemed longer than a seal's; moreover, no seal
would be anywhere near a pack of killer whales; nor did they poise in an
upright position. It couldn't be a seal, he told himself. What, then?
Was it only imagination that made it appear faintly human-shaped?

He strove to catch it again with staring eyes, but it was gone, leaving
only a jumbled impression of something fantastic in his mind, and the
next instant the whole thing was forgotten in the movements of the
killer school, now only a few hundred yards ahead.

They suddenly began a great sweeping curve to the right, a typical
maneuver before standing for attack or breaking up. At once Ken swerved
to starboard and drove the torpoon's nose for an advance point on the
circle the fish were describing. His move swallowed the distance between
them; the sleek, thick-blubbered bodies swept close by his vision-plate,
their rush tossing the torp slightly. Twelve of them went past in a
blur, and then came the thirteenth, the invariable straggler of a
school. The thin light-beams pencilled through the darkness, outlining
the rushing black shape; Ken gripped the gun's trigger and jockeyed the
torp up a trifle in the seconds remaining, always keeping the sights
dead set on the vital spot twelve inches behind the whale's little eye.

When only fifteen feet separated them he squeezed the trigger and at
once zoomed up and away to get clear of the killer's start of pain and,
if the shot were true, its following death flurry.

The shell slid deep into the rich outer blubber; and, wheeling, Ken
watched the mighty mammal quiver in its forward rush. This was merely
the reaction from the pain of the shell's entrance; the nitro had not as
yet exploded.

Now it did. The projectiles carried but a small charge, in order not to
rip too much the buoyant lungs and so cause the body to sink, but the
killer trembled like a jelly from the shock. The heart was reached; its
razor-sharp flukes thrashing and tooth-lined jaws clicking, the killer
wheeled with incredible speed in its death flurry. A minute later the
body shuddered a last time, then drifted slowly over, showing the white
belly. It began a gentle rise up toward the ceiling of ice.

"One!" grinned Ken Torrance. He noted his position on the torpoon's
dials and gave it to the _Narwhal_ by radio. They would then follow and
pick up the whale.

"I'll have the second in ten minutes," he promised confidently. "Signing
off!"

Again the torp darted after its prey.

He found it easy, this time, to overhaul them. Not many minutes had
elapsed before he again caught sight of their rhythmically thrusting
flukes and the flash of white under-sides. Unaware that one of their
fellows had been left a lifeless carcass by the steel fish again nearing
them, they had reduced their speed somewhat.

Ken angled down a hundred feet into the deeper shadows, not wanting to
apprise them of his presence. He continued at that level until the belly
of the rearmost whale rolled white above him; then he veered off to the
left, rising as he did so, in order to bring his assault to bear
directly on the killer's flanks.

He swung back and streaked in for the kill. It looked like an easy one.

But he was never more mistaken in his life. For, as luck had it, he had
chosen a tartar, a fighting fish--literally the "killer" which its kind
had been named.

      *      *      *      *      *

The torpooner knew what he was in for as soon as he fired his first
shell. Its aim was bad, and instead of sinking into the flesh it merely
ripped across the whale's back, leaving a ragged, ugly scar.

An ordinary whale would have been scared into panic by the wound and
doubled its speed in an effort to get away; but Ken Torrance saw this
one wheel its six-foot snout around viciously until its beady little
eyes settled on the torpoon.

"I'll be damned!" he muttered. "He's turning to fight. All right, come
ahead!"

He veered about and fired another shot that missed its mark by feet, but
creased the whale's flukes. At once this terrible weapon lashed
titanically up and down, and thirty feet of berserk killer came curving
towards the lone man inside his shell of steel. Ken tensed himself for
combat. He would have to keep a good distance from the fish and fire
until he got it, as a square smash from its flukes might crumple the
torp like an egg-shell.

[Illustration: _Thirty feet of berserk killer came curving towards the
lone man_.]

But his foe gave him no chance. Crazy with pain and anger, it swept up
and nipped his dive for the bottom with a fluke-blow that tumbled the
torpoon over and dazed its pilot. Before he could get straightened out
it was on him again, catching him up into a wild whirlpool, butting the
shell and flashing round to get its flukes into position. With a wrench,
Ken jammed the rudder over, shoved his accelerator flat, and got free
just as the tail thrashed down. He was breathing hard and sweating as he
banked around--to see once more the whale, its wicked jaws wide open,
charging directly at him.

For a moment he was unable to move. Such a mode of attack was totally
unexpected, and the sight held him fascinated. He could see the very
wrinkles of the monster's skin as it rushed in, with shadowy flukes
thrusting behind; could see the lines of dagger-like teeth, the
cavernous maw and gullet. And then all vision was blotted out as the
jaws closed around the torpoon's nose.

Ken did not wait for those jaws to crunch shut. He gripped the
nitro-shell gun's trigger and squeezed it back.

The weapon hissed, flung its shell. He reversed his engines to try and
tear free. Seconds dragged by with no result. Then he felt a mighty
jolt; his harness broke; and he was pitched into the torp's engine
controls.

That was all he knew, save for a vague feeling of falling, falling over
and over, which was ended when a second bone-shaking shock brought
complete oblivion....

      *      *      *      *      *

