problem.

"I'll take the snapper-boat," he stated. "Santos in the gunner's seat. Koa
in charge in the landing boat. Dowst pilot. Let's show an exhaust."

He fitted himself into the tight pilot seat of the snapper-boat while
Santos climbed in behind. Then, handling the controls with the skill of
long practice, he lifted the tiny fighting rocket above the asteroid and
waited for the landing boat. When it joined up, Rip led the way to safety.
As he cut his exhaust to wait for the explosion, he sighted past the
snapper-boat's nose to the asteroid.

He was moving, and the direction of his move told him the sun was already
pulling. Its pull was strong, too. He cut his jets back on, just to hold
position, and saw Dowst do the same.

Another few miles toward the sun and the landing boat wouldn't have the
power to get away from Sol's gravity. A few miles beyond that, even the
powerful little snapper-boat would be caught.

Below, the timer reached zero. A mighty fan of fire shot into space. The
asteroid shuddered from the blast, then swerved gradually, picking up
speed as well as new direction.

Rip swallowed hard. Now they were committed. They would reach a new
perihelion far beyond the limits of safety. P for perihelion and P for
peril. In this case, they were the same thing!





CHAPTER FOURTEEN - BETWEEN TWO FIRES


Back on the asteroid, the Planeteers started laying the second atomic
charge. Rip selected the spot, found a near-by crystal that would serve to
house the bomb, and Kemp started cutting.

The Planeteers knew what to do now, and the work went rapidly. Rip kept an
eye on his chronometer. According to the message from Terra base, he had
about fifteen minutes before the Consops cruiser arrived.

"We have one advantage we didn't have back in the asteroid belt," he
remarked to Koa. "Back there they could have landed anywhere on the rock.
Now they have to stick to the dark side. Snapper-boats could last on the
sun side, but men in ordinary space suits couldn't."

"That's good," Koa agreed. "We have only one side to defend. Why don't we
put the rocket launcher right in the middle of the dark side?"

"Go ahead. And have all men check their pistols and knives. We don't know
what's likely to happen when that Connie flames in."

Rip walked over to the communicator and plugged his suit into the circuit.
"This is the asteroid calling Terra base. Over."

"This is Terra base. Go ahead, Foster. How are you doing?"

"If you need anything cooked, send it to us," Rip replied. "We have heat
enough to cook anything, including tungsten alloy." He explained briefly
what action they had taken.

A new voice came on the communicator. "Foster, this is Colonel Stevens."

Rip responded swiftly, "Yes, sir!" Stevens was the top Planeteer,
commanding officer of all the Special Order Squadrons.

"We've piped this circuit into every channel in the system," the colonel
said. "Every Planeteer in the Squadrons is listening, and rooting for you.
Is there anything we can do?"

"Yes, sir," Rip replied. "Do you know if Terra base has plotted our course
this far?"

There was a brief silence, then the colonel answered, "Yes, Foster. We
have a complete track from the time you started showing on the Terra
screens, about halfway between the orbits of Mars and earth."

"Did you just get our change of direction?"

"Yes. We're following you on the screens."

"Then, sir, I'd appreciate it if you'd put the calculators to work and
make a time-distance plot for the next few hours. The blast we're saving
to push back to safety is about three kilotons. Let us know the last
moment when we can fire and still get free of Sol's gravity."

"You'll have it within fifteen minutes. Anything else, Foster?"

"Nothing else I can think of, sir."

"Then good luck. We'll be standing by."

"Yes, sir. Foster off."

Rip disconnected and turned up his helmet communicator, repeating the
conversation to his men. Koa came and stood beside him. "Lieutenant, how
do we set off this next charge?"

There was only one way. When the time came to blast, they would be too
close to the sun to take to the boats. The blast had to be set off from
the asteroid.

"We'll get underground as far away from the bomb as we can," Rip said. He
surveyed the dark side, which was rapidly growing less dark. "I think the
second crater will do. Kemp can square it off on the side toward the blast
to give us a vertical wall to hide behind."

Koa looked doubtful. "Plenty of radiation left in those holes, sir."

Rip grinned mirthlessly. "Radiation is the least of our problems. I'd
rather get an overdose of gamma than get blasted into space."

A yell rang in his helmet. "Here comes the Connie!"

Rip looked up, startled. The Consops cruiser passed directly overhead,
about ten miles away. It was decelerating rapidly. Rip wondered why they
hadn't spotted it earlier and realized the Connie had come from the
direction of the hot side.

The enemy cruiser was probably the same one that had attacked them before.
He must have lain in wait for days, keeping between the sun and Terra.
That way, the screens wouldn't pick him up, since only a few observatories
scanned the sun regularly. To the observatories, the cruiser would have
been only a tiny speck, too small to be noticed. Or if they had noticed
it, the astronomers probably decided it was just a very tiny sunspot.

The Planeteers worked with increased speed. Kemp welded the final plug
into place, then hurried to the crater from which they would set off the
charge. Dominico and Dowst connected the wires from the rocket head to a
reel of wire and rolled it toward the crater. Nunez got a hand-driven
dynamo from the supplies and tested it for use in setting off the charge.
Santos stood by the rocket launcher, with Pederson ready to put another
rack of rockets into the device when necessary.

Rip and Koa watched the Connie cruiser. It decelerated to a stop for a
brief second, then started moving again, with no jets showing.

"That's the sun pulling," Rip said exultantly. "They'll have to keep
blasting to maintain position."

The Consops commander didn't wait to trim ship against the sun's drag. His
air locks opened, clearly visible to Rip and Koa because that side of the
cruiser was brilliant with sunlight. Ten snapper-boats sped forth. Rip was
certain now that this was the enemy cruiser they had fought off back in
the asteroid belt. Two Connie snapper-boats had been destroyed in that
clash, which explained why the commander was sending out only ten boats,
instead of the full quota of twelve.

The squadron instantly formed a V, like a strange space letter made up of
globes. The sun's gravity pulled at them, dragging them off course. Rip
watched as flames poured from their stern tubes. They were firing full
speed ahead, but the drag of the sun distorted their line of flight into a
great arc.

Rip saw the strategy instantly. The Connie commander knew the situation
exactly, and he was staking everything in one great gamble, sending his
snapper-boats to land on the asteroid--to crash land if necessary.

The asteroid was so close to the sun that even the powerful fighting
rockets would use most of their fuel in simply combatting its gravity.

"All hands stand by to repel Connies," Rip shouted, and drew his pistol.
He looked into the magazine, saw that he had a full clip, and then charged
the weapon.

Santos was crouched over the rocket launcher, his space gloves working
rapidly as he kept the rockets pointed at the enemy.

Rip called, "Santos, fire at will."

The Planeteers formed a skirmish line which pivoted on the launcher. Only
Kemp remained at work. His torch flared, slicing through the thorium as he
prepared their firing position.

The atomic charge was ready. The wires had been laid up to the rim of the
crater in which Kemp worked, and the dynamo was attached.

Rip was everywhere, checking on the launcher, on Kemp, on the pistols of
his men. And Santos, hunched over his illuminated sight, watched the
Connie snapper-boats draw near.

"Here we go," the Filipino corporal muttered. He pressed the trigger.

The first rocket sped outward in a sweeping curve, and for a moment Rip
opened his mouth to yell at Santos. The sun's gravity affected the attack
rockets, too! Then he saw that the corporal had allowed for the sun's
pull.

The rocket curved into the squadron of oncoming boats and they all tried
to dodge at once. Two of them met in a sideways crash, then a third
staggered as its stern globe flared and exploded. Santos had scored a hit!

Rip called, "Good shooting!"

The corporal's reply was rueful, "Sir, that wasn't the one I aimed at. The
sun's pull is worse than I figured."

The damaged snapper-boat instantly blasted from its nose tubes,
decelerated and went into reverse, flipping through space crabwise as it
tried to regain the safety of the cruiser. The two boats that had crashed
while trying to dodge were blasting in great spurts of flame, following
the example of their damaged companion.

"Seven left," Rip called, and another rocket flashed on its way. He
followed its trail as it curved away from the asteroid and into the
squadron. Its proximity fuse detonated in the exhaust of a Connie boat,
blowing the tube out of position. The boat yawed wildly, cut its stern
tubes, and blasted to a stop from the bow tube. Then it, too, started
backward toward the cruiser.

Six left!

Flame blossomed a few yards from Rip. He was picked up bodily and flung
into space, whirling end over end. Koa's voice rang in his helmet.

"Watch it! They're firing back!"

Rip tugged frantically at an air bottle in his belt. He pulled it out and
used it to whirl him upright again, then its air blast drove him back to
the surface of the asteroid. Sweat poured from his forehead and the suit
ventilator whined as it worked to pick up the extra moisture. Great
Cosmos! That was close.

Koa called, "All right, sir?"

"Fine."

Santos fired again, twice, in rapid succession. The Connie snapper-boats
scattered as the proximity fuses produced flowers of fire among them. Two
near misses, but they threw the enemy off course. Rip watched tensely as
the boats fought to regain their course. He knew asteroid, cruiser, and
boats were speeding toward the sun at close to 50 miles a second, and the
drag was getting terrific. The Connies knew it too.

There was an exultant yell from the Planeteers as two of the boats gave up
and turned back, using full power to regain the safety of the mother ship.

Four left, and they were getting close!

Santos scored a direct hit on the nose of the nearest one, but its
momentum drove it within a few yards of the asteroid. Five space-suited
figures erupted from it, holding hand propulsion units, tubes of rocket
fuel used for hand combat in empty space.

The Connies lit off their propulsion tubes and drove feet first for the
asteroid. The Planeteers estimated where the enemy would land, and were
there waiting with pointed handguns. The Connies had their hands over
their heads, holding the propulsion tubes. They took one look at the
gleaming Planeteer guns and their hands stayed upright.

The Planeteers lashed the Connies' hands behind them with their own safety
lines and, at Rip's orders, dumped all but one of them into the crater
where Kemp was just finishing.

Three snapper-boats remained. Rip watched, holding tightly to the arm of
the Connie he had kept at his side. The man wore the insignia of an
officer.

The remaining snapper-boats were going to make it. Santos threw rockets
among them and scored hits, but the boats kept coming. The Connies were
too far away from the cruiser to return, and they knew it. Getting to the
asteroid was their only chance.

Rip called, "Santos. Cease fire. Set the launcher for ground level. Let
them land, but don't fire until I give the word." He hoped his plan would
work. Experience back in the asteroid belt had taught him something about
Connies.

He put his helmet against his prisoner's for direct communication. "You
speak English?"

The man shouted back, "Yes."

"Good. We're going to let your friends land. As soon as they do, I want
you to yell to them. Say we have assault rockets trained on them. Tell
them to surrender or they'll be killed in their tracks. Got that?"

The Connie replied, "Suppose I refuse?"

Rip put his space knife against the man's stomach. "Then we'll get them
with rockets. But you won't care because you won't know it."

The truth was, Santos couldn't hope to get them all with his rockets. They
might overcome the Connies in hand-to-hand fighting, but there would be a
cost to pay in Planeteer casualties. Rip hoped the Connie wouldn't call
his bluff, because that's all it was. He couldn't use a space knife on an
unarmed prisoner.

The Connie didn't know that. In Rip's place he would have no compunctions
about using the knife, so instead of calling Rip's bluff he agreed.

The snapper-boats blew their front tubes, decelerating, and squashed down
to the asteroid in a roar of exhaust flames, sending the Planeteers
running out of the way. Rip thrust harder with his space knife and yelled,
"Tell them!"

The Connie officer nodded. "Turn up my communicator."

Rip turned it on full, and the Connie barked quick instructions. The
exhausts died and five men filed out of each boat with hands held high.
Rip blew a drop of perspiration from the tip of his nose. Empty space! It
was a good thing Connie morale was bad. The enemy's willingness to
surrender had saved them a costly fight.

The Planeteers rounded up the prisoners and secured them while Rip took an
anxious look at the communicator. It was about time he heard from Terra
base.

The light was glowing. For all he knew, it might have been glowing for
many minutes. He plugged into the circuit.

"This is Foster on the asteroid."

"Terra base to Foster. Listen, you will reach optimum position on the
time-distance curve at twenty-three-oh-six. Repeat back,
twenty-three-oh-six."

"Got it. We will reach optimum position at twenty-three-oh-six." He looked
at his chronometer and his pulse stopped. It was 2258! They had just eight
minutes before the sun caught them forever, atomic blast or no!

And the Connie cruiser was still overhead, with no friendly cruisers in
sight. He looked up, white-faced. Not only was the Connie still there, but
its main air lock was sliding open to disclose a new danger.

In the opening, ready to launch, an assault boat waited. The assault boats
were something only the Connies used. They were about four times the size
of a snapper-boat, less maneuverable but more powerful. They carried 20
men and a pair of guided missiles with atomic warheads!





CHAPTER FIFTEEN - THE ROCKETEERS


Rip ran for the snapper-boat, feet moving as rapidly as lack of gravity
would permit. He called instructions. "Santos! Turn the launcher over to
Pederson and come with me. Koa, take over. Start throwing rockets at that
boat and don't stop until you run out of ammunition."

He reached the snapper-boat and squeezed in, Santos close behind him. As
he strapped himself into the seat he called, "Koa! Get this, and get it
straight. At twenty-three-oh-five, fire the bomb. Fire it whether I'm back
or not. Got that?"

Koa replied, "Got it, sir."

That would give the Planeteers a minute's leeway. Not much of a safety
margin, especially when he wasn't sure how much power the improvised
atomic charge would produce.
