
"Who?" he asked shakily. "_Who?_ St. Cyr--"

A hoarse bellow came over the wire. Martin sat bolt upright, seizing the
phone desperately with both hands.

"Listen!" he cried. "Will you let me finish what I'm going to say, just
for once? Putting a robot in _Angelina Noel_ is simply--"

"I do not hear what you say," roared a heavy voice. "Your idea stinks.
Whatever it is. Be at Theater One for yesterday's rushes! At once!"

"But wait--"

St. Cyr belched and hung up. Martin's strangling hands tightened briefly
on the telephone. But it was no use. The real strangle-hold was the one
St. Cyr had around Martin's throat, and it had been tightening now for
nearly thirteen weeks. Or had it been thirteen years? Looking backward,
Martin could scarcely believe that only a short time ago he had been a
free man, a successful Broadway playwright, the author of the hit play
_Angelina Noel_. Then had come St. Cyr....

A snob at heart, the director loved getting his clutches on hit plays
and name writers. Summit Studios, he had roared at Martin, would follow
the original play exactly and would give Martin the final okay on the
script, provided he signed a thirteen-week contract to help write the
screen treatment. This had seemed too good to be true--and was.

Martin's downfall lay partly in the fine print and partly in the fact
that Erika Ashby had been in the hospital with a bad attack of influenza
at the time. Buried in legal verbiage was a clause that bound Martin to
five years of servitude with Summit should they pick up his option. Next
week they would certainly do just that, unless justice prevailed.

        *        *       *        *        *

"I think I need a drink," Martin said unsteadily. "Or several." He
glanced toward the robot. "I wonder if you'd mind getting me that bottle
of Scotch from the bar over there."

"But I am here to conduct an experiment in optimum ecology," said the
robot.

Martin closed his eyes. "Pour me a drink," he pleaded. "Please. Then put
the glass in my hand, will you? It's not much to ask. After all, we're
both human beings, aren't we?"

"Well, no," the robot said, placing a brimming glass in Martin's groping
fingers. Martin drank. Then he opened his eyes and blinked at the tall
highball glass in his hand. The robot had filled it to the brim with
Scotch. Martin turned a wondering gaze on his metallic companion.

"You must do a lot of drinking yourself," he said thoughtfully. "I
suppose tolerance can be built up. Go ahead. Help yourself. Take the
rest of the bottle."

The robot placed the tip of a finger above each eye and slid the fingers
upward, as though raising his eyebrows inquiringly.

"Go on, have a jolt," Martin urged. "Or don't you want to break bread
with me, under the circumstances?"

"How can I?" the robot asked. "I'm a robot." His voice sounded somewhat
wistful. "What happens?" he inquired. "Is it a lubricatory or a fueling
mechanism?"

Martin glanced at his brimming glass.

"Fueling," he said tersely. "High octane. You really believe in staying
in character, don't you? Why not--"

"Oh, the principle of irritation," the robot interrupted. "I see. Just
like fermented mammoth's milk."

Martin choked. "Have you ever drunk fermented mammoth's milk?" he
inquired.

"How could I?" the robot asked. "But I've seen it done." He drew a
straight line vertically upward between his invisible eyebrows, managing
to look wistful. "Of course my world is perfectly functional and
functionally perfect, but I can't help finding temporalizing a
fascina--" He broke off. "I'm wasting space-time. Ah. Now. Mr. Martin,
would you be willing to--"

"Oh, have a drink," Martin said. "I feel hospitable. Go ahead, indulge
me, will you? My pleasures are few. And I've got to go and be terrorized
in a minute, anyhow. If you can't get that mask off I'll send for a
straw. You can step out of character long enough for one jolt, can't
you?"

"I'd like to try it," the robot said pensively. "Ever since I noticed
the effect fermented mammoth's milk had on the boys, it's been on my
mind, rather. Quite easy for a human, of course. Technically it's simple
enough, I see now. The irritation just increases the frequency of the
brain's kappa waves, as with boosted voltage, but since electrical
voltage never existed in pre-robot times--"

"It did," Martin said, taking another drink. "I mean, it does. What do
you call that, a mammoth?" He indicated the desk lamp.

The robot's jaw dropped.

"That?" he asked in blank amazement. "Why--why then all those telephone
poles and dynamos and lighting-equipment I noticed in this era are
powered by electricity!"

"What did you think they were powered by?" Martin asked coldly.

"Slaves," the robot said, examining the lamp. He switched it on,
blinked, and then unscrewed the bulb. "Voltage, you say?"

"Don't be a fool," Martin said. "You're overplaying your part. I've got
to get going in a minute. Do you want a jolt or don't you?"

"Well," the robot said, "I don't want to seem unsociable. This _ought_
to work." So saying, he stuck his finger in the lamp-socket. There was a
brief, crackling flash. The robot withdrew his finger.

"_F(t)_--" he said, and swayed slightly. Then his fingers came up and
sketched a smile that seemed, somehow, to express delighted surprise.

"_Fff(t)!_" he said, and went on rather thickly, "_F(t)_ integral
between plus and minus infinity ... _a-sub-n_ to _e_...."

Martin's eyes opened wide with shocked horror. Whether a doctor or a
psychiatrist should be called in was debatable, but it was perfectly
evident that this was a case for the medical profession, and the sooner
the better. Perhaps the police, too. The bit-player in the robot suit
was clearly as mad as a hatter. Martin poised indecisively, waiting for
his lunatic guest either to drop dead or spring at his throat.

The robot appeared to be smacking his lips, with faint clicking sounds.

"Why, that's wonderful," he said. "AC, too."

"Y-you're not dead?" Martin inquired shakily.

"I'm not even alive," the robot murmured. "The way you'd understand it,
that is. Ah--thanks for the jolt."

        *        *       *        *        *

Martin stared at the robot with the wildest dawning of surmise.

"Why--" he gasped. "Why--_you're a robot_!"

"Certainly I'm a robot," his guest said. "What slow minds you pre-robots
had. Mine's working like lightning now." He stole a drunkard's glance at
the desk-lamp. "_F(t)_--I mean, if you counted the kappa waves of my
radio-atomic brain now, you'd be amazed how the frequency's increased."
He paused thoughtfully. "_F(t)_," he added.

Moving quite slowly, like a man under water, Martin lifted his glass and
drank whiskey. Then, cautiously, he looked up at the robot again.

"_F(t)_--" he said, paused, shuddered, and drank again. That did it.
"I'm drunk," he said with an air of shaken relief. "That must be it. I
was almost beginning to believe--"

"Oh, nobody believes I'm a robot at first," the robot said. "You'll
notice I showed up in a movie lot, where I wouldn't arouse suspicion.
I'll appear to Ivan Vasilovich in an alchemist's lab, and he'll jump to
the conclusive I'm an automaton. Which, of course, I _am_. Then there's
a Uighur on my list--I'll appear to him in a shaman's hut and he'll
assume I'm a devil. A matter of ecologicologic."

"Then you're a devil?" Martin inquired, seizing on the only plausible
solution.

"No, no, no. I'm a robot. Don't you understand anything?"

"I don't even know who I am, now," Martin said. "For all I know, I'm a
faun and you're a human child. I don't think this Scotch is doing me as
much good as I'd--"

"Your name is Nicholas Martin," the robot said patiently. "And mine is
ENIAC."

"Eniac?"

"ENIAC," the robot corrected, capitalizing. "ENIAC Gamma the
Ninety-Third."

So saying, he unslung a sack from his metallic shoulder and began to
rummage out length upon length of what looked like red silk ribbon with
a curious metallic lustre. After approximately a quarter-mile of it had
appeared, a crystal football helmet emerged attached to its end. A
gleaming red-green stone was set on each side of the helmet.

"Just over the temporal lobes, you see," the robot explained, indicating
the jewels. "Now you just set it on your head, like this--"

"Oh no I don't," Martin said, withdrawing his head with the utmost
rapidity. "Neither do you, my friend. What's the idea? I don't like the
looks of that gimmick. I particularly don't like those two red garnets
on the sides. They look like eyes."

"Those are artificial eclogite," the robot assured him. "They simply
have a high dielectric constant. It's merely a matter of altering the
normal thresholds of the neuron memory-circuits. All thinking is based
on memory, you know. The strength of your associations--the emotional
indices of your memories--channel your actions and decisions, and the
ecologizer simply changes the voltage of your brain so the thresholds
are altered."

"Is that all it does?" Martin asked suspiciously.

"Well, now," the robot said with a slight air of evasion. "I didn't
intend to mention it, but since you ask--it also imposes the
master-matrix of your character type. But since that's the prototype of
your character in the first place, it will simply enable you to make the
most of your potential ability, hereditary and acquired. It will make
you react to your environment in the way that best assures your
survival."

"Not me, it won't," Martin said firmly. "Because you aren't going to put
that thing on my head."

The robot sketched a puzzled frown. "Oh," he said after a pause. "I
haven't explained yet, have I? It's very simple. Would you be willing to
take part in a valuable socio-cultural experiment for the benefit of all
mankind?"

"No," Martin said.

"But you don't know what it is yet," the robot said plaintively. "You'll
be the only one to refuse, after I've explained everything thoroughly.
By the way, can you understand me all right?"

Martin laughed hollowly. "Natch," he said.

"Good," the robot said, relieved. "That may be one trouble with my
memory. I had to record so many languages before I could temporalize.
Sanskrit's very simple, but medieval Russian's confusing, and as for
Uighur--however! The purpose of this experiment is to promote the most
successful pro-survival relationship between man and his environment.
Instant adaptation is what we're aiming at, and we hope to get it by
minimizing the differential between individual and environment. In other
words, the right reaction at the right time. Understand?"

"Of course not," Martin said. "What nonsense you talk."

"There are," the robot said rather wearily, "only a limited number of
character matrices possible, depending first on the arrangement of the
genes within the chromosomes, and later upon environmental additions.
Since environments tend to repeat--like societies, you know--an
organizational pattern isn't hard to lay out, along the Kaldekooz
time-scale. You follow me so far?"

"By the Kaldekooz time-scale, yes," Martin said.

"I was always lucid," the robot remarked a little vainly, nourishing a
swirl of red ribbon.

"Keep that thing away from me," Martin complained. "Drunk I may be, but
I have no intention of sticking my neck out that far."

"Of course you'll do it," the robot said firmly. "Nobody's ever refused
yet. And don't bicker with me or you'll get me confused and I'll have to
take another jolt of voltage. Then there's no telling how confused I'll
be. My memory gives me enough trouble when I temporalize. Time-travel
always raises the synaptic delay threshold, but the trouble is it's so
variable. That's why I got you mixed up with Ivan at first. But I don't
visit him till after I've seen you--I'm running the test
chronologically, and nineteen-fifty-two comes before fifteen-seventy, of
course."

"It doesn't," Martin said, tilting the glass to his lips. "Not even in
Hollywood does nineteen-fifty-two come before fifteen-seventy."
