pointed the iron at Pringle.

"Those," said Kenzie in a hollow, impressive voice, "are aphis. If you
will look closer, Pringle, you will see among them--ants. The aphid is
to the ant as the dairy cow is to the human. Those ants are aphid
herders, carefully tending and milking their flock."

"Here we go again," moaned one of the fellows across the lab.

"The ants are a highly intelligent life form," Kenzie went on. "I
would explain it to you in detail, but I am in the middle of a problem
at this moment."

"Thank heaven for that," another tech ground out the words.

"Suffice it to say," Kenzie ignored all interruptions, "Man would well
occupy himself trying to communicate with them."

The Chief came to the doorway of his little office down at the end of
the lab. He looked us all over patiently and knowingly.

"Now give him your syllogism, Kenzie," he said quietly, "so we can all
get back to work."

"You may reflect on this, Pringle," Kenzie stated and waved his
soldering iron in the air.

"One: Man wants to communicate with intelligent life from other
planets or the stars.

"Two: We know from observation the ants communicate with one another.

"Ergo: Before we reach so far as to contact extra terrestrial
intelligence, had we not better occupy our time with solving a much
simpler communications problem; to wit: communicate with the ants? How
can we expect to solve communication with really alien beings from the
stars, when we have not learned to communicate with the intelligent
beings at our very feet?"

All over the room we sighed heavily with relief. We knew the syllogism
was the conclusion, the Sunday punch. The boy had really cut it short
this time. Usually he was good for a solid hour with facts and figures
about how ants built bridges and such stuff.

We all looked at Pringle's face, expecting to see the embarrassed and
sheepish grin. This was the usual reaction of a stranger when he first
met up with Kenzie's syllogism. It horrified us to see, instead, his
shining eyes. We heard him say enthusiastically.

"That's just how I've always felt about it, Kenzie. It's a pleasure to
meet a man who isn't afraid of thinking."

"Oh, no-o-o!" we all groaned out in a chorus.

"Only," Pringle said dubiously, and our hopes began to arise again.
"Only I've been thinking more along the line of termites." Our hopes
fell and were shattered.

We heard the Chief moan to himself and saw him turn and almost run
back into his office.

"Two of 'em now," he was mumbling over and over. "Two of 'em now. It
ain't worth it. It ain't worth it." He sat down heavily and buried his
head in his arms across the top of his desk. Kenzie was watching him
too, like he was wondering what had got into the Chief. Then Kenzie
turned back to Pringle.

"Ants," he said with determination.

"Termites," Pringle answered him stubbornly. Kenzie glared at Pringle
for a minute, then his face cleared.

"Why not both of them?" he asked, like a fellow who was willing to be
big about it.

"Sure, why not?" Pringle came his half way also. Then, like he wasn't
to be outdone in generosity. "Ants first, then termites later."

Solemnly the two shook hands. They went back to their work at the
bench, and there was an aura of understanding and accord at that end
of the room thick enough to be felt.

"I hope you insect lovers will be very happy together," the grid
expert mumbled to their backs. The rest of us also settled back into
our varied jobs and problems. But we worked as if we momentarily
expected an earthquake to rock us. Our hands were not quite steady.
Our eyes were not firm and piercing. We almost held our breaths. For a
wonder, we agreed with the Chief. Two of 'em now.

The days passed and nothing more was said. More than ever now, we
enforced the taboo on insects. We didn't mention trees, or wood, or
even the conditional subjunctive. Would sounded like wood. Wood might
bring up the thought of termites.

We could see the Chief was weighing the advantages of keeping them
against the risks of upsetting the department constantly. As we
expected, greed won. We knew he would not risk giving up the prestige
and extra bonuses he got for Kenzie's work. And he knew he had to keep
those discoveries coming, because our management has a short memory of
what a guy has done in the past.

The Chief even let Kenzie have Pringle as his own personal tech. It
