think of what.

Millicent giggled unexpectedly. "Oh, Lord Dionysus! I feel so
_honored_!"

"Er," Forrester said. Finally he found words. "Oh, that's all right," he
said, wondering exactly what he meant. "Perfectly all right, Millicent."

"Call me Millie."

"Of course, Millie."

"You can call me Bets, if you want to," Bette chimed in. Bette was a
blonde with short, curly hair and a startling figure. "It's kind of a
pet name. You know."

"Sure," Forrester said. "Uh--would you mind keeping your voices down a
little?"

"Why?" Millicent asked.

Forrester passed a hand over his forehead. "Well," he said at last,
thinking about Gerda, only a few feet away, "I thought it might be nicer
if we were quiet. Sort of private and romantic."

"Oh," Bette said.

Kathy spoke up. "You mean we have to whisper? As if we were doing
something secret?"

Forrester tightened his lips. He felt the beginnings of a strong
distaste for Kathy. Why couldn't she leave well enough alone? But he
only said: "Well, yes. I thought it might be fun. Let's try it, girls."

"Of course, Lord Dionysus," Kathy said demurely.

He disliked her, he decided, intensely.

There was a little silence.

"Well," Forrester said. "You're all such beautiful girls that I hardly
know how to--ah--proceed from here."

Millicent tittered. So did one of the others--Judy, Forrester thought.

"I wouldn't want any of you to feel disappointed, or think you were any
lower in my estimation than--than any other one of you." The sentence
seemed to have got lost somewhere, Forrester thought, but he had
straightened it out. "That wouldn't be fair," he went on, "and we Gods
are always fair."

The sentence didn't ring quite true in Forrester's mind, and he thought
he heard one of the girls snicker, but he ignored it and went bravely
on.

"So," he said, "we're going to have a little game."

Millicent said: "Game?"

"Sure," Forrester said, trying his best to sound enthusiastic. "We all
like games, don't we? I mean, what's an orgy--I mean, what's a
revel--but a great big game? Isn't that right?"

"Well," Bette said doubtfully, "I guess so. Sure, Lord Dionysus, if you
say so."

"Well, sure it is!" Forrester said. "Fun and games! So we'll play a
little game. Ha-ha."

Kathy looked up at him brightly. "What kind of game, Lord Dionysus?" she
asked in an innocent tone. She was an extravagantly pretty brunette with
bright brown eyes, and she had been one of the two he had held in his
arms during the Procession back from the uptown end of the park.
Thinking it over now, Forrester wasn't entirely sure whether he had
chosen her or she had chosen him, but it didn't really seem to matter,
after all.

"Well, now," he said, "it's going to be a game of pure chance. Chance
and nothing more."

"Like luck," Bette contributed.

"That's right--uh--Bets," Forrester said. "Like luck. And I promise not
to use my powers to affect the outcome. Fair enough, isn't it?"

"Certainly," Kathy said demurely. There was really no reason for him to
be irritated by the girl, so long as she was agreeing with him so
nicely. Nevertheless, he wasn't quite sure that she was speaking her
mind.

"Oh," Millicent said. "Sure."

Bette nodded. "Uh-huh. I mean, yes, Lord Dionysus."

Forrester waved a hand. "No need for formality," he said, and felt like
an ass. But none of the girls seemed to notice. Agreement with his idea
became general. "Well, let's see."

His eyes wandered over the surrounding scenery in quiet thought. Several
Myrmidons were scattered about twenty feet away, and they were standing
with their backs to the group as a matter of formality. If they had
turned around, they couldn't have seen a thing in the darkness. But they
had to remain at their stations, to make sure no unauthorized persons,
souvenir-hunters, musicians, special-pleaders or just plain lost souls
intruded upon great Dionysus while he was occupied.

The Myrmidons were the only living souls within that radius, except for
Forrester himself and his bevy--and the Symes trio.

His gaze settled on them. Ed Symes, he noticed with quiet satisfaction,
was now out cold. Forrester thought that the little spell he had cast on
the beer might have had something to do with that, and he felt rather
pleased with his efforts, at least in that direction. Symes was lying
flat on his back, snoring loudly enough to drown out all but a few notes
from the steam calliope, which was singing itself loudly to sleep
somewhere in the distance. Near the prone figure, Gerda was trying to
fend off the advances of good old Alvin Sherdlap, but it was obvious
that the sheer passage of time, plus the amount of liquor she had
consumed, were weakening her resistance.

Forrester pointed a finger at the man. The one thing he really wanted to
do was to give Alvin the rock treatment. One little _zap_ would do it,
and Alvin Sherdlap would encumber the Earth no more. And it wasn't as if
Alvin would be missed, Forrester told himself. It was clear from one
look at the lout that no one, anywhere, for any reason, would miss Alvin
if he were exploded into dust.

The temptation was very nearly irresistible, but somehow Forrester
managed to resist it. He had been told that he had to be extremely
careful in the use of his powers, and he had a pretty good idea that he
wouldn't be able to justify blasting Alvin. Viewed objectively, there
was nothing wrong with what the oaf was doing. He was merely following
his religion as he understood it, and the religion was a very simple
one: when at an orgy, have an orgy.

Gerda didn't have to give in if she didn't want to, Forrester thought.
He tried very hard to make himself believe that.

But his finger was still pointed at the man. He didn't stop his powers
entirely; he merely throttled them down so that only a tiny fraction of
the neural energy at his command came into play. The energy that came
from the tip of his finger made no noise and cast no light. It was not a
killing blow.

Invisibly, it leaped across the intervening space and hit Alvin Sherdlap
squarely on the nose.

The results were eminently satisfactory. Alvin uttered a sharp cry, let
go of Gerda and fell over backward. His legs stood up straight in the
air for a second, and then came down to hit the ground. He was silent.
Gerda stared down at him, too tired and confused to make any coherent
picture out of what was going on.

Forrester sighed happily to himself. _That_, he thought, _ought to take
care of Alvin for a while_.

"Lord Dionysus," Kathy asked in that same innocent tone, "what are you
pointing at out there?"

The girl was decidedly irritating, Forrester thought. "Pointing?" he
said. "Ah, yes." He thought fast. "My target-tosser. I fear that his
religious fervor has led to his being overcome."

The girls all turned round to look but, of course, Forrester thought,
they could see nothing at all in the darkness.

"My goodness," Bette said.

"But if he's unconscious," Kathy put in, "why were you pointing at him?"

Forrester told himself that the next time the Sabbatical Bacchanal was
held, he would see to it that an intelligence test was given to every
candidate for Dionysian Escort, and anyone who scored as high on it as
Kathy would be automatically disqualified.

He had to think of some excuse for looking at the man. And then he had
it--the game he had planned. It was really quite a nice little idea.

"I hate to see the poor mortal miss out on the rest of the evening,"
Forrester said, "even if he is asleep now. And I think we may have a use
for him."

He gestured gently with one hand.

Gerda and Alvin Sherdlap didn't even notice what was happening. They
were much too busy arguing, Alvin claiming that somebody had slapped him
on the nose--"and pretty hard, too, let me tell you!"--and Gerda
swearing she hadn't done it. The fact that Ed Symes's snores were fading
quietly into the distance dawned on neither of them.

But Ed was in flight. He rose five feet above the ground, still
unconscious and snoring, and sped unerringly across the air, like a
large, fat arrow shot from a bow, in the direction of Forrester and the
circle of girls.

He appeared overhead suddenly, and Forrester controlled him so that he
drifted downward as delicately as an overweight snowflake, eddying in
the slight breeze while the girls gaped at him. Forrester allowed the
body to drop the last six inches out of control, so that Ed Symes landed
with a heavy thump in the center of the circle. But no harm was done. Ed
was very far gone indeed; he merely snored on.

"There," Forrester said.

Millicent blinked. "Where?" she said. "Him?"

"Certainly," Forrester said in a pleased tone. "He's a good deal too
noisy, though, don't you think?"

"He snores a lot," Judy offered in a tentative voice, "if that's what
you mean, Lord Dionysus."

"Exactly. And I don't see any reason to put up with it. Instead, well
just put him in stasis for a little while, and that'll keep him quiet."
Again he waved one hand, almost carelessly. Ed Symes's snores vanished
immediately, leaving the world a cleaner, purer, quieter place to live
in, and his body became as rigid as if he were a statue.

"There," Forrester said again with satisfaction.

"Now what?" Kathy asked.

"Now we straighten him out."

One more pass, and Ed Symes's arms were at his sides, his legs stretched
straight out. Only his stomach projected above the rigid lines of his
body. Forrester thought he had never seen a more pleasing sight.

Dorothy gasped. "Is he--is he dead?"

Forrester looked at her reprovingly. "Dead? Now what would I do that
for, after he's been so helpful and all?"

"I don't know," she muttered.

"Well," Forrester said, "he's not dead. He's just in stasis--in a state
of totally suspended animation. As soon as I take the spell off, he'll
be all right. But I don't think I'll take it off just yet. I've got
plans for my little target-tosser."

He reached over and touched the stiff body. It seemed to rise a fraction
of an inch, floating on the tips of the grass. The wind stirred it a
little, but it didn't float away.

"I took some of his weight off," Forrester explained, "so he'll be a
little easier to handle."

Now Ed Symes was behaving as if he were a statue carved out of cork.
With a quick flip, Forrester turned the statue over. The effect was
exactly what he wanted. Ed did not touch the grass at any point except
one: the point where his protuberant stomach most protruded. Fore and
aft, the rest of him was balanced stiffly in the air.

Forrester gazed at the sight, feeling fulfilled. "Now," he said with a
note of decision in his voice, "we are going to play Spin-the-Bottle!"

The girls giggled and laughed.

"You mean with him?" Bette said.

Forrester sighed. "That's right," he said patiently. "With him."

He got into position and looked up at the girls. "This one's just for
practice, so we can all see how it works." He gave Symes's extended foot
a little push.

_Whee!_ he thought. Round and round the gentleman went, spinning
quietly on his stomach, revolving in a merry fashion while the girls and
Forrester watched silently. At last he slowed and stopped, his nose
pointing at Bette and his toes at Dorothy.

"Oh, my!" Dorothy said. "He's pointing at me!"

"He is not!" Bette said decisively. "His head points my way!"

"But he--"

"Temper, temper," Forrester said. "No arguments. That one didn't count,
anyhow--it was just to see how he worked. And I do think he works very
nicely, don't you?"

"Oh, yes, Lord Dionysus," Kathy said. There was the same undertone in
her voice, as if she were silently laughing at everything. She was, he
told himself, an extremely unlikable young woman.

The other girls agreed in a chorus. They were still studying the stiff
body of Ed Symes. His stomach had made a little depression in the grass
as he whirled, and he was now nicely bedded down for a real spin.
Forrester rubbed his hands together.

"Fine," he said. "Now, all of you are going to be judges."

"Me, too?" Bette asked.

Forrester nodded. "The head will be the determining factor. If our
little Mr. Bottle's head points to any one of you, that is the one I'll
choose first."

"See?" Bette said. "I told you it was his head."

"Well, I couldn't tell before anybody said so," Dorothy said. "And
anyhow, I--"

"Now, now, girls," Forrester said, feeling momentarily like a Girl Scout
troop leader. "Let's listen to the rules, shall we? And then we can get
down to playing the game." He took a deep breath. "Isn't this fun?"

The girls giggled.

"Good," Forrester said. "If Mr. Bottle's head ends up between two of
you, then the other five girls will have to decide which girl the head's
nearer to. The two girls involved will remain absolutely quiet during
the judging, and if the other five can't come to a unanimous agreement,
we'll spin Mr. Bottle again. Understand?"

"You mean if the head points at me, I get picked," Bette said. "And if
the head goes in between me and somebody else, all the other girls have
to decide who gets picked."

It was a masterly summation.

"Right," Forrester said. "I'm going to give Mr. Bottle a spin. This one
