periphery, and this they maintained despite the increasing pressure of
the crowd.

The hours passed and nothing happened. The faint creaking and snapping
sounds as the seamless hull of the vessel warmed its space-chilled
metal in the warmth of the summer sun were lost in the growing
impatience of the crowd. They wanted something to happen. Shouts and
catcalls filled the air as more nervous individuals clamored to
relieve the tension. Off to one side a small group began to clap their
hands rhythmically. The little claque gained recruits, and within
moments the air was riven by the thunder of thousands of palms meeting
in unison. Frightened the crowd might be, but greater than fear was
the desire to see what sort of creatures were inside.

Matson stood in the cleared area surrounding the ship, a position of
privilege he shared with a few city and state officials and the high
brass from McChord Field, Fort Lewis, and Bremerton Navy Yard. He was
one of the bright young men who had chosen Government Service as a
career, and who, in these days of science-consciousness had risen
rapidly through ability and merit promotions to become the Director of
the Office of Scientific Research while still in his early thirties. A
dedicated man, trained in the bitter school of ideological survival,
he understood what the alien science could mean to this world. Their
knowledge would secure peace in whatever terms the possessors cared to
name, and Matson intended to make sure that his nation was the one
which possessed that knowledge.

He stood beside a tall scholarly looking man named Roger Thornton, who
was his friend and incidentally the Commissioner of Police for the
Twin City metropolitan area. To a casual eye, their positions should
be reversed, for the lean ascetic Thornton looked far more like the
accepted idea of a scientist than burly, thick shouldered, square
faced Matson, whose every movement shouted Cop.

Matson glanced quizzically at the taller man. "Well, Roger, I wonder
how long those birds inside are going to keep us waiting before we get
a look at them?"

"You'd be surprised if they really were birds, wouldn't you?" Thornton
asked with a faint smile. "But seriously, I hope it isn't too much
longer. This mob is giving the boys a bad time." He looked anxiously
at the strained line of police and soldiery. "I guess I should have
ordered out the night shift and reserves instead of just the riot
squad. From the looks of things they'll be needed if this crowd gets
any more unruly."

Matson chuckled. "You're an alarmist," he said mildly. "As far as I
can see they're doing all right. I'm not worried about them--or the
crowd, for that matter. The thing that's bothering me is my feet. I've
been standing on 'em for six hours and they're killing me!"

"Mine too," Thornton sighed. "Tell you what I'll do. When this is all
over I'll split a bucket of hot water and a pint of arnica with you."

"It's a deal," Matson said.

As he spoke a deep musical hum came from inside the ship, and a
section of the rim beside him separated along invisible lines of
juncture, swinging downward to form a broad ramp leading upward to a
square orifice in the rim of the ship. A bright shadowless light that
seemed to come from the metal walls of the opening framed the shape of
the star traveller who stood there, rigidly erect, looking over the
heads of the section of the crowd before him.

A concerted gasp of awe and admiration rose from the crowd--a gasp
that was echoed throughout the entire ring that surrounded the ship.
There must be other openings like this one, Matson thought dully as he
stared at the being from space. Behind him an Army tank rumbled
noisily on its treads as it drove through the crowd toward the ship,
the long gun in its turret lifting like an alert finger to point at
the figure of the alien.

The stranger didn't move from his unnaturally stiff position. His
oddly luminous eyes never wavered from their fixed stare at a point
far beyond the outermost fringes of the crowd. Seven feet tall,
obviously masculine, he differed from mankind only in minor details.
His long slender hands lacked the little finger, and his waist was
abnormally small. Other than that, he was human in external
appearance. A wide sleeved tunic of metallic fabric covered his upper
body, gathered in at his narrow waist by a broad metal belt studded
with tiny bosses. The tunic ended halfway between hip and knee,
revealing powerfully muscled legs encased in silvery hose. Bright
yellow hair hung to his shoulders, clipped short in a square bang
across his forehead. His face was long, clean featured and
extraordinarily calm--almost godlike in its repose. Matson stared,
fascinated. He had the curious impression that the visitor had
stepped bodily out of the Middle Ages. His dress and haircut were
almost identical with that of a medieval courtier.

The starman raised his hand--his strangely luminous steel gray eyes
scanned the crowd--and into Matson's mind came a wave of peaceful
calm, a warm feeling of goodwill and brotherhood, an indescribable
feeling of soothing relaxation. With an odd sense of shock Matson
realized that he was not the only one to experience this. As far back
as the farthest hangers-on near the airport gates the tenseness of the
waiting crowd relaxed. The effect was amazing! Troops lowered their
weapons with shamefaced smiles on their faces. Police relaxed their
sweating vigilance. The crowd stirred, moving backward to give its
members room. The emotion-charged atmosphere vanished as though it had
never been. And a cold chill played icy fingers up the spine of Daniel
Matson. He had felt the full impact of the alien's projection, and he
was more frightened than he had ever been in his life!

       *       *       *       *       *

They had been clever--damnably clever! That initial greeting with its
disarming undertones of empathy and innocence had accomplished its
purpose. It had emasculated Mankind's natural suspicion of strangers.
And their subsequent actions--so beautifully timed--so careful to
avoid the slightest hint of evil, had completed what their
magnificently staged appearance had begun.

The feeling of trust had persisted. It lasted through quarantine,
clearance, the public receptions, and the private meetings with
scientists and the heads of government. It had persisted unabated
through the entire two months they remained in the Twin City area. The
aliens remained as they had been in the beginning--completely
unspoiled by the interest shown in them. They remained simple,
unaffected, and friendly, displaying an ingenuous innocence that
demanded a corresponding faith in return.

Most of their time was spent at the University of Washington, where at
their own request they were studied by curious scholars, and in return
were given courses in human history and behavior. They were quite
frank about their reasons for following such a course of
action--according to their spokesman Ixtl they wanted to learn human
ways in order to make a better impression when they visited the rest
of Mankind. Matson read that blurb in an official press release and
laughed cynically. Better impression, hah! They couldn't have done any
better if they had an entire corps of public relations specialists
assisting them! They struck exactly the right note--and how could they
improve on perfection?

From the beginning they left their great ship open and unguarded while
they commuted back and forth from the airport to the campus. And
naturally the government quickly rectified the second error and took
instant advantage of the first. A guard was posted around the ship to
keep it clear of the unofficially curious, while the officially
curious combed the vessel's interior with a fine tooth comb. Teams of
scientists and technicians under Matson's direction swarmed through
the ship, searching with the most advanced methods of human science
for the secrets of the aliens.

They quickly discovered that while the star travellers might be
trusting, they were not exactly fools. There was nothing about the
impenetrably shielded mechanisms that gave the slightest clue as to
their purpose or to the principles upon which they operated--nor were
there any visible controls. The ship was as blankly uncommunicative as
a brick wall.
