
"Put that pack down," he commanded. "Now, stand over there." He
pointed. "And be very quiet." He glanced at the doorman.

"You can stay where you are." He looked at Korentona.

"My apologies," he said, "for being so informal. But I come from the
Kor-en, and I had a little trouble. There's a message for you in the
pack. You know, of course, where to find it. Who are these two?"

Korentona looked worried. "This one," he pointed at the doorman, "is a
trusted employee. He's been with me for years."

He paused, looking at the other man. "But this one, I have never
trusted. I'm sure he reports to the police."

Don glanced at the doorman. "My apologies," he said. "You are free to
go as you will." He looked closely at the other.

"Is this correct?" he demanded. "Are you a police agent?"

The man nodded. "That's right," he said reluctantly. "I'm supposed to
watch this place and report on its visitors."

"Here," Don told him, "is one visitor you won't report." He stopped,
considering, then impaled the man with a cold stare.

"Have you ever seen a man bitten by a gersal?"

The man shrugged. "Yeah. What about it?"

Don nodded. "You will remember that scene," he said. "Do you remember
that man's struggles? Do you remember the animal, chewing at him,
injecting its poison? Do you remember this man dropping, first to his
knees, then to his back? Do you remember----"

"Hey!" protested the other. His hands came up before his face.

"Put those hands down," snapped Don. "And listen closely. I want you to
have full recall on this. You remember this man who was bitten, how he
sobbed for breath--how his legs stretched out and his back arched, till
the muscles tore from the bones with their effort. You remember all
this?"

The man nodded wordlessly, his fascinated stare fixed on Don's face.

"Then I want you to fix this in your mind," Don told him. "Should you
be so unwise as to attempt to mention any of these things that have
happened since you came down those stairs--should you even allow your
memory to dwell on these things for too long--these are the things that
will happen to you.

"You will sink to your knees. Your muscles will be unable to support
you, and you will fall to your back. You will find it impossible to
breathe, for the muscles of your chest will distend the ribs. And in
your struggles, you will break bones. And you will tear your body to
bits. Do you understand this?"

The man sagged against the wall, panting. He managed a nod.

"Then forget about this afternoon," commanded Don. "Go about your
business in normal fashion. And forget about this afternoon. Nothing
happened that was worthy of note." He waved a hand in dismissal, then
turned to Korentona.

"I don't want to go into a lot of detail," he said. "As I said, there's
a detailed message in the pack. I'll wait for you to read it." He
glanced down at his clothing.

"I'd like a place, though, where I can clean up. And I could use some
other clothes, if you don't mind."

                    *      *      *      *      *

When he came back to the office, Korentona waved him to a chair.

"So," he said musingly, "they were right. You did go to the clans for
aid." He smiled.

"The police have been keeping close watch on everyone in the city who
might have even a remote connection with the hill clans. And they're
really keeping an eye on the Waern home. You're going to have a nice
time getting in there."

Don nodded. "I expected some trouble. Do you know whether they've done
any searching?"

Korentona shrugged. "I don't run an investigative agency," he said with
a smile, "so I don't know everything that's going on. But I've heard
there've been lights on up there nearly every night. And they've had
crowds of people around the place. Not so much activity the last couple
of days, though. They're just watching."

"I see," Don nodded. "Wonder if they've found what they were looking
for?"

The other shook his head, "Doubt it," he said. "If they had, they'd
relax. Now that I know what it's all about, I can figure out what I've
heard. They'll take off the watch as soon as they find that book, I
think.

"Oh, of course, they still want you," he added. "And they'd like to get
their hands on the Waernu. But they wouldn't be frantic about it if
they weren't worried about the outcome of a conclave."

"No," agreed Don. "I guess they wouldn't, at that."

He stretched. "Well, guess I'd better get on my way. I've got to get
into that house somehow. Think I'll take a wander out there and see if
I can get some ideas."

The merchant put up a detaining hand. "Take it slow," he advised. "You
can't go up there tonight."

"Oh?"

"No. It wouldn't be wise at all. There are a bunch of young fellows
that have been hanging around there lately. It isn't safe to walk
around that neighborhood. They've beaten five or six people pretty
badly. And they've killed a couple." Korentona paused.

"Funny," he added. "The police don't seem to be so upset about that."

"They wouldn't be," Don told him.

"So you think I'd better wait till morning?"

"It'll be a lot better. I can give you a place to stay tonight. And my
house isn't too far from the Waern place, so you can get over there in
a hurry if you want to." Korentona paused.

"Say, how about that fellow, Foree? Are you sure he'll keep quiet?"

Don smiled. "Pretty certain. Of course, I don't know whether an effort
to talk would actually kill him. But he'd be pretty uncomfortable for a
while. Might even come up with shock amnesia." The smile broadened.

"He may have already done enough careless thinking by this time to make
him pretty sick." He regarded Korentona thoughtfully.

"You say there's a gang of young fellows hanging around the Waern
neighborhood?"

The merchant nodded. "Quite a few of them, I think. People living
around there don't spend any time on the street or in the park, you can
be sure of that."

"I see." Don nodded slowly. "That way, it's a lot easier to watch the
Waern place at night. Look, there must be quite a few hillmen in this
city. I should think you'd know quite a number of them."

"Yes, I do, of course." Korentona smiled. "We don't exactly form a
closed group, but ... well, I'll have to admit we do think a little
differently from the plainsmen."

"I know." Don reached into his jacket and slowly withdrew a stick with
a thong wrapped around it.

"Many of your friends carry these?"

The merchant laughed. "Certainly!" He produced a polished stick of his
own.

"Can you imagine any clansman without this sling?"

Don looked at him speculatively. "I wonder," he said casually, "what
would happen if these young toughs found themselves being hunted down
by ... say ten or fifteen blood hungry clansmen. Might worry them a
little, wouldn't you think?"

Korentona shook his head doubtfully. "You know what the situation is
here in Riandar," he remarked. "The police don't worry too much about
these robberies and beatings. But they'd be pretty perturbed if someone
started hunting the hunters."

"That's what I mean." Don spread his hands. "Might even get the people
watching the Waern place upset and nervous." He shrugged. "And who's to
know what caused the uproar, or who's involved? After all, all the
clansmen were at home. The watchers on their houses could testify to
that."

Korentona looked at him curiously. "Interesting idea, at that, you
know." He got to his feet. "Suppose we talk it over for a while."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Maurie VanSickle crouched behind a bush, watching the path. This, he
thought, was getting old. It had been a lot of fun at first.
Profitable, too. He thought with amusement of the old man who had
scrambled about in the dirt that first night. Boy, what a beat jerk
he'd been. And what a beautiful job Gerry had done on him. Clipped the
stupid yokel so hard he didn't make a sound when he went down.

Then he and Walt had come in. Man, how the old guy had wriggled! He
looked down the path.

Now, though? Phooey! Not a lousy person on the path all evening. He'd
tried to tell Gerry they were on a loser. Park was all worked out for a
few weeks. But the stubborn clown wouldn't listen. Kept insisting they
try it a couple more nights. Maurie reached into his pocket.

"Better make a strike pretty soon," he muttered to himself. "The old
cash bag's getting empty." He stretched, then tensed. There were
footsteps on the path.

This one was his!

Silently, he gathered himself. He'd clip the guy from behind, then
Gerry and Walt could come in from the other side and pin him down.

"Hope the jerk's got plenty of that stuff," he muttered.

The stroller came closer. Maurie appraised him as he walked. Oh, boy,
another little, old guy. Clothes looked pretty good, too. Nice stack of
cloth. Should be quite a rack of the purple in them.

Now the man was almost close enough. Maurie's eyes followed him as he
approached, then passed. He launched himself in a crouching dash.

As he left the shelter of the bush, something bumped against his neck.
He found himself whirling to the ground. Dimly, he saw his intended
victim whirl around. He attempted to dodge the foot as it came down on
his face, but it was like moving in a dream. Somehow, he was too slow.

For just an instant, he felt crushing pain, then the world dissolved
into bright specks in a spreading blackness. One by one, the points of
light winked out. And then, there was nothing.

As their intended victim whirled to crush Maurie, Gerry Kelton poked at
his brother.

"Come on," he urged. "He can't take two of us. Let's go."

The two dashed out of their cover, then found themselves prostrate at
the edge of the path.

Walt Kelton was flipped over and held in a vicelike grip, his head
grinding into the path. Close by, he could see his brother. Two men
held him down. As he watched, they seized Gerry's hands, twisting them
so that his head flopped face up.

A third man leaned over, a long knife in his hand. Unbelievingly, Walt
watched as the man thrust the knife into Gerry's throat. The boy's feet
kicked convulsively a couple of times, then dropped. The toes sank, to
point outward.

With calm precision, the killer turned his knife and forced it across
the throat with the heel of his hand. Dark fluid welled out on the
path, making a pool which flowed toward Walt.

Casually, the man pulled the slack of Gerry's shirt toward him and
wiped the blade till it was gleaming again. Then he looked toward Walt.
He got to his feet.

For an instant, the boy lay limp, paralyzed with terror. Then, he
kicked and struggled madly. Unbelievingly, he felt the hands which
restrained him loosen and he kicked and squirmed until he was free to
scramble away.

He skittered on all fours till he reached the middle of the path.

Then he struggled to his feet.

And ran.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Don Michaels flipped on the light in the vault and looked around him.
Yes, it was just as Jasu Waern had said it would be. He walked over to
the closet at the side of the room and pulled out a towel. As he dried
himself, he continued his examination of the room.

It had been easier to get in than he had hoped. When that screaming kid
had come dashing along, it had been like a stick in an ant hill.
Everyone around the house had been shaken up. Several men had gone
streaking over to the park. The others had given the incident their
full attention.

And all Don had needed do was walk up to the front door and go in.

"Guess they thought they had a full-scale revolution on their hands,"
he told himself. "Wonder how many Hunters the Moreku nailed." He
grinned.

The men Korentona had talked to had jumped at the plan like starving
gersals. Several of them had been victimized in the past. They really
wanted blood. The others saw a good hunt in the offing. Every one of
them knew someone who had been robbed. He'd turned something loose, all
right.

"Hope they don't get too enthusiastic about it," he said. "Hate to have
'em make a habit of that sort of thing." He shrugged.

"Oh, well, let's see where that book is."

The sides of the room were lined with books. Over in a corner was a
reading table with writing materials and a conveniently placed light.
Don walked over to a glass-fronted bookcase and opened it, studying the
titles of the volumes within. Finally, he selected a book and carried
it over to the reading table.

He leafed through the volume, noting the careful engrossing. Then he
paused as he came to the pages he was searching for. He examined the
ornate script closely, then looked at the intricate stamp. It was the
signature stamp of the old king. Beside it was his queen's less
pretentious stamp. Don nodded in satisfaction.

Now, the only problem was to wrap the book safely in the waterproof
tissue he'd brought with him, and get it out of the house. He stood,
looking at the door.

It might not be too safe to leave the book with Korentona, as had been
originally planned. With the clansmen under surveillance as they had
been, and now, with this additional disturbance, there could be a
disastrous slip. Don shook his head.
