"But how do we settle priority, Doctor Hilton?" a girl called out; a
tall, striking, brunette laboratory technician whose name Hilton needed
a second to recall. "By pulling straws or hair? Or by shooting dice or
each other or what?"

"Thanks, Betty, you've got a point. Sandy Cummings and department heads
first, then assistants. Then you girls, in alphabetical order, each
with her own husband or fiance."

"And my name is Ames. Oh, goody!"

"Larry, please tell them to ..."

"I already have, sir. We are set up to handle four at once."

"Good boy. So scat, all of you, and get back to work--except Sandy,
Bill, Alex, and Teddy. You four go with Larry."

Since the new sense was not peyondix, Hilton had started calling it
"perception" and the others adopted the term as a matter of course.
Hilton could use that sense for what seemed like years--and actually was
whole minutes--at a time without fatigue or strain. He could not,
however, nor could the Omans, give his tremendous power to anyone else.

As he had said, he could do a certain amount of reworking; but the
amount of improvement possible to make depended entirely upon what there
was to work on. Thus, Temple could cover about six hundred light-years.
It developed later that the others of the Big Eight could cover from one
hundred up to four hundred or so. The other department heads and
assistants turned out to be still weaker, and not one of the rank and
file ever became able to cover more than a single planet.

This sense was not exactly telepathy; at least not what Hilton had
always thought telepathy would be. If anything, however, it was more.
It was a lumping together of all five known human senses--and half a
dozen unknown ones called, collectively, "intuition"--into one
super-sense that was all-inclusive and all-informative. If he ever could
learn exactly what it was and exactly what it did and how it did it ...
but he'd better chip-chop the wool-gathering and get back onto the job.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Stretts had licked the old Masters very easily, and intended to wipe
out the Omans and the humans. They had no doubt at all as to their
ability to do it. Maybe they could. If the Masters hadn't made some
progress that the Omans didn't know about, they probably could. That was
the first thing to find out. As soon as they'd been converted he'd call
in all the experts and they'd go through the Masters' records like a
dose of salts through a hillbilly schoolma'am.

At that point in Hilton's cogitations Sawtelle came in.

He had come down in his gig, to confer with Hilton as to the newly
beefed-up fleet. Instead of being glum and pessimistic and foreboding,
he was chipper and enthusiastic. They had rebuilt a thousand Oman ships.
By combining Oman and Terran science, and adding everything the First
Team had been able to reduce to practise, they had hyped up the power
by a good fifteen per cent. Seven hundred of those ships, and all his
men, were now arrayed in defense around Ardry. Three hundred, manned by
Omans, were around Fuel Bin.

"Why?" Hilton asked. "It's Fuel Bin they've been attacking."

"Uh-uh. Minor objective," the captain demurred, positively. "The real
attack will be here at you; the headquarters and the brains. Then Fuel
Bin will be duck soup. But the thing that pleased me most is the
control. Man, you never imagined such control! No admiral in history
ever had such control of ten ships as I have of seven hundred. Those
Omans spread orders so fast that I don't even finish thinking one and
it's being executed. And no misunderstandings, no slips. For instance,
this last batch--fifteen skeletons. Far out; they're getting cagy. I
just thought 'Box 'em in and slug 'em' and--In! Across! Out! Socko!
Pffft! Just like that and just that fast. None of 'em had time to light
a beam. Nobody before ever even _dreamed_ of such control!"

"That's great, and I like it ... and you're only a captain. How many
ships can Five-Jet Admiral Gordon put into space?"

"That depends on what you call ships. Superdreadnoughts, _Perseus_
class, six. First-line battleships, twenty-nine. Second-line, smaller
and some pretty old, seventy-three. Counting everything armed that will
hold air, something over two hundred."

"I thought it was something like that. How would you like to be Five-Jet
Admiral Sawtelle of the Ardrian Navy?"

"I wouldn't. I'm Terran Navy. But you knew that and you know me.
So--what's on your mind?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Hilton told him. _I ought to put this on a tape_, he thought to himself,
_and broadcast it every hour on the hour_.

"They took the old Masters like dynamiting fish in a barrel," he
concluded, "and I'm damned afraid they're going to lick us unless we
take a lot of big, fast steps. But the hell of it is that I can't tell
you anything--not one single thing--about any part of it. There's simply
no way at all of getting through to you without making you over into the
same kind of a thing I am."

"Is that bad?" Sawtelle was used to making important decisions fast.
"Let's get at it."

"Huh? Skipper, do you realize just what that means? If you think they'll
let you resign, forget it. They'll crucify you--brand you as a traitor
and God only knows what else."

"Right. How about you and your people?"

"Well, as civilians, it won't be as bad...."

"The hell it won't. Every man and woman that stays here will be posted
forever as the blackest traitors old Terra ever disgraced herself by
spawning."

"You've got a point there, at that. We'll all have to bring our
relatives--the ones we think much of, at least--out here with us."

"Definitely. Now see what you can do about getting me run through your
mill."

By exerting his authority, Hilton got Sawtelle put through the
"Preservatory" in the second batch processed. Then, linking minds with
the captain, he flashed their joint attention to the Hall of Records.
Into the right room; into the right chest; along miles and miles of
braided wire carrying some of the profoundest military secrets of the
ancient Masters.

Then:

"Now you know a little of it," Hilton said. "Maybe a thousandth of what
we'll have to have before we can take the Stretts as they will have to
be taken."

For seconds Sawtelle could not speak. Then: "My ... God. I see what you
mean. You're right. No Omans can ever go to Terra; and no Terrans can
ever come here except to stay forever."

The two then went out into space, to the flagship--which had been
christened the _Orion_--and called in the six commanders.

"What _is_ all this senseless idiocy we've been getting, Jarve?" Elliott
demanded.

Hilton eyed all six with pretended disfavor. "You six guys are the
hardest-headed bunch of skeptics that ever went unhung," he remarked,
dispassionately. "So it wouldn't do any good to tell you anything--yet.
The skipper and I will show you a thing first. Take her away, Skip."

The _Orion_ shot away under interplanetary drive and for several hours
Hilton and Sawtelle worked at re-wiring and practically rebuilding two
devices that no one, Oman or human, had touched since the _Perseus_ had
landed on Ardry.

"What are you ... I don't understand what you are doing, sir," Larry
said. For the first time since Hilton had known him, the Oman's mind was
confused and unsure.

"I know you don't. This is a bit of top-secret Masters' stuff. Maybe,
some day, we'll be able to re-work your brain to take it. But it won't
be for some time."




X


The _Orion_ hung in space, a couple of thousands of miles away from an
asteroid which was perhaps a mile in average diameter. Hilton
straightened up.

"Put Triple X Black filters on your plates and watch that asteroid." The
commanders did so. "Ready?" he asked.

"Ready, sir."

Hilton didn't move a muscle. Nothing actually moved. Nevertheless there
was a motionlessly writhing and crawling distortion of the ship and
everything in it, accompanied by a sensation that simply can not be
described.

It was not like going into or emerging from the sub-ether. It was not
even remotely like space-sickness or sea-sickness or free fall or
anything else that any Terran had ever before experienced.

And the asteroid vanished.

It disappeared into an outrageously incandescent, furiously pyrotechnic,
raveningly expanding atomic fireball that in seconds seemed to fill half
of space.

After ages-long minutes of the most horrifyingly devastating fury any
man there had ever seen, the frightful thing expired and Hilton said:
"_That_ was just a kind of a firecracker. Just a feeble imitation of the
first-stage detonator for what we'll have to have to crack the Stretts'
ground-based screens. If the skipper and I had taken time to take the
ship down to the shops and really work it over we could have put on a
show. Was this enough so you iron-heads are ready to listen with your
ears open and your mouths shut?"

They were. So much so that not even Elliott opened his mouth to say yes.
They merely nodded. Then again--for the last time, he hoped!--Hilton
spoke his piece. The response was prompt and vigorous. Only Sam Bryant,
one of Hilton's staunchest allies, showed any uncertainty at all.

"I've been married only a year and a half, and the baby was due about a
month ago. How sure are you that you can make old Gordon sit still for
us skimming the cream off of Terra to bring out here?"

"Doris Bryant, the cream of Terra!" Elliott gibed. "_How_ modest our
Samuel has become!"

"Well, damn it, she is!" Bryant insisted.

"Okay, she is," Hilton agreed. "But either we get our people or Terra
doesn't get its uranexite. That'll work. In the remote contingency that
it doesn't, there are still tighter screws we can put on. But you missed
the main snapper, Sam. Suppose Doris doesn't want to live for five
thousand years and is allergic to becoming a monster?"

"Huh; you don't need to worry about that." Sam brushed that argument
aside with a wave of his hand. "Show me a girl who doesn't want to stay
young and beautiful forever and I'll square you the circle. Come on.
What's holding us up?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Orion_ hurtled through space back toward Ardry and Hilton, struck
by a sudden thought, turned to the captain.

"Skipper, why wouldn't it be a smart idea to clamp a blockade onto Fuel
Bin? Cut the Stretts' fuel supply?"

"I thought better of you than that, son." Sawtelle shook his head sadly.
"That was the first thing I did."

"Ouch. Maybe you're 'way ahead of me too, then, on the one that we
should move to Fuel Bin, lock, stock and barrel?"

"Never thought of it, no. Maybe you're worth saving, after all. After
conversion, of course.... Yes, there'd be three big advantages."

"Four."

Sawtelle raised his eyebrows.

"One, only one planet to defend. Two, it's self-defending against sneak
landings. Nothing remotely human can land on it except in heavy lead
armor, and even in that can stay healthy for only a few minutes."

"Except in the city. Omlu. That's the weak point and would be the point
of attack."

"Uh-uh. Cut off the decontaminators and in five hours it'll be as hot as
the rest of the planet. Three, there'd be no interstellar supply line
for the Stretts to cut. Four, the environment matches our new physiques
a lot better than any normal planet could."

"That's the one I didn't think about."

"I think I'll take a quick peek at the Stretts--oh-oh; they've screened
their whole planet. Well, we can do that, too, of course."

"How are you going to select and reject personnel? It looks as though
everybody wants to stay. Even the men whose main object in life is to go
aground and get drunk. The Omans do altogether too good a job on them
and there's no such thing as a hangover. I'm glad I'm not in your
boots."

"You may be in it up to the eyeballs, Skipper, so don't chortle too
soon."

Hilton had already devoted much time to the problems of selection; and
he thought of little else all the way back to Ardry. And for several
days afterward he held conferences with small groups and conducted
certain investigations.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bud Carroll of Sociology and his assistant Sylvia Banister had been
married for weeks. Hilton called them, together with Sawtelle and Bryant
of Navy, into conference with the Big Eight.

"The more I study this thing the less I like it," Hilton said. "With a
civilization having no government, no police, no laws, no medium of
exchange ..."

"No _money_?" Bryant exclaimed. "How's old Gordon going to pay for his
uranexite, then?"

"He gets it free," Hilton replied, flatly. "When anyone can have
anything he wants, merely by wanting it, what good is money? Now,
remembering how long we're going to have to live, what we'll be up
against, that the Masters failed, and so on, it is clear that the prime
basic we have to select for is stability. We twelve have, by
psychodynamic measurement, the highest stability ratings available."

"Are you sure _I_ belong here?" Bryant asked.

"Yes. Here are three lists." Hilton passed papers around. "The list
labeled 'OK' names those I'm sure of--the ones we're converting now and
their wives and whatever on Terra. List 'NG' names the ones I know we
don't want. List 'X'--over thirty percent--are in-betweeners. We have to
make a decision on the 'X' list. So--what I want to know is, who's going
to play God. I'm not. Sandy, are you?"

"Good Heavens, no!" Sandra shuddered. "But I'm afraid I know who will
have to. I'm sorry, Alex, but it'll have to be you four--Psychology and
Sociology."

Six heads nodded and there was a flashing interchange of thought among
the four. Temple licked her lips and nodded, and Kincaid spoke.

"Yes, I'm afraid it's our baby. By leaning very heavily on Temple, we
can do it. Remember, Jarve, what you said about the irresistible force?
We'll need it."

"As I said once before, Mrs. Hilton, I'm very glad you're along,"
Hilton said. "But just how sure are you that even you can stand up under
the load?"

"Alone, I couldn't. But don't underestimate Mrs. Carroll and the Messrs.
Together, and with such a goal, I'm sure we can."

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus, after four-fifths of his own group and forty-one Navy men had been
converted, Hilton called an evening meeting of all the converts. Larry,
Tuly and Javvy were the only Omans present.

"You all knew, of course, that we were going to move to Fuel Bin
sometime," Hilton began. "I can tell you now that we who are here are
all there are going to be of us. We are all leaving for Fuel Bin
immediately after this meeting. Everything of any importance, including
all of your personal effects, has already been moved. All Omans except
these three, and all Oman ships except the _Orion_, have already gone."

He paused to let the news sink in.

Thoughts flew everywhere. The irrepressible Stella Wing--_now_ Mrs.
Osbert F. Harkins--was the first to give tongue. "What a _wonderful_
job! Why, everybody's here that I really like at all!"

That sentiment was, of course, unanimous. It could not have been
otherwise. Betty, the ex-Ames, called out:

"How did you get their female Omans away from Cecil Calthorpe and the
rest of that chasing, booze-fighting bunch without them blowing the
whole show?"

"Some suasion was necessary," Hilton admitted, with a grin. "Everyone
who isn't here is time-locked into the _Perseus_. Release time eight
hours tomorrow."

"And they'll wake up tomorrow morning with no Omans?" Bernadine tossed
back her silvery mane and laughed. "Nor anything else except the
_Perseus_? In a way, I'm sorry, but ... maybe I've got too much stinker
blood in me, but I'm very glad none of them are here. But I'd like to
ask, Jarvis--or rather, I suppose you have already set up a new Advisory
Board?"

"We have, yes." Hilton read off twelve names.
