pair of his socks, as seriously as if she didn't know that he had
always refused to wear the lumpy results. Her stockings had runs, and
she still wore the faded apron in which she'd cooked supper.

He contrasted her with Shirley unconsciously, and shuddered. In the
year since Shirley Bates had come to work in his rare book store, he'd
done a lot of such shuddering, and never because of the slim blonde
warmth of his assistant. Since that hot day in August when they'd
closed the shop early and he'd suggested a ride in the country to cool
off, he and Shirley....

He was interrupted in his more pleasant thoughts by the crash of
scissors onto the floor, and his eyes focussed on the deepening folds
of fat as Emma bent to retrieve them. "Company coming," she said,
before he could think of anything to prevent the mistaken cliche. Then
she became aware that he was staring at her. "Did you take the garbage
out, Henry?"

"Yes, dear," he answered woodenly. Then, because he knew it was coming
anyhow, he filled in the inevitable. "Cleanliness is next to
godliness."

She nodded solemnly, and began putting aside her darning. "That's
finished. Mama always said a stitch in time saves nine. If you'd cut
your toenails, Henry...."

He could feel his skin begin to tingle with irritation. But there was
no escape. If he went upstairs to his bedroom, she'd be up at once,
puttering about. If he went to the basement, she'd find the canned
food needed checking. A woman's place was with her husband, as she'd
repeatedly told him. Probably she couldn't stand her own company,
either.

Then he remembered something he'd stored away. "There's a new picture
at the Metro," he said as quietly as he could. "Taylor's starred, I
think. I was going to take you, before this extra work came up."

He could see her take the bait and nibble at it. She had some vague
crush left for Taylor. She stared at the television set, shifted her
bulk, and then shook her head reluctantly. "It'd be nice, Henry. But
going at night costs so much, and--well, a penny saved is a penny
earned."

"Exactly. That's what I meant to say." He even relaxed enough to
overlook the platitude, now that there was some hope. "I saved the
price of lunch today. The nut who wanted _King in Yellow_ was so
tickled to get the copy finally, he insisted on treating. You can even
take a cab home afterwards."

"That's nice. It'll probably rain, the way my bunion's been aching."
She considered it a second more, before cutting off the television. He
watched as she drew off the apron and went for her coat and hat,
making a pretense of dabbing on make-up. She might as well have worn
the apron, he decided, as she came over to kiss him a damp good-bye.

       *       *       *       *       *

He considered calling Shirley, but her mother was visiting her, and
the conversation would have to be too guarded at her end. If he could
find some way of getting rid of Emma....

It wouldn't even be murder, really. More like destroying a
vegetable--certainly no worse than ending the life of a dumb cow to
make man's life more worth living. It wasn't as if she had anything to
live for or to contribute. It would almost be a kindness, since she
lived in a perpetual state of vague discontent and unhappiness, as if
somehow aware that she had lost herself. But unfortunately, the law
wouldn't look at it in such a light.

He'd only been thinking actively of getting her out of the way since
August, however; and somehow, with time, there must be some fool-proof
scheme. There was that alcohol-injection system--but it required
someone who would drink pretty freely first, and Emma was a
teetotaler. Maybe, though, if he could get her to taking some of those
tonics for women....

He dropped it for the moment and turned back to the book. It was an
odd old volume he'd received with a shipment for appraisal. There was
no title or date, but the strange leather binding showed it was old.
Apparently it had been hand-set and printed on some tiny press by the
writer, whose name was omitted. It seemed to be a mixture of
instructions on how to work spells, conjure demons, and practice
witchcraft, along with bitter tirades against the group who had driven
the writer out and forced him, as he put it, to enter a compact with
the devil for to be a wizard, which is like to a male witch. Henry had
been reading it idly, slowly deciding the book was authentic enough,
however crazy the writer was. The book had no particular value as a
collector's item, but he could probably get a fine price from some of
the local cultists, particularly since there were constant promises in
it that the writer was going to give a surefire, positive and simple
recipe for conjuring up a demon without need of virgin blood,
graveyard earth or unicorn horn.

He skimmed through it, looking for the formula. It turned up on the
