Rysland was saying: "We're not sure, of course, but we suspect--we
_feel_--that more than mere accident may be behind these Supremists."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Someone seeking power, perhaps. As I said, we don't know. We want to
find out. Dr. Nebel has been interested for some time in the curious
psychology of these Supremists--their blind, unthinking loyalty to their
cause, for instance. He is, as you know, a special assistant in the
Department of Education. He asked my help in arranging for an
investigation, and I agreed with him wholeheartedly that one should be
made."

"And I told these gentlemen," said Chief Larkin, "that I'd put a detail
on it right away."

Now Pell believed he saw through it. Larkin didn't believe it was
important at all; he was just obliging these Vips. A man couldn't have
too many friends in World Government circles, after all. But of course
Larkin couldn't afford to put one of his bright, machine-minded boys on
it, and so Pell was the patsy.

"Could I remind you," said Pell, "that my vacation is supposed to start
tomorrow?"

"Now, now, Dick," said Larkin, turning on the personality, "this won't
take you long. Just a routine report. The computers ought to give you
all the information you need in less than a day."

"That's what you always say, every time I'm ready to take a vacation.
I've been saving up for two years now...."

"Dick, that's hardly the right attitude for an agent who is so close to
making second grade."

Larkin had him over a barrel, there. Pell desperately wanted to make his
promotion. Second-graders didn't spend their time at the control banks
gathering data; they did mostly desk work and evaluation. They had a
little more time to spend with their wives. He said, "Okay, okay," and
got up.

"Where are you going?"

"To get my wife on the viewer and tell her I won't be home for a while
after all."

He left the three of them chuckling and thought: _He jests at scars who
never felt a wound._ He didn't say it aloud. You could quote formulae or
scientific precepts in front of Larkin, but not Shakespeare.

       *       *       *       *       *

He punched out his home number and waited until Ciel's image swirled
into the viewplate. His heart went boppety-bop as it always did. Hair of
polished gold. Dark eyes, ripe olives, a little large for her face and
sometimes deep and fathomless. She wore a loose, filmy nightgown and the
suggestion of her body under it was enough to bring on a touch of
madness in him.

"Let me say it," Ciel said. She wasn't smiling. "You won't be home for a
while. You've got another case."

"Well--yes. That's it, more or less." Pell swallowed.

"Oh, Dick."

"I'm sorry, honey. It's just that something important came up. I've got
a conference on my hands. It shouldn't take more than an hour."

"And we were supposed to leave for the moon in the morning."

"Listen, baby, this is absolutely the last time. I mean it. As soon as
this thing is washed up we'll _really_ take that vacation. Look, I'll
tell you what, I'll meet you somewhere in an hour. We'll have some
fun--take in a floor show--drink a little meth. We haven't done that in
a long time. How about the Stardust Cafe? I hear they've got a terrific
new mentalist there."

Ciel said, "No."

"Don't be like that. We need an evening out. It'll hold us until I get
this new case washed up. That won't be long, but at least we'll have a
little relaxation."

Ciel said, "Well...."

"Attababy. One hour. Absolutely. You just go to Station B-90, take the
lift to topside and it's right on Shapley Boulevard there. You can't
miss it."

"I know where it is," said Ciel. She shook her finger. "Richard Pell, so
help me, if you stand me up this time...."

"Baby!" he said in a tone of deep injury.

"Goodbye, Dick." She clicked off.

Pell had the feeling that even the free-flowing meth and the gaiety of
the Stardust Cafe wouldn't really help matters much. He sighed deeply as
he turned and went back into the other room.




Chapter II


A little over an hour later he stepped from the elevator kiosk at
Station B-90 and breathed the night air of topside. It was less pure
actually than the carefully controlled tunnel air, but it was somehow
infinitely more wonderful. At least to a sentimental primitive boob like
Richard Pell, it was. Oh, he knew that it was infinitely more sensible
to live and work entirely underground as people did these days--but just
the same he loved the look of the black sky with the crushed diamonds of
stars thrown across it and he loved the uneven breeze and the faint
smell of trees and grass.

This particular topside section was given over to entertainment; all
about him were theaters and cafes and picnic groves and airports for
flying sports. A few hundred feet ahead he could see the
three-dimensional atmospheric projection that marked the Stardust Cafe,
and he could hear faintly the mournful sound of a Venusian lament being
played by the askarins. He was glad they hadn't banned Venusian music,
anyway, although he wouldn't be surprised if they did, some day.

That was one of the things these Supremists were trying to do. Rysland
and Chief Larkin had given him a long and careful briefing on the outfit
so that he could start work tomorrow with his partner, Steve Kronski.
Steve, of course, would shrug phlegmatically, swing his big shoulders
toward the computer rooms and say, "Let's go to work." It would be just
another assignment to him.

As a matter of fact, the job would be not without a certain amount of
interest. There were a couple of puzzling things about these Supremists
that Rysland had pointed out. First of all, they didn't seem to be at
all organized or incorporated. No headquarters, no officers that anybody
knew about. They just _were_. It was a complete mystery how a man became
a Supremist, how they kept getting new members all the time. Yet you
couldn't miss a Supremist whenever you met one. Before the conversation
was half over he'd start spouting about the destiny of Earthmen and the
general inferiority of all other creatures and so on. It sounded like
hogwash to Pell. He wondered how such an attitude could survive in a
scientific age.

Nor would a Supremist be essentially a moron or a neurotic; they were
found in all walks of life, at all educational and emotional levels.
Rysland told how he had questioned a few, trying to discover when, where
and how they joined the movement: Apparently there was nothing to join,
at least to hear them tell it. They just knew one day that they were
Supremists, and that was the word. Rysland had shaken his head sadly and
said, "Their belief is completely without logic--and maybe that's what
makes it so strong. Maybe that's what frightens me about it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Okay, tomorrow then Pell would tackle it. Tomorrow he'd think about it.
Right now he had a date with his best girl.

He entered the cafe and the music of the askarins swirled more loudly
about his head and he looked through the smoke and colored light until
he spotted Ciel sitting in a rear booth. The place was crowded. On the
small dance floor before the orchestra nearly nude Venusian girls were
going through the writhing motions of a serpentine dance. Their greenish
skins shimmered iridescently. The sad-faced Venusian musicians on the
band-stand waved their graceful, spatulated fingers over their curious,
boxlike askarins, producing changing tones and overtones by the altered
capacitance. A rocketman in the black and silver uniform of the Space
Force was trying to stumble drunkenly out on to the floor with the
dancers and his friends were holding him back. There was much laughter
about the whole thing. The Venusian girls kept dancing and didn't change
their flat, almost lifeless expressions.

Ciel looked up without smiling when he got to the booth. She had a
half-finished glass of meth before her.

He tried a smile anyway. "Hello, baby." He sat down.

She said, "I didn't really think you'd get here. I could have had dates
with exactly eleven spacemen. I kept count."

"You have been faithful to me, Cynara, in your fashion. I need a drink
and don't want to wait for the waitress. Mind?" He took her half glass
of meth and tossed it down. He felt the wonderful illusion of an
explosion in his skull, and it seemed to him that his body was suddenly
the strongest in the world and that he could whip everybody in the joint
with one arm tied behind his back. He said, "Wow."

Ciel tried a smile now. "It does that to you when you're not used to
it."

The first effect passed and he felt only the warmth of the drink. He
signaled a waitress and ordered a couple more. "Don't forget to remind
me to take a hangover pill before I go to work in the morning," he told
Ciel.

"You--you are going to work in the morning, then?"

"Afraid I can't get out of it."

"And the moon trip's off?"

"Not off, just postponed. We'll get to it, don't worry."

"Dick."

"Yes?"

"I can take it just so long, putting our vacation off and off and off."
Her eyes were earnest, liquid and opaque. "I've been thinking about it.
Trying to arrive at something. I'm beginning to wonder, Dick, if maybe
we hadn't just better, well--call it quits, or something."

He stared at her. "Baby, what are you saying?"

       *       *       *       *       *

A sudden, fanfare-like blast from the orchestra interrupted. They looked
at the dance floor. There was a flash of light, a swirling of mist, and
within the space of a second the Venusian girls suddenly disappeared and
their place was taken by a tall, hawk-nosed, dark-eyed man with a cloak
slung dramatically over one shoulder. The audience applauded.

"That's Marco, the new mentalist," said Pell.

Ciel shrugged to show that she wasn't particularly impressed. Neither
was Pell, to tell the truth. Mentalists were all the rage, partly
because everybody could practice a little amateur telepathy and
hypnotism in his own home. Mentalists, of course, made a career of it
and were much better at it than anybody else.

