       *       *       *       *       *

Treading water, Parker dragged Mercedes to the edge of the raft. Retch
leaned over and lifted her in. For an instant, Parker remained in the
water, his fingers firm on the raft, letting it support him while he
gasped air into his lungs. Behind him, with a gurgle and a rumble, the
helicopter sank. He swung himself into the raft. Mercedes, her masculine
garb clinging to her, was sitting up.

"I am sorry, Beel," she said. "I get the scare up and I grab at you. I
not know for sure what I am doing. You will forgive me, no?"

"Think nothing of it," Parker answered. "Anybody can get scared under
these circumstances."

"That I know," she answered. "But you saved my life. And that I will
remember."

"Forget it," Parker said. "I did what had to be done, nothing more."

"But I will remember it," she calmly repeated.

Parker was silent. Under her hardness for the first time he glimpsed
something deeper, finer. She was the type who meant what she said. She
was a woman who paid her debts. Under other circumstances.... Parker put
the thought out of his mind.

Now he set about doing what had to be done--paddling to the island. He
turned his eyes toward it.

The island was gone. Calm, serene, the level face of the sea stretched
away to the horizon.

Fear, dark, sudden, and overwhelming, arose in Bill Parker. The fear did
not come up just because the face of the sea was level and calm, the
island not visible, but because of something else, something that he had
forgotten, something that he had put out of his mind and out of his
life. Could it be possible that--

He caught himself. In that direction lay madness. Words exploded out of
him. "Hey, what the hell? Am I nuts? What became of that island? I saw
it!"

"I told you we had to hurry to get there when we saw it." Retch was
hesitant. "It's--it's not always there."

"But it's got to be there! I saw it!"

"There is a trick about that island," Retch said. "I--it--I--you don't
always see it. Something funny."

Parker was across the shaking, unsteady raft. His impulse was to take
Retch by the throat, to shake words out of him. "What do you mean?" He
was restraining himself with difficulty.

Retch spread his hands. "I'm sorry, I can't explain. That's all I know.
Believe me."

Retch was telling the truth Parker decided. The big pilot swung his gaze
in every direction, searching for land. Somewhere in the far distance
was the peninsula of Lower California. But it was beyond range of his
eyes. As far as he could see, was barren water.

Setting his course by the small compass that was included as part of the
standard equipment on the life raft, Parker paddled toward the south.
The clumsy raft made little progress. Parker hardly noticed, hardly
cared. Deep in his mind was a lurking thought he was trying to keep
below his consciousness.

In the front of the raft, Retch sat with his back to Parker. From
Retch's motions, Parker knew the man was cleaning his gun. Parker made
no comment. When Retch had finished and had turned back to him, Parker
spoke. "I want to know a little more about that island. How does it
happen we can't see it?"

"I'm not certain," Retch answered. "I think it's a lot like the mirages
you see on the desert. This island is something like that, only in
reverse. In a mirage, you see something that doesn't exist. In the case
of this island, you _don't_ see something that _does_ exist."

"Um," Parker said, then was silent. The explanation sounded reasonable
enough, as far as it went. The trouble was it didn't go far enough, not
nearly far enough to quiet the thought lurking deep in the big pilot's
mind. He worked with the paddle. "When you hired me to fly you down
here, you told me that you knew where this island was located but you
didn't tell me it had a bad habit of vanishing."

"I didn't believe it myself," Retch answered. "So far as I was
concerned, it was just a wild rumor."

"Um," Parker said again. As he spoke, part of the thought that he had
been keeping buried in his mind came blasting to the surface. "She said
it was a mirage too!" he blurted out the words. "And that goddamned Dr.
Yammer--" He caught himself. Into his mind had come a vision of a woman
he had once known, and a psychiatrist called Dr. Yammer. Pain crossed
his face.

"What?" Retch asked. "Who are you talking about?"

"Nobody," Parker answered. "Just a woman I once knew."

Her name had been Effra. Effra of the Green Eyes, he had called her.
Rigidly he forced the thought of her from his mind, forced himself to
think of what Retch had said. But it was no good. His mind kept going
back to Effra and Yammer.

"She is caught, trapped in a net of delusion and hallucination that is
as solid as a block of steel," Dr. Yammer had once said, his voice
precise with authoritarian certainty. "I cannot get her out of this
steel block unless I hospitalize her, perhaps operate. There is no other
choice, no other decision that can be made. Putting it bluntly--she is
insane. A delicate thing, insanity. We still work in the dark with
things of the mind."

       *       *       *       *       *

At the memory of Yammer's words, Parker twisted uncomfortably. He used
the paddle much more vigorously than was necessary. It was as if
Yammer's face showed in the water into which he thrust the paddle.

Mercedes was studying Parker. "About this woman--"

"She was just a woman I once knew."

"You loved her, yes?"

"Well--" Parker was silent.

"Tell me what 'appened."

"Nothing," Parker said. "Oh, hell--all right. Up in LA three years ago I
knew Effra. She was a pilot too, and we got to running around together.
She liked to fly out over the Pacific all by herself. I don't know why;
she just liked to flirt with danger, maybe. One time she came in a
couple of hours over-due. Figuring she was down in the drink, I was
about to rouse out the Navy to hunt for her when she came in." He
paused.

Mercedes was silent. In the front of the raft, Retch said nothing. His
eyes were still searching the skyline.

"She was wildly excited," Parker went on. "She said she had made a
forced landing on an island somewhere off the coast of Southern Cal. She
also said there were a lot of strange people living on the island." He
shook his head. There was a feeling in him he did not like.

His eyes came to focus on a ripple in the water. A shark. It made him
think of Dr. Yammer.

"What 'appened then?" Mercedes asked softly.

"I helped her look for the island," Parker said. "We spent months
looking in our spare time. We flew over more ocean than I ever knew
existed. But we didn't find it."

"No?"

"That island was awfully important to her. She thought something
wonderful was there, what it was, she could not tell me, just that it
was there. When we could not find it, she began to doubt herself, to
think perhaps she had not seen it, that she had not landed there. She
reached the conclusion then--well, she went to see one of these fancy
mental specialists who know everything about nothing and nothing about
anything."

Under the water, he could see the eyes of the shark. They reminded him
of the expression in Dr. Yammer's eyes, except that the shark's eyes
looked more honest.

"And then?" Mercedes said, very softly.

"She--vanished," Parker said. "Yammer was going to stick her into a
hospital, use something that he called 'shock' on her, maybe operate.
She ran away."

"Did you try to find her, Beel?"

"For asking that question, Mercedes, I ought to choke you!" Parker said
hotly. "I hunted high and low. All we knew for certain was that her
plane was missing. I think she decided she would simply fly out to the
sea she loved, and never come back." Again his voice sank to a whisper
as he visualized Effra of the Green Eyes flying out over this wilderness
of waters.

"I am sorry, Beel," Mercedes said gently. "Will you remember one thing,
Beel?"

"Sure. What is it?"

"You saved my life back there. I will not forget it. If the time ever
comes, I will pay my debt."

"Thank you," Parker said. "But there is no debt."

"You think this island we are hunting might be the same island your girl
claimed she found?" Retch spoke from the front end of the boat.

"And if it is the same island?" Mercedes said.

Anger came boiling up in Parker. "If it is that island, and if I ever
get back to Los Angeles, I am going to hunt up a psychiatrist by the
name of Yammer and take care of him!" Parker dug the water savagely.
Gradually, his anger subsided. "Where did you run into the rumor about
this island?"

Retch shrugged. "It was just one of those things you hear." He studied
the landscape. "We should spot a boat soon."

"We are not exactly on the well-traveled ocean lanes," Parker pointed
out. "Does it happen that there are any other little things about this
island that you forgot to tell me when you chartered my ship to fly you
down here?"

Retch flushed. "Such as--"

"Such as how it happened that my 'copter threw a vane just after we
sighted the place?"

Retch did not answer.

"Seemed as though somebody shot at us."

"Oh hell no! The loss of the vane was accidental."

"Accidents like that can happen but they usually don't. I checked the
ship before we took off." Parker turned silent. There was no proof that
the wrecking of the 'copter had been anything but an accident. "What do
you expect to find on this island?"

"I told you--"

"Just before the 'copter started down, Miss Valdar was yakking about how
we were all going to be rich," Parker interrupted.

The glance Retch gave Mercedes had no love in it. "Sometimes she's got
her mouth open when she ought to have it shut."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mercedes was silent. "I see," Parker said. "When you chartered my ship,
you told me you were a scientist and that you wanted to investigate
certain phenomena on this island. You said your investigation would take
only a few hours. I was to fly you here and wait for you. You said you
might want me to fly you back to the mainland, or might not, depending
on what you found here. Is this correct?"

"Certainly," Retch answered. "I'm sorry you lost your ship but the
insurance will take care of it."

"Insurance will take care of the 'copter but not of my neck. _Are_ you a
scientist?"

"Of course. Didn't I tell you--"
