
                                  Soil.    Red Ash.
Water                              0.93     1.18
Organic matter                    10.67     3.32
Oxides of iron and alumina        13.40    18.42
Carbonate of lime                 23.90     8.83
Sulphate of lime                  trace     1.15
Carbonate of magnesia              1.10      "
Magnesia                            "       1.76
Phosphoric acid                   trace     0.71
Potash                             0.38     1.08
Soda                               0.13      "
Chloride of sodium                  "       1.03
Insoluble matter, chiefly clay    49.66    62.52
                                  -----    -----
                                 100.17   100.00

In this instance the quantity of burned soil amounted to about fifteen
tons per acre, and it is obvious that the quantity of potash which had
been liberated from the insoluble clay and the phosphoric acid are equal
to that contained in a considerable manuring. In order to obtain these
results, it is necessary, as has been already observed, to keep the
temperature as low as possible during the process of burning, direct
experiment having shown that when this precaution is not observed
another change occurs, whereby the potash, which at low temperatures
becomes soluble, passes again into an insoluble state. A part of the
beneficial effect is no doubt also due to the change produced in the
physical characters of the clay by burning, which makes it lighter and
more friable, and by mixture with the unburnt clay ameliorates the
whole. This improvement in the physical characters of the clay also
requires that it shall be burnt with as low a heat as possible; for if
it rises too high, the clay coheres into hard masses which cannot again
be reduced to powder, and the success of the operation of burning may
always be judged of by the readiness with which it falls into a uniform
friable powder.

The improvement of peat by burning has been practised to some extent in
Scotland, though less frequently of late years than formerly; but it is
still the principal method of reclaiming peat soils in many countries,
and particularly in Finland, where large breadths of land have been
brought into profitable cultivation by means of it. The _modus operandi_
of burning peat is very simple; it acts by diminishing the superabundant
quantity of humus or other organic matters, which, in the previous
section we have seen to be so injurious to the fertility of the soil. It
_may_ act also in the same way as it does on clay, by making part of the
inorganic constituents more really soluble, although it is not probable
that its effect in this way can be very marked. Its chief action is
certainly by destroying the organic matters, and by thus improving the
physical character of the peat, and causing it to absorb and retain a
smaller quantity of water than it naturally does. For this reason it is
that it proves successful only on thin peat bogs, for if they be deep,
the inorganic matters soon sink into the lower part, and the surface
relapses into its old state of infertility. It is probably for this
reason that the practice has been so much abandoned in Scotland, more
especially as other and more economical modes of treating peat soils
have come into use.

_Warping._--This name has been given to a method of improving soils by
causing the water of rivers to deposit the mud it carries in suspension
upon them, and which has been largely practised in the low lying lands
of Lincoln and Yorkshire, where it was introduced about a century ago.
It is most beneficial on sandy or peaty soil, and by its means large
tracts of worthless land have been brought under profitable cultivation.
It requires that the land to be so treated shall be under the level of
the river at full tide, and it is managed by providing a sluice through
which the river water is allowed to flood the land at high tide, and
again to escape at ebb, leaving a layer of mud generally about a tenth
of an inch in thickness, which it brought along with it. By the
repetition of this process, a layer of several feet in thickness, of an
excellent soil, is accumulated on the surface. Herapath, who has
carefully examined this subject chemically, has shown that in one
experiment where the water used contained 233 grains of mud per gallon,
210 were deposited during the warping. The following analyses will show
the general nature of the matters deposited, and the change which they
produce on the soil:--No. 1 is the mud from the Humber in its natural
state, No. 2 a specimen of warp of average quality artificially dried,
No. 3 a sandy soil before warping, and No. 4, the same fifteen years
after having received a coating of 11 inches of mud.

+---------------------------------+---------+--------+---------+--------+
|                                 |   1     |   2    |   3     |  4     |
|                                 +---------+--------+---------+--------+
| Water                           |   47.49 |    ... |    1.06 |   2.00 |
| Organic matter                  |    5.94 |   6.93 |    2.20 |   7.61 |
| Chloride of Calcium             |     ... |    ... | }   ... |    ... |
|     Magnesium                   | }   ... |   0.10 | }   ... |    ... |
|     Sodium                      | }  1.66 | } 0.94 | }  0.14 |   0.16 |
|     Potassium                   | }       | }      | }       |        |
| Sulphate of Soda                | }   ... |   0.31 | }   ... |    ... |
|     Magnesia                    | }   ... |   1.18 | }   ... |    ... |
|     Lime                        |   trace |   1.10 |   trace |  trace |
| Carbonate of Magnesia           |    2.60 |   0.31 |   trace |   0.29 |
|     Lime                        |    3.59 |   8.18 |   trace |   0.46 |
| Potash and Soda                 |    0.18 |   0.47 |   trace |   0.17 |
| Magnesia                        |    1.69 |   2.60 |   trace |   0.26 |
| Lime                            |    0.39 |   0.68 |   trace |   0.14 |
| Peroxide of Iron                | }  6.63 |   5.05 |    0.08 |   1.17 |
| Alumina                         | }       |   8.18 |    0.39 |   0.41 |
| Phosphate of Iron               |    0.58 |   1.04 |   trace |   0.28 |
| Silica                          |     ... |   9.05 |    0.14 |   2.77 |
| Sand and Stones                 |   29.15 |  55.87 |   95.91 |  84.97 |
|                                 |---------|--------|---------|--------|
|                                 |  100.00 | 100.00 |  100.00 | 100.00 |
+---------------------------------+---------+--------+---------+--------+

It is easy to understand the importance of the effects produced by
adding to any soil large quantities of a mud containing upwards of one
per cent of phosphate of iron; and in point of fact, Herapath has
calculated that in one particular instance the quantity of phosphoric
acid brought by warping upon an acre of land, exceeded seven tons per
acre. As, moreover, the matters are all in a high state of division,
they must exist in a condition peculiarly favourable to the plant. The
overflow of the Nile is only an instance of warping on the large scale,
with this difference, that it is repeated once only in every year,
whereas, in this country, the operation is repeated at every tide until
a deposit sometimes of several feet in thickness is obtained, after
which it is stopped, and the soil brought under ordinary cultivation.

An operation which is, in some respects, the converse of warping, has
been carried out on Blair-Drummond Moss, where the peat has been
dislodged and carried off by the action of water, leaving the subjacent
soil in a state fitted for cropping. Of course both this and warping are
restricted to special localities, but they are most important means of
ameliorating the soil when circumstances admit of their being carried
out.

_Mixing of Soils._--When soils possess conspicuous defects in their
physical, and even in their chemical properties, great advantages may,
in some instances, be derived from their proper admixture. A light sandy
soil, for instance, is greatly improved by the addition of clay, and
_vice versa_; so that, when two soils of opposite properties occur near
to one another, both may be improved by mixture. It has been applied to
the improvement of heavy clay soil and of peat, the former being mixed
with sand or marl so as to diminish its tenacity; the latter with clay
or gravel to add to its inorganic matters, and in both instances it has
proved successful.

The process of chalking, which has been carried out on a large scale in
some parts of England, and which consists in bringing up the chalk from
pits, penetrating through the overlying tenacious clay, and mixing it
with the soil, operates, to some extent, in a similar manner, though no
doubt the lime also exercises a strictly chemical action. It is probable
that the mixing of soils might be advantageously extended, and it merits
more minute study than it has yet obtained. Its use is obviously limited
by the expense, because, of course, where good effects are to be
obtained, it is necessary to remove large quantities of soil, in some
instances as much as 50 or 100 tons per acre, but the expense might be
much diminished if it were carried out methodically, and on a
considerable scale. The admixture of highly fertile soils with others of
inferior quality is also worthy of attention; indeed, it is understood
that this has been done, to some extent, with the rich trap soils of
some parts of Scotland, but the extent of the benefit derived from it
has not been made public.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote J: Mr. Dudgeon, Spylaw. Transactions of the Highland Society,
vol. cxxix., p. 505.]




CHAPTER VII.

THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MANURING.


In their natural condition all soils not absolutely barren are capable
of supporting a certain amount of vegetation, and they continue to do so
for an unlimited period, because the whole of the substances extracted
from them are again restored, either directly by the decay of the
plants, or indirectly by the droppings of the wild animals which have
browzed upon them. Under these circumstances, a soil yields what may be
called its normal produce, which varies within comparatively narrow
limits, according to the nature of the season, temperature, and other
climatic conditions. But the case is completely altered if the crop, in
place of being allowed to decay on the soil, is removed from it, for,
though the air will continue to afford an undiminished supply of those
elements of the food of plants which may be derived from it, the fixed
substances, which can only be obtained from the soil, decrease in
quantity, and are at length entirely exhausted. In this way a gradual
diminution of the fertility of the soil takes place, until, after the
lapse of a period, longer or shorter, according to its natural
resources, it will become entirely incapable of maintaining a crop, and
fall into absolute infertility unless the substances removed from it are
restored from some other source in the form of manure. When this is
done, the fertility of the soil may not only be sustained but greatly
increased, and, in point of fact, all cultivated soils, by the use of
manure, are made to yield a much larger crop than they can do in their
natural condition.

The fundamental principle upon which a manure is employed is that of
adding to the soil an abundant supply of the elements removed from it by
plants in the condition best fitted for absorption by their roots; but
looked at in its broadest point of view, it acts not merely in this way,
but also by promoting the decomposition of the already partially
disintegrated rocks of which the soil is composed, setting free those
substances it already contains, and facilitating their absorption by the
plants.

In considering the practical applications of the broad general principle
just stated, it might be assumed that a manure ought invariably to
contain all the elements of plants in the quantities in which they are
removed by the crops, and that when this has been accurately ascertained
by analysis, it would only be necessary to use the various substances in
the proportions thus indicated. But this, though a very important, and
no doubt in many cases essential condition, is by no means the only
matter which requires to be taken into consideration in the economical
application of manures. And this becomes sufficiently obvious when the
circumstances attending the exhaustion of the soil are minutely
examined. When a soil is cropped during a succession of years with the
same plant, and at length becomes incapable of longer maintaining it,
the exhaustion is rarely, if ever, due to the simultaneous consumption
of all its different constituents, but generally depends upon that of
one individual substance, which, from its having originally existed in
the soil in comparatively small quantity, is removed in a shorter time
than the others. To restore the fertility of a soil in this condition,
it is by no means necessary to supply all the different substances
required by the plant, for it will suffice to add that which has been
entirely removed. On the other hand, if an ordinary soil be supplied
with a manure containing a very small quantity of one of the elements of
plant food, along with abundance of all the others, the amount of
increase which it yields must obviously be measured, not by those which
are abundant, but by that which is deficient; for the crop which grows
luxuriantly so long as it obtains a supply of all its constituents, is
arrested as effectually by the want of one as of all, as has been proved
by the experiments of Prince Salm Horstmar and others, referred to in a
previous chapter; and hence, in order to obtain a good crop, it would be
necessary to use the manure in such abundance as to supply a sufficiency
of the deficient element for that purpose. If this course were
persevered in for a succession of years, the other substances which
would have been used in much more than the quantity required by the
crops, must either have been entirely lost or have accumulated in the
soil. In the latter case it is sufficiently obvious that the soil must
have been gradually acquiring an amount of resources which must remain
dormant until the system of manuring is changed. To render them
available, it is only necessary to add to it a quantity of the
particular substance in which the manure hitherto employed has been
deficient, so as to restore the lost balance, and enable the plant to
make use of those which have been stored up within it. The substance so
used is called a _special_ manure; that containing all the constituents
of the crop is a _general_ manure.

The distinction of these two classes of manures is very important in a
practical point of view, because a special manure is not by itself
capable of maintaining the life of plants, but is only a means of
bringing into use the natural and acquired resources of the soil. In
place of preventing or retarding its exhaustion, it rather accelerates
it by causing the increased crops to consume more abundantly, and within
a shorter period of time, those substances which it contains. On the
other hand, a general manure prevents or diminishes the consumption of
the elements of plant-food contained in the soil, and if added in
sufficient abundance, may cause them to accumulate in it, and even
enable an almost absolutely barren soil to yield a tolerable crop.
General manures must therefore always be the most important and
essential, and no others would be used if it were possible to obtain
them of a composition exactly suited to the requirements of the crop to
be raised. Practically, however, this condition cannot be fulfilled,
because all the substances available for the purpose, and particularly
farm-yard manure, are refuse matters, the exact composition of which is
not under our control, and they do not necessarily contain their
constituents either in the most suitable proportions, or the most
available forms, and consequently when they are used during a succession
of years, certain of their constituents may accumulate in the soil, and
it is under such circumstances that special manures are both necessary
and advantageous.

Several different substances, but more especially farm-yard manure,
fulfil in a very remarkable manner the conditions of a general manure,
and supply abundantly, not merely the mineral, but also the carbonaceous
and nitrogenous matters necessary for building up the organic part of
the plant; and hence its use is governed by principles of comparative
simplicity, and really resolves itself into determining the best mode of
managing it so as effectually to preserve its useful constituents, and,
at the same time, to bring them into those forms of combination in which
they are most available to the plant. But the employment of a special
manure opens up nice questions as to the relative importance of the
different elements of plants which have given rise to much controversy
and difference of opinion.

In treating of the food of plants, it has been already observed that the
fixed or mineral constituents which are contained in their ash, are
necessarily derived exclusively from the soil, but that the carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen, of which their organic part is composed,
may be obtained either from that source or from the air. The important
distinction which thus exists between these two classes of substances,
has given rise to two different views regarding the theory of manures.
Basing his views on the presence of the organic elements in the air,
Liebig has maintained that it is unnecessary to supply them in the
manure, while others, among whom Messrs. Lawes and Gilbert have taken a
prominent position, hold that, as a rule, fertile soils, cultivated in
the ordinary manner, contain a sufficient supply of mineral matters for
the production of the largest possible crops, but that the quantity of
ammonia and nitric acid which the plants are capable of extracting from
the air is insufficient, and must be supplemented by manures containing
them. A large number of experiments have been made in support of these
views, but the inferences which can be drawn from them are not
absolutely conclusive on either side, and it is necessary to consider
the matter in a general point of view.

Setting out from the proposition already so frequently referred to, that
the plant cannot grow unless it receives a supply of all its elements,
it must be obvious that if, to a soil containing a sufficiency of
mineral matters to raise a given number of crops, a supply of ammonia be
added, its total productive capacity cannot be thus increased; and
though it may yield larger crops than it would have done without that
substance, this can only be accomplished by a proportionate diminution
of their number. In either case, the same quantity of vegetable matter
will be produced, but the time within which it is obtained will be
regulated by the supply of ammonia. That substance differs in no respect
from any other element of plant-food, and used in this way is to all
intents and purposes a special manure, and acts merely by bringing into
play those substances which the soil already contains. Its effect may
not be apparent until after the lapse of a very long period of time, but
it ultimately leads to the exhaustion of the soil. If, on the other
hand, a soil be continuously cropped until it ceases to yield any
produce, it is manifest that the exhaustion must in this instance be
entirely due to the removal of its available mineral nutriment, because
the superincumbent air constantly changed by the winds must continue to
afford the same unvarying supply of the organic elements, and the power
of supporting vegetation would be restored to it, by adding the
necessary inorganic matters. Hence when a soil, which in its natural
condition is capable of yielding a certain amount of vegetable matter,
is rendered barren by the removal of the crop, it may be laid down as an
incontrovertible position, that its infertility is due to the loss of
mineral matters, and that it may be restored to its pristine condition
by the use of them, and of them only.

But the case is materially altered when we come to consider the course
of events in a cultivated soil. The object of agriculture is to cause
the soil, by appropriate treatment, to yield much more than its normal
produce, and the question is, how this can be best and most economically
effected in practice. According to Liebig, it is attained by adding to
the soil a liberal supply of those mineral substances required by the
plant, and that it is unnecessary to use any of the organic elements,
because they are supplied by the air in sufficient quantity to meet the
requirements of the most abundant crops. Other chemists and vegetable
physiologists again hold that though a certain increase may be obtained
in this way, a point is soon reached beyond which mineral matters will
not cause the plant to absorb more ammonia from the air, although a
further increase may be obtained by the addition of nitrogen in that or
some other available form.

It is admitted on both sides, that all the elements of plant food are
equally essential, and the controversy really lies in determining what
practically limits the crop producible on any soil. The point at issue
may be put in a clear point of view by considering the course of events
on a soil altogether devoid of the elements of plants. If a small
quantity of mineral matters be added to such a soil, it immediately
becomes capable of supporting a certain amount of vegetation, deriving
from the air the organic elements necessary for this purpose, and with
every increase of the former, the air will be laid under a larger
contribution of the latter, to support the increased growth, and this
must proceed until the limit of supply from the atmosphere is reached.
At this point a further supply of mineral matters alone must obviously
be incapable of again increasing the crop, and it would thus be
absolutely necessary to conjoin them with a proportionate quantity of
organic substances. Liebig maintains that this limit is never attained
in practice, but that the air affords ammonia and the other organic
elements in excess of the requirements of the largest crop, while
mineral matters are generally though not invariably present in the soil
in insufficient quantity. Messrs. Lawes and Gilbert, on the other hand,
believe that the soil generally contains an excess of mineral matters,
and that a manure which is to bring out their full effect must contain
ammonia, or some other nitrogenous substance fitted to supplement the
deficient supply afforded by the atmosphere. In short, the question at
issue is, whether there is or is not a sufficiency of atmospheric food
to meet the demands of the largest crop which can practically be
produced.

An absolutely conclusive reply to this question is by no means easy. The
experiments by which it is to be resolved are complicated by the fact,
that all soils capable of supporting anything like a crop, contain not
only the mineral, but the organic elements of its food in large and
generally in greatly superabundant quantity, and it is impossible
satisfactorily to ascertain how much is derived from this source, and
how much from the atmosphere. There are in fact no experiments in which
the effects of a purely mineral soil have been ascertained. The
important and carefully performed researches of Messrs. Lawes and
Gilbert were made upon a soil which had been long under cultivation, and
contained decaying vegetable matters in sufficient abundance to supply
nitrogen to many successive crops, and it would be most unreasonable to
assert that the produce they did obtain by means of mineral manures,
drew the whole of its nitrogen from the air. On the contrary, it may be
fairly assumed that the soil did yield a certain quantity of its
nitrogenous compounds, but to what extent this occurs, it is impossible
to determine. This difficulty is encountered more or less in all the
other experiments, and precludes absolute conclusions. The same fallacy
also besets the arguments of Liebig when he holds that the crop,
increased by means of mineral manures alone, must derive the whole of
