surely to be its next passenger. It consisted of nothing more than a
large basket, deep enough so that one would have to leap out of it, and
rimmed with thorns to prevent one from leaping back in. Three hempen
ropes were tied to its rim, and were then cunningly interwound on a
single-drum windlass of wood, which could be turned by two men even when
the basket was loaded.

The procedure was equally simple. The condemned man was forced into the
basket, and the basket lowered out of sight, until the slackening of the
ropes indicated that it had touched the surface. The victim climbed
out--and if he did not, the basket remained below until he starved or
until Hell otherwise took care of its own--and the windlass was rewound.

The sentences were for varying periods of time, according to the
severity of the crime, but in practical terms this formality was empty.
Although the basket was dutifully lowered when the sentence had expired,
no one had ever been known to get back into it. Of course, in a world
without seasons or moons, and hence without any but an arbitrary year,
long periods of time are not easy to count accurately. The basket could
arrive thirty or forty days to one side or the other of the proper date.
But this was only a technicality, however, for if keeping time was
difficult in the attic world it was probably impossible in Hell.

Honath's guards tied the free end of his tether to a branch and settled
down around him. One abstractedly passed a pine cone to him and he tried
to occupy his mind with the business of picking the juicy seeds from it,
but somehow they had no flavor.

More captives were being brought in now, while the Spokesman watched
with glittering black eyes from his high perch. There was Mathild the
Forager, shivering as if with ague, the fur down her left side
glistening and spiky, as though she had inadvertently overturned a tank
plant on herself. After her was brought Alaskon the Navigator, a
middle-aged man only a few years younger than Honath himself; he was
tied up next to Honath, where he settled down at once, chewing at a
joint of cane with apparent indifference.

Thus far, the gathering had proceeded without more than a few words
being spoken, but that ended when the guards tried to bring Seth the
Needlesmith from the nets. He could be heard at once, over the entire
distance to the glade, alternately chattering and shrieking in a mixture
of tones that might mean either fear or fury. Everyone in the glade but
Alaskon turned to look, and heads emerged from purses like new
butterflies from cocoons.

A moment later, Seth's guards came over the lip of the glade in a
tangled group, now shouting themselves. Somewhere in the middle of the
knot Seth's voice became still louder; obviously he was clinging with
all five members to any vine or frond he could grasp, and was no sooner
pried loose from one than he would leap by main force, backwards if
possible, to another. Nevertheless he was being brought inexorably down
into the arena, two feet forward, one foot back, three feet forward....

Honath's guards resumed picking their pine-cones. During the
disturbance, Honath realized Charl the Reader had been brought in
quietly from the same side of the glade. He now sat opposite Alaskon,
looking apathetically down at the vine-web, his shoulders hunched
forward. He exuded despair; even to look at him made Honath feel a
renewed shudder.

From the High Seat, the Spokesman said: "Honath the Pursemaker, Alaskon
the Navigator, Charl the Reader, Seth the Needlesmith Mathild the
Forager, you are called to answer to justice."

"Justice!" Seth shouted, springing free of his captors with a tremendous
bound and bringing up with a jerk on the end of his tether. "This is no
justice! I have nothing to do with--"

The guards caught up with him and clamped brown hands firmly over his
mouth. The Spokesman watched with amused malice.

"The accusations are three," the Spokesman said. "The first, the telling
of lies to children. Second, the casting into doubt of the divine order
among men. Third, the denial of the Book of Laws. Each of you may speak
in order of age. Honath the Pursemaker, your plea may be heard."

Honath stood up, trembling a little, but feeling a surprisingly renewed
surge of his old independence.

"Your charges," he said, "all rest upon the denial of the Book of Laws.
I have taught nothing else that is contrary to what we all believe, and
called nothing else into doubt. And I deny the charge."

The Spokesman looked down at him with disbelief. "Many men and women
have said that you do not believe in the Giants, pursemaker," he said.
"You will not win mercy by piling up more lies."

"I deny the charge," Honath insisted. "I believe in the Book of Laws as
a whole, and I believe in the Giants. I have taught only that the Giants
were not real in the sense that we are real. I have taught that they
were intended as symbols of some higher reality and were not meant to be
taken as literal persons."

"What higher reality is this?" the Spokesman demanded. "Describe it."

"You ask me to do something the writers of the Book of Laws themselves
couldn't do," Honath said hotly. "If they had to embody the reality in
symbols rather than writing it down directly, how could a mere
pursemaker do better?"

"This doctrine is wind," the Spokesman said. "And it is plainly intended
to undercut authority and the order established by the Book. Tell me,
pursemaker: if men need not fear the Giants, why should they fear the
law?"

"Because they are men, and it is to their interest to fear the law. They
aren't children, who need some physical Giant sitting over them with a
whip to make them behave. Furthermore, Spokesman, this archaic belief
_itself_ undermines us. As long as we believe that there are real
Giants, and that some day they'll return and resume teaching us, so long
will we fail to seek answers to our questions for ourselves. Half of
what we know was given to us in the Book, and the other half is supposed
to drop to us from the skies if we wait long enough. In the meantime, we
vegetate."

"If a part of the Book be untrue, there can be nothing to prevent that
it is all untrue," the Spokesman said heavily. "And we will lose even
what you call the half of our knowledge--which is actually the whole of
it--to those who see with clear eyes."

Suddenly, Honath lost his temper. "Lose it, then!" he shouted. "Let us
unlearn everything we know only by rote, go back to the beginning, learn
all over again, and _continue_ to learn, from our own experience.
Spokesman, you are an old man, but there are still some of us who
haven't forgotten what curiosity means!"

"Quiet!" the Spokesman said. "We have heard enough. We call on Alaskon
the Navigator."

"Much of the Book is clearly untrue," Alaskon said flatly, rising. "As a
handbook of small trades it has served us well. As a guide to how the
universe is made, it is nonsense, in my opinion; Honath is too kind to
it. I've made no secret of what I think, and I still think it."

"And will pay for it," the Spokesman said, blinking slowly down at
Alaskon. "Charl the Reader."

"Nothing," Charl said, without standing, or even looking up.

"You do not deny the charges?"

"I've nothing to say," Charl said, but then, abruptly, his head jerked
up, and he glared with desperate eyes at the Spokesman. "I can read,
Spokesman. I have seen words in the Book of Laws that contradict each
other. I've pointed them out. They're facts, they exist on the pages.
I've taught nothing, told no lies, preached no unbelief. I've pointed to
the facts. That's all."

"Seth the Needlesmith, you may speak now."

The guards took their hands gratefully off Seth's mouth; they had been
bitten several times in the process of keeping him quiet up to now. Seth
resumed shouting at once.

"I'm no part of this group! I'm the victim of gossip, envious neighbors,
smiths jealous of my skill and my custom! No man can say worse of me
than that I sold needles to this pursemaker--sold them in good faith!
The charges against me are lies, all lies!"

Honath jumped to his feet in fury, and then sat down again, choking back
the answering shout almost without tasting its bitterness. What did it
matter? Why should he bear witness against the young man? It would not
help the others, and if Seth wanted to lie his way out of Hell, he might
as well be given the chance.

The Spokesman was looking down at Seth with the identical expression of
outraged disbelief which he had first bent upon Honath. "Who was it cut
the blasphemies into the hardwood tree, by the house of Hosi the
Lawgiver?" he demanded. "Sharp needles were at work there, and there are
witnesses to say that your hands held them."

"More lies!"

"Needles found in your house fit the furrows, Seth."

"They were not mine--or they were stolen! I demand to be freed!"

"You will be freed," the Spokesman said coldly. There was no possible
doubt as to what he meant. Seth began to weep and to shout at the same
time. Hands closed over his mouth again. "Mathild the Forager, your plea
may be heard."

The young woman stood up hesitantly. Her fur was nearly dry now, but she
was still shivering.

