protection toward a woman sufficiently to lynch her if they could. Men
like Senator Jones instinctively disliked her; others, like Dr Johnson,
detested her, but no one thought of her lightly, even when they glibly
coupled the word nut with her name.

When it was found the saltband worked Miss Francis immediately became
the butt of all the ridicule and contumely which could be heaped upon
her head. What could you expect of a woman who meddled with things
outside her province? Since she had asserted the grass would absorb
everything, its failure to absorb the salt proved beyond all doubt she
was an ignoramus, a dangerous charlatan, and a crazy woman, better
locked up, who had destroyed Southern California to her own obscure
benefit. The victory over the grass became a victory over Miss Francis;
of the ordinary gumchewing moviegoing maninthestreet over the
pretentious highbrow. She was ignominiously ejected from her
chickenhouse-laboratory on the ground that it was more needed for its
original use, and she was jeered at in every vehicle of public
expression. In spite of my natural chivalry, I cannot say I pitied her
in her fall, which she took with an unbecoming humility amounting to
arrogance.


_35._ It was amazing how quickly viewpoints returned to an apparent
normality as soon as the grass stopped at the saltband. That it still
existed, in undisputed possession of nearly all Southern California
after dispersing and scattering millions of people all over the country,
disturbing by its very being a large part of the national economy, was
only something read in newspapers, an accepted fact to be pushed into
the farthest background of awareness, now the immediate threat was gone.
The salt patrol, vigilant for erosions or leachings, a select corps, was
alert night and day to keep the saline wall intact. The general
attitude, if it concerned itself at all with the events of the past half
year, looked upon it merely as one of those setbacks periodically
afflicting the country like depressions, epidemics, floods, earthquakes,
or other manmade or natural misfortunes. The United States had been a
great nation when Los Angeles was a pueblo of five thousand people; the
movies could set up in business elsewhere, Iowans find another spot for
senescence, the country go on much as usual.

One of the first results of the defeat of the grass was the building,
almost overnight, it seemed, of a great city on the east bank of the
Salton Sea. Displaced realtors from the metropolis found the surrounding
mountains ideally suited for subdivision and laid out romantically named
suburbs large enough to contain the entire population of California
before the site of the city had been completely surveyed. Beyond their
claims, the memorial parks, columbariums, homes of eternal rest and
elysian lawns offered choice lots--with a special discount on
caskets--on the installmentplan. Magnificent brochures were printed, a
skeletal biographical dictionary--$5 for notice, $50 for a
portrait--planned, advertisements in leading magazines urged the
migration of industry: "contented labor and all local taxes remitted for
ten years."

These essential preliminaries accomplished, the city itself was laid
out, watermains installed, and paving and grading begun. It was no great
feat to divert the now aimless Colorado River aqueduct to the site nor
to erect thousands of prefabricated houses. The climate was declared to
be unequalled, salubrious, equable, pleasant and bracing. Factories were
erected, airports laid out, hospitals, prisons, and insane asylums
built. The Imperial and Coachella valleys shipped their products in at
low cost, and as a gesture to those who might suffer from homesickness
it was called New Los Angeles.

Perhaps in relief from the fear and despair so recently dispelled, New
Los Angeles began to boom from the moment the mayor first handed the key
to a passing distinguished visitor. It grew and spread as the grass had
grown and spread, the embryonic skeletons of its unborn skyline rivaled
the height of the green mass now triumphant in its namesake, presenting,
as newsphotographers were quick to see, an aspect from the west not
entirely dissimilar to Manhattan's.

To New Los Angeles, of course, the _Daily Intelligencer_ moved as soon
as a tent large enough to house its presses could be set up. But I did
not move with it. For some reason, perhaps intuitively forewarned of my
intention, Le ffacase never gave me the opportunity to humiliate him as
I planned. On the contrary, I received from him, a few days before the
paper's removal, a silly and characteristic note: "Since the freak grass
has been stopped it seems indicated other abnormalities be terminated
also. Your usefulness to this paper, always debatable, is now clearly at
an end. As of this moment your putative services will be no longer
required. W.R.L."

Bitter vexation came over me at having lost the opportunity to give this
bully a piece of my mind and my impulse was to go immediately to his
office and tell him I scorned his petty paycheck, but I reflected a man
of his nature would merely find some tricky way of turning the interview
to his malicious satisfaction and he would know soon enough it was the
paper which was suffering a loss and not I.

I started next morning and drove eastward toward my property, quite
satisfied to leave behind forever the scenes of my early struggles. The
West had given me only petty irritations. In the East, with its older
culture and higher level of intelligence, I looked forward to having my
worth appreciated.




FOUR

_Man Triumphant ... II_


_36._ Everything I had visualized in the broker's office turned out too
pessimistically accurate. Consolidated Pemmican and Allied Concentrates
was nothing but a mailing address in one of the most forlorn of
Manhattan buildings, long before jettisoned by the tide of commerce. The
factory, no bigger than a very small house, was a brokenwindowed affair
whose solid brick construction alone saved it from total demolition at
the playful hands of the local children. The roof had long since fallen
in and symbolical grass and weeds had pushed their way through cracks in
the floor to flourish in a sickly and surreptitious way.

The whole concern, until my stock purchase, had been the chattel and
creature of one Button Gwynnet Fles. In appearance he was such a genuine
Yankee, lean and sharp, with a slight stoop and prying eyes, that one
quite expected a straw to protrude from between his thin lips or have
him draw from his pocket a wooden nutmeg and offer it for sale. After
getting to know him I learned this apparent shrewdness was a pure
defense mechanism, that he was really an artless and ingenuous soul who
had been taught by other hands the swindle he practiced for many years
and had merely continued it because he knew no way of making an honest
living. He was, like myself, unattached, and disarmed whatever lingering
suspicions of him I might have by offering to share his quarters with me
until I should have found suitable accommodations.

The poor fellow was completely at my mercy and I not only forbore,
generously, to press my advantage, but made him vicepresident of the
newly reorganized concern, permitting him to buy back a portion of the
stock he had sold. The boom in the market having sent our shares up to
an abnormal 1/2, we flooded our brokers with selling offers, at the same
time spreading rumors--by no means exaggerated--of the firm's
instability, buying back control when Consolidated Pemmican reached its
norm of 1/16. We made no fortunes on this transaction, but I was enabled
to look ahead to a year on a more comfortable economic level than ever
before.

But it was by no means in my plans merely to continue to milk the
corporation. I am, I hope, not without vision, and I saw Consolidated
Pemmican under my direction turned into an active and flourishing
industry. Its very decrepitude, I reasoned, was my opportunity; starting
from scratch and working with nothing, I would build a substantial
structure.

One of the new businesses which had sprung up was that of personally
conducted tours of the grass. After the experience of Gootes and myself,
parachute landings had been ruled out as too hazardous, but someone
happily thought of the use of snowshoes and it was on these clumsy means
that tourists, at a high cost and at less than snail's pace, tramped
wonderingly over the tamed menace.

My thought then, as I explained to Fles, was to reactivate the factory
and sell my product to the sightseers. Food, high in calories and small
in bulk, was a necessity on their excursions and nourishing pemmican
high in protein quickly replaced the cloying and messy candybar. We made
no profit, but we suffered no loss and the factory was in actual
operation so that no snoopers could ever accuse us of selling stock in
an enterprise with a purely imaginary existence.

I liked New York; it accorded well with my temperament and I wondered
how I had ever endured those weary years far from the center of the
country's financial life, its theaters and its great human drama. Give
me the old Times Square and the East Fifties any day and you can keep
Death Valley and functional architecture. I was at home at last and I
foresaw a future of slow but sure progress toward a position of
eminence and respectability. The undignified days of Miss Francis and Le
ffacase faded from my mind and I was aware of the grass only as a cause
for selling our excellent pemmican.

I won't say I didnt read the occasional accounts of the weed appearing
in _Time_ or the newspapers, or watch films of it in the movies with
more than common interest, but it was no longer an engrossing factor in
my life. I was now taken up with larger concerns, working furiously to
expand my success and for a year after leaving the _Intelligencer_ I
doubt if I gave it more than a minute's thought a day.


_37._ The band of salt remained an impregnable bulwark. Where the winter
rains leached it, new tons of the mineral replaced those washed away.
Constant observation showed no advance; if anything the edge of the
grass impinging directly on the salt was sullenly retreating. The
central bulk remained, a vast, obstinate mass, but most people thought
it would somehow end by consuming itself, if indeed this doom were not
anticipated by fresh scatterings of salt striking at its vitals as soon
as the rains ceased.

No more than any other reader, then, was I disquieted by the following
small item in my morning paper:

    FREAK WEED STIRS SPECULATION

    San Diego, Mar 7. (AP) An unusual patch of Bermuda grass discovered
    growing in one of the city parks' flower beds here today caused an
    excited flurry among observers. Reaching to a height of nearly four
    feet and defying all efforts of the park gardeners to uproot it, the
    vivid green interloper reminded fearful spectators of the plague
    which over ran Los Angeles two years ago. Scientists were
    reassuring, however, as they pointed out that the giantism of the
    Los Angeles devil grass was not transmissible by seed and that no
    stolons or rhizomes of the abnormal plant had any means of traveling
    to San Diego, protected as it is by the band of salt confining the
    Los Angeles growth.

I was even more confident, for I had seen with my own eyes the shoots
grown by Miss Francis from seeds of the inoculated plant. A genuine
freak, this time, I thought, and promptly forgot the item.

Would have forgotten it, I should say, had I not an hour later received
a telegram, RETURN INSTANTLY CAN USE YOUR IMPRESSIONS OF NEW GRASS
LEFFACASE. I knew from the fact he had only used nine of the ten words
paid for he considered the situation serious.

The answer prompted by impulse would, I knew, not be transmitted by the
telegraph company and on second thought I saw no reason why I should not
take advantage of the editor's need. Business was slack and I was
overworked; a succession of petty annoyances had driven me almost to a
nervous breakdown and a vacation at the expense of the New Los Angeles
_Daily Intelligencer_ sounded pleasantly restful after the serious work
of grappling with industrial affairs. Of course I did not need their
paltry few dollars, but at the moment some of my assets were frozen and
a weekly paycheck would be temporarily convenient, saving me the bother
of liquidating a portion of my smaller investments.

Besides, if, as was barely possible, this new growth was in some
unbelievable way an extension of the old, it would of course ruin our
sales of pemmican to the tourists and it behooved me to be on the spot.
I therefore answered: CONSIDER DOUBLE FORMER SALARY WIRE TRANSPORTATION.
Next day the great transcontinental plane pouterpigeoned along the
runway of the magnificent New Los Angeles airport.

I was in no great hurry to see the editor, but took a taxi instead to
the headquarters of the American Alpinists Incorporated where there was
frank worry over the news and acknowledgment that no further
consignments of pemmican would be accepted until the situation became
more settled. I left their offices in a thoughtful mood. Pausing only to
wire Fles to unload as much stock as he could--for even if this were
only a temporary scare it would undoubtedly affect the market--I finally
drove to the _Intelligencer_.

Knowing Le ffacase I hardly expected to be received with either
cordiality or politeness, but I was not quite prepared for the actual
salute. A replica of his original office had been devised, even to the
shabby letters on the door, and he was seated in his chair beneath the
gallery of cartoons. He began calmly enough when I entered, speaking in
a low, almost gentle tone, helping himself to snuff between sentences,
but gradually working up into a quite artistic crescendo.

"Ah, Weener, as you yourself would undoubtedly put it in your inimitable
way, a bad penny always turns up. I could not say _canis revertit suam
vomitem_, for it would invert a relationship--the puke has returned to
the dog.

"It is a sad thought that the listless exercise which eventuated in your
begetting was indulged in by two whose genes and chromosomes united to
produce a male rather than a female child. For think, Weener, if you had
been born a woman, with what gusto would you have peddled your flaccid
flesh upon the city streets and offered your miserable dogsbody to the
reluctant use of undiscriminating customers. You are the paradigmatic
whore, Weener, and I weep for the physiological accident which condemns
you to sell your servility rather than your vulva. Ah, Weener, it
restores my faith in human depravity to have you around to attempt your
petty confidence tricks on me once more; I rejoice to find I had not
overestimated mankind as long as I can see one aspect of it embodied in
your 'homely face and bad complexion,' as the great Gilbert so mildly
put it. I shall give orders to triplelock the pettycash, to count the
stampmoney diligently, to watch all checks for inept forgery. Welcome
back to the _Intelligencer_ and be grateful for nature's mistakes, since
they afford you employment as well as existence.

"But enough of the friendly garrulousness of an old man whose powers are
failing. Remove your unwholesomelooking person from my sight and convey
the decrepit vehicle of your spirit to San Diego. It is but a gesture; I
expect no coherent words from your clogged and sputtery pen; but while I
am sufficiently like yourself to deceive the public into thinking you
have written what they read, I am not yet great enough scoundrel to do
so without your visiting the scene of your presumed labors. Go--and do
not stop on the way to draw expensemoney from the cashier for she has
strict orders not to pay it."

Jealousy, nothing but jealousy, I thought, first of my literary ability
and now of my independence of his crazy whims. I turned my back
deliberately and walked slowly out, to show my contempt for his
rantings.

In my heart, now, there was little doubt the new grass was an extension
of the old and it didnt take more than a single look at the overrun park
to confirm this. The same creeping runners growing perceptibly from
instant to instant, the same brilliant color, the same towering central
mass gorged with food. I could have described it line by line and blade
by blade in my sleep. I wasted no more time gazing at it, but hurried
away after hardly more than a minute's inspection.

I could take no credit for my perceptivity since everyone in San Diego
knew as well as I that this was no duplicate freak, but the same, the
identical, the fearsome grass. But a quite understandable conspiracy had
been tacitly entered into; the knowledge was successfully hushed until
property could be disposed of before it became quite worthless. The
conspiracy defeated itself, however, with so many frantic sellers
competing against each other and the news was out by the time the first
of my new columns appeared in the _Intelligencer_.

The first question which occurred to those of us calm enough to escape
panic was, how had the weed jumped the saltband? It was answered
simultaneously by many learned professors whose desire to break into
print and share the front page with the terrible grass overcame their
natural academic reticence. There was no doubt that originally the
peculiar voracity of the inoculated plant had not been inherited; but
it was equally uncontroverted that somehow, during the period it had
been halted by the salt, a mutation had happened and now every wind
blowing over the weed carried seeds no longer innocent but bearing
embryos of the destroyer.

Terror ran before the grass like a herald. The shock felt when Los
Angeles went down was multiplied tenfold. Now there was no predictable
course men could shape their actions to avoid. No longer was it possible
to watch and chart the daily advance of a single body so a partially
accurate picture could be formed of what might be expected tomorrow.
Instead of one mass there were countless ones; at the whim of a chance
wind or bird, seeds might alight in an area apparently safe and
overwhelm a community miles away from the living glacier. No place was
out of range of the attack; no square foot of land kept any value.

The stockmarket crashed, and I congratulated myself on having sent Fles
orders to sell. A day or two later the exchanges were closed and,
shortly after, the banks. Business came to a practical standstill. The
great industries shut down and all normal transactions of daily life
were conducted by means of barter. For the first time in threequarters
of a century the farmer was topdog; his eggs and milk, his wheat and
corn and potatoes he could exchange for whatever he fancied and on his
own terms. Fortunately for starving citydwellers his appetite for
manufactured articles and for luxuries was insatiable; their
automobiles, furcoats, costumejewelry, washingmachines, files of the
_National Geographic_, and their periodfurniture left the city flat for
the farm, to come back in the more acceptable form of steaks, butter,
fowl, and turnips. The whole elaborate structure of money and credit
seemed to disappear overnight like some tenuous dream.

The frenzied actions of the humanbeings had no effect on the grass. The
saltband still stood inviolate, as did smaller counterparts hastily laid
around the earlier of the seedborne growths, but everywhere else the
grass swept ahead like a tidalwave, its speed seemingly increased by the
months of repression behind. It swallowed San Diego in a gulp and
leaped beyond the United States to take in Baja California in one swift
downward lick. It sprang upon the deserts, whose lack of water was no
deterrent, now always sending little groups ahead like paratroopers or
fifthcolumnists; they established positions till the main body came up
and consolidated them. It curled up the high mountains, leaving only the
snow on their peaks unmolested and it jumped over struggling rivers with
the dexterity of a girl playing hopscotch.

It lunged eastward into Arizona and Nevada, it swarmed north up the San
Joaquin Valley through Fresno and spilled over the lip of the High
Sierras toward Lake Tahoe. New Los Angeles, its back protected by the
Salton Sea, was, like the original one, subjected to a pincer movement
which strangled the promising life from it before it was two years old.

Forced to move again, Le ffacase characteristically demanded the burden
fall upon the employees of the paper, paying them off in scrip on the
poor excuse that no money was available. I saw no future in staying with
this sinking ship and eager to be back at the center of things--Fles
wrote me that the large stock of pemmican which had been accumulating
without buyers could now be very profitably disposed of--I severed my
connection for the second time with the _Intelligencer_ and returned to
my proper sphere.

This of course did not mean that I failed to follow each step of the
grass; such a course would have been quite impossible since its every
move affected the life and fortune of every citizen. By some strange
freak it spared the entire coast north of Santa Barbara. Whether it had
some disinclination to approach saltwater--it had been notably slow in
its original advance westward--or whether it was sheer accident, San
Luis Obispo, Monterey and San Francisco remained untouched as the cities
to the south and east were buried under grassy avalanches. This odd
mercy raised queer hopes in some: perhaps their town or their state
would be saved.

The prostration of the country which had begun with the first wave of
panic could not be allowed to continue. The government moved in and
seized, first the banks and then the railroads. Abandoned realestate was
declared forfeit and opened to homesteading. Prices were pegged and
farmers forced to pay taxes in produce.

Although these measures restored a similitude of life to the nation, it
remained but a feeble imitation of its previous self. Many of the idle
factories failed to reopen, others moved with painful caution. Goods,
already scarce, disappeared almost completely and at the same time a
reckless disregard of formerly sacred symbols seized upon the people.
The grass was coming, so what good was the lot on which they were paying
installments? The grass was coming, so why gather together the dollars
to meet the interest on the mortgage? The grass was coming--what was the
use of depositing money in the bank which would probably go bust
tomorrow?

The inflation would have been worse had it not been for the pegged
prices and other stern measures. The glut on the labor market was
tremendous and wages reached the vanishing point in a currency which
would buy little. Suddenly, the United States, which had so long boasted
of being the richest country in the world, found itself desperately
poor.

Government work projects did little to relieve the suffering of the
proletariat. Deaths from malnutrition mounted and the feeble strikes in
the few operating industries were easily and quickly crushed by starving
strikebreakers ashamed of their deed yet desperately eager to feed their
hungry families. Riots broke out in New York and Detroit, but the police
were fortunately wellfed and the arms wielding the blackjacks which
crushed the skulls of the undernourished rioters were stout.

There was a sweeping revival of organized religion and men too broke to
afford the neighborhood movie flocked to the churches. Brother Paul, now
on a national hookup, repeated his exhortations to all Christians,
urging them to join their Savior in the midst of the grass. There was
great agitation for restraining him; more reserved pastors pointed out
that he was responsible for increasing the national suicide rate, but
the Federal Communications Commission took no action against him,
possibly because, as some said, it was cheaper to let a percentage of
the surplus population find an ecstatic death than to feed it.

On political maps the United States had lost not one foot of territory.
Population statistics showed it harbored as many men, women, and
children as before. Not one tenth of the national wealth had been
destroyed by the grass or a sixth of the country given up to it, yet it
had done what seven wars and many vicissitudes had failed to do: it
brought the country to the nadir of its existence, to a hopeless
despondency unknown at Valley Forge.

At this desperate point the federal government decided it could no
longer temporize with the clamor for using atomic power against the
grass. All the arguments so weighty at first became insignificant
against the insolent facts. It was announced in a Washington
pressconference that as soon as arrangements could be made the most
fearful of all weapons would be employed.


_38._ No one doubted the atomicbomb would do the trick, finally and
conclusively. The searing, volcanic heat, irresistible penetration,
efficient destructiveness and the aftermath of apocalyptic radiation
promised the end of the grass.

When I say no one, of course I mean no clearthinking person of vision
with his feet on the ground who didnt go deliberately out of his way to
look for the dark side of things. Naturally there were crackpots, as
there always are, who opposed the use of the bomb for various untenable
reasons, and among them I was not surprised to find Miss Francis.

Though her pessimistic and unpopular opinions had been discredited time
and again, the newspapers, possibly to enliven their now perpetually
gloomy columns with a little humor, gave some space to interviews which,
with variations predicated on editorial policy, ran something like
this:

    Will you tell our readers what you think of using the atom bomb
    against the grass?

    I think it at the very best a waste of time; at the worst, extremely
    dangerous.

    In what way, Miss Francis?

    In every way. Did you ever hear of a chain-reaction, young man? Or
    radioactivity? Can you conceive, among other possibilities--and
    mind, this is merely a possibility, a quite unscientific guess
    merely advanced in the vain hope of avoiding one more folly--of the
