
Then Zaphnath held a long consultation with the wise men, which ended by
the summoning of three soldiers--one to take the woman home, another to
carry the news of peace to the Park and to the people, and the third, as
I supposed, to convey a message to the Pharaoh; but before the last was
despatched, Zaphnath said to me,--

"Our messengers reported a third curious person with you, having a much
larger body and long moving horns. What have ye done with him? Is he
left in charge of your travelling house?"

Then I explained this circumstance to them, as well as the incident of
my smoking, which I promised to repeat at the banquet in the evening.
After hearing this they dispatched the third messenger.

"We have heard, not only that ye breathed smoke and carried flames in
your limbs, but that your flesh was of iron, invulnerable to arrows;
that ye were stronger than birds, and carried the thunder and lightnings
of the gods with which to kill; and that ye were able to walk through
the air as well as on the ground."

"'Tis true we are stronger than any birds upon our proper star, and that
we kill with a thunder and a lightning. Our flesh is tougher and more
solid than thine, yet 'tis not of iron. But tell me, what knowest thou
of iron?"

"'Tis a rare, precious metal which we coin for money, but I see thou
carriest much of it. Thy thunderers are made of it."

"And hast thou no metal, bright and yellow, such as this?" I asked,
exhibiting my gold watch.

"In truth, the Pharaoh alone is able to possess such riches, and in all
the land of Kem there is no such huge lump of it as that!" he exclaimed
in wonder, while the sleepy wise men opened their big eyes.

"We have within our belts many coins of this, which we may barter with
the Pharaoh for things more plenteous here."

"Are ye travelling traders then, or what were your occupations on the
Blue Star? Were ye warriors, rulers, wise men, or owners of the soil?"

"My good friend here hath been a wise man, as thou must know from his
grey beard," I answered, smiling at the doctor. "He hath been a teacher
of knowledge to the people, and it was his superior wisdom which
contrived the house in which we travelled hither."

"But hath it not been a folly to teach wisdom to the people? When they
have learned, the wise man turneth fool! Wisdom groweth ripe by being
bottled, but whoso poureth it out for every thirsty drinker wasteth good
wine upon gross beasts!"

"In its youth our star held to these opinions, but now it teacheth
wisdom to every child, and in this manner we have made progress into
many things not even dreamed of here. As for my own profession, I have
been a dealer in wheat, the bread-grain of our star. Hast thou here such
a small grain growing at the bearded end of a tall straw?"

"In truth, the land of Kem raiseth so large a store of such a grain as
to feed all the surrounding countries! Our greatest traffic is in this
wheat. Hast thou not seen the green fields of it lining the banks of the
Nasr-Nil, until the sight tires following it? This season there cometh
such a crop as Kem hath never seen before, and for six years we have
been blest with its plenty----"

Here he was interrupted by the hurried return of the third messenger,
who addressed him in excited tones. As the Kemi use no gestures, and
but little facial expression in their conversation, I could not guess
the import of his message. Therefore when it was translated by the youth
it was all the more surprising.

"The soldier saith that a certain curious man of Kem, anxious to explore
thy travelling house, ventured within it, when presently it rose and
sailed away with him far out of the city, and was lost from sight in the
red distance!"

This was an unforeseen, stupefying development. I left the doctor to
guard our things, and rushing out I leaped the courtyard wall and ran
with all haste to the Park. The projectile was gone! No sign or trace of
it was anywhere to be seen. Willingly or not, we were henceforth chained
to Mars!




CHAPTER VI

The Iron Men from the Blue Star


Returning from Long Breath, I could not but notice the entire subsidence
of the terror, which had previously been so marked, and the general
signs of rejoicing which were now taking its place. It was easy to see
that I was an object of absorbing interest and busy comment. No one
pointed the finger at me, for that rude gesture was as unknown as it was
unnecessary. The mere turning of a great pair of eyes quickly in my
direction was an indication, significant enough, that I was being
denoted.

I now understood the more composed behaviour of the women. They were
accustomed to the idea of being taken in war, and never suffered
slaughter or hardship thereby, but merely a change of masters. As they
now left the Park they eyed me curiously, as if wondering from what sort
of new master they had escaped. I imagined I could detect some signs of
disappointment among them, at being cheated out of a trip to a new star
or being dismissed from the service of a god. Occasionally one of them
would incline her head gently to the right to meet her rising hand, in a
dignified salutation. I approached one of the fairest of these and
extended my hand. She seemed rather surprised, but calmly placed an iron
coin in my palm! Evidently I must make haste to learn the Kemish
salutation, or I would pass for a common beggar! My hand certainly did
look hard and brown, compared with her perfectly white and transparent
skin, through which the blood suffused the beautiful pink flush of life.
But even if a hotter sun had scorched and tanned my hand, it did not
look as dark and tough as the coin, although the soldiers had spread the
report that our flesh was of iron.

The chief business activity in the city seemed to be the transporting
from the surrounding country of an endless number of fibrous bags filled
with the bread-grain. I saw some of these bags open in the shops, and
the grain was shaped like wheat, but as large and less solid than a
coffee berry. Trains of asses bearing these bags were seen in every
street and entering by every gate. Each train of fifteen or twenty asses
was driven by a sandalled Martian, wearing the spread bird-wing which
seemed to denote the Pharaoh's service. The animals had the lazy,
sluggish, plodding habits which I expected, and in these respects their
driver differed very little from them. He gave an occasional long hiss,
followed by a jerky grunt, which sounded like "sh-h-h-h, kuhnk!" and
was evidently intended to hurry the animals, but it served them quite as
well as a lullaby. These drivers, who doubtless had just been hearing
stories of me, were a little surprised at coming upon me so soon, but
looked me over deliberately, as if calculating how much iron money I
would make, if there were no waste in the coinage!

But I hastened back to the doctor at the Palace, being obliged to leap
the courtyard wall again, for I was not acquainted with the signal to
command the Terror-birds. He expected no other report of the projectile
than the one I brought.

"The only hope is that the meddling Martian may have turned in but one
battery," he said. "In time this will exhaust itself, and the projectile
will tumble back upon Mars. If it should strike in the water, it may not
be shattered, but of course it might be submerged. The chances that we
will ever see it again are extremely remote. If it should be discovered
anywhere on the planet, it would probably be coined up into money, and
the fortune of the Pharaoh would hardly buy us iron enough to make
another. Well, the unexpected always happens. It was a fatal mistake
ever to have left it."

"If it is gone for good," I answered, "let us hope that this planet may
suit us better than the Earth, anyhow. We are certain of an easy
existence here at least. One shield will coin into money enough to
supply our wants a long time. If we had not been so dreadfully secretive
on Earth, perhaps some one, infringing our ideas, might have built
another projectile and sent a relief expedition!"

Preparations for the banquet were rapidly being made about the Palace by
men servants. We saw no female servants, and we learned afterward that
they did no menial work, except the serving of the meals, which was
rather an artistic duty.

We were conducted to two large ante-chambers, adjoining the banquet
room, where we deposited our armament and proceeded to make ourselves at
home as well as we could. The rooms were gloomy and poorly lighted, but
a great number of servants were busy waiting upon us, and one presently
brought in four portable gas-burners, placing them in a circle about my
head as I reclined on a large pillow of soft down, laid on the floor.
These burners thus furnished both heat and light, and nearly all the
rooms were thus lighted and heated throughout the day. They had windows
and a very thick, coarse, translucent but not transparent glass in them.
But as the sunlight was never strong, rooms were rarely ever light
enough for comfort without the flames of gas.

This was my first acquaintance with Martian gases, which I soon found to
be very numerous and various in use. On the other hand, very few liquids
existed. The atmospheric pressure was so low that what might have
existed normally as liquids on Earth, took the form of heavy gases here.
In every case they were heavier than the air, so that they remained in
vessels just as a liquid would have done. The four lamps were made of
reeds and shaped like the letter U. The right-hand side of the U was a
large vertical reed, connecting neatly at the bottom with a very much
smaller reed forming the other prong and terminating at the top in a tip
of baked earth, turned downward, so that it would discharge the gas away
from the lamp. A light stone weight was fitted to slide neatly down the
large vertical tube in which the gas was stored, and thus force the gas
up to the burner in the smaller tube. If a brighter light was desired, a
heavier weight was put on, and to extinguish the light it was only
necessary to lift the weight, which cut off the supply from the burner.

While lying on the downy floor-cushion, I was strangely annoyed by the
faint and distant howling of a dog. It seemed to come from the banquet
room adjoining mine, or from the doctor's room on the other side. I
called in the doctor, who said he heard nothing and had seen no dogs on
Mars. He tried to make me believe it was a fancy of mine. But presently
when a servant entered, he seemed to hear it instantly, for he turned
quickly about and left, but it was fully half an hour later before the
plaintive howling ceased.

"These Kemish people have better ears than we have," I remarked to the
doctor.

"Yes, both their ears and eyes are much better suited to the conditions
of fainter light, and higher, thinner sounds. There may be music at the
banquet to-night which we cannot hear at all in some of its notes."

"If there are no foods whose delicate flavours we fail to taste, I shall
be able to get along quite well. I am extremely hungry, and quite ready
for a change of fare." We had only eaten a hasty lunch when we had
re-entered the projectile at Long Breath to await the return of the
soldier.

Zaphnath himself came to conduct us to the banquet room, and we were
much surprised at its dark and gloomy character. The entire vast
enclosure had but twenty-one flickering fire-brands, suspended overhead
and in front of us, to furnish light. There were no tables or chairs, no
flowers or decorations, no sign of anything to eat. Other guests were
moving about through the semi-darkness to their places, seemingly
without inconvenience. I was whispering to the doctor that I would need
eyes of much greater candle power to enjoy the function, when we arrived
at our places. A double row of comfortable cushions ran along the edge
of our floor, where it seemed to sink to a lower terrace, whence we
could hear the indistinct hum of women's voices. Zaphnath took his seat
on a raised cushion in the middle of the row, and motioned me to the
cushion on his right and the doctor to his left. Eighteen other guests
now reclined upon their cushions to left and right, so that we were all
arranged in a direct line, facing the lower terrace whence came the
feminine buzz. Directly opposite each of us was an empty cushion, but no
table.

I was wondering at it all when the fire-brand farthest from me suddenly
exploded a great flaming ball of fire, and we all sprang to our feet.
From the terrace below came a grand burst of reed music, a swelling
chorus of women's voices, and then each fire-brand in quick succession
exploded a burst of flame, which floated down toward the dancing women,
but expired above their heads. I soon saw that these white fire-balls,
which continued in quick succession throughout the banquet, and afforded
us a glorious if a somewhat appalling light, were caused by the
successive discharges of small volumes of heavy gas from twenty-one
reed-tanks in the comb of the roof, one above each of the fire-brands.
When the discharged gas had floated down to the fire-brand beneath it,
there was a quick, bright explosion, and the flame sank menacingly
toward the women below.

The burst of music, the chorus of huzzahs, and the flashing forth of
light, proved to be a welcome to the Pharaoh, who was standing proudly
on his great throne opposite us, across the terrace and somewhat higher,
whence he could look down upon the dancers and singers. He wore a crown
of thin iron, surmounted by a golden asp. His elaborately curled wig did
not conceal his ears, from which large golden pendants hung almost to
his shoulders. His own beard was waxed and curled, and trimmed to the
shape of a beaver's tail. His dress is best described by calling it a
feather velvet, edged with flaring wing and tail plumes of iridescent
colours. In this feather cloth there was none of the rough, gaudy show
of the savage, but a discriminating, tasteful blending of colours and
harmony of design, imitated from the beauty of the bird itself.

Grouped about him on the approaches to his throne were one-and-twenty of
his favourite women, beautifully dressed in feather textures, with the
curved neck and head of a bird surmounting their brows. But their
costume was scant and simple compared with that of the dancing girls
below us. They wore a wonderful head-dress, composed of the entire body
of a small peacock. The head and neck were arched over the forehead, the
back fitted tightly, like a hat over their head, the drooping wings
covered their ears, while the fully spread tail arched above their head
in its wonderful opalescence. Much of the snowy whiteness of their backs
and breasts was bare, and a downy feather ribbon circled the necks,
wrists, and ankles. A two-headed iron serpent with golden eyes clasped
the upper arm and gartered the knee, but no jewels of any kind were to
be seen. All the dancers carried long decorated reeds, which they
flourished wondrously, and with which occasionally they executed the
most surprising leaps. While there was a stateliness about their
movements, there were also the most startling acrobatic surprises, made
possible by the feeble gravity.

The singing women, or what might be called the chorus, were in twelve
sets, each group clad in a different colour or design of feather-silk.
Their head-dress, while composed of the entire body of a bird of
plumage, lacked the flamboyant tail of the peacock. The music was weird
and whimsical, as there were neither stringed nor brass instruments. It
was made wholly by women playing upon a vast variety of drums and reeds.
There were all sizes of whistling reeds or flutes; several of these of
different lengths were grouped into one instrument like the pipes of
Pan; a series of long hollow reeds, when rapidly struck, gave forth a
marvellous cadence; while groups of small drums, of different size and
tensity, gave curious tones. The whole effect was weirdly eloquent,
rather than racy or exciting.

When the burst of welcome was ended, Zaphnath stretched forth his hand
and exclaimed, first to us in Hebrew, and then in Kemish,--

"O Pharaoh, whose power and wisdom from all the Pharaohs have descended,
behold, I bring unto thee these two iron men from the Blue Star, who,
though excelling in the arts of war, are yet pleased to come out of the
ruddy heavens to practise peace amongst us!"

And thus did Zaphnath translate the Pharaoh's response to us:--

"Unto Ptah, the Centre of Things, to whom the myriad stars of the
heavens are but ministering slaves, I, Pharaoh of Kem, do give you
welcome. Whatever pleaseth you in the largeness of this rich land, or in
the matchless beauty of our women, shall be unto you as if ye had owned
it always."

Whereupon the other guests turned toward us with the right hand upon the
cheek, and we awkwardly attempted the same salutation. Then a group of
the singing women, twenty-one in number, tripping to the weird music,
came up the steps which led to our floor, carrying covered dishes. At
the top they turned and saluted the Pharaoh, and then took their places,
one upon each of the cushions opposite us. Before uncovering the dishes
they took me a little by surprise, by bending forward and pressing their
warm, pink cheek against the right cheek of the guest they were about to
serve. My maiden unconsciously shivered a little, for my cheek must have
felt cold, even though my surprised blushes did their best to warm it.
Her dish, when opened, contained nothing but flowers, waxy white, but
emitting a delicately sweet perfume. She held them toward my face, and
presently breathed gently across them, as if to waft their perfume to
me. Then scattering them about my cushion, she pressed her left cheek
to mine, arose and tripped down the steps again. There was a modest
self-possession about her which enchanted me, and I hoped she would soon
return bringing something more substantial.

But another group of maidens, differently clothed, had already begun to
mount towards us with earthen goblets and reed-pitchers, which looked as
if they might contain wine. Dropping on her knees on the cushion before
me, this maiden saluted me as the other had done. Then sitting
gracefully before me, she tipped her reed pitcher toward the goblet, and
poured out apparently nothing! But, watching the others, I saw them
carry the goblet to their lips and draw a deep breath from it, while
tipping it as one might a glass of wine. I did the same, and inhaled a
deep draught of stimulating, wine-flavoured gas, which, when I exhaled
it through the nostrils, proved to be deliciously perfumed.

"I have heard of some poets who could dine upon the fragrance of flowers
and sup the sweetness of a woman's kiss, but I am hungry for grosser
things," I whispered to the doctor.

"There are ten other groups of these serving maidens to come up to us,"
he replied. "They will certainly bring us something more tangible before
it is over. Meantime, while we are in Kem, let us imitate the Kemish;"
and I must say he was succeeding remarkably well.

The next maiden who tripped up toward me was wonderfully beautiful and
most becomingly dressed. I was a little disappointed that, upon taking
her place on the cushion in front of me, she omitted the salutation the
others had given. However, she carried a small flask in her right hand,
which she placed near my mouth. Then opening the top of it slightly, it
jetted forth a deliciously perfumed fine spray, which moistened my lips.
Waiting just a moment for me to enjoy the perfume, she then pressed her
pretty cheeks in turn against my lips, until they were soft and dry.
This was the nearest approach to a kiss which I saw among these people,
and I learned it was given always just before eating solid food. The
plate she carried to me contained small morsels of fish, served upon
neat little wheaten cakes. There was no knife, fork, chopstick, or
anything of that kind, but each little cake was lifted with its morsel
of fish, and they were together just a delicate mouthful. This maiden
quite took my fancy, and I watched her evolutions and listened for her
voice in the chorus during the rest of the banquet, for she had no more
serving to do.

After this course Zaphnath arose, and waving to the music and singing to
cease, he thus addressed the Pharaoh:--

"It doth appear, O Pharaoh, that these visitors of ours come from a
strange, small world, where, though much is done, but little is enjoyed.
At thy bidding I have offered unto them all the luxuries of Kem, such
as our people strive all their lives for, and dying still desire; but
they wish no gifts or presents. Like slaves they only wish to work, but
at some noble, fitting occupation. This younger man, whose wondrous
learning hath taught him to speak even the tongues of other worlds, hath
been a great handler of grain upon his proper star, and for him the
fitting occupation is not far to seek. Thou knowest how the gathering of
thy bounteous harvests hath distracted my own attention from weightier
matters; wherefore, O Pharaoh, I do entreat thee to put into his charge
the labour of gathering, storing, and distributing all thy harvests; and
as a fitting compensation, let him have one measure of grain for every
twenty that he shall gather for thee."

Nothing could have suited my wishes and abilities better, and my pay on
Earth had been only one measure in five hundred. The Pharaoh's reply was
thus translated to us,--

"The gods put into thy mouth, O Zaphnath, only the ripeness of their
wisdom, and Pharaoh granteth thy requests ere they are uttered. But what
desireth the wise man?"

To this I made answer for the doctor,--

