
"No, Mrs. Schermerhorn. 'Phone. I want to telephone!"

"Oh. Yes; of course. We'll have our contest in the living room."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gary Elvin wormed his way toward the closet under the stairway. It was a
very small telephone alcove, not designed for utility. Yet he found he
could shut out some of the din if he jackknifed himself against the
slanting wall and held the door partly shut.

But it required the use of both his hands. He set the cylinder on a
bookcase in the hall and squeezed into the closet. With the telephone in
his hand, he hesitated. It had seemed a good idea a moment ago--to call
in the Authorities. But, to bring the generalization down to specifics,
just who would that be?

In a big city he would have telephoned the police. But San Benedicto was
a California valley town, small, sleepy, and contented. The four-man
police force was more or less capable of handling minor traffic
violations, but certainly nothing else. The State Police? Elvin doubted
they would have jurisdiction. His last, feeble resort seemed to be the
_San Benedicto News_, a daily, four-page advertising circular that
passed, locally, for a newspaper. Elvin called the editor-reporter at
his home.

After he had told his story, Elvin had to suffer a certain standardized
banter concerning the advisability of changing his brand of bourbon. It
was entirely meaningless, a form of humor enjoyed by the valley people.
Matt Henderson eventually agreed that the strange rocket might bear
investigation.

"I'll be out first thing in the morning," he promised.

"In the morning! Listen, Matt, this thing may be--it might--" He was
unable to crystalize his reasons for urgency. He finished lamely, "It's
important, I think."

"It ain't going to run away, is it?"

"No, but--"

"Then we can both get a good night's sleep."

Gary Elvin turned away from the telephone, vaguely dissatisfied. He felt
that something ought to be done immediately. What, he didn't know, or
why. He went to get his cylinder of colored spheres from the bookcase
where he had left it. The jar was gone.

He heard a burst of talk in the living room and he was suddenly
frightened. From the archway he looked in on the guests, some thirty
youngsters, all of the tenth grade of San Benedicto High School. They
sprawled over chairs and couches, or they sat, Indian fashion, on the
floor. Mrs. Schermerhorn stood in the center of the room, like a judge,
smiling patiently. All thirty of the guests were chewing industriously.
On the floor stood Elvin's jar of colored spheres, open and more than
half-empty.

"Oh, dear," Mrs. Schermerhorn protested, turning to Elvin. "Something
seems wrong with their gum. They've tried and tried, but I haven't seen
a single bubble. And it did seem such a clever game! I suppose if the
gum were stale--" Her voice trailed off when she saw the horror on
Elvin's face.

Wordlessly he pointed at the open jar. The room fell silent. All thirty
of the youngsters looked at him. Their chomping jaws became motionless.

"Is--is that mine?" he whispered hoarsely.

"The jar you brought in?" Mrs. Schermerhorn asked. "I don't know, Mr.
Elvin, I'm sure. Mabel Travis was supposed to bring the gum for the
contest, and she forgot where--"

"But mine wasn't gum." He licked his lips, uncomfortable in the focus of
so many staring eyes. "A--a rocket of some sort fell in the field, just
beyond the irrigation ditch. I found the cylinder inside. It might
be--it could be--anything."

Elvin had the strange sensation, for almost ten seconds, of looking at a
motion picture film that had stopped at a single frame. Then, as if the
projector had started to run again, all thirty of the youngsters broke
into activity. For another second the analogy of the film persisted;
Elvin had the elusive impression that each of the youngsters was
carefully playing a part.

       *       *       *       *       *

They clamored to go out and see the rocket. Mrs. Schermerhorn protested
that they would ruin their clothes trailing over the fields after dark.
The guests allowed themselves to be talked into putting off their
curiosity until morning. As their excited talk faded, Mabel Travis
looked up at Elvin.

"Was your jar the one on the bookcase, Mr. Elvin?" she asked, eyeing him
with her enormous, blue eyes.

"Yes. Is that where you got--"

"No." The room was still again, and all the youngsters were looking at
her with a peculiar anxiety. "I thought that was one of the prizes. You
know, when we played forfeits earlier in the--"

"Of course," Mrs. Schermerhorn put in. "Bill Blake did win a jar of
candy, didn't he?"

"And that's what I thought the jar was when I saw it on the bookcase,"
Mary Travis continued. "So I took it upstairs and put it with our coats
in the bedroom. I'll get it for you, Mr. Elvin." Slowly she picked up
the nearly empty jar on the floor and recapped it. "I'm going to take
this back to the drugstore tomorrow morning and demand my money back. I
certainly don't like being cheated!"

When she returned to the living room, she handed Elvin his cylinder of
colored balls and slowly his fear dissipated. Until a competent
authority analyzed the contents, the jar represented unknown danger. It
might be harmless; but it could also be an explosive, a form of fuel for
the rocket, perhaps even germ colonies used in biological warfare. If
Bill Blake had taken it home with him as an innocent jar of candy--Elvin
shuddered.

The party broke up and Elvin went to his room. He hung his suit
carefully at the back of his closet to preserve the creases and thereby
cut down on his cleaning bill. After five years of living on a teacher's
salary, such economies had become second nature with him. He brought out
his blue serge and hung it on the door; it was the suit he would wear
next week to school.

Saturday dawned crisply sunny. Elvin shaved and dressed leisurely.
Through the dormer windows of his room he saw the rich, black fields
that surrounded the ranch house and the distant ridge of misty mountains
beyond the desert, one or two of them crested with snow.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Schermerhorns, of course, were already awake and busy. Elvin heard
the clatter of dishes in the kitchen. He saw the twins, David and
Donald, tall and muscular in their tight jeans and brilliant plaid
shirts, working in their shop back of the garage. Pop Schermerhorn was
in conference with a score of day laborers clustered around the
half-dozen tractors in the drive. Through the open garage door Elvin
could see the Schermerhorn Cadillac, the station wagon, and the red
Convertible that belonged to the twins.

The scene could be duplicated, with minor variations, on any day of the
week. Elvin always resented the Schermerhorn prosperity, even though Pop
Schermerhorn had been kind enough to offer him board and room when it
was obvious the family did not need the additional income.

Elvin never allowed himself to forget that the Schermerhorns owned one
of the largest ranches in the valley as well as the feed store in San
Benedicto and a half-interest in the bank. Yet Pop Schermerhorn actually
boasted that he had never gone past the eighth grade in school, and his
kids were fortunate to be considered mentally normal. Elvin had the
twins in class; he knew the limits of their ability. Donald had an I.Q.
of 89, David of 85.

Yet such a family literally rolled in money, while Elvin was like a
slum-dweller staring emptily into a crowded shop window.

Matt Henderson turned in from the main highway as Elvin finished
breakfast. He joined the reporter and they walked out to the field
beyond the irrigation ditch. In daylight the terrain was very different.
Elvin backtracked over the same ground several times before it dawned on
him that he could not locate the rocket.

Perspiration beaded his face. That was impossible! The rocket was large
enough to be seen from any point in the field. Even if some part of the
