archeologist and you're getting paid to examine ruins. I came here
because I'm a roustabout who is supposed to be able to do anything,
which is what I'm getting paid for." He paused and removed an offending
grain of sand from his right eyelid. "Dying is not much," he continued.
"Why are you so frazzled about it? It doesn't even hurt, when you really
get to it, that is."

"You talk as if you have died before!"

"Why, I have," he answered, surprise in his voice. "Hundreds of times.
Since we first crawled out on the mud flats and grew feet and left our
gills behind us, that's a long time. We've been dying ever since, that's
for sure. And probably for a much longer time."

"I thought you were talking about reincarnation," the astonished
archeologist said.

"So I was," the roustabout answered. "They're only different approaches
and aspects of the same problem. We reincarnate in order to take another
crack at the puzzle of evolution. Some day we'll solve it! Then we will
fall heir to the farther stars instead of just this little old duck pond
of a solar system."

"You sound very sure of yourself. What proof--"

"It's in the book," McLean answered. "We're _homo sapiens_. And that
means something. The mud flats didn't stop us. We crawled off of them
and on to the high ground and into the forests and overran a planet. The
atom bomb didn't hold us up too long, even when we got to using it on
each other. Where in all that space--" His hand swept upward in an arc
that included all the vast expanse of stars dimly seen here on this
world even at high noon. "--is anything that can stop us, when we can
keep coming back to take another crack at the problem? Any problem, I
don't care what it is, can be solved if we can keep working at it long
enough!" Enthusiasm sounded in his voice, then faded out. He drew his
hand down. Two of the fingers were missing.

McLean stared at the ooze of blood and plasma and set his lips against
the pain. "That damned needle ray can sure knock a hunk out of a man,"
he said.

"Oh, Pike, why did you have to be so careless!" Sliding the pack from
her back, she opened it. Taking great care not to get her head above the
edge of the hole, she opened the first-aid kit and applied antiseptics
and bandages to the stumps of the two fingers. Alternately she scolded
and then soothed him.

"You do that real well," he said, approvingly. "You should have been a
mama, instead of an archeologist, and raised a whole slather of kids, so
you could bandage all their cuts and pat away all their bruises."

A longing as deep as the seas of Earth showed in her blue eyes.
"That--that was what I wanted. But I got side-tracked into a
profession." The longing was washed away in a film of sudden tears.

       *       *       *       *       *

McLean closed his lips even tighter. He applied one eye to the sight of
the Rangeley, now adjusted to function as a periscope. Level and
apparently free of all danger, the grim red sands swept away to the low
mountains in the distance. The air was so clear and so thin that he
could even see the ruins of the city that had been their destination
when they had left the ship. The city was a vast mass of tumbled masonry
sprawled on treeless, forgotten hills. On the sand nothing moved. Yet
death was there in front of him, and his eye had certainly passed over
it.

"The nice little foxes are all in their nice little holes," he said.

The girl made a wan effort to smile. "How are your fingers? I mean, do
they hurt much?"

"They feel like I don't have them." Grinning at his own joke, McLean
swung the sight of the Rangeley around to their desert buggy. The
over-size tires loomed up like huge rubber doughnuts sprouting
mysteriously out of the desert sand. The door of the car was invitingly
open.

"It's only a quarter of a mile," he said. "We could sprint that far. But
how could we run at all without legs?"

"We have legs," the girl said eagerly. "Let's try to make the car."
