him, loving him, longing for him? How did she feel about their first
moment together being shared by the greedy eyes of continents?

The President was speaking now, rolling sonorous sentences into the
mike, words which would officially sanction this unorthodox act of the
military, which would justify the morally unprecedented dispensing of
maid to man without benefit of--anything. Because the psychologists had
wanted it that way. Ken leaned down to whisper in her ear, "I wish I
could get you inside the ship."

She looked at him with sudden coolness. "Impatient, Major?" She turned
away quickly and he could feel her body stiffen.

Had he said something wrong? Or--the new thought was jarring disharmony:
did he represent the end of this girl's--_his_ girl's--hopes for a
conventional, happy marriage? Did she think him the altar of sacrifice,
whereupon she would accrue the moralist's scorn and, tomorrow, attract
only the lecherous? Or was it just an act? What, besides ship and
instrument operation, had they taught her?

Grimly he listened to the President, who was then extolling their merits
as though--well, as though they were some sort of laboratory specimens.
"... acute hearing, 20/10 vision ... perfect health ... highest
combination of intelligence and fast physical reactions ... exceptional
bravery and loyalty." Cheers. "... intensive training ... youngest to
receive their military ranks ... expert pilots ... _fittest humans for
this attempt_."

Stubbornly, Ken continued to hold her waist. He watched the sun sneak
around one stubby wing of the _Latecomer_. He'd need those glinting
wings to land. Land? What were the actual odds against circling the moon
and landing again on earth? That phase--and a lot of others--had never
been discussed. The speeches were over and he put the thought from his
mind. They were extending the mike to him, waiting for his farewell--or
his last words?

Abruptly, ignoring the mike, he swung Carol up the ramp and crawled in
through the port behind her.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the narrow confines she slipped out of her uniform. She glanced at
him once, quickly, then cast down her eyes. "You don't have to look, you
know."

There was a hurt in his throat. "I want to look, Carol. I don't ever
want to stop looking at you. I--" He choked off, tore his eyes from her
and hurriedly began to get out of his uniform.

Hidden from the spectators outside, they divested themselves of all but
filmy, clinging, chemically inert garb. Carol's body was sheathed in a
kind of sarong. Ken wore a short, kilt-like affair. They pulled on soft,
tough-soled sandals. The medics had insisted on this specific attire,
but the psychologists had planned it that way. Their discarded clothing
was dropped into a basket. Ken shoved it out the port, down the ramp,
slammed and bolted the hatch. Then he stared at it. Clamped to the inner
side were two knives: one was about the length of a bayonet, shaped like
a saber; the other was half that length, and straight. Both were
sheathed, with belts wrapped around checkered handles.

All his official instructions flashed through his head in an instant.
All the technical data, instrument operation, procedures, emergency
measures. There had never been mention of knives. Except--of course.
Survival training. If he were unable to bring the ship to its proper
destination, was forced down in uninhabited territory, a knife would be
essential equipment. But so would a gun, fishing tackle, matches,
clothing....

The ship's radio said, "Fourteen minutes to take-off."

Ken flung himself on the couch. Carol moved in quietly beside him.

"You understand, Carol," he said, "you're to touch no controls unless
I'm unable to."

"Yes."

"You'll handle the cameras only, but you'll keep reminding me of every
step to be taken, as though I'd forgotten, and make sure I answer
sensibly each time."

"Yes, Ken."

Yes, _Ken_. A pulse throbbed in his temple.

They watched the crowd on the screen--scattered now, far from that area
below and behind the ship which would be washed in radiation. They
listened to the radio calling off the minutes before departure. Ken
kept his thoughts on the structure of the space vessel, similar in
many ways to vastly cheaper atmosphere models he and Carol had
flown--separately--for hundreds of training hours. Behind them, and
lining the inner hull, was a light, spongy wall protecting them from the
atomic converters aft. The surrounding couch could be regulated to form
a resilient cocoon during high-G acceleration and deceleration, or
during periods of weightlessness. Forward were the controls, instruments
and hooded viewport.

Escape velocity was not needed to pull away from gravity. With atomic
engines and the new, low-mass shielding, fuel quantity was a problem of
dollars only--and none had been spared for this voyage. The
psychologists had seen to that.

"Eight minutes to take-off."

