his own murder. To the thought of his kids--and his wife--left alone out
here, hundreds of millions of miles from Earth, and real law and
order--with these lugs. These guys who had been starved emotionally, and
warped inside by raw space. Coldness crawled into John Endlich's guts,
and seemed to twist steel hooks there, making him sick. The silence of a
vacuum, and of unthinkable distances, and of ghostly remains which must
be left on this fragment of a world that had blown up, maybe fifty
million or more years ago, added its weight to John Endlich's feelings.

And for his family, he was scared. What hell could not have
accomplished, became fact. His almost suicidal impulse to inflict
violence on his tormenters was strangled, bottled-up--brutally
repressed, and left to impose the pangs of neurosis on his tormented
soul. Narrowing domesticity had won a battle.

Except, of course, that what he had already said to Alf Neely and
Friends was sufficient to start the Juggernaut that they represented,
rolling. As he picked himself and Rose up from the ground, he saw that
the miners were grimly donning their space-suits, in preparation to
their coming out of the ship to lay him low.

"Oh--tired, hunh, Pun'kin-head?" Alf Neely growled. "It don't matter,
Dutch. We'll finish you off without you liftin' a finger!"

In John Endlich the rage of intolerable insults still seethed. But there
was no question, now, of outcome between it and the brassy taste of
danger on his tongue. He knew that even knuckling down, and changing
from man to worm to take back his fighting words, couldn't do any good.
He felt like a martyr, left with his family in a Roman arena, while the
lions approached. His butchery was as good as over....

Reprieve came presumably by way of the good-sense of the pilot of the
space ship. The hold-port was closed abruptly by a mechanism that could
be operated only from the main control-board. The rocket jets of the
craft emitted a single weak burst of flame. Like a boulder grown agile
and flighty, the ship leaped from the landscape, and arced outward
toward the stars, to curve around the asteroid and disappear behind the
scene's jagged brim. The craft had gone to make its next and final
stop--among the air-domes of the huge mining camp on the other side of
Vesta--the side of torn rocks and rich radioactive ores.

But before the ship had vanished from sight, John Endlich heard Alf
Neely's grim promise in his helmet radiophones: "We'll be back tonight,
Greenhorn. Lots of times we work night-shift--when it's daytime on this
side of Vesta. We'll be free. Stick around. I'll rub what's left of you
in the dust of your claim!"

Endlich was alone, then, with the fright in his wife's eyes, the
squalling of his children, and his own abysmal disgust and worry.

For once he ceased to be a gentle parent. "Bubs! Evelyn!" he snapped.
"Shud-d-d--up-p-p!..."

The startled silence which ensued was his first personal victory on
Vesta. But the silence, itself, was an insidious enemy. It made his ears
ring. It made even his audible pulsebeats seemed to ache. It bored into
his nerves like a drill. When, after a moment, Rose spoke quaveringly,
he was almost grateful:

"What do we do, Johnny? We've still got to do what we're supposed to do,
don't we?"

Whereupon John Endlich allowed himself the luxury and the slight relief
of a torrent of silent cussing inside his head. Damn the obvious
questions of women! Damn the miners. Damn the A.H.O.--the Asteroids
Homesteaders Office--and their corny slogans and posters, meant to hook
suckers like himself! Damn his own dumb hide! Damn the mighty urge to
get drunk! Damn all the bitter circumstances that made doing so
impossible. Damn! Damn! Damn!

Finished with this orgy, he said meekly: "I guess so, Hon."

       *       *       *       *       *

All members of the Endlich family had been looking around them at the
weird Vestal landscape. Through John Endlich's mind again there flashed
a picture of what this asteroid was like. At the Asteroids Homesteaders'
School in Chicago, where his dependents and he had been given several
weeks of orientation instruction, suitable to their separate needs, he
had been shown diagrams and photographs of Vesta. Later, he had of
course seen it from space.

It was not round, like a major planet or most moons. Rather, it was like
a bomb-fragment; or even more like a shard of a gigantic broken vase. It
was several hundred miles long, and half as thick. One side of it--this
side--was curved; for it had been a segment of the surface of the
shattered planet from which all of the asteroids had come. The other
side was jagged and broken, for it had been torn from the mesoderm of
that tortured mother world.

From the desolation of his own thoughts, in which the ogre-form of Alf
Neely lurked with its pendent promise of catastrophe soon to come, and
from his own view of other desolation all around him, John Endlich was
suddenly distracted by the comments of his kids. All at once, conforming
to the changeable weather of children's natures regardless of
circumstance, their mood had once more turned bright and adventurous.

"Look, Pop," Bubs chirped, his round red face beaming now from his
helmet face-window, in spite of his undried tears. "This land all around
here was fields once! You can even see the rows of some kind of stubble!
Like corn-stubble! And over there's a--a--almost like a fence! An' up
there is hills with trees on 'em--some of 'em not even knocked over. But
everything is all dried-out and black and grey and dead! Gosh!"

"We can see all that, Dopey!" Evelyn, who was older, snapped at Bubs.
"We know that something like people lived on a regular planet here,
awful long ago. Why don't you look over the other way? There's the
house--and maybe the barn and the sheds and the old garden!"

Bubs turned around. His eyes got very big. "Oh! O-ooh-h-h!" he gasped in
wonder. "Pop! Mom! Look! Don't you see?..."

"Yeah, we see, Bubs," John Endlich answered.

For a long moment he'd been staring at those blocklike structures.
One--maybe the house--was of grey stone. It had odd, triangular windows,
which may once have been glazed. Some of the others were of a blackened
material--perhaps cellulose. Wood, that is. All of the buildings were
pushed askew, and partly crumpled from top to bottom, like great
cardboard cartons that had been half crushed.

Endlich's imagination seemed forced to follow a groove, trying to
picture that last terrible moment, fifty-million years ago. Had the
blast been caused by natural atomic forces at the heart of the planet,
as one theory claimed? Or had a great bomb, as large as an oversized
meteor, come self-propelled from space, to bury itself deep in that
ancient world? A world as big as Mars, its possible enemy--whose weird
inhabitants had been wiped out, in a less spectacular way, perhaps in
the same conflict?

Endlich's mind grabbed at that brief instant of explosion. The awful
jolt, which must have ended all consciousness, and all capacity for eyes
to see what followed. Perhaps there was a short and terrible passing of
flame. But in swift seconds, great chunks of the planet's crust must
have been hurled outward. In a moment the flame must have died,
dissipated with the suddenly vanishing atmosphere, into the cold vacuum
of the void. Almost instantly, the sky, which had been deep blue before,
must have turned to its present black, with the voidal stars blazing.
There had been no air left to sustain combustion, so buildings and trees
had not continued to burn, if there had been time at all to ignite them.
And, with the same swiftness, all remaining artifacts and surface
features of this chip of a world's crust that was Vesta, had been
plunged into the dual preservatives of the interplanetary
regions--deep-freeze and all but absolute dryness. Yes--the motion of
the few scattered molecules in space was very fast--indicating a high
temperature. But without substance to be hot, there can be no heat. And
so few molecules were there in the void, that while the concept of a
"hot" space remained true, it became tangled at once with the fact that
a _practically_ complete vacuum can have _practically_ no temperature.
Which meant--again in practice--all but absolute zero.

John Endlich knew. He'd heard the lectures at the Homesteaders' School.
Here was a ghost-land, hundreds of square miles in extent--a region that
had been shifted in a few seconds, from the full prime of life and
motion, to moveless and timeless silence. It was like the mummy of a
man. In its presence there was a chill, a revulsion, and yet a
fascination.

       *       *       *       *       *

The kids continued to jabber--more excitedly now than before. "Pop!
Mom!" Bubs urged. "Let's go look inside them buildings! Maybe the
_things_ are still there! The people, I mean. All black and dried up,
like the one in the showcase at school; four tentacles they had instead
of arms and legs, the teacher said!"

"Sure! Let's go!" Evelyn joined in. "I'm not scared to!"

Yeah, kids' tastes could be pretty gruesome. When you thought most that
you had to shelter them from horror, they were less bothered by it than
you were. John Endlich's lips made a sour line.

"Stay here, the pair of you!" Rose ordered.

"Aw--Mom--" Evelyn began to protest.

"You heard me the first time," their mother answered.

John Endlich moved to the great box, which had come with them from
Earth. The nervous tension that tore at him--unpleasant and chilling,
driving him toward straining effort--was more than the result of the
shameful and embarrassing memory of his very recent trouble with Alf
Neely and Companions, and the certainty of more trouble to come from
that source. For there was another and even worse enemy. Endlich knew
what it was--

The awful silence.

He still looked shamefaced and furious; but now he felt a gentler
sharing of circumstances. "We'll let the snooping go till later, kids,"
he growled. "Right now we gotta do what we gotta do--"

The youngsters seemed to join up with his mood. As he tore the pinchbar,
which had been conveniently attached to the side of the box, free of its
staples, and proceeded to break out supplies, their whimsical musings
fell close to what he was thinking.

"Vesta," Evelyn said. "They told us at school--remember? Vesta was the
old Roman goddess of hearth and home. Funny--hunh--Dad?"

Bubs' fancy was vivid, too. "Look, Pop!" he said again, pointing to a
ribbon of what might be concrete, cracked and crumpled as by a terrific
