
"No, uncle, I have not forgotten."

"Then why did you take the pope's letter to my brother without telling
me about it?"

Simon felt a dull heat in his face. Somewhere in the back of his mind he
had always known that Uncle Charles would want to be told first about
any messages passing between the pope and the king. But, feeling it
would be wrong, Simon had pretended to himself that he knew no such
thing.

"It was my duty to take it promptly to the king," said Simon, looking
straight ahead.

Charles suddenly stopped walking. "Simon," he said, forcing Simon to
stop, turn, and look at him.

"Simon, do not let your idea of duty make you forget your loyalty to me.
I helped raise you as a boy. I gave you this opportunity to bring honor
to your house. I will be offering you even greater opportunities."

"I have not forgotten, uncle," Simon said again.

"I do not suppose you know how to unseal and reseal a royal document?"

Simon felt his blood heat with anger.

"No, uncle." He did not feel strong enough to denounce Charles, but he
tried to put disapproval into his voice. "I have never heard of anyone
doing such a thing."

"Pas mal. Too bad." Charles's round eyes were heavy-lidded with
contempt. "Well, I must leave at once to begin squeezing the money for
this campaign out of my subjects. Especially since I have given up my
claim to Provence. I cannot wait around to see who my brother thinks
should be pope. I am sure he will make a good choice."

"I am sure he will," said Simon frostily.

_I pray God it is not de Verceuil himself._

Again the heavy blow on his shoulder, both comradely and threatening.
"Well, then. In the future when you have important news, make sure I am
the first one to hear it."

Simon felt hotter still. Uncle Charles was supposedly helping him win
back his honor, and yet was proposing that he betray the king's trust.
He had admired Uncle Charles all his life because he seemed to be
everything a great baron should--commanding, strong, warlike,
victorious, loyal to the king, the Church, and the pope. But he had
always had the uneasy feeling that Charles d'Anjou was not a _good_ man
in the sense that King Louis was. And he had always kept in the back of
his mind his mother's warning, _He uses people_. He had felt that unease
strongly over a year ago, the day Charles asked him to lead the Tartars'
military escort. Now he knew there was good reason for that uneasiness.

"Yes, uncle." Simon had no intention of obeying, but since Charles had
no right to ask such a thing, there was no harm in misleading him. After
a year in Italy and all he had been through, Simon found he feared his
Uncle Charles less than he had. And trusted him less.

And now, he thought, it would be back to Italy. Back to see his efforts
bear fruit, as the alliance of Christians and Tartars became a reality.
Perhaps he would escort the Tartars to France, to King Louis, so they
could draw up their war plans together.

But, best of all, he would seek out Sophia in Perugia. He would propose
marriage to her again. Now she would believe him, now that she'd had
time to think about everything he had said to her. Sophia. Seeing her in
his mind, he felt as if he walked among the angels.




LVIII


Manfred von Hohenstaufen sat at a table at the far end of the colonnaded
audience chamber, his pale blond hair gleaming in the candlelight.

"Come forward," he called to Daoud and Lorenzo. He beckoned to them, the
wide sleeve of his green tunic falling away from his arm.

Their booted feet echoed on the long floor of polished pink marble.
Daoud's stomach felt hollow. He _must_ persuade Manfred to carry the war
into the north at once.

A dark green velvet cloth, hanging to the floor, covered the table at
which the king of southern Italy and Sicily sat. The tabletop was strewn
with pens and open rolls of parchment. Two chamberlains in dark brown
tunics hovered at Manfred's back. He wrote quickly on one parchment
after another, and handed them to his two assistants. Even though it was
a sunny morning outside, this chamber had few windows, and Manfred, to
see his work, needed candelabra at each end of the table.

When Daoud and Lorenzo reached his table, he waved in dismissal to the
chamberlains, and they bowed and left, carrying armloads of scrolls.
Seeing Manfred at work, Daoud felt a powerfully protective impulse
toward him. Manfred was not _his_ king, but he had become a worthy ally,
and Daoud was prepared to fight Manfred's enemies. To die, if need be,
fighting them.

"An old friend of yours wants to greet you, David," said Manfred, his
bright smile flashing.

Daoud saw no one. In a candlelit alcove behind Manfred hung a painting
of a red-bearded man in mail armor partly covered by a black and gold
surcoat. It was not painted on the wall, but seemed to be on a separate
piece of wood with a gilded border, which was hung on the wall. The man
looked a bit like Manfred, and Daoud suspected it must be his father,
the famous Emperor Frederic. There was an idolatrous look about the
painting and the way it was displayed that made Daoud uneasy. It
reminded him a bit of the saint's image Sophia had kept in her room at
Orvieto.

"David of Trebizond!" came a cry from beside Manfred. Manfred reached
down and helped a bent, monkeylike figure scramble up to stand on the
table.

"God blesses our meeting, Daoud ibn Abdallah--this time," said the dwarf
Erculio.

He grinned at Daoud through his spiky black mustache. At the sight of
him Daoud winced at the memory of all the pain this little man had
inflicted on him. He still felt some of that pain, especially in his
feet, despite the tawidh's hastening of the healing process. But Daoud
also felt a sudden warmth that reminded him of the first time he had
seen the little man, here at Lucera. Deformed in body and soul, required
to do unspeakable things, Erculio had still found a way to serve God.

"If my lord Daoud wishes to kill me, I am at his service," said Erculio
in Arabic. "I have finished the work our sultan sent me to do in Italy."

Daoud found himself smiling in spite of himself. "You would have saved
me from a mutilation worse than death, Erculio. I cannot hate you for
that. You did your work well."

Erculio looked like a spider when he bowed, his head touching the
tabletop, his elbows bent upward. "I am my lord's slave."

He was the more admirable, Daoud thought, because despite being so
deformed, he had found important work to do in the world.

"How is your former master, d'Ucello, faring with the Sienese in
Orvieto?" he asked Erculio.

Erculio spread his hands wide. "Alas! The podesta is dead."

"Dead?" It was hard to believe. Daoud heard Lorenzo's startled grunt
beside him.

"The Contessa di Monaldeschi never forgave him for surrendering to the
Sienese without a fight," Erculio said. "Vittorio, the Monaldeschi heir,
stabbed him to death in his office and then escaped into the hills. He
is probably seeking asylum with the Church leaders in Perugia."

"I would rather have heard that d'Ucello killed Vittorio," said Lorenzo.
"Then there would be some sense in the world."

Daoud felt a pang of sorrow, and was surprised at himself. After all,
had not d'Ucello arrested him and subjected him to a day and a night of
horrible torment, with the threat of worse hanging over him? But he
remembered the podesta as a man of rare ability, who would have ruled
Orvieto well, given a chance. His death was a waste.

Manfred said, "Erculio has told me of your arrest and your sufferings at
the hands of the podesta of Orvieto. I want to hear more about that. But
let us speak now of Perugia. What is Ugolini doing?"

"Lorenzo and I escorted Cardinal Ugolini to Perugia and left him there,"
Daoud said. "He planned to block the election of a new pope by keeping
the Italian cardinals united behind himself." He paused a moment. Now
should he bring up his conviction that Manfred must march northward
before a new pope was elected?

But while he hesitated, Manfred spoke. "What of Sophia Karaiannides?"
Manfred looked sharply at Daoud, the sapphire eyes intent. "Why did you
not bring her back here with you?"

Jealous anger stabbed Daoud. Sophia had spoken little of Manfred, but
Daoud had long ago realized that she and Manfred must have been lovers.
He had decided not to think about that. Now Manfred was wondering what
had happened between Sophia and Daoud, and perhaps wanted Sophia back;
Daoud could read it in Manfred's tone and the look in his eyes.

Daoud tried to see Manfred as Sophia might have. Intensely--one might
almost say blindingly--handsome, strong, graceful, his brilliant mind
attractively decked out with elegance and wit, learned but carrying his
learning lightly, skilled in all the courtly arts and graces. What woman
could resist such a man?

But Manfred must have tired of her, as such men did, who had access to
any woman they wanted. Perhaps his queen, or some new love of his, had
insisted that Sophia be sent away. And once she was gone, he had
realized what he had lost.

_Too late now, Manfred._

But, he reminded himself, he must not let Sophia come between himself
and Manfred.

Daoud put out his hands, palms up. "Sophia is with Cardinal Ugolini. The
cardinal's courage fails him at times. We thought it best for one of us
to stay and give him strength. And Sophia can help him run his household
and entertain the men of influence he must see."

Manfred nodded, a small smile twitching his blond mustache. "Yes, she
would be good at that."

Daoud thought of Simon de Gobignon and felt a flash of hatred for him.
But he must report about him, too.

"She has captured the heart of a young French nobleman, the Count de
Gobignon, who commands the Tartars' military escort. When Charles
d'Anjou invades Italy, de Gobignon will surely be one of his captains."

"_When_ Charles d'Anjou invades Italy? And a moment ago you said _when_
a pope of the French party is elected."

Daoud was about to reply, but Manfred raised a hand for silence. He rose
from his high-back chair. With a glance, as if for reassurance, at the
portrait of the red-bearded man hanging behind him, he strode out in
front of the table with his hands clasped behind his back. Daoud and
Lorenzo made way for him. He walked the length of the marble floor to
the door at the end of the hall. The dwarf Erculio sank down
cross-legged on the tabletop, his long arms clasped around his knees,
watching Manfred sombrely.

Daoud prayed, _Oh, God, help him to judge wisely_.

"King Louis has always held Charles back," Manfred said, turning
suddenly to face Daoud and Lorenzo. "Louis does not believe that the
pope should set Christian rulers against one another."

_And help me to advise him well._

Daoud gathered his thoughts. The success of his mission in Italy
depended on persuading Manfred to choose the right course. His heart
beat harder. He tried to speak with all the assurance he could muster.

"Sire, there are enough French cardinals to elect the next pope. They
are bound to choose a man who will give King Louis what he wants--the
alliance between Christians and Tartars. And that same pope will surely
offer your crown to Charles d'Anjou as Urban did. If Louis has the
alliance he wants above all else, he will not stand in Charles's way."

Manfred sighed and turned away. "So, you think war is certain."

_Accept it!_ Daoud cried out to Manfred in his heart. _Hesitate no
longer._

"Yes, once a pope is elected," Daoud said. "But you can act before that
happens. Use the time Ugolini is gaining for you. March north now, Sire,
while your enemies are without a head. Join forces with your Ghibellino
allies in northern Italy--Siena, Florence, Pisa, and the rest. Surround
the College of Cardinals and you can force them to elect a pope of your
choice. Or scatter them. Three-fourths of them are needed for the
election of a pope. You might be able to stop the election altogether."

Manfred's back remained turned. Daoud looked at Lorenzo. He could not
read Lorenzo's expression; the Sicilian's mouth was hidden beneath his
grizzled mustache. But Lorenzo shook his head slightly, as if to say
that Daoud was not having the effect he wanted. At that, Daoud felt
himself waver toward despair. He commanded himself to stand firm.

Manfred walked back to the table. He stood before Daoud, his hands still
clasped behind him. His face wore a haunted look. The cheerful
self-confidence Daoud had always seen before was gone.

"The north is a quagmire this time of year."

"For your enemies as well as for you," Daoud said. "And they do
not--yet--have anything like the strength you can muster. You can call
up your vassals here in a few weeks' time. When Charles gets a summons
from the new pope, he will then have to gather his troops in France and
cross the Alps into Italy. By the time he is ready, you could have all
of Italy under your control. And there would be no pope to give
legitimacy to his invasion."

Manfred snorted and turned away. Daoud, Erculio, and Lorenzo watched him
pace.

He came back and said, "No. I do not trust those you call my allies in
the north. They opposed the pope, but neither do they want to be ruled
by me. If I were to try to make myself king of Italy, they would turn
against me."

Probably true, Daoud thought, remembering the reluctance of Lapo di
Stefano, the heir of Siena, to recognize Manfred's kingship over all of
Italy.

Baibars would be in the north like lightning, though. He would welcome
the bad weather, because it would impede his foes while he himself would
simply not _let_ his own troops slow down because of it. And if any of
his allies even thought of betraying him, he would kill them. But that
was Baibars. This king, Daoud remembered, had at first not wanted to
help him with his mission in Orvieto because it might provoke a war.

Manfred, he saw, kept raising objections because he really wanted to be
left alone to enjoy what he had. He showed no interest whatever in
conquering all of Italy. He was the enlightened ruler of a civilized,
prosperous land, and he probably would not go to war until the enemy was
on his border.

Though Daoud felt for Manfred and his wish to be at peace, he knew that
no ruler could refuse the duty of war. Peace could be achieved only by
conquering the enemies of peace. Every great ruler of Islam from the
Prophet to Salah ad-Din and Baibars had been a warrior on horseback.

Daoud's heart felt like a lump of lead. He saw so clearly that with one
stroke they could end the danger of a union between Tartars and
Christians and save Manfred's kingdom.

He sighed inwardly. He had tried his best and failed.

He had no choice but to accept that. But acceptance was not surrender.
You surrendered only to the will of God. You accepted things as they
were, but struggled to make them better.

_The potter does not sigh for better clay, but works with what God puts
in his hand_, Sheikh Saadi said.

Manfred turned away from Daoud, walked around the table with another
glance at the portrait, and sat down. He frowned at a parchment that lay
before him, as if wishing to end the conversation.

Daoud said, "Then, Sire, let us at least prepare to defend ourselves as
best we can." He untied a small leather bag from his belt and went over
to the desk. Manfred looked up, his blond eyebrows lifted.

Daoud said, "Allow the sultan of the lands of Islam, who feels himself a
brother to you, to come to your aid with this gift." He upended the
leather bag over the table, and a flood of tiny lights spilled out.
Erculio gasped and drew back from the small pile of precious stones.

Manfred stared in wonder. "This is enough to pay and equip enough
knights and men-at-arms to double the size of my army. Your sultan gives
with a great heart." He looked at Daoud with more warmth that Daoud had
ever seen in those cold blue eyes. "Or is it in fact you who give?"

"My lord the sultan commanded me to use this wealth carefully, and to
help you if your enemies should attack."

Manfred said, "These, then, remain of the jewels I sent you with to
Orvieto? Twelve? You are a remarkably good steward, Daoud. I should put
you in charge of my treasury."

Daoud inclined his head respectfully. "I hope you will put me where I
can serve you better, Sire."

"And where is that?"

"Sire, my work here is far from done. Give me a unit of your army to
command. Let them be, if you permit, fighting men of my own faith."

_And I may yet kill the Tartars and rescue Rachel._

Manfred's face fairly glowed. He picked up one of the jewels from his
table, a large precious topaz of a warm golden color. He took Daoud's
hand, laid the rare stone on his palm, and closed his fingers over it.

"This is yours. Use it to recruit and supply a troop of your own in my
service. They should count themselves blessed by God to have a Mameluke
to train and lead them."

"It is I who am blessed," Daoud said.

He looked at the stone in his hand. It was a shade lighter than the
color of Sophia's eyes.

He bowed again to Manfred. At last he could fight as he preferred to,
leading troops in open battle. As a Mameluke.

Smiling to himself, he stroked his chin.

_And at last I can let my beard grow._

       *       *       *       *       *

_A letter from Emir Daoud ibn Abdallah to El Malik Baibars
al-Bunduqdari, from Lucera, 19th day of Rabia, A.H. 663:_

    Next to the Byzantine Empire this kingdom of southern Italy and
    Sicily is the most civilized of Christian nations. That is to say, a
    Muslim might almost be comfortable here. In fact, many are.

    The chief interests of King Manfred's courtiers are falconry,
    poetry, dalliance with beautiful women, and philosophical
    disputation. My lord will note that I do not mention warfare.

    King Manfred seems to hope that some intervention by God or fate or
    chance will make it unnecessary for him to take the field against
    Charles d'Anjou.

    Christian warriors generally prefer to wait for their enemies to
    come to them, reasoning that a small force of defenders can defeat a
    large force of attackers. That is why there are castles everywhere
    in Europe, even in the cities of Europe. Their wars against us, that
    they call crusades, are an exception, and perhaps, too, they have
    learned something from the failure of those invasions.

    But this is also an exceptional moment. The Guelfi and the French
    are not ready to fight, and Manfred could win everything if he were
    to act now.

    I tried to persuade him to invade northern Italy and bring the
    Papacy under his control, but he would have none of it. So we must
    await Charles, and defeat him when he comes. After that Italy will
    lie open to Manfred. Then for his own future safety he will have to
    place the pope under his influence.

    But how I long for a day like that when I rode behind my lord
    Baibars to destroy the Tartars on the field at the Well of Goliath.

    It appears to me now that God intends the destiny of the Dar
    al-Islam to hinge on one great battle. If Manfred defeats Charles
    d'Anjou in Italy, the Franks will withdraw to lick their wounds. The
    French losses will deprive Louis of the troops he needs for his
    crusade against us. But, if Manfred falls, then the pope and the
    Franks, made greedy by victory, will be eager to join forces with
    the Tartars and extend their empire into our sacred lands of Islam.
    I will do my best to see that the Franks do not defeat Manfred, and
    if I fail I hope not to live to see what comes after.

    All is in the hands of God, the All-Powerful, the Compassionate.




LIX


Cold and steady, the rain drummed on Simon's wide-brimmed leather hat.
His wool cloak had been soaking up water all day, and lay heavy as an
iron plate on his body. It was not yet sunset, he knew, but the rain so
darkened the streets of Perugia that he despaired of finding his
destination.

He rode along the wide main street hunched over against the chill rain,
Sordello and Thierry on either side, their two spare horses and their
baggage mule trailing behind. People hurried past without looking up.

"There it is!" Sordello shouted through the rain.

Simon's first thought on seeing the Baglioni palace was, _If only we had
been in a place like that when the Filippeschi attacked_.

Rain and darkness made it hard for him to see it in detail, but lighted
torches and candles glowing inside the windows limned its general shape.
The square central tower loomed high above the surrounding city, its
stone face ruddy in the glow from the upper windows of four cylindrical
corner turrets. The palace was surrounded by a high outer wall, and
Simon supposed there was an expanse of bare ground between the wall and
the main building. To him, the palace looked more like a great French
country chateau than a noble Italian family's town house.

Streamers of purple cloth, betokening mourning, were draped from one
turret of the gatehouse to the other, the rain-soaked ends flapping
across the arch of the gateway.

The tall wooden gate, sheltered from the rain by a pointed arch, was
adorned with painted carvings of the lion, symbol of the Guelfi, and the
griffin, symbol of the city of Perugia. Simon and Sordello pounded on
the gate, and men-at-arms admitted them. Simon unstrapped a flat leather
case from his saddle and then left Thierry to unload and stable the
animals. He and Sordello hurried through the rain to the front door of
the palace.

Simon identified himself to the steward, who conducted him, with much
solicitude about the bad weather, to the sala maggiore of the palace.
In the great hall, Simon was glad to see a fire of logs burning on a
stone hearth under a chimney opening. He headed for it, throwing his
sopping cloak and leather hat to the stone floor. Let the servants pick
them up. Riding all day in the rain had made him irritable.

"Simon!" Friar Mathieu was shuffling toward him, leaning heavily on a
walking stick. The old Franciscan's painfully slow movements alarmed
him. Simon put his arms about him, but gently.

"Are you feeling worse, Father?"

"The weather is reminding my bones that they were cracked not long ago.
I have a fire on the hearth in my room upstairs. Come up with me and you
can get out of those wet clothes."

Simon sent Sordello to the kitchen and, still carrying the leather case,
followed Friar Mathieu up a long flight of stone steps.

Wrapped in a blanket, seated on a bench before the fire in Friar
Mathieu's chamber with a cup of hot spiced wine in his hand, he began to
feel more comfortable, and he told the old priest about his journey back
to Italy from Avignon.

"King Louis dismissed me on the twentieth of September. I paid fifty
livres for a fast galley to Livorno. Then we rode our horses almost to
death through the hills to get here. It took us less than two weeks.
Very good time, but not good enough."

Simon paused. He remembered the old pope so vividly, writing letters
furiously and dispatching them hither and yon, feeling surrounded by
enemies on all sides and knowing he was going to die. He had so wanted
to bring the Holy Father good news. Now Pope Urban was no more, and
Simon was deeply disappointed.

_But surely he is happier out of all this turmoil. He is with God and at
peace now._

"And what news do you bring?" said Friar Mathieu.

Simon leaned toward him enthusiastically. "The pope's last wish has been
granted! King Louis has agreed to let his brother Charles make war on
King Manfred."

Instead of looking delighted as Simon had expected, Friar Mathieu
surprised him by sighing and staring into the fire.

"Are you not pleased?" Simon prodded him.

"Pleased about a war?" Friar Mathieu's eyes were sad under his
snow-white brows.

Simon felt as if his chair had been pulled out from under him and he had
been dumped on the floor. His whole being had been focused on bringing
good news to Perugia.

"But Father Mathieu, this means that the alliance of Tartars and
Christians is approved. By Pope Urban, anyway."

Now that Pope Urban was dead, did that mean anything? He hesitated,
confused.

Friar Mathieu sighed again. "I want the Tartars to embrace Christianity.
I want the holy places liberated. But this warfare in Italy seems to me
a false turning in the road. However--neither you nor I can stop the
march of events. What is it you are carrying?"

Simon unbuckled the fastenings of the leather case and took out a
package wrapped in silk. "Two letters written by King Louis. One was for
Pope Urban. The other is for de Verceuil if Pope Urban should die."

"You will have trouble delivering either one."

"The one for Pope Urban I will keep as the king ordered me, until a new
pope is elected. But the other one--why? Where is de Verceuil?"

"Locked away with the other cardinals in the Cathedral of Perugia,
trying to make himself pope."

The thought of Paulus de Verceuil as supreme head of the Church made
Simon's lip curl. "Pope? Not him!"

"He has the support of about half the French cardinals," Friar Mathieu
said, shaking his white beard. "The cardinals are supposed to be in
absolute seclusion, with no messages going in or out, but the servants
who bring them their meals report things in both directions. The other
cardinals lean to Gerard de Tracey, cardinal-bishop of Soissons. A
former inquisitor." Friar Mathieu made a sour face.

"What of the Italians?"

"Amazingly, despite the rumors about his heresy and sorcery, Ugolini has
four Italian cardinals voting for him. The servants say he has promised
large sums of money to those four. The other three Italian votes are
going to Piacenza. That must include Ugolini's vote, since the rules
forbid a cardinal to vote for himself. Voting for old Piacenza is just a
gesture, of course. He probably has less than a year of life left to
him. But until one or two Italians can be persuaded to vote for a French
candidate, no Frenchman can get the necessary two thirds."

"Are there not fourteen French cardinals to seven Italians?" Simon
asked.

"Yes, but right now there are only twenty cardinals in conclave
altogether. One of the French cardinals is in England on a diplomatic
mission, sent by Pope Urban before his death. So, even united, the
thirteen French would be one short of two thirds. And they are far from
united. It could take years to elect a new pope."

Years! Simon was horrified. What a disaster! Without a pope, the
question of the alliance would languish. The Tartar ambassadors might
yet be assassinated, or just die. Hulagu Khan might die. Even King
Louis, God forbid, might die, and the next king would probably not be
interested in crusading.

Simon, for his part, had pinned his hopes for the restoration of his
family honor on the success of the Tartar alliance. A new pope must be
elected, and soon.

He carefully took the two scrolls out of their silk wrappings. Both were
tied with red ribbons and sealed with blobs of red wax which King Louis
had stamped with his personal seal, a shield bearing fleurs-de-lis.
Simon held up the one addressed "His Eminence, Cardinal Paulus de
Verceuil."

"We must try to get this letter to de Verceuil at once. It names King
Louis's choice for the next pope. It could end the deadlock."

Father Mathieu stroked his white beard thoughtfully. "Exactly the sort
of letter the rule against messages was instituted to keep out. A king
attempting to influence a papal election." The old Franciscan took the
scroll in one hand and tapped it against the palm of the other. "But I
think for the good of the Church and for the success of our own mission
we had better get this letter to de Verceuil at once. King Louis's
choice cannot be worse than de Verceuil, de Tracey, or Ugolini."

"Yes!" said Simon eagerly. "But how do we get the letter to him?"

The old Franciscan pushed himself to his feet. It hurt Simon to see how
slow and painful his movements were. Damn that devil in black who had
tried to kill the Tartars!

The Tartars! He had thought they were well guarded enough, and that it
was safe to leave them while he carried Urban's letter and the king's
reply. But if the question of the alliance were to drag on, the foes of
the alliance would try again to strike at them. Fear clutched at his
heart.

"Are the Tartars here in this palace?" he called after Friar Mathieu,
who was hobbling out of the room holding King Louis's scroll.

"Oh, yes. The Baglioni family have given them a whole quarter of the
palace. They are well enough, though they hate being trapped indoors by
the weather and by the need to keep them under guard. John Chagan has
with him a young Jewish girl named Rachel, whom he kidnapped from a
brothel in Orvieto. The girl was an orphan, and she has been terribly
abused. She is virtually their prisoner."

Simon's mouth twisted. "And we want to ally ourselves with such men.
How can such things go on in the same city with the Sacred College?"

