
Two of the men....

It wasn't quite clear to her, even yet, what had happened. They'd used
the normal drive to get clear of regular solar shipping lanes. The
warning bell had rung that they were about to warp into hyperspace, a
mechanism which canceled out distance and made the trip in apparent time
no more than an overnight jaunt to Mars. There was a grinding
shudder--then a twisted ship which looked as if some giant had taken a
wet rag and torqued it to squeeze out the water. Lt. Harper and Sam had
got her out of her cabin, and finally into the lifeboat which was only
partly crippled.

The other two men of the crew....

She zipped up the front of her coveralls with a crisp gesture, as if to
snap off the vision. She would show no weakness in front of these two
men. She had no weakness to show!

"All right, gentlemen," she said incisively to their backs. "Now. What
is it I must be told?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lt. Harper pointed to the ball of Earth so close ahead. It was huge,
almost filling the sky in front of them. The misty atmosphere blurred
outlines slightly, but she could make out the Eastern halves of North
and South America clearly. The Western portions were still in dim
darkness.

"See anything wrong, Miss Kitty?" the lieutenant asked quietly.

She looked more closely, sensing a possible trap in his question, a
revealment of her lack of knowledge.

"I'm not an authority on celestial geography," she said cautiously,
academically. "But obviously the maps I've seen were not accurate in
showing the true continental proportions." She pointed to a small chart
hanging on the side wall. "This map shows Florida, for example, a much
longer peninsula than it actually is. A number of things like that. I
don't see anything else wrong, but, of course, it's not my field of
knowledge."

Lt. Harper looked at her approvingly, the kind of look she gave a bright
pupil who'd been especially discerning.

"Only it's not the map that's wrong, Miss Kitty," he said. "It is _my_
field of knowledge, and I've seen those continental outlines hundreds of
times. They always corresponded to the map ... before."

She looked at him without comprehension.

"Not only that," Sam Eade entered the conversation. "As soon as we were
clear of the wreck, Lt. Harper took a fix on stars and constellations.
He's an astrogator. He knows his business. And they were wrong, too.
Just a little wrong, here and there, but enough. And even more than
that. On a tight beam, I should have been able to make a connection with
Earth headquarters on this set. And I haven't yet got communication, and
we know there's nothing wrong with this set."

"Sam knows his business, too, Miss Kitty," Lt. Harper said. "If he can't
get communication, it's because there isn't any."

She looked wide-eyed from one to the other. For once, she was more
concerned with a problem than with concealing her ignorance about it.

"It means," the lieutenant said, as if he were answering a question she
hadn't yet asked, "that the Earth we are returning to is not the Earth
we left."

"I don't understand," she gasped.

"There's a theory," Lt. Harper answered slowly. "Heretofore it has been
considered only a mathematical abstraction, and having no counterpart in
reality. The theory of multiple dimensions." She looked at him closely,
and in her habitual ambivalence of thought reflected that he sounded
much more intelligent than she had suspected.

"I've read about that," she answered.

He looked relieved, and threw a quick look at Sam. Apparently he had
underestimated her intelligence, too--in spite of all her degrees.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We never thought it could be real," he emphasized. "But the theory was
that multiple universes lay side by side, perhaps each an instant's time
away from the other. The only thing I can see is that some flaw in the
space warper threw us out of our dimension into another one closely
adjacent--not far enough for things to be totally different, just
different enough that the duplication isn't identical. It's Earth, but
it's not our Earth. It's a New Earth, one we don't know anything about."

"In another few hours, we'll be entering the atmosphere," Sam put in,
"and we don't know what we'll find. We thought you ought to know."

She flared in exasperation at the simple assumption of male arrogance.

"Of course I should know!" she snapped back. "I am not one of your
little bits of blonde, empty-headed fluff to be protected by strong
males! I should have been told immediately!"

Lt. Harper looked at Sam with a broad grin. It was amusement, but it was
more--a confirmation that they could depend on her to take it in her
stride--an approval. Apparently, they had discussed more things about
her than she'd overheard, while she slept. He didn't turn off the grin
when he looked directly at her.

"What could you have done about it, if we had told you, Miss Kitty?" he
asked mildly.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was not the same Earth. The charts and maps had not been wrong. Her
tentative theory that perhaps there were vision flaws in the plastic
nose window which had not stood up.

The continents, the lakes, the rivers--the topography really was
distorted. Now there was the Mississippi River, one spot swinging rather
too widely to the East. The Great Lakes were one huge inland sea. The
Gulf of Mexico swung high up into what had once been Alabama and
Georgia.

There was no New Orleans, shipping center of the world, headquarters of
Space.

There were no cities anywhere up and down the Mississippi. Where St.
Louis should have been, there was virgin forest. As they dropped down
into the upper reaches of atmosphere, experiencing the familiar and
sometimes nauseating reference shift from ahead to below, there had been
no New York to the East, no San Francisco to the West. There had been no
Boulder Dam, no Tennessee Valley project, no continuous hydroelectric
installations running the entire length of the Mississippi, where the
strength of the Father of the Waters had finally been harnessed for Man.
There were no thin lines of highways, no paint-brush strokes of smoke
against the canvas of the Gulf of Mexico to denote steamers, for atomic
power was still not available to all.

On this New Earth, Man could not yet have reached a state of complex
technology.

And as they dropped lower still, through their telescope sights, they
saw no canoes on the river or the feeder streams. They saw no huts along
the river shore, no thin streamers of wood smoke from huts hidden under
the trees along the bayous. New Earth was purple and blue, then shading
into green as they dropped lower. They sighted a deer drinking at the
edge of a pool.

But there was no trace of Man.

"If there are no scars, no defacements upon this forest primeval," Miss
Kitty said didactically, "then Man has not evolved on New Earth." Since
it was spoken in the tone of an axiom, and there was no evidence to
refute it, neither of the two men felt like arguing the matter.
