pass muster. As far as I could see, I looked like almost any college
student.

There wasn't anything I could do about my hair. It hadn't grown at all.
It was a mass of short, black ringlets that fit my head like a tight
cap. But there was no use worrying about that.

Mrs. Mara came down the hall just as I was locking the door. She looked
hurt when she saw me turn the key.

"You don't have to do that in my house," she said. "There's nobody would
think of going into your room."

"Of course not," I said. "It's just force of habit, you know."

I smiled and hoped she would pass it off as lightly as I seemed to. The
last thing in the world I wanted was to have her get suspicious and go
prowling about my room. I felt easier when she smiled back at me.

"Sure. And where are you off to, now?"

"Swimming," I said. "That is, if I can get into the college pool."

"Just act like you own the place and nobody will ask you any questions,"
she said, and winked at me.

That was exactly the way I had figured it, but it was good to have
reassurance. Theoretically, no one was supposed to use the pool who was
not a member of the faculty or student body. Enforcement, however, was
lax, and the chances were that nobody would ask to see my card.

Mrs. Mara and I were right. The day was hot, and the men who were
supposed to be watching the entrance were sitting in the shade of the
stands and quenching their thirst with soft drinks. I walked right in,
looking straight ahead.

It was a large pool, used for skating in winter, and there were stands
built on three sides. Instead of going down to the locker rooms, I
merely slipped out of my shirt and trousers, rolled them into a ball and
dropped them beside the pool. A good many others had also worn their
swim suits underneath.

Then I looked around for the girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was down near the other end of the pool, talking to some people. As
I came toward them she left the group and climbed up on the diving
board.

Against her white bathing suit, her small trim figure showed golden. Her
hair was almost the same color. She looked like the bathing suit models
I had seen in store windows. The golden model came to life as she left
the board in a high, arching dive. She hit the water with hardly a
splash.

"Nice stuff, Beth," one of the men said as she swam toward them.

"Was it really, Ken?" the girl asked.

He nodded as he said it was. They began to talk about diving and
swimming. The man called Ken did most of the talking. He said he wanted
to show her a few things about her swimming stroke.

He jumped off the edge of the pool and swam across and then turned
around and swam back. Everybody stopped what they were doing and watched
him. When he clambered out he smiled in a very superior way.

"See what I mean? You've got to use your legs more."

"You splash too much," I said.

It was the only way I could think of at the moment to get into the
conversation. But it got me in. Everybody was looking at me as though I
were out of my mind. Ken sneered.

"Oh, I do?"

"Don't take it offensively," I said. "But you really do. Also your arm
motion is not good."

       *       *       *       *       *

He was so angry that it was almost funny. Now I was sorry I had spoken,
because the girl might be a close friend of his and she might take
offense.

"Maybe you would like to show me how it's done," Ken said hotly. "I
could make it worth your while. Suppose we race two lengths. For ten
dollars."

"That's not fair, Ken," the girl said.

I could see that she didn't like the way he was taking it, so that was
all right. But I hesitated. I didn't have ten dollars. On the other
hand, I had been watching these people swim.

It was an easy way to make ten dollars, since I had no other means of
getting money. There was the hundred dollars which I had taken from a
man on the road the day I came into town, but that money was gone.

"Come on," I said, and started walking to the end of the pool.

When I got there I bent and dipped one foot into the water. It was
colder than the water I had been used to, and not quite as heavy,
somehow. I pulled my foot out quickly and everybody laughed, except the
girl.

"This isn't right," she said. She turned to me. "You don't know who Ken
is, apparently."

"You are very kind," I said. I smiled at her and she smiled back. She
had blue eyes.

By that time the pool had been cleared. Everybody was out of the water
and standing at the edge. Ken said, "Whenever you're ready."

