"The manager--" haughtily--"is asleep. I am the night clerk."

"O.K., then. You tell those hundred girls of yours to hurry. Don't scare
them, but have you heard about the prison break?"

"Heard about it? It's all I've been hearing. They--they want to stay and
see what happens."

"Don't let 'em!" roared Pitchblend. "Use any excuse you have to. Tell
'em we got centrifigal-upigal and perihelion-peritonitus over here at
the spaceport, or any darn thing. Tell 'em if they want to blast off
tonight, they'll have to get down here quick. You got it?"

"Yes, but--"

"Then do it." Pitchblend hung up.

The escape bell tolled a fourth time.

       *       *       *       *       *

His name was House Bartock, he had killed two guards in his escape, and
he was as desperate as a man could be. He had been sentenced to
Interstelpen for killing a man on Mars in this enlightened age when
capital punishment had been abolished. Recapture thus wouldn't mean
death, but the prison authorities at Interstelpen could make their own
interpretations of what life-in-prison meant. If House Bartock allowed
himself to be retaken, he would probably spend the remaining years of
his life in solitary confinement.

He walked quickly now, but he did not run. He had had an impulse to run
when the first escape bell had tolled, but that would have been foolish.
Already he was on the outskirts of Triton City because they had not
discovered his escape for two precious hours. He could hole up in the
city, lose himself somewhere. But that would only be temporary.

They would find him eventually.

Or, he could make his way to the spaceport. He had money in his
pocket--the dead guard's. He had a guardsman's uniform on, but stripped
of its insignia it looked like the jumper and top-boots of any spaceman.
He had false identification papers, if needed, which he had worked on
for two years in the prison printshop where the prison newspaper was
published. He had....

Suddenly he flattened himself on the ground to one side of the road,
hugging the gravel and hardly daring to breathe. He'd heard a vehicle
coming from the direction of Interstelpen. It roared up, making the
ground vibrate; its lights flashed; it streaked by trailing a jet of
fire.

House Bartock didn't move until the afterglow had faded. Then he got up
and walked steadily along the road which led from Interstelpen to Triton
City.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Girls! Hurry with your packing! Girls!"

Sighing, Matilda Moriarity subsided. The girls, obviously, were in no
hurry. That would have been out of character.

Matilda Moriarity sighed again. She was short, stocky, fifty-two years
old and the widow of a fabulously wealthy interstellar investment
broker. She had a passion for classical music and, now that her husband
had been dead three years, she had decided to exercise that passion. But
for Matilda Moriarity, a very out-going fifty-two, exercising it had
meant passing it on. The outworlds, Matilda had told her friends, lacked
culture. The highest form of culture, for Matilda, was classical music.
Very well. She would bring culture to the outworlds.

       *       *       *       *       *

Triton was her first try and even now sometimes she had to pinch herself
so she'd know the initial attempt had been a smashing success. She
didn't delude herself completely. It had been a brainstorm selecting
only girls--and pretty young things, at that--for the Interstellar
Symphony. On a world like Triton, a world which played host to very few
women and then usually to the hard types who turned up on any frontier
in any century, a symphony of a hundred pretty girls was bound to be a
success.

But the music, Matilda Moriarity told herself. They had listened to the
music. If they wanted to see the girls in their latest Earth-style
evening gowns, they had to listen to the music. And they had listened
quietly, earnestly, apparently enjoying it. The symphony had remained on
Triton longer than planned, playing every night to a full house. Matilda
had had the devil's own time chaperoning her girls, but that was to be
expected. It was their first taste of the outworlds; it was the
outworlds' first taste of them. The widow Moriarity had had her hands
full, all right. But secretly, she had enjoyed every minute of it.

"They say the bell means a prison break!" First Violin squealed
excitedly. First Violin was twenty-two, an Earth girl named Jane
Cummings and a student at the conservatory on Sirtus Major on Mars, but
to the widow Moriarity she was, and would remain, First Violin. That
way, calling the girls after their instruments, the widow Moriarity
could convince herself that her symphonic music had been of prime
importance on Triton, and her lovely young charges of secondary
importance.

"How many times do I have to tell you to hurry?"

"But these gowns--"

"Will need a pressing when you return to Mars anyway."

"And a prison break. I never saw a prison break before. It's so
exciting."

"You're not going to see it. You're just going to hear about it. Come
on, come on, all of you."

At that moment the room phone rang.

"Hello?" the widow Moriarity said.

"This is Jenkins, ma'am, desk. The spaceport called a few minutes ago.
I'm not supposed to frighten you, but, well, they're rather worried
about the prison break. The escaped convict, they figure, will head for
the spaceport. Disguised, he could--"

"Let him try masquerading as a member of _my_ group!" the widow
Moriarity said with a smile.

"All the same, if you could hurry--"

"We are hurrying, young man."

"Yes, ma'am."

The widow Moriarity hung up. "Gi-irls!"

The girls squealed and laughed and dawdled.

       *       *       *       *       *

House Bartock felt like laughing.

He'd just had his first big break, and it might turn out to be the only
one he needed. On an impulse, he had decided to strike out directly for
the spaceport. He had done so, and now stood on the dark tarmac between
the manifest shed and the pilot-barracks. And, not ten minutes after he
had reached the spacefield a cordon of guards rushed there from
Interstelpen had been stationed around the field. Had Bartock arrived
just a few minutes later, he would have been too late, his capture only
a matter of time. As it was now, though, he had a very good chance of
