plainly enough. I went back to the flier and waved him a final farewell,
which he acknowledged through a window; then I returned to the receiver.
A loud hum filled the air, and suddenly the projectile rose and flew out
through the open roof, gaining speed rapidly until it was a mere speck
in the sky. It vanished. I had no trouble in picking him up with the
telescope. In fact, I could see the Doctor through one of the windows.

"I have passed beyond the range of the atmosphere, Tom," came his voice
over the receiver, "and I find that everything is going exactly as it
should. I feel no discomfort, and my only regret is that I did not
install a transmitter in the house so that you could talk to me; but
there is no real necessity for it. I am going to make some observations
now, but I will call you again with a report of progress in
half-an-hour."

       *       *       *       *       *

For the rest of the afternoon and all of that night I received his
messages regularly, but with the coming of daylight they began to fade.
By nine o'clock I could get only a word here and there. By noon I could
hear nothing. I went to sleep hoping that the night would bring better
reception, nor was I disappointed. About eight o'clock I received a
message, rather faintly, but none the less distinctly.

"I regret more than ever that I did not install a transmitter so that I
could learn from you whether you are receiving my messages," his voice
said faintly. "I have no idea of whether you can hear me or not, but I
will keep on repeating this message every hour while my battery holds
out. It is now thirty hours since I left the earth and I should be on
the moon, according to my calculations. But I am not, and never will be.
I am caught at the neutral point where the gravity of the earth and the
moon are exactly equal.

"I had relied on my momentum to carry me over this point. Once over it,
I expected to reverse my polarity and fall on the moon. My momentum did
not do so. If I keep my polarity as it was when left the earth, both the
earth and the moon repel me. If I reverse it, they both attract me, and
again I cannot move. If I had equipped my space flier with a rocket so
that I could move a few miles, or even a few feet, from the dead line, I
could proceed, but I did not do so, and I cannot move forward or back.
Apparently I am doomed to stay here until my air gives out. Then my
body, entombed in my space ship, will endlessly circle the earth as a
satellite until the end of time. There is no hope for me, for long
before a duplicate of my device equipped with rockets could be
constructed and come to my rescue, my air would be exhausted. Good-by,
Tom. You may write your story as soon as you wish. I will repeat my
message in one hour. Good-by!"

At nine and at ten o'clock the message was repeated. At eleven it
started again but after a few sentences the sound suddenly ceased and
the receiver went dead. I thought that the fault was with the receiver
and I toiled feverishly the rest of the night, but without result. I
learned later that the messages heard all over the world ceased at the
same hour.

The next morning Professor Montescue announced his discovery of the
world's new satellite.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Coming_--
  MURDER MADNESS
  _An Extraordinary Four-Part Novel_

  _By_ MURRAY LEINSTER

       *       *       *       *       *




The Beetle Horde

_By Victor Rousseau_


    Bullets, shrapnel, shell--nothing can stop the trillions of
    famished, man-sized beetles which, led by a madman, sweep down
    over the human race.

[Illustration: _The hideous monsters leaped into the cockpits and began
their abominable meal._]


CONCLUSION

Tommy Travers and James Dodd, of the Travers Antarctic Expedition, crash
in their plane somewhere near the South Pole, and are seized by a swarm
of man-sized beetles. They are carried down to Submundia, a world under
the earth's crust, where the beetles have developed their civilization
to an amazing point, using a wretched race of degenerated humans, whom
they breed as cattle, for food.

The insect horde is ruled by a human from the outside world--a
drug-doped madman. Dodd recognizes this man as Bram, the archaeologist
who had been lost years before at the Pole and given up for dead by a
world he had hated because it refused to accept his radical scientific
theories. His fiendish mind now plans the horrible revenge of leading
his unconquerable horde of monster insects forth to ravage the world,
destroy the human race and establish a new era--the era of the insect.

The world has to be warned of the impending doom. The two, with Haidia,
a girl of Submundia, escape, and pass through menacing dangers to within
two miles of the exit. There, suddenly, Tommy sees towering over him a
creature that turns his blood cold--a gigantic praying mantis. Before he
has time to act, the monster springs at them!


CHAPTER VII

_Through the Inferno_

Fortunately, the monster miscalculated its leap. The huge legs, whirling
through the air, came within a few inches of Tommy's head, but passed
over him, and the mantis plunged into the stream. Instantly the water
was alive with leaping things with faces of such grotesque horror that
Tommy sat paralyzed in his rocking shell, unable to avert his eyes.

Things no more than a foot or two in length, to judge from the slender,
eel-like bodies that leaped into the air, but things with catfish heads
and tentacles, and eyes waving on stalks; things with clawlike
appendages to their ventral fins, and mouths that widened to fearful
size, so that the whole head seemed to disappear above them, disclosing
fangs like wolves'. Instantly the water was churned into phosphorescent
fire as they precipitated themselves upon the struggling mantis, whose
enormous form, extending halfway from shore to shore, was covered with
the river monsters, gnawing, rending, tearing.

Luckily the struggles of the dying monster carried it downstream instead
of up. In a few moments the immediate danger was past. And suddenly
Haidia awoke, sat up.

"Where are we?" she cried. "Oh, I can see! I can see! Something has
burned away from my eyes! I know this place. A wise man of my people
once came here, and returned to tell of it. We must go on. Soon we shall
be safe on the wide river. But there is another way that leads to here.
We must go on! We must go on!"

Even as she spoke they heard the distant rasping of the beetle-legs. And
before the shells were well in mid-current they saw the beetle horde
coming round the bend; in the front of them Bram, reclining on his shell
couch, and drawn by the eight trained beetles.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bram saw the fugitives, and a roar of ironic mirth broke from his lips,
resounding high above the strident rasping of the beetle-legs, and
roaring over the marshes.

"I've got you, Dodd and Travers," he bellowed, as the trained beetles
hovered above the shell canoes. "You thought you were clever, but you're
at my mercy. Now's your last chance, Dodd. I'll save you still if you'll
submit to me, if you'll admit that there were fossil monotremes before
the pleistocene epoch. Come, it's so simple! Say it after me: 'The
marsupial lion--'"

"You go to hell!" yelled Dodd, nearly upsetting his shell as he shook
his fist at his enemy.

High above the rasping sound came Bram's shrill whistle. Just audible to
human ears, though probably sounding like the roar of thunder to those
of the beetles, there was no need to wonder what it was.

It was the call to slaughter.

Like a black cloud the beetles shot forward. A serried phalanx covered
the two men and the girl, hovering a few feet overhead, the long legs
dangling to within arm's reach. And a terrible cry of fear broke from
Haidia's lips.

Suddenly Tommy remembered Bram's cigarette-lighter. He pulled it from
his pocket and ignited it.

Small as the flame was, it was actinically much more powerful than the
brighter phosphorescence of the fungi behind them. The beetle-cloud
overhead parted. The strident sound was broken into a confused buzzing
as the terrified, blinded beetles plopped into the stream.

None of them, fortunately, fell into either of the three shells, but the
mass of struggling monsters in the water was hardly less formidable to
the safety of the occupants than that menacing cloud overhead.

"Get clear!" Tommy yelled to Dodd, trying to help the shell along with
his hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

He heard Bram's cry of baffled rage, and, looking backward, could not
refrain from a laugh of triumph. Bram's trained steeds had taken fright
and overset him. Bram had fallen into the red mud beside the stream,
from which he was struggling up, plastered from head to feet, and
shaking his fists and evidently cursing, though his words could not be
heard.

"How about your marsupial lion now, Bram?" yelled Dodd. "No monotremes
before the pleistocene! D'you get that? That's my slogan now and for
ever more!"

Bram shrieked and raved, and seemed to be inciting the beetles to a
renewed assault. The air was still thick with them, but Tommy was waving
the cigarette-lighter in a flaming arc, which cleared the way for them.

Then suddenly came disaster. The flame went out! Tommy closed the
lighter with a snap and opened it. In vain. In his excitement he must
have spilled all the contents, for it would not catch.

Bram saw and yelled derision. The beetle-cloud was thickening. Tommy,
now abreast of his companions on the widening stream, saw the imminent
end.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then once more fate intervened. For, leaping through the air out of
the places where they had lain concealed, six mantises launched
themselves at their beetle prey.

Those awful bounds of the long-legged monsters, the scourges of the
insect world, carried them clear from one bank to the other--fortunately
for the occupants of the shells. In an instant the beetle-cloud
dissolved. And it had all happened in a few seconds. Before Dodd or
Tommy had quite taken in the situation, the mantises, each carrying a
victim in its grooved legs, had vanished like the beetles. There was no
sign of Bram. The three were alone upon the face of the stream, which
went swirling upward into renewed darkness.

Tommy saw Dodd bend toward Haidia as she lay on her shell couch. He
heard the sound of a noisy kiss. And he lay back in the hollow of his
shell, with the feeling that nothing that could happen in the future
could be worse than what they had passed through.

       *       *       *       *       *

Days went by, days when the sense of dawning freedom filled their hearts
with hope. Haidia told Dodd and Tommy that, according to the legends of
her people, the river ran into the world from which they had been driven
by the floods, ages before.

There had been no further signs of Bram or the beetle horde, and Dodd
and Tommy surmised that it had been disorganized by the attack of the
mantises, and that Bram was engaged in regaining his control over it.
But neither of them believed that the respite would be a long one, and
for that reason they rested ashore only for the briefest intervals, just
long enough to snatch a little sleep, and to eat some of the shrimps
that Haidia was adept at finding--or to pull some juicy fruit
surreptitiously from a tree.

Incidents there were, nevertheless, during those days. For hours their
shells were followed by a school of the luminous river monsters, which,
nevertheless, made no attempt to attack them. And once, hearing a cry
from Haidia, as she was gathering shrimps, Dodd ran forward to see her
battling furiously with a luminous scorpion, eight feet in length, that
had sprung at her from its lurking place behind a pear shrub.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dodd succeeded in stunning and dispatching the monster without suffering
any injury from it, but the strain of the period was beginning to tell
on all of them. Worst of all, they seemed to have left all the luminous
vegetation behind them, and were entering a region of almost total
darkness, in which Haidia had to be their eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something had happened to the girl's sight in the journey over the
petrol spring. As a matter of fact, the third, or nictitating membrane,
which the humans of Submundia possessed, in common with birds, had been
burned away. Haidia could see as well as ever in the dark, but she could
bear more light than formerly as well. Unobtrusively she assumed command
of the party. She anticipated their wants, dug shrimps in the darkness,
and fed Tommy and Dodd with her own hands.

"God, what a girl!" breathed Dodd to his friend. "I've always had the
reputation of being a woman-hater, Tommy, but once I get that girl to
civilization I'm going to take her to the nearest Little Church Around
the Corner in record time."

"I wish you luck, old man, I'm sure," answered Tommy. Dodd's words did
not seem strange to him. Civilization was growing very remote to him,
and Broadway seemed like a memory of some previous incarnation.

The river was growing narrower again, and swifter, too. On the last day,
or night, of their journey--though they did not know that it was to be
their last--it swirled so fiercely that it threatened every moment to
overset their beetle-shells. Suddenly Tommy began to feel giddy. He
gripped the side of his shell with his hand.

"Tommy, we're going round!" shouted Dodd in front of him.

There was no longer any doubt of it. The shells were revolving in a
vortex of rushing, foaming water.

"Haidia!" they shouted.

The girl's voice came back thickly across the roaring torrent. The
circles grew smaller. Tommy knew that he was being sucked nearer and
nearer to the edge of some terrific whirlpool in that inky blackness.
Now he could no longer hear Dodd's shouts, and the shell was tipping so
that he could feel the water rushing along the edge of it. But for the
exercise of centrifugal force he would have been flung from his perilous
seat, for he was leaning inward at an angle of forty-five degrees.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then suddenly his progress was arrested. He felt the shell being drawn
to the shore. He leaped out, and Haidia's strong hands dragged the shell
out of the torrent, while Tommy sank down, gasping.

"What's the matter?" he heard Dodd demanding.

"There is no more river," said Haidia calmly. "It goes into a hole in
the ground. So much I have heard from the wise men of my people. They
say that it is near such a place that they fled from the flood in years
gone by."

"Then we're near safety," shouted Tommy. "That river must emerge as a
stream somewhere in the upper world, Dodd. I wonder where the road
lies."

"There is a road here," came Haidia's calm voice. "Let us put on our
shells again, since who knows whether there may not be beetles here."

"Did you ever see such a girl as that?" demanded Dodd ecstatically.
"First she saves our lives, and then she thinks of everything. Good
lord, she'll remember my meals, and to wind my watch for me, and--and--"

But Haidia's voice, some distance ahead, interrupted Dodd's soliloquy,
and, hoisting the beetle-shells upon their backs, they started along the
rough trail that they could feel with their feet over the stony ground.
It was still as dark as pitch, but soon they found themselves traveling
up a sunken way that was evidently a dry watercourse. And now and again
Haidia's reassuring voice would come from in front of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The road grew steeper. There could no longer be any doubt that they were
ascending toward the surface of the earth. But even the weight of the
beetle-shells and the steepness could not account for the feeling of
intense weakness that took possession of them. Time and again they
stopped, panting.

"We must be very near the surface, Dodd," said Tommy. "We've surely
passed the center of gravity. That's what makes it so difficult."

"Come on," Haidia said in her quiet voice, stretching out her hand
through the darkness. And for very shame they had to follow her.

On and on, hour after hour, up the steep ascent, resting only long
enough to make them realize their utter fatigue. On because Haidia was
leading them, and because in the belief that they were about to leave
that awful land behind them their desires lent new strength to their
limbs continuously.

Suddenly Haidia uttered a fearful cry. Her ears had caught what became
apparent to Dodd and Jimmy several seconds later.

Far down in the hollow of the earth, increased by the echoes that came
rumbling up, they heard the distant, strident rasp of the beetle swarm.

Then it was Dodd's turn to support Haidia and whisper consolation in her
ears. No thought of resting now. If they were to be overwhelmed at last
by the monsters, they meant to be overwhelmed in the upper air.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was growing insufferably hot. Blasts of air, as if from a furnace,
began to rush up and down past them. And the trail was growing steeper
still, and slippery as glass.

"What is it, Jim?" Tommy panted, as Dodd, leaving Haidia for a moment,
came back to him.

"I'd say lava," Dodd answered. "If only one could see something! I don't
know how she finds her way. My impression is that we are coming out
through the interior of an extinct volcano."

"But where are there volcanoes in the south polar regions?" inquired
Tommy.

"There are Mount Erebus and Mount Terror, in South Victoria Land, active
volcanoes discovered by Sir James Ross in 1841, and again by
Borchgrevink, in 1899. If that's where we're coming out--well, Tommy,
we're doomed, because it's the heart of the polar continent. We might as
well turn back."

"But we won't turn back," said Tommy. "I'm damned if we do."

"We're damned if we don't," said Dodd.

"Come along please!" sang Haidia's voice high up the slope.

They struggled on. And now a faint luminosity was beginning to penetrate
that infernal darkness. The rasping of the beetle-legs, too, was no
longer audible. Perhaps they had thrown Bram off their track! Perhaps in
the darkness he had not known which way they had gone after leaving the
whirlpool!

That thought encouraged them to a last effort. They pushed their
flagging limbs up, upward through an inferno of heated air. Suddenly
Dodd uttered a yell and pointed upward.

"God!" ejaculated Tommy. Then he seized Dodd in his arms and nearly
crushed him. For high above them, a pin-point in the black void, they
saw--a star!

They were almost at the earth's surface!

One more effort, and suddenly the ground seemed to give beneath them.
They breathed the outer air, and went sliding down a chute of sand, and
stopped, half buried, at the bottom.


CHAPTER VIII

_Recaptured_

"Where are we?" each demanded of the other, as they staggered out.

It was a moonless night, and the air was chill, but they were certainly
nowhere near the polar regions, for there was no trace of snow to be
seen anywhere. All about them was sand, with here and there a spiny
shrub standing up stiff and erect and solitary.

When they had disengaged themselves from the clinging sand they could
see that they were apparently in the hollow of a vast crater, that must
have been half a mile in circumference. It was low and worn down to an
elevation of not more than two or three hundred feet, and evidently the
volcano that had thrown it up had been extinct for millennia.

"Water!" gasped Dodd.

