were doing. Because I never knew that poor George had fallen into such
evil things."

       *       *       *       *       *

I could only hold her thankfully in my arms. The lost
what-might-have-been seemed coming back to us.

"And they cut my hair, Gregg, and Glutz altered my face a little, and I
did my best. But there was no time--it came upon us so quickly."

And she whispered, "But I love you, Gregg. I want to be the first to say
it: I love you--I love you."

But we had the sanity to try and plan.

"Anita, when you go back, tell Miko we discussed radium ores. You'll
have to be careful, clever. Don't say too much. Tell him we estimate the
treasure at a hundred and thirty millions."

I told her what Miko had vouchsafed me of his plans. She knew all that.
And Snap knew it. She had had a few moments alone with Snap. Gave me now
a message from him:

"We'll pull out of this, Gregg."

With Snap she had worked out a plan. There were Snap and I; and Shac and
Dud Ardley, upon whom we could doubtless depend. And Dr. Frank. Against
us were Miko and his sister; and Coniston and Hahn. Of course there were
the members of the crew. But we were numerically the stronger when it
came to true leadership. Unarmed and guarded now. But if we could break
loose--recapture the ship....

I sat listening to Anita's eager whispers. It seemed feasible. Miko did
not altogether trust George Prince; Anita was now unarmed.

"But I can make opportunity! I can get one of their ray cylinders, and
an invisible cloak equipment."

That cloak--it had been hidden in Miko's room when Carter searched for
it in A20--was now in the chart-room by Johnson's body. It had been
repaired now; Anita thought she could get possession of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

We worked out the details of the plan. Anita would arm herself, and come
and release me. Together, with a paralyzing ray, we could creep aboard
the ship, overcome these brigands one by one. There were so few of the
leaders. With them felled, and with us in control of the turret and the
helio-room we could force the crew to stay at their posts. There were,
Anita said, no navigators among Miko's crew. They would not dare oppose
us.

"But it should be done at once, Anita. In a few hours we will be at the
asteroid."

"Yes. I will go now--try and get the weapons."

"Where is Snap?"

"Still in the helio-room. One of the crew guards him."

Coniston was roaming the ship; he was still loitering on the deck,
watching our door. Hahn was in the turret. The morning watch of the crew
were at their posts in the hull-corridors; the stewards were preparing a
morning meal. There were nine members of subordinates altogether, Anita
had calculated. Six of them were in Miko's pay; the other three--our own
men who had not been killed in the fighting--had joined the brigands.

"And Dr. Frank, Anita?"

He was in the lounge. All the passengers were herded there, with Miko
and Moa alternating on guard.

"I will arrange it with Venza," Anita whispered swiftly. "She will tell
the others. Dr. Frank knows about it now. He thinks it can be done."

       *       *       *       *       *

The possibility of it swept me anew. The brigands were of necessity
scattered singly about the ship. One by one, creeping under cover of an
invisible cloak, I could fell them, and replace them without alarming
the others. My thoughts leaped to it. We would strike down the guard in
the helio-room. Release Snap. At the turret we could assail Hahn, and
replace him with Snap.

Coniston's voice outside broke in upon us. "Prince."

He was coming forward. Anita stood in the doorway. "I have the figures,
Coniston. By God, this Haljan is with us! And clever! We think it will
total a hundred and thirty millions. What a stake!"

She whispered, "Gregg, dear--I'll be back soon. We can do it--be ready."

"Anita--be careful of yourself! If they should suspect you...."

"I'll be careful. In an hour, Gregg, or less, I'll come back. All right,
Coniston. Where is Miko? I want to see him. Stay where you are, Haljan!
All in good time Miko will trust you with your liberty. You'll be rich
like us all, never fear."

She swaggered out upon the deck, waved at the brigand, and banged my
cubby door in my face.

I sat upon my bunk. Waiting. Would she come back? Would she be
successful?




CHAPTER XVI

_In the Blue-lit Corridor_


She came. I suppose it was no more than an hour: it seemed an eternity
of apprehension. There was the slight hissing of the seal of my door.
The panel slid. I had leaped from my bunk where in the darkness I was
lying tense.

"Prince?" I did not dare say, "Anita."

"Gregg."

Her voice. My gaze swept the deck as the panel opened. Neither Coniston
nor anyone else was in sight, save Anita's dark-robed figure which came
into my room.

"You got it?" I asked her in a low whisper.

I held her for an instant, kissed her. But she pushed me away with quick
hands.

"Gregg, dear--"

She was breathless. My kisses, and the tenseness of what lay before us
were to blame.

"Gregg, see, I have it. Give us a little light--we must hurry!"

In the blue dimness I saw that she was holding one of the Martian
cylinders. The smallest size; it would paralyze, but not kill.

"Only one, Anita?"

"Yes. I had it before, but Miko took it from me. It was in his room. And
this--"

The invisible cloak. We laid it on my grid, and I adjusted its
mechanism. A cloak of the reflecting-absorbing variety.[A]


  [A] The principle of this invisible cloak involves the use of an
  electronized fabric. All color is absorbed. The light rays reflected to
  the eye of the observer thus show an image of empty blackness. There is
  also created about the cloak a magnetic field which by natural laws
  bends the rays of light from objects behind it. This principle of the
  natural bending of light when passing through a magnetic field was first
  recognized by Albert Einstein, a scientist of the Twentieth century. In
  the case of this invisible cloak, the bending light rays, by making
  visible what was behind the cloak's blackness, thus destroyed its solid
  black outline and gave a pseudo-invisibility which was fairly effective
  under favorable conditions.

       *       *       *       *       *

I donned it, and drew its hood, and threw on its current.

"All right, Anita?"

"Yes."

"Can you see me?"

"No." She stepped back a foot or two further. "Not from here. But you
must let no one approach too close."

Then she came forward, put out her hand, fumbled until she found me.

It was our plan to have me follow her out. Anyone observing us would see
only the robed figure of the supposed George Prince, and I would escape
notice.

The situation about the ship was almost unchanged. Anita had secured the
weapon and the cloak and slipped away to my cubby without being
observed.

"You're sure of that?"

"I think so, Gregg. I was careful."

Moa was now in the lounge, guarding the passengers. Hahn was asleep in
the chart-room; Coniston was in the turret. Coniston would be off duty
presently, Anita said, with Hahn taking his place. There were look-outs
in the forward and stern watch-towers, and a guard upon Snap in the
helio-room.

"Is he inside the room, Anita?"

"Snap? Yes."

"No--the guard."

"No. He was sitting upon the spider bridge at the door."

       *       *       *       *       *

This was unfortunate. That guard could see all the deck clearly. He
might be suspicious of George Prince wandering around; it would be
difficult to get near enough to assail him. This cylinder, I knew, had
an effective range of only some twenty feet.

Anita and I were swiftly whispering. It was necessary now to decide
exactly what we were to do; once under observation outside, there must
be no hesitation, no fumbling.

"Coniston is sharpest, Gregg. He will be the hardest to get near."

The languid-spoken Englishman was the one Anita most feared. His alert
eyes seemed to miss nothing. Perhaps he was suspicious of this George
Prince--Anita thought so.

"But where is Miko?" I whispered.

The brigand leader had gone below a few moments ago, down into the
hull-corridor. Anita had seized the opportunity to come to me.

"We can attack Hahn in the chart-room first," I suggested. "And get the
other weapons. Are they still there?"

"Yes. But Gregg, the forward deck is very bright."

We were approaching the asteroid. Already its light like a brilliant
moon was brightening the forward deck-space. It made me realize how much
haste was necessary.

We decided to go down into the hull-corridors. Locate Miko. Fell him,
and hide him. His non-appearance back on deck would very soon throw the
others into confusion, especially now with our impending landing upon
the asteroid. And under cover of this confusion we would try and release
Snap.

We had been arguing no more than a minute or two. We were ready. Anita
slid my door wide. She stepped through, with me soundlessly scurrying
after her. The empty, silent deck was alternately dark with
shadow-patches and bright with blobs of starlight. A sheen of the Sun's
corona was mingled with it; and from forward came the radiance of the
asteroid's mellow silver glow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anita turned to seal my door; within my faintly humming cloak I stood
beside her. Was I invisible in this light? Almost directly over us,
close under the dome, the look-out sat in his little tower. He gazed
down at Anita.

Amidships, high over the cabin superstructure, the helio-room hung dark
and silent. The guard on its bridge was visible. He, too, looked down.

A tense instant. Then I breathed again. There was no alarm. The two
guards answered Anita's gesture.

Anita said aloud into my empty cubby: "Miko will come for you presently,
Haljan. He told me to tell you that he wants you at the turret controls
to land us on the asteroid."

She finished sealing my door and turned away; started forward along the
deck. I followed. My steps were soundless in my elastic-bottomed shoes.
Anita swaggered with a noisy tread. Near the door of the smoking room a
small incline passage led downward. We went into it.

The passage was dimly blue-lit. We descended its length, came to the
main corridor, which ran the length of the hull. A vaulted metal
passage, with doors to the control rooms opening from it. Dim lights
showed at intervals.

       *       *       *       *       *

The humming of the ship was more apparent here. It drowned the slight
humming of my cloak. I crept after Anita; my hand under the cloak
clutched the ray weapon.

A steward passed us. I shrank aside to avoid him.

Anita spoke to him. "Where is Miko, Ellis?"

"In the ventilator-room, Mr. Prince. There was difficulty with the air
renewal."

Anita nodded, and moved on. I could have felled that steward as he
passed me. Oh, if I only had, how different things might have been!

But it seemed needless. I let him go, and he turned into a nearby door
which led to the galley.

Anita moved forward. If we could come upon Miko alone. Abruptly she
turned, and whispered, "Gregg, if other men are with him, I'll draw him
away. You watch your chance."

What little things may overthrow one's careful plans! Anita had not
realized how close to her I was following. And her turning so
unexpectedly caused me to collide with her sharply.

"Oh!" She exclaimed it involuntarily. Her outflung hand had unwittingly
gripped my wrist, caught the electrode there. The touch burned her, and
close-circuited my robe. There was a hiss. My current burned out the
tiny fuses.

My invisibility was gone! I stood, a tall black-hooded figure, revealed
to the gaze of anyone who might be near!

The futile plans of humans! We had planned so carefully! Our
calculations, our hopes of what we could do, came clattering now in a
sudden wreckage around us.

"Anita, run!"

If I were seen with her, then her own disguise would probably be
discovered. That above everything would be disaster!

"Anita, get away from me! I must try it alone!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I could hide somewhere, repair the cloak perhaps. Or, since now I was
armed, why could I not boldly start an assault?

"Gregg, we must get you back to your cubby!" She was clinging to me in a
panic.

"No! You run! Get away from me! Don't you understand? George Prince has
no business here with me! They'd kill you!"

Or worse--- Miko would discover it was Anita, not George Prince.

"Gregg, let's get back to the deck."

I pushed at her. Both of us in sudden confusion.
