But animals could so they had worked on it and finally they decided to
change a man into an animal, at least temporarily. Geneticists and
biochemists and other specialists had been able to do a lot with
hormones and hard radiation treatment. Especially with hormones. You
could shoot a man full of some fluid or another, and do almost anything
to his organism. You could induce atavism, regression to some lower form
of animal life--a highly speeded up regression. When you did that,
naturally the analytical mind, the higher thought centers of a more
recent evolutionary development, blanked out and the primal mind took
over. The body changed too, considerably.

Bowren was changing. Then the pain came and he couldn't think. He felt
his mind cringing--giving way before the onslaught of the pain. Dimly he
could feel the agony in his limbs, the throbbing of his heart, the
fading power of reason.

He retched, languished through flaccid minutes. There were recurring
spasms of shivering as he rolled his thickened tongue in the arid cavity
of his mouth. And then, somewhere, a spark exploded, and drowned him in
a pool of streaming flame.

       *       *       *       *       *

Consciousness returned slowly--much as it had gone--in waves of pain. It
took a long time. Elements of reason and unreason fusing through
distorted nightmares until he was lying there able to remember, able to
wonder, able to think.

Inside the tiny compartment were supplies. A hypo, glucose, a durolene
suit neatly folded which he put on. He gave himself a needle, swallowed
the tablets, and waited until energy and a sense of well-being gave him
some degree of confidence.

It was very still. The ship would be cradled on Mars now. He lay there,
relaxing, preparing for the real challenge. He thought of how well the
Earth Investigation Committee had planned the whole thing.

The last desperate attempt of man to get into space--to Mars--a woman's
world. At least it was supposed to be. Whatever it was, it wasn't a
man's world.

The women didn't want Earth anymore. They had something better. But
what? There were other questions, and Bowren's job was to find the
answers, remain unobserved and get back aboard this ship. He would then
hypo himself again, and when the ship blasted off to Earth, he would go
through the same transition all over again.

He put on the soft-soled shoes as well as the durolene suit and crawled
through the small panel into the big cargo bin. It was empty. Only a dim
yellow light shone on the big cargo vices along the curved walls.

He climbed the ladders slowly, cautiously, through a gnawing silence of
suspense, over the mesh grid flooring along the tubular corridors. He
wondered what he would find.

Could the women have been influenced by some alien life form on Mars?

That could explain the fact that women had divorced themselves
completely from all men, from the Earth. Something had to explain it.

There was one other possibility. That the women had found human life on
Mars. That was a very remote possibility based on the idea that perhaps
the Solar system had been settled by human beings from outer space, and
had landed on two worlds at least.

Bowren remembered how his wife, Lora, had told him he was an idiot and a
bore, and had walked out on him five years before; taken her three
months course in astrogation, and left Earth. He hadn't heard of her or
from her since. It was the same with every other man, married or not.
The male ego had taken a beating for so long that the results had been
psychologically devastating.

The ship seemed to be empty of any human being but Bowren. He reached
the outer lock door. It was ajar. Thin cold air came through and sent a
chill down his arms, tingling in his fingers. He looked out. It was
night on Mars, a strange red-tinted night, the double moons throwing
streaming color over the land.

Across the field, he saw the glowing Luciferin-like light of a small
city. Soaring spherical lines. Nothing masculine about its architecture.
Bowren shivered.

He climbed down the ladder, the air biting into his lungs. The silence
down there on the ground under the ship was intense.

He stood there a minute. The first man on Mars. Man's oldest dream
realized.

But the great thrill he had anticipated was dulled somewhat by fear. A
fear of what the women had become, and of what might have influenced
their becoming.

He took out a small neurogun and walked. He reached what seemed to be a
huge park that seemed to surround the city. It grew warmer and a soft
wind whispered through the strange wide-spreading trees and bushes and
exotic blossoms. The scent of blossoms drifted on the wind and the sound
of running water, of murmuring voices.

The park thickened as Bowren edged into its dark, languid depth. It
seemed as though the city radiated heat. He dodged suddenly behind a
tree, knelt down. For an instant he was embarrassed seeing the two
shadowy figures in each others arms on a bench in the moonlight. This
emotion gave way to shock, anger, fear.

One of them was a--man!

Bowren felt the perspiration start from his face. An intense jealousy
surrendered to a start of fearful curiosity. Where had the man come
from?

Bowren's long frustration, the memory of his wife, the humiliation, the
rejection, the abandonment, the impotent rage of loneliness--it all came
back to him.

He controlled his emotion somehow. At least he didn't manifest it
physically. He crept closer, listened.

"This was such a sweet idea," the woman was whispering. "Bringing me
here to the park tonight. That's why I love you so, Marvin. You're
always so romantic."

"How else could I think of you, darling," the man said. His voice was
cultured, precise, soft, thick with emotion.

"You're so sweet, Marvin."

"You're so beautiful, darling. I think of you every minute that you're
away on one of those space flights. You women are so wonderful to have
conquered space, but sometimes I hate the ships that take you away from
me."

The woman sighed. "But it's so nice to come back to you. So exciting, so
comfortable."

The kiss was long and deep. Bowren backed away, almost smashing into the
tree. He touched his forehead. He was sweating heavily. His beard
