Well, it will do no good."

"It will, eventually. They'll go on and someday they'll learn the
secret." Marquis thought of Marden. Marden was as old as the New System
of statism and inhumanity that had started off disguised as
social-democracy. Three-hundred and three years old to be exact.

The Manager said, "No. 5274--you will be sent to the work colony on the
Moon. You won't be back. We've tried re-conditioning rebels, but it
doesn't work. A rebel has certain basic deviant characteristics and we
can't overcome them sufficiently to make happy, well-adjusted workers
out of you. However on the Moon--you will conform. It's a kind of social
experiment there in associative reflex culture, you might say. You'll
conform all right."

He was taken to a small, naked, gray-steel room. He thought about taking
the capsule from his tooth now, but decided he might be observed. They
would rush in an antidote and make him live. And he might not get a
chance to take his life in any other way. He would try of course, but
his knowledge of his future situation was vague--except that in it he
would conform. There would be extreme conditioned-reflex therapeutic
techniques. And it would be pretty horrible. That was all he knew.

He didn't see the pellet fall. He heard the slight sound it made and
then saw the almost colorless gas hissing softly, clouding the room. He
tasted nothing, smelled or felt nothing.

He passed out quickly and painlessly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was marched into another office, and he knew he was on the Moon. The
far wall was spherical and was made up of the outer shell of the
pressure dome which kept out the frigid cold nights and furnace-hot
days. It was opaque and Marquis could see the harsh black and white
shadows out there--the metallic edges of the far crater wall.

This Manager was somewhat fat, with a round pink face and cold blue
eyes. He sat behind a chrome shelf of odd shape suspended from the
ceiling with silver wires.

The Manager said, "No. 5274, here there is only work. At first, of
course, you will rebel. Later you will work, and finally there will be
nothing else. Things here are rigidly scheduled, and you will learn the
routines as the conditioning bells acquaint you with them. We are
completely self-sufficient here. We are developing the perfect
scientifically-controlled society. It is a kind of experiment. A closed
system to test to what extremes we can carry our mastery of associative
reflex to bring man security and happiness and freedom from
responsibility."

Marquis didn't say anything. There was nothing to say. He knew he
couldn't get away with trying to kill this particular Managerial
specimen. But one man, alone, a rebel, with something left in him that
still burned, could beat the system. _He had to!_

"Our work here is specialized. During the indoctrination period you will
do a very simple routine job in coordination with the cybernetics
machines. There, the machines and the nervous system of the workers
become slowly cooperative. Machine and man learn to work very intimately
together. Later, after the indoctrination--because of your specialized
knowledge of food-concentrate preparation--we will transfer you to the
food-mart. The period of indoctrination varies in length with the
individuals. You will be screened now and taken to the indoctrination
ward. We probably won't be seeing one another again. The bells take care
of everything here. The bells and the machines. There is never an
error--never any mistakes. Machines do not make mistakes."

He was marched out of there and through a series of rooms. He was taken
in by generators, huge oscilloscopes. Spun like a living tube through
curtains of vacuum tube voltimeters, electronic power panels. Twisted
and squeezed through rolls of skeins of hook-up wire. Bent through
shieldings of every color, size and shape. Rolled over panel plates,
huge racks of glowing tubes, elaborate transceivers. Tumbled down long
surfaces of gleaming bakelite. Plunged through color-indexed files of
resistors and capacitances....

_... here machine and man learn to work very intimately together._

As he drifted through the machine tooled nightmare, Marquis knew _what_
he had been fighting all his life, what he would continue to fight with
every grain of ingenuity. Mechanization--the horror of losing one's
identity and becoming part of an assembly line.

He could hear a clicking sound as tubes sharpened and faded in
intensity. The clicking--rhythm, a hypnotic rhythm like the beating of
his own heart--the throbbing and thrumming, the contracting and
expanding, the pulsing and pounding....

_... the machines and the nervous system of the workers become slowly
cooperative._

       *       *       *       *       *

Beds were spaced ten feet apart down both sides of a long gray metal
hall. There were no cells, no privacy, nothing but beds and the gray
metalene suits with numbers printed across the chest.

His bed, with his number printed above it, was indicated to him, and the
guard disappeared. He was alone. It was absolutely silent. On his right
a woman lay on a bed. No. 329. She had been here a long time. She
appeared dead. Her breasts rose and fell with a peculiarly steady
rhythm, and seemed to be coordinated with the silent, invisible
throbbing of the metal walls. She might have been attractive once. Here
it didn't make any difference. Her face was gray, like metal. Her hair
was cropped short. Her uniform was the same as the man's on Marquis'
left.

The man was No. 4901. He hadn't been here so long. His face was thin and
gray. His hair was dark, and he was about the same size and build as
Marquis. His mouth hung slightly open and his eyes were closed and there
was a slight quivering at the ends of the fingers which were laced
across his stomach.
