may be made by flattening and filing the end of a six-inch nail. _d_ is
the large turn-pin and consists of a polished iron spike, about five
inches long and a quarter of an inch diameter at its largest part. This
should be mounted in a wooden handle. _e_ and _f_ are carbon cones. A
thin rubber tube is also useful; it may be attached to the work and
serve as a blowing tube, thus obviating the necessity of moving the work
to the mouth when internal air pressure is to be applied. In order to
avoid undue repetition, the uses of these tools and appliances will be
described as they occur.

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

Glass, as usually supplied by chemical apparatus dealers is of the
composition known as "soda-glass." They also supply "hard" or
"combustion" glass, but this is only used for special purposes, as it is
too infusible for convenient working in the ordinary blowpipe flame.

Soda-glass consists primarily of silicate of sodium with smaller
quantities of silicate of aluminum and potassium. Its exact composition
varies. It is not blackened, as lead glass is, by exposure to the
reducing gases which are present in the blue cone of a blowpipe flame,
and hence is easier for a beginner to work without producing
discolouration.

Further notes on glasses will be found on page 55, but for ordinary
purposes soda-glass will probably be used.




CHAPTER II

     Easy Examples of Laboratory Glass-Blowing--Cutting and
     Sealing Tubes for Various Purposes; Test-Tubes,
     Pressure-Tubes, Tubes for High Temperature
     Experiments--Thermometer-Bulbs, Bulbs of Special Glass,
     Pipettes, Absorption-Bulbs or Washing-Bulbs--Joining Tubes;
     Branches, Exhaustion-Branches, Branches of Dissimilar
     Glass--Blowing Bulbs; A Thistle Funnel; Cracking and
     Breaking Glass; Leading and Direction of Cracks--Use of
     Glass Rod or Strips of Window-Glass; Joining Rod, Feet and
     Supports--Gripping Devices for use in Corrosive
     Solutions--The Building Up of Special Forms from Solid
     Glass.


Perhaps the most common need of the glass-blower whose work is connected
with that of the laboratory is for a sealed tube; and the sealing of a
tube is an excellent preliminary exercise in glass-blowing.

We will assume that the student has adjusted the blowpipe to give a
flame similar to that shown in _d_, Fig. 1, and that he has learned to
maintain a steady blast of air with the bellows; further, we will assume
that the tube he wishes to seal is of moderate size, say not more than
half an inch in diameter and with walls of from one-tenth to one-fifth
of an inch thick.

[Illustration: Fig. 4]

A convenient length of tube for the first trial is about one foot; this
should be cut off from the longer piece, in which it is usually
supplied, as follows:--lay the tube on a flat surface and make a deep
cut with the edge of a file. Do not "saw" the file to and fro over the
glass. If the file edge has been ground as shown in _a_, Fig. 3, such a
procedure will be quite unnecessary and only involve undue wear; one
movement with sufficient pressure to make the file "bite" will give a
deep cut. Now rotate the tube through about one-eighth of a turn and
make another cut in continuation of the first. Take the tube in the
hands, as shown in _a_, Fig. 4, and apply pressure with the thumbs, at
the same time straining at the ends. The tube should break easily. If it
does not, do not strain too hard, as it may shatter and cause serious
injuries to the hands, but repeat the operation with the file and so
deepen the original cuts. In holding a tube for breaking, it is
important to place the hands as shown in sketch, as this method is least
likely to cause shattering and also minimises the risk of injury even if
the tube should shatter. To cut a large tube, or one having very thick
walls, it is better to avoid straining altogether and to break by
applying a small bead of intensely heated glass to the file cut. If the
walls are very thin, a glass-blower's knife should be used instead of a
file. The tube and glass-blower's knife should be held in the hand, and
the tube rotated against the edge of the knife; this will not produce a
deep cut, but is less likely to break the tube. A bead of hot glass
should be used to complete the work.

The next operation is to heat the glass tube in the middle; this must be
done gradually and evenly; that is to say the tube must be rotated
during heating and held some considerable distance in front of the flame
at first; otherwise the outer surface of the glass will expand before
the interior is affected and the tube will break. From two to five
minutes, heating at a distance of about eight inches in front of the
flame will be found sufficient in most cases, and another minute should
be taken in bringing the tube into the flame. Gradual heating is
important, but even heating is still more important and this can only be
obtained by uniform and steady rotation. Until the student can rotate a
tube steadily _without thinking about it_, real progress in
glass-blowing is impossible.

When the tube is in the flame it must be held just in front of the blue
cone and rotated until the glass is soft enough to permit the ends to be
drawn apart. Continue to separate the ends and, at the same time, move
the tube very slightly along its own axis, so that the flame tends to
play a little more on the thicker part than on the drawn-out portion. If
this is done carefully, the drawn-out portion can be separated off,
leaving only a slight "bleb" on the portion it is desired to seal. This
is illustrated by _b_, Fig. 4.

To convert the seal at _b_, Fig. 4., into the ordinary form of test-tube
seal, it is only necessary to heat the "bleb" a little more strongly,
blow gently into the tube until the thick portion is slightly expanded,
re-heat the whole of the rounded end until it is beginning to collapse,
and give a final shaping by careful blowing after it has commenced to
cool. In each case the glass must be removed from the flame before
blowing. The finished seal is shown by _c_, Fig. 4. If desired, the open
end may now be finished by heating and rotating the soft glass against
the large turn-pin, as illustrated in _d_, but the turn-pin must not be
allowed to become too hot, as if this happens it will stick to the
glass. After turning out the end, the lip of glass must be heated to
redness and allowed to cool without coming in contact with anything;
otherwise it will be in a condition of strain and liable to crack
spontaneously. The finished test-tube is shown by _e_.

When it is necessary to seal a substance inside a glass tube, the bottom
of the tube is first closed, as explained above, and allowed to cool;
the substance, if a solid, is now introduced, but should not come to
within less than two inches of the point where the second seal is to be
made. If the substance is a liquid it can more conveniently be
introduced at a later stage.

Now bring the tube into the blowpipe flame gradually, and rotate it,
while heating, at the place where it is to be closed. Allow the glass to
soften and commence to run together until the diameter of the tube is
reduced to about half its original size. Remove from the flame and draw
the ends apart, this should give a long, thick extension as shown by
_f_, Fig. 4. If any liquid is to be introduced, it may now be done by
inserting a thin rubber or other tube through the opening and running
the liquid in. A glass tube should be used with caution for introducing
the liquid, as any hard substance will tend to scratch the inside of the
glass and cause cracking. The final closure is made by melting the
drawn-out extension in the blowpipe flame; the finished seal being shown
by _g_, Fig. 4.

If the sealed tube has to stand internal pressure, it is desirable to
allow the glass to thicken somewhat more before drawing out, and the
bottom seal should also be made thicker. For such a tube, and especially
when it has to stand heating, as in a Carius determination of chlorine,
each seal should be cooled very slowly by rotating it in a gas flame
until the surface is covered with a thick layer of soot, and it should
then be placed aside in a position where the hot glass will not come in
contact with anything, and where it will be screened from all draughts.

_Joining Tube._--We will now consider the various forms of join in glass
tubing which are met with in the laboratory. First, as being easiest, we
will deal with the end-to-end joining of two tubes of similar glass.
_a_, _b_, and _c_, Fig. 5, illustrate this. One end of one of the tubes
should be closed, a lip should be turned out on each of the ends to be
joined, and both lips heated simultaneously until the glass is
thoroughly soft. Now bring the lips together gently, until they are in
contact at all points and there are no places at which air can escape;
remove from the flame, and blow slowly and very cautiously until the
joint is expanded as shown in _b_, Fig. 5. Reheat in the flame until
the glass has run down to rather less than the original diameter of the
tube, and give a final shaping by re-blowing. The chief factors of
success in making such a join are, thorough heating of the glass before
bringing the two tubes together, and avoidance of hard or sudden blowing
when expanding the joint. The finished work is shown by _c_, Fig. 5.

[Illustration: Fig. 5]

To join a small glass tube to the end of a large one, the large tube
should first be sealed, a small spot on the extreme end of the seal
heated, and air pressure used to expand the heated spot as shown in _d_.
This expanded spot is then re-heated and blown out until it bursts as
shown in _e_, the thin fragments of glass are removed and the end of the
small tube turned out as shown in _f_. After this the procedure is
similar to that used in jointing two tubes of equal size.

When these two forms of joint have been mastered, a T piece will present
but little difficulty. It is made in three stages as shown in Fig. 5,
and the procedure is similar to that used in joining a large and small
tube. Care should be taken to avoid softening the top of the "T" too
much, or the glass will bend and distort the finished work; although a
slight bend can be rectified by re-heating and bending back. Local
re-heating is often useful in giving the joint its final shape.

An exhaustion branch is often made by a totally different method. This
method is shown by _g_, _h_, and _i_, Fig. 5; _g_ is the tube on which
the branch is to be made. The end of a rod of similar glass should be
heated until a mass of thoroughly liquid glass has collected, as shown,
and at the same time a spot should be heated on that part of the tube
where it is desired to make the branch. The mass of hot glass on the rod
is now brought in contact with the heated spot on the tube and expanded
by blowing as shown by _h_. The air pressure in the tube is still
maintained while the rod is drawn away as shown by _i_. This will give a
hollow branch which may be cut off at any desired point, and is then
ready for connection to the vacuum pump.

If the rod used is of a dissimilar glass, the branch should be blown
much thinner. Such a branch will often serve as a useful basis for
joining two tubes of different composition, as the ordinary type of
branch is more liable to crack when made with two glasses having
different coefficients of expansion.

_Blowing Bulbs._--A bulb may be blown on a closed tube such as that
shown by _c_, Fig. 5, by rotating it in the blowpipe flame until the end
is softened, removing it from the flame and blowing cautiously. It is
desirable to continue the rotation during blowing. In the case of a very
small tube, it is sufficient to melt the end without previous sealing,
rotate it in the flame until enough glass has collected, remove from the
flame and blow while keeping the tube in rotation.

_Thermometer Bulbs._--If the thermometer is to be filled with mercury,
it is desirable to use a rubber bulb for blowing, as moisture is liable
to condense inside the tube when the mouth is used, and this moisture
will cause the mercury thread to break. In any case, a slight pressure
should be maintained inside the thermometer tube while it is in the
flame; otherwise the fine capillary tube will close and it will be very
difficult to expand the heated glass into a bulb.

_Large Bulbs._--When a large bulb is needed on a small or medium sized
tube, it is often necessary to provide more glass than would be obtained
if the bulb were blown in the ordinary way. One method is to expand the
tube in successive stages along its axis, as shown by _a_, Fig. 6. These
expanded portions are then re-heated, so that they run together into one
hollow mass from which the bulb is blown; _b_ and _c_, illustrate this.
Another method, and one which is useful for very large bulbs, is to
fuse on a length of large, thick-walled, tubing. The heat reflector,
_g_, Fig. 3, should be used, if necessary, when making large bulbs. It
consists of a sheet of asbestos mounted in a foot, and is used by being
placed close to the mass of glass on the side away from the blowpipe
flame while the glass is being heated.

[Illustration: Fig. 6]

_Bulbs of Dissimilar Glass._--These may be made by the second method
given under "Large Bulbs," but the joint should be blown as thin as
possible. Further instructions in the use of unlike glasses are given on
page 94.

_A Bulb in the Middle of a Tube._--Unless the bulb is to be quite small,
it will be necessary to join in a piece of thick glass tubing, or to
draw the thin tube out from a larger piece, thus leaving a thick mass in
the middle as shown by _d_, Fig. 6. This mass of glass should now be
rotated in the blowpipe flame until it is quite soft and on the point of
running together. Considerable practice will be necessary before the two
ends of the tube can be rotated at the same speed and without
"wobbling," but this power must be acquired. When the glass is
thoroughly hot, remove from the flame, hold in a horizontal position,
and expand by blowing. It is essential to continue the rotation while
this is done. Should one part of the bulb tend to expand more than the
other, turn the expanded part to the bottom, pause for about a second,
both in rotating and blowing, in order that the lower portion may be
cooled by ascending air-currents; then continue blowing and turning as
before.

_Absorption Bulbs or Washing Bulbs._--These are made by an elaboration
of the processes given in the last paragraph, _g_, _h_, and _i_, Fig. 6,
