But no answer came back. The line remained dead. The strange fish had
cut George Abbot's last contact with the upper world. The
grapple-hooks could never find him now, for there was now not even a
telephone cable to guide them down to his sphere.

The realization that he was hopelessly lost, and that he had not much
longer to live, came as a real relief to him, after the last few
moments of frantic uncertainty.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hoping that his sphere would eventually be found, even though too late
to do him any good, he set assiduously to work jotting down all the
details which he could remember of those strange denizens of the deep,
the man-handed sharks, which he was now firmly convinced were the
cause of his present predicament.

He stared out through one of his windows into the brilliant blue
darkness, but did not turn on his flashlight. How near were these
enemies of his, he wondered?

The presence of those menacing man-sharks, just outside the
four-inch-thick steel shell, which withstood a ton of pressure for
each square inch of its surface, began to obsess young Abbot. What
were they doing out there in the watery-blue midnight? Perhaps, having
secured his sphere as a scientific specimen, they were already
preparing to cut into it so as to see what was inside. That these
fish could cut through four inches of steel was not so improbable as
it sounded, for had they not already succeeded in severing a rubber
cable an inch and a half thick, containing two heavy copper wires, and
also two inches of the finest, non-kinking steel rope!

The young scientist flashed his pocket torch out through the thick
quartz pane, but his enemies were nowhere in sight. Then he fell to
calculating his oxygen supply. His normal consumption was about half a
quart per minute, at which rate his two tanks would be good for
thirty-six hours. His chemical racks contained enough soda-lime to
absorb the excess carbon dioxide, enough calcium chloride to keep down
the humidity and enough charcoal to sweeten the body odors for much
more than that period.

For a moment, the thought of these facts encouraged him. He had been
down less than two hours. Perhaps the boat above him could affect his
rescue in the more than thirty-four hours which remained!

       *       *       *       *       *

But then he realized that he had failed to take into consideration the
near-freezing temperature of the ocean depths. This temperature he
knew to be in the neighborhood of 39 degrees Fahrenheit--even though
no thermometer hung outside his window, as none could withstand the
frightful pressures at the bottom of the sea. For it is one of the
remarkable facts of inductive science that man has been able to figure
out _a priori_ that the temperature at all deep points of the ocean,
tropic as well as arctic, must always be stable at approximately 39
degrees.

Abbot was clad only in a light cotton sailor suit, and now that his
source of heat had been cut off by the severing of his power lines,
his prison was rapidly becoming unbearably chilly. His thick steel
sphere constituted such a perfect transmitter of heat that he might
almost as well have been actually swimming in water of 39 degrees
temperature, so far as comfort was concerned.

Abbot's emotions ran all the gamut from stupefaction, through dull
calmness, clear-headed thought, intense but aimless mental activity,
nervousness, frenzy, and insane delirium, back to stupefaction again.

During one of his periods of calmness, he figured out what an almost
total impossibility there was of the chance that his ship, one mile
above him on the surface, could ever find his sphere with grappling
hooks. Yet he prayed for that chance. A single chance in a million
sometimes does happen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Several hours had by now elapsed since the parting of the young
scientist's cables. It was bitterly cold inside the sphere. In order
to keep warm, he had to exercise during his calm moments as
systematically as his cramped quarters would permit. During his
frantic moments he got plenty of exercise automatically. And of course
all this movement used up more than the normal amount of oxygen, so
that he was forced to open the valves on his tanks to two or three
times their normal flow. His span of further life was thereby cut to
ten or twelve hours, if indeed he could keep himself warm for that
long.

Why didn't the people on the boat do something!

He was just about to indulge in one of his frantic fits of despair,
when he heard or felt--the two senses being strangely commingled in
his present situation--a clank or thump upon the top of his
bathysphere. Instantly hope flooded him. Could it be that the one
chance in a million had actually happened, and that a grapple from the
boat above had actually found him?

With feverish expectation, he pressed the button of his little
electric pocket flashlight, and sent its feeble beam out through one
of the quartz-glass windows into the blue-black depths beyond.

No hooks in front of this window. He tried the others. No hooks there,
either. But he did see plenty of the superhuman fish. Eighteen of
them, he counted, in sight at one time. And also two huge snake-like
creatures with crested backs and maned heads, veritable sea-serpents.

As there was nothing the young man could do to assist in the grappling
of his sphere by his friends in the boat above, he devoted his time to
jotting down a detailed description of these two new beasts and of
their behavior.

One of the sharks appeared to be leading or driving them up to the
bathysphere; and when they got close enough, Abbot was surprised to
see that they wore what appeared to be a harness!

       *       *       *       *       *

The clanking upon the bathysphere continued, and now the young man
learned its cause. It was not the grapple hooks from his ship, but
chains--chains which the man-armed sharks were wrapping around the
bathysphere.

Two more of the harnessed sea-serpents swam into view, and these two
were hitched to a flat cart: an actual cart with wheels. The chains
were attached to the harness of the original two beasts; they swam
upward and disappeared from view; and the sphere slowly rose from the
mucky bottom of the sea, to be lowered again squarely on top of the
cart. The cart jerked forward, and a journey over the ocean floor
began.

Then the little pocket torch dimmed to a dull red glow, and the scene
outside faded gradually from view. Abbot switched off the now useless
light and set to work with scientific precision to record all these
unbelievable events.

In his interest and excitement, he had forgotten the ever-increasing
cold; but gradually, as he wrote, the frigidity of his surroundings
was forced on his consciousness. He turned on more oxygen, and
exercised frantically. Meanwhile the cart, carrying his bathysphere,
bumped along over an uneven road.

From time to time, he tried his almost exhausted little light, but its
dim red beam was completely absorbed by the blue of the ocean depths,
and he could make out nothing except two bulking indistinct shapes,
writhing on ahead of him. Finally even this degree of visibility
failed, and he could see absolutely nothing outside.

He was now so chilled and numb that he could no longer write. With a
last effort, he noted down that fact, and then put the book away in
its rack.

He began to feel drowsy. Rousing himself, he turned on more oxygen.
The effect was exhilaration and a feeling of silly joy. He began to
babble drunkenly to himself. His head swam. His mind was in a daze.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed hours later when he awoke. Ahead of him in the distance
there was a dim pale-blue light, against which there could be seen, in
silhouette, the forms of the two serpentine steeds and their fish-like
drivers. Abbot's hands and feet were completely numb, but his head was
clear.

As they drew nearer to the light, it gradually took form, until it
turned out to be the mouth of a cave. The cart entered it.

Down a long tunnel they progressed, the light getting brighter and
brighter as they advanced. The color of the light became a golden
green. The rough stone walls of the tunnel could now be seen; and
finally there appeared, ahead, two semicircular doors, swung back
against the sides of the passage.

Beyond these doors, the tunnel walls were smooth and exactly
cylindrical, and on the ceiling there were many luminous tubes, which
lit up the place as brightly as daylight. The cart came to a stop.

The young scientist could now see with surprising distinctness his
captors and their serpentine steeds, and even the details of the
chains and the harness. He tried to pick up his diary, so as to jot
down some points which he had theretofore missed; but his hands were
too numb. But at least he could keep on observing; so he glued his
eyes to the thick quartz window-pane once more.

A short distance ahead in the passage there was another pair of doors.
Presently these swung open and the cavalcade moved forward. Five or
six successive pairs of doors were passed in this manner, and then the
sea-serpents began to thrash about and become almost unmanageable. It
was evident that some change not to their liking had taken place in
their surroundings.

       *       *       *       *       *

At last, as one of the portals swung open, young Abbot saw what
appeared to be four deep-sea diving-suits. Could these suits contain
human beings? And if so, who? It seemed incredible, for no diving-suit
had ever been devised in which a man could descend to the depth of one
mile, and live.

These four figures, whatever they were, came stolidly forward and took
charge of the cart. One of the sharks swam up to them and appeared to
talk to them with its hands. Then the sharks unhitched the two
sea-serpents and led them to the rear, and Abbot saw them no more.

The four divers picked up the chains, and slowly towed the cart
forward, their clumsy, ponderous movements contrasting markedly with
the swift and sure swishings which had characterized the man-sharks
and their snake-like steeds.

Several more pairs of doors were passed, and then there met them four
figures in less cumbersome diving-suits, like those ordinarily used by
men just below the surface of the sea. One of the deep-sea divers then
pressed his face close to the outside of one of the windows of the
bathysphere, as though to take a look inside; but the four newcomers
waved him away, and hurriedly picked up the chains. Nevertheless, in
that brief instant, Abbot had seen within the head-piece of the diver
what appeared to be a bearded human face.

Several more pairs of doors were passed. The four deep-sea divers
floundered along beside the cart, quite evidently having more and more
difficulty of locomotion as each successive doorway was passed, until
finally they lay down and were left behind.

At last the procession entered a section of tunnel which was square,
instead of circular, and in which there was a wide shelf along one
side about three feet above the floor. The four divers then dropped
the chains, and one by one took a look at Abbot through his window.

And he at the same time took a most interested look at them.

They had unmistakable human faces!

       *       *       *       *       *

He must be dreaming! For even if Osborne was right about his supposed
super-race at the bottom of the sea, this race could not be human, for
the pressures here would be entirely too great. No human being could
possibly stand two thousand pounds per square inch!

Having satisfied their curiosity, the four divers pulled themselves up
onto the shelf, and sat there in a row with their legs hanging over.

Abbot glanced upward at the ceiling lights, but these had become
strangely blurred. There seemed to be an opaque barrier above him, and
this barrier seemed to be slowly descending. The lights blurred out
completely, and were replaced by a diffused illumination over the
entire ripply barrier. And then it dawned on the young man that this
descending sheet of silver was the surface of the water. He was in a
lock, and the water was being pumped out.

The surface settled about the helmets of the divers, and their helmets
disappeared; then their shoulders and the rest of them. At last it
reached the level of Abbot's window. The divers could again be seen,
and among then on the shelf there stood a half dozen naked bearded
men, clad only in loin-cloths. They had evidently entered the lock
while the water was subsiding.

       *       *       *       *       *

These men unbuckled the helmets of the divers and helped them out, and
then splashed down into the water and peered in through the windows of
the bathysphere. Presently some of them left through a door at the end
of the platform, but soon reappeared with staging, which they set up
around the sphere. Then, climbing on top, they got to work on the
man-hole cover.

As George Abbot realized their purpose, he became frantic. Although
these men appeared to be human, just like himself, yet his
scientifically-trained mind told him that they must be of some very
special anatomical structure, in order to be able to withstand the
immense pressures at the bottom of the Pacific. It was all right for
them to be out there, but it would be fatal to him!

And then the heavy circular door above him began slowly to revolve.

This was terrible! In a moment the crushing pressures of the depths
would come seeping in. Rising unsteadily upon his knees, the young man
tried with his fingers to resist the rotation of the door; but it
continued to turn.

Yet no pressure could be felt. The door became completely unscrewed.
It was pried up, and slid off the top of the bathysphere, to crash
upon the floor outside. Inquisitive bearded faces peered down through
the hole.

Young Abbot slumped to the cold bottom of the sphere and stared back
at them. He was saved; incredibly saved! These were real people, the
air was real air and he must therefore be on the surface of the earth,
instead of at the bottom of the Pacific as he had imagined! With a
sigh of relief, he fainted....

       *       *       *       *       *

When he came to his senses again, he was lying in a bed in a small
room. Bending over him was the sweetest feminine face that he had ever
seen.

The girl seemed to be about twenty years of age. She was clad in a
clinging robe of some filmy green substance. Her hair was honey-brown,
short and curly, and her forehead high and intelligent. Her eyes, an
indescribable shade of deep violet, were matchlessly set off by her
ivory skin.

The young man smiled up at her, and she smiled back. Thus far it had
not occurred to him to wonder where he was, or why. No recollection of
his recent strange adventures came to him. To him this was an exotic
dream, from which he did not care to awake.

She spoke. Her words were unintelligible, and unlike any language
which George Abbot knew or had even heard; and he was an accomplished
linguist in addition to his other attainments.

And her words were not all that was strange about her speech, for the
very tones of her voice sounded completely unhuman, although not
displeasing. Her talk had a metallic ring to it, like the brassy blare
of temple gongs, and yet was so smooth and subdued as to be sweeter
than any sound that the young scientist had ever heard before.

"Beautiful dream fairy," replied the enraptured young man, "I haven't
the slightest idea what you are saying, but keep right on. I like it."

His own voice sounded crass and crude compared to hers. At his first
words she gave a start of surprise, but thereafter the sound did not
appear to grate on her ears.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then one of the bearded men in loin-cloths entered, and he and the
girl talked together, quite evidently about their patient. The man's
voice had the same strange metallic quality to it as that of the girl,
but was deeper, so that it boomed with the rich notes of a bell.

At the sight of the man, young Abbot's memory swept back, and he
remembered the adventure of his diving-sphere, and its capture, one
mile down, by the strange shark-fish with human hands and arms. But
how he had reached the surface of the earth again, he couldn't figure
out. Nor did he particularly care.

The strange man withdrew, and the girl sat down beside the bed and
smiled at Abbot. He smiled back at her.

Presently another girl entered and called, "Milli!"

The girl beside the bed started, and looking up asked some question,
to which the other replied.

The newcomer brought in some strange warm food in a covered dish and
then withdrew. The first girl proceeded to feed her patient.
