"And be damned as a kidnapper of a particularly horrible sort, as long
as Subterranea lasts!"

"I know. I know. But what will happen to them all when the automatic
machinery fails?"

"They may learn to run it, if they have to. Or if we succeed in
establishing ourselves in the outer world we can tunnel back to them
around the Gate in a year or so. Don't worry about them too much.
We're taking the big risk, not they."

Gobet Hanlon, accompanied by Flos Entine and Mila Mane, approached. He
was loaded down with a huge case of concentrated food.

"I've given orders to bring with us all the cold resisting fabrics we
could carry. Got 'em loaded down, eh?"

"All here?"

"Every last one."

"Let's go, then." Mich'l stepped to a small door that led into the
main corridor close to the Gate. This door had not been used by the
technies when assembling. Through a tiny hole the guard, four
soldiers, could be seen about a blanket, tossing sixteen-sided dice.
Mich'l opened the door, his needle-ray pointed.

"Don't move, or you burn!" he commanded harshly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The guards, taken completely by surprise, did not move. In a few
moments they were bound, gagged, and dumped into a corner of 37X.
Eager technies were swarming over the complicated mechanism that they
had dared to touch, before, only for inspection and maintenance. The
Frozen Gate was like a huge stopper in a bottle, made of chromium
steel. It was thirty feet in diameter, and thirty feet thick from its
well insulated inside face to that enigmatical Outside that had been a
grisly mystery to the race for some five hundred centuries.

There was a flash of sparks, and the quiet hum of motors. With a
shuddering groan the great plug freed itself from the grip of
millennia; turned a few inches in its hole. The supporting gimbals
took the load now, and slowly the great mass moved inward, carried by
an overhead traveling crane whose track was bolted to the rock roof.
The rate of movement was slow, not much over three or four inches a
minute.

An excited murmur filled the cavern--almost hysterical joy. But
Mich'l, watching that widening margin for the dreaded gush of liquid
air, only trembled with relief. At least the calamity that had visited
rash Atlantica would not be repeated here.

A young technie, one of the heat distributors, climbed up the heavy
bosses on the gateway's face.

"I'm going to be the first to see the Sun!" he shouted joyously. His
challenging gaze roved over the waiting crowd, and suddenly his face
turned ashen. For at the turn of the corridor, some hundred yards
away, he had seen men. No mistaking those uniforms; they were
soldiers. And Mich'l, following his gaze, saw a riot-ray being wheeled
into place. His own riot-ray already commanded the corridor, but he
dared not use it. The soldiers, under the partial protection of the
turn, could incinerate the helpless technies with little danger to
themselves.

"Wait!" Mich'l shouted, running into the open.

       *       *       *       *       *

An officer came to meet him. He then recognized Captain Ilgen, whose
exceptional shrewdness had almost undone him before. Ilgen could not
see the slow movement of the gate, and Mich'l, himself weaponless,
counted only on parleying for time.

They met midway between the two forces, and the small black lens of
the captain's weapon pointed steadily at Mich'l's chest.

"Mich'l Ares, I arrest you." It seemed that the captain's fine gray
eyes looked out of the lean face with real sympathy. "It may be there
will be executive clemency for these people of yours, but for you--"

Mich'l, tense and deadly, saw the captain's vigilant attention leave
his face for a second; saw his eyes widen in consternation. He could
not know that Ilgen had seen a slender crescent of green light appear
in the Frozen Gate, but he did not lose the opportunity. His fist
crashed on the captain's jaw, so that the soldierly figure reeled and
the needle-ray fell to the ground. Mich'l leaped after him, picked him
up, held him. The riot-ray was turned full on him, and a soldier's
hand trembled on the lever. But it did not pull.

"You'll kill him!" Mich'l shouted. And then he ventured to turn his
head to look at the Gate. He saw the first of the fugitives struggle
into the narrow crack. The gate seemed to have stuck, and there was
barely room to pass. Ilgen, half conscious, was trying to rain blows
on Mich'l's back, compelling him to stop and pass the officer's hands
through the belt of his tunic and to manacle them with a pair of
bracelets which he found in his pocket. As he staggered toward the
Gate with his burden, he saw Gobet beside him, the stolen riot-ray
menacing the soldiers, who would otherwise have rushed in.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly Ilgen struggled upright.

"Fire," he commanded in stentorian tones.

"They'll kill you too, you fool!" Mich'l exclaimed angrily.

"I am a soldier!" Ilgen answered with contempt. His legs barely
supported his weight, and he was struggling to free his manacled
hands. He threw himself into the narrow crevice of the Gate, to
obstruct the stream of fugitives. He started to shout again:

"Fi--" Crack! Again Mich'l's fist caught him. He hooked the officer's
elbows over two of the bosses, so that he was supported in plain sight
of his men, and turned to urge haste. The last two stragglers were
hurrying through, and with relief Mich'l turned to follow. But he set
the closing mechanism in motion before he leaped for the narrow
opening that was becoming still narrower, though very slowly. Now for
that green crescent of light, and hope!

He felt a wave of heat. Glancing back, he saw the irresolute guards
scattered by the enraged charge of a square, blocky man in civilian
robe--the usually smiling Provisional President, Senator Mollon.
Mollon himself was fumbling with the lever of the riot-ray. Ilgen had
evidently reported where he was going before starting in pursuit of
the technies.

Again that withering flash of heat, and Mich'l saw Captain Ilgen,
still semi-conscious, suddenly turn red-faced. Mollon would burn him
up without compunction, in the hope of catching one of the fugitive
technies. And now a figure in uniform leaped forward at Mollon's angry
gesture, and bent purposefully to the sighting tube.

The crescent was now so slender that Mich'l had to turn sideways to
squeeze back into the corridor. And slowly, inexorably, it was growing
smaller still. With desperate haste the practiced, uniformed man was
adjusting his range.

Captain Ilgen struggled when Mich'l seized him.

"I arrest--"

Mich'l thought for a sickening moment that he was caught in the
closing gate. Then he was free in the cylindrical tunnel into which
the plug was creeping. Luckily, Ilgen was slight. His body squeezed
through with little more difficulty than Mich'l's own. Now the opening
was too small for any man's body. A red glow illuminated that
narrowing slit; an acrid wave of heat, and the smell of burnt metal
came with the strong current of air that blew out of Subterranea.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mich'l dragged his captive down the rocky tunnel, the floor of which
dipped gently away from the Gate; for drainage, no doubt. Around a
bend, the source of the greenish light was apparent. The fugitives
were in an ice cavern. The light seemed to emanate from roof and
walls. The air was uncompromisingly chill, for the blast of warm air
from Subterranea had stopped.

But the cold of the air was nothing to the icy chill that settled on
the heart of Mich'l Ares, and the hearts of Senator Mane, and the
other leaders of this desperate enterprise. So this, this was the
Outside! A cavern of ice--small, hemmed-in! Those ancient folk-legends
of a Sun--

"I arrest you, Mich'l Ares!"

Mich'l laughed shortly. What a single-minded fellow this Captain Ilgen
was! Still groggy, of course. Didn't know where they were. He left the
soldier with the red, blistered face.

"Mich'l! Mich'l!" a voice echoed shrilly from the ice walls. It was a
high-pitched voice, and an excited one. A boy came flying out of a
narrow crevice, his short robe flying, his cloth-wrapped legs
twinkling.

"Mich'l!" he shouted. "I saw it! I saw the Sun, the beautiful Sun!"

Lucky it was that in the rush no one was hurt. The small cleft opened
into a wide tunnel, a low-roofed cave through which milky-white water
flowed. The cave opened upon a vista of blue sky and towering
mountains whose tops were burdened with snow and upon whose sides
glaciers slid down and melted; and the milky-white stream brawled down
into a green valley, far, far below. On a mountain meadow, not far
from the glacier that still buried the Frozen Gate, they rested....

       *       *       *       *       *

And so came a new strain of humanity upon the surface of the earth--a
strain tempered and refined by the inexorable process of evolution and
environment. Already animal life had reappeared, drastically changed
and ruthlessly weeded out by the most severe Ice Age the world had
ever known, and now Man stood once more on a new threshold of time.

Something of this may have passed through the minds of the refugees
luxuriating in the strong sunlight of this mountain meadow, and in
active and alert brains the foundations of a new civilization were
already being built.

They were preparing to go into the valley below when there was a dull
concussion. The glacier over the Frozen Gate rose slightly, then
disappeared completely out of sight, leaving a yawning hole in the
mountainside. Ice and rocks slid down, filling the hole. The refugees
gazed at the scene in fear and wonder.

"They have blown up the gate! And the chambers leading to it!" Senator
Mane--now only Leo Mane--said slowly. "There goes our last chance to
save them!" His tones were deeply sad. He could not look upon these
people as an experiment that Nature had abandoned, although he knew
that history is thronged with the shadows of vanished races, culled by
the process of natural selection.

But Youth looks only ahead. The majority of the rescued technies were
young, and with eagerness and anticipation, they followed Mich'l and
Nida Ares down into the valley to build their first homes.




The Midget From the Island

A COMPLETE NOVELETTE

_By H. G. Winter_

[Illustration: _"For God's sake, Hagendorff, what's come over you?"_]


[Sidenote: Garth Howard, prey to half the animals of the forest,
fights valiantly to regain his lost five feet of size.]

In the chill of an early morning, a rowboat drifted aimlessly down the
Detroit River. It seemed to have broken loose from its mooring and
been swept away; its outboard motor was silent and it swung in slow
circles as the currents caught at it. But the boat carried a
passenger. A man's nude body stretched face downward in it.

It was a startling figure that lay there. The body was fully matured
and had a splendid development of rounded muscles--and yet it was not
more than three feet in length. A perfectly formed and proportioned
manikin! The two officers in the harbor police launch which presently
slid alongside to investigate were giants in comparison.

They had not expected to find such weird cargo in a drifting rowboat.
They stared at the naked, unconscious midget in utter amazement, as if
seeing a thing that could not be real. And when one of them reached
down to lift the tiny body aboard, his eyes went wider with added
surprise. His lift was inadequate. The dwarf's weight was that of a
normal-sized man!

This was mystery on mystery. But they got the uncannily heavy figure
aboard at last and ascertained that, though the skin showed many
wounds and was blue from long exposure, the heart was still beating.
And realizing that the life might flicker out beneath their eyes
unless they took action immediately, they proceeded to work over him.

After some minutes, the dwarf gave signs of returning consciousness.
His lids fluttered and opened, disclosing eyes that filled suddenly
with terror as they stared into the faces, huge in comparison, that
leaned over his. One of the officers said reassuringly:

"You're all right, buddy: you're on a harbor police launch. But who in
the devil are you? D'you speak English? Where'd you come from?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The midget struggled to speak; struggled desperately to tell something
of great importance. They bent closer. Gasping, high-pitched words
came to their ears, and the story that those words told held them
spellbound. When the shrill voice ceased and the dwarf sank back into
the coat they had thrown around him, the two policemen gazed at each
other. One whistled softly, and his companion said soberly:

"We'd better phone up and have the local police tend to this right
away, Bill."

Thus, two hours later, several miles up the river, another launch
containing three officers came to its destination, a solitary,
thickly-wooded island that brooded under a cloak of silence where the
river leaves broad Lake St. Clair. The launch crept up to a mooring
post a few feet from a small, rough beach, and was tied there.
Quickly, the men waded ashore and tiptoed up a winding trail that was
barred from the sun by dank foliage. They soon came to a clearing
where a large cabin had been built. There, one of them whispered,
"Guns out!"

Then the three men crossed the clearing and cautiously entered the
cabin.

For a moment there was silence. Then came a terrified shout, followed
by the bunched thunder of a succession of pistol shots. The
reverberations slowly died away, and some time later the policemen
reappeared and stood outside the door.

One of them, dazed, kept repeating over and over, "I wouldn't have
believed it! I wouldn't have believed it!" and another nodded in
wordless agreement. The third, white-faced, stared for a long time
unseeingly at the cloud-flecked bowl of the sky....

But it would be best, perhaps, to tell the story as it happened.

       *       *       *       *       *

The incredible events that shaped it began two nights before, when the
larger of the two rooms in the island cabin was bathed in the bald
glare of a strong floodlight that threw into sharp prominence the
intent features of two men in the room, and the complicated details of
the strange equipment around them.

Garth Howard, the younger of the two, was holding a tiny, squawling,
spitting thing, not more than three inches long, which might have
seemed, at a quick glance, to have been a normal enough kitten. Closer
inspection, however, would have revealed that it had a thick, smooth
coat, a lithe, fully developed body and narrowed, venomous
eyes--things which no week-old kitten ever possessed. It was a mature
cat, but in the size of a kitten.

Howard's level gray eyes were held fascinated by it. When he spoke,
his words were hushed and almost reverent.

"Perfect, Hagendorff!" he said. "Not a flaw!"

"The reduction has not improved her temper," Hagendorff articulated
precisely. His deep voice matched the rest of him. Garth Howard's
clean-muscled body stood a good six feet off the floor, yet the other
topped him by inches. And his face compared well with his bulky body,
for his head was massive, with overhanging brows and a shaggy mop of
blond hair. Athlete and weight-lifter, the two looked, but in reality
they were scientist and assistant, working together for a common end.

       *       *       *       *       *

The room in which they stood was obviously a laboratory. Bulky gas
engines and a generator squatted at one end; tables held racks of
tools and loops of insulated wiring and jars of various chemicals. One
long table stretched the whole length of the room, placed flush
against the left wall, whose rough planking was broken by a lone
window. There were racks of test tubes on this table, and tools,
carelessly scattered by men intent on their work.

Still another table was devoted to several cages, containing the usual
martyrs of experimental science: guinea pigs and rabbits, rats and
white mice. Beside these was a large box, screen topped, in which, in
separate partitions, were a variety of insects: beetles and flies and
