the blood undergoes by its passage through the lungs, is the change of
color from a dark blue to bright red. That this change is dependent upon
respiration has been fully proved by experiment. If the trachea, or
windpipe, of a living animal be so compressed as to exclude the air from
the lungs, the blood in the arteries will gradually grow darker, until its
color is the same as that of the venous blood. When the pressure is removed
the blood speedily resumes its bright hue. Again, if the animal be made to
breathe an atmosphere containing more oxygen than atmospheric air, the
color changes from scarlet to vermilion, and becomes even brighter than
arterial blood. This change of color is not of itself a very important
matter, but it indicates a most important change of composition.

[Sidenote: 20. What does the air lose and gain by respiration? What, the
blood? Air as food?]

20. The air, as we have seen, by respiration loses oxygen and gains
carbonic acid: the blood, on the contrary, gains oxygen and loses carbonic
acid. The oxygen is the food of the blood corpuscles; while the articles we
eat and drink belong more particularly to the plasma of the blood. The air,
then, it is plain, is a sort of food, and we should {134} undoubtedly so
regard it, if it were not for the fact that we require it constantly,
instead of taking it at stated intervals, as is the case with our articles
of diet. Again, as the demand of the system for food is expressed by the
sensation of hunger, so the demand for air is marked by a painful sensation
called suffocation.

[Sidenote: 21. Moist animal membranes? How shown with the bladder?]

21. INTERCHANGE OF GASES IN THE LUNGS.--As the air and the blood are not in
contact, they being separated from each other by the walls of the air-cells
and of the blood-vessels, how can the two gases, oxygen and carbonic acid,
exchange places? Moist animal membranes have a property which enables them
to transmit gases through their substance, although they are impervious to
liquids. This may be beautifully shown by suspending a bladder containing
dark blood in a jar of oxygen. At the end of a few hours the oxygen will
have disappeared, the blood will be brighter in color, and carbonic acid
will be found in the jar.

[Sidenote: 22. Gaseous diffusion? If oxygen be not received? If carbonic
acid be retained?]

22. If this interchange takes place outside of the body, how much more
perfectly must it take place within, where it is favored by many additional
circumstances! The walls of the vessels and the air-cells offer no obstacle
to this process, which is known as gaseous diffusion. Both parts of the
process are alike of vital importance. If oxygen be not received, the
organs cease to act; and if carbonic acid be retained in the blood, its
action is that of a poison; unconsciousness, convulsions, and death
following.

[Sidenote: 23. Difference in the appearance and composition of the blood?
Temperature of the blood? The blood while passing through the lungs? The
consequence?]

23. DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ARTERIAL AND VENOUS BLOOD.--The following table
presents the essential points of difference in the appearance and
composition of the blood, before and after its passage through the lungs:--
{135}

                  _Venous Blood._      _Arterial Blood._

  Color,          Dark blue,           Scarlet.
  Oxygen,         8 per cent.,         18 per cent.
  Carbonic Acid,  15 to 20 per cent.,  6 per cent., or less.
  Water,          More,                Less.

The temperature of the blood varies considerably; but the arterial stream
is generally warmer than the venous. The blood imparts heat to the air
while passing through the lungs, and consequently the contents of the right
side of the heart has a higher temperature than the contents on the left
side.

[Sidenote: 24. What do we learn by means of the spectroscope? "Carriers of
oxygen?" Blue blood in the system?]

24. By means of the spectroscope, we learn that the change of color in the
blood has its seat in the corpuscles; and that, according as they retain
oxygen, or release it, they present the spectrum of arterial or venous
blood. There evidently exists, on the part of these little bodies, an
affinity for this gas, and hence they have been called "carriers of
oxygen." It was long ago thought that blue blood was a trait peculiar to
persons of princely and royal descent, and boastful allusions to the "_sang
azure_" of kings and nobles are quite often met with. Physiology, however,
informs us that blue blood flows in the veins of the low as well as the
high, and that so far from its presence indicating a mark of purity, it, in
reality, represents the waste and decay of the system.

[Sidenote: 25. The amount of air that passes in and out of the lungs?]

25. AMOUNT OF RESPIRATORY LABOR.--During ordinary calm respiration, we
breathe eighteen times in a minute; and twenty cubic inches of air pass in
and out of the lungs with every breath. This is equivalent to the use of
three hundred and sixty cubic inches, or more than ten pints of air each
minute. From this we calculate that the quantity of air which hourly
traverses the lungs is about thirteen cubic feet, or seventy-eight gallons;
and daily, not {136} less than three hundred cubic feet, an amount nearly
equal to the contents of sixty barrels.

[Sidenote: 26. Air absorbed in its transit through the lungs? The loss?
Carbonic acid exhaled? Effect of excitement or exertion? What estimate?]

26. Of this large volume of air five per cent. is absorbed in its transit
through the lungs. The loss thus sustained is almost wholly of oxygen, and
amounts to fifteen cubic feet daily. The quantity of carbonic acid exhaled
by the lungs during the day is somewhat less, being twelve cubic feet.
Under the influence of excitement or exertion, the breathing becomes more
frequent and more profound; and then the internal respiratory work
increases proportionately, and may even be double that of the above
estimate. It has been estimated that in drawing a full breath, a man exerts
a muscular force equal to raising two hundred pounds placed upon the chest.

[Sidenote: 27. Importance of the oxygen in the atmosphere? Injurious
character of gases?]

27. IMPURITIES OF THE AIR.--The oxygen in the atmosphere is of such prime
importance, and its proportion is so nicely adjusted to the wants of man,
that any gas or volatile substance which supplants it must be regarded as a
hurtful impurity. All gases, however, are not alike injurious. Some, if
inhaled, are necessarily fatal; _arsenuretted hydrogen_ being one of these,
a single bubble of which destroyed the life of its discoverer, Gehlen.
Others are not directly dangerous, but by taking the place of oxygen, and
excluding it from the lungs, they become so. Into this latter class we
place carbonic acid.

[Sidenote: 28. Pungency of gases? The inference? Our safeguard?]

28. Most of the actively poisonous gases have a pungent or offensive odor;
and, as may be inferred, most repugnant odors indicate the presence of
substances unfit for respiration. Accordingly, as we cannot see or taste
these impurities, the sense of smell is our principal safeguard against
them; and we recognize the design which has planted this sense, like a
sentinel at the proper entrance of the {137} air-passages, the nostrils, to
give us warning of approaching harm. Take, as an example, the ordinary
illuminating gas of cities, from which so many accidents happen. How many
more deaths would it cause if, when a leak occurs, we were not able to
discover the escape of the gas by means of its disagreeable odor.

[Sidenote: 29. The air of rooms in which fever-sick persons are confined?]

29. Organic matters exist in increased measure in the expired breath of
sick persons, and impart to it, at times, a putrid odor. This is especially
true in diseases which, like typhus and scarlet fever, are referable to a
blood poison. In such cases the breath is one of the means by which nature
seeks to expel the offending material from the system. Hence, those who
visit or administer to fever-sick persons should obey the oft-repeated
direction, "not to take the breath of the sick." At such times, if ever,
fresh air is demanded, not alone for the sick, but as well for those who
are in attendance.

[Sidenote: 30. Animalcula in the water? Dust in the air?]

30. DUST IN THE AIR.--Attention has lately been directed to the dust, or
haze, that marks the ray of sunshine across a shaded room. Just as, many
years ago, it was discovered that myriads of animalcula infested much of
the water we drank, so now the microscope reveals "the gay motes that dance
along a sunbeam" to be, in part, composed of multitudes of animal and
vegetable forms of a very low grade, the germs of fermentation and
putrefaction, and the probable sources of disease.

[Sidenote: 31. The best air filter? The remarks of Prof. Tyndall?]

31. It is found that the best filter by which to separate this floating
dust from the air is cotton wool, although a handkerchief will imperfectly
answer the same purpose. In a lecture on this subject by Prof. Tyndall, he
remarks that, "by breathing through a cotton wool respirator, the noxious
air of the sick room is restored to practical purity. Thus filtered,
attendants may breathe the air unharmed. {138} In all probability, the
protection of the lungs will be the protection of the whole system. For it
is exceedingly probable that the germs which lodge in the air-passages are
those which sow epidemic disease in the body. If this be so, then disease
can certainly be warded off by filters of cotton wool. By this means, so
far as the germs are concerned, the air of the highest Alps may be brought
into the chamber of the invalid."

[Sidenote: 32. Carbonic acid in volcanic regions? In Java? At Lake Avernus?
In mines?]

32. CARBONIC ACID IN THE AIR.--We have already spoken of this gas as an
exhalation from the lungs, and a source of impurity; but it exists
naturally in the atmosphere in the proportion of one half part per
thousand. In volcanic regions it is poured forth in enormous quantities
from fissures in the earth's surface. Being heavier than air, it sometimes
settles into caves and depressions in the surface. It is stated that in the
island of Java, there is a place called the "Valley of Poison," where the
ground is covered with the bones of birds, tigers, and other wild animals,
which were suffocated by carbonic acid while passing. The Lake Avernus, the
fabled entrance to the infernal regions, was, as its name implies,
bird-less, because the birds, while flying over it, were poisoned by the
gas and fell dead into its waters. In mines, carbonic acid forms the
dreaded _choke-damp_, while carburetted hydrogen is the _fire-damp_.

[Sidenote: 33. In the open air? Amount of carbonic acid exhaled by a man? A
gas-burner? A room fire? From furnaces?]

33. In the open air, men seldom suffer from carbonic acid, for, as we shall
see presently, nature provides for its rapid distribution, and even turns
it to profitable use. But its ill effects are painfully evident in the
abodes of men, in which it is liable to collect as the waste product of
respiration and of that combustion which is necessary for lighting and
warming our homes. A man exhales, during repose, not less than one-half
cubic foot of carbonic acid per hour. One gas-burner liberates five cubic
feet in the {139} same time, and spoils about as much air as ten men. A
fire burning in a grate or stove emits some gaseous impurity, and at the
same time abstracts from the air as much oxygen as twelve men would consume
in the same period, thus increasing the relative amount of carbonic acid in
the air. From furnaces, as ordinarily constructed, this gas, with other
products of combustion, is constantly leaking and vitiating the air of
tightly-closed apartments.

[Sidenote: 34. Effects of inhaling carbonic acid alone? In small
quantities?]

34. EFFECTS OF IMPURE AIR.--Carbonic acid, in its pure form, is
irrespirable, causing rapid death by suffocation. Air containing forty
parts per thousand of this gas (the composition of the expired breath)
extinguishes a lighted candle, and is fatal to birds; when containing one
hundred parts, it no longer yields oxygen to man and other warm-blooded
animals; and is of course at once fatal to them. In smaller quantities,
this gas causes headache, labored respiration, palpitation,
unconsciousness, and convulsions.

[Sidenote: 35. Effects of the air in crowded and badly ventilated rooms?]

35. In crowded and badly ventilated apartments, where the atmosphere
relatively contains from six to ten times the natural amount of carbonic
acid, the contaminated air causes dulness, drowsiness, and faintness; the
dark, impure blood circulating through the brain, oppressing that organ and
causing it to act like a blunted tool. This is a condition not uncommon in
our schools, churches, court-rooms, and the like, the places of all others
where it is desirable that the mind should be alert and free to act; but,
unhappily, an unseen physiological cause is at work, dispensing weariness
and stupor over juries, audience, and pupils.

[Sidenote: 36. A cause of consumption? How was the fact illustrated?]

36. Another unmistakable result of living in and breathing foul air is
found in certain diseases of the lungs, especially consumption. For many
years the barracks of {140} the British army were constructed without any
regard to ventilation; and during those years the statistics showed that
consumption was the cause of a very large proportion of deaths. At last the
government began to improve the condition of the buildings, giving larger
space and air-supply; and as a consequence, the mortality from consumption
has diminished more than one-third.

[Sidenote: 37. How, in the case of the lower animals? Tendency of certain
occupations?]

37. The lower animals confined in the impure atmosphere of menageries,
contract the same diseases as man. Those brought from a tropical climate,
and requiring artificial warmth, generally die of consumption. In the
Zoological gardens of Paris, this disease affected nearly all monkeys,
until care was taken to introduce fresh air by ventilation; and then it
almost wholly disappeared. The tendency of certain occupations to shorten
life is well known; disease being occasioned by the fumes and dust which
arise from the material employed, in addition to the unhealthful condition
of the workshop or factory where many hours are passed daily.

[Sidenote: 38. Give the fact as set forth in the table.]

38. The following table shows the comparative amount of carbonic acid in
the air under different conditions and the effects sometimes produced:--

  PROPORTION OF CARBONIC ACID.             In 1000 parts of Air.

  Air of country.                                       .4
   "   "  city.                                         .5
  In hospital, well ventilated.                         .6
  In school, church, etc., fairly ventilated.          1.2 to 2.5
  In court-house, factory, etc., without ventilation.  4. to 40.
  In bedroom, before being aired.                      4.5
  In bedroom, after being aired.                       1.5
  Constantly breathed, causing ill health.             2.
  Occasionally breathed, causing discomfort.           3.
  Occasionally breathed, causing distress.            10.
  Expired air.                                        40.
  Air no longer yielding oxygen                      100.

{141}

[Sidenote: 39. What can you state of the diffusive power of gases? The
added influence of the winds?]

39. NATURE'S PROVISION FOR PURIFYING THE AIR.--We have seen that carbonic
acid is heavier than air, and is poisonous. Why, then, does it not sink
upon and overwhelm mankind with a silent, invisible wave of death? Among
the gases there is a more potent force than gravity, which forever
precludes such a tragedy. It is known as the diffusive power of gases. It
acts according to a definite law, and with a resistless energy compelling
these gases, when in contact, to mingle until they are thoroughly diffused.
The added influence of the winds is useful, by insuring more rapid changes
in the air; air in motion being perfectly wholesome. The rains also wash
the air.

[Sidenote: 40. How is the constant purity of the air secured? Explain the
process?]

40. We have seen that the whole animal creation is constantly abstracting
oxygen from the atmosphere, and as constantly adding to it vast volumes of
a gas injurious alike to all, even in small quantities. How, then, does the
air retain, unchanged, its life-giving properties? The constant purity of
the air is secured by means of the vegetable creation. Carbonic acid is the
food of the plants, and oxygen is its waste product. The leaves are its
lungs, and under the stimulus of sunlight a vegetable respiration is set in
motion, the effects of which are just the reverse of the function we have
been considering. Thus nature purifies the air, and at the same time builds
up beautiful and useful forms of life from elements of decay.

[Sidenote: 41. What process occurs in the sea? How is the fact
illustrated?]

41. In the sea, as in the air, the same circle of changes is observed.
Marine animals consume oxygen and give off carbonic acid; while marine
plants consume carbonic acid and liberate oxygen. Taking advantage of this
fact, we may so arrange aquaria with fishes and sea-plants, in their proper
combinations, so that each supplies the needs of the other, and the water
requires seldom to be renewed. This {142} affords us, on a small scale, an
illustration of the mutual dependence of the two great kingdoms of nature;
as well as of those compensating changes which are taking place on such a
grand scale in the world about us.

[Sidenote: 42. Character of the external air? Of the air in our dwellings?
What becomes imperative? Imperfect ventilation of our dwellings?]

42. VENTILATION.--Since the external atmosphere, as provided by nature, is
always pure, and since the air in our dwellings and other buildings is
almost always impure, it becomes imperative that there should be a free
communication from the one to the other. This we aim to accomplish by
ventilation. As our houses are ordinarily constructed, the theory of
ventilation, "to make the internal as pure as the external air," is seldom
carried out. Doors, windows, and flues, the natural means of replenishing
the air, are too often closed, almost hermetically, against the precious
element. Special means, or special attention, must therefore be used to
secure even a fair supply of fresh air. This is still more true of those
places of public resort, where many persons are crowded together.

[Sidenote: 43. What hints are given for the ventilation of our dwellings?]

43. If there are two openings in a room, one as a vent for foul air, and
the other an inlet for atmospheric air, and if the openings be large, in
proportion to the number of air consumers, the principal object will be
attained. Thus, a door and window, each opening into the outer air, will
ordinarily ventilate a small apartment; or a window alone will answer, if
