universe and that all heavy bodies are borne towards it; and this will
be readily understood if it is remembered that the earth has been
demonstrated to have a spherical shape, and according to what we have
said, is placed at the center of the universe, for the direction of
the fall of heavy bodies (I speak of their own motions) is always and
everywhere perpendicular to an uncurved plane drawn tangent to the
point of intersection. Obviously these bodies would all meet at the
center if they were not stopped by the surface, since a straight line
drawn to the center is perpendicular to a plane tangent to the sphere
at that point.

Those who consider it a paradox that a mass like the earth is
supported on nothing, yet not moved at all, appear to me to argue
according to the preconceptions they get from what they see happening
to small bodies about them, and not according to what is
characteristic of the universe as a whole, and this is the cause of
their mistake. For I think that such a thing would not have seemed
wonderful to them any longer if they had perceived that the earth,
great as it is, is merely a point in comparison to the surrounding
body of the heaven. They would find that it is possible for the earth,
being infinitely small relative to the universe, to be held in check
and fixed by the forces exercised over it equally and following
similar directions by the universe, which is infinitely great and
composed of similar parts. There is neither up nor down in the
universe, for that cannot be imagined in a sphere. As to the bodies
which it encloses, by a consequence of their nature it happens that
those that are light and subtle are as though blown by the wind to the
outside and to the circumference, and seem to appear to us to go _up_,
because that is how we speak of the space above our heads that
envelops us. It happens on the other hand that heavy bodies and those
composed of dense parts are drawn towards the middle as towards a
center, and appear to us to fall _down_, because that it is the word
we apply to what is beneath our feet in the direction of the center of
the earth. But one should believe that they are checked around this
center by the retarding effect of shock and of friction. It would be
admitted then that the entire mass of the earth, which is considerable
in comparison to the bodies falling on it, could receive these in
their fall without acquiring the slightest motion from the shock of
their weight or of their velocity. But if the earth had a movement
which was common to it and to all other heavy bodies, it would soon
seemingly outstrip them as a result of its weight, thus leaving the
animals and the other heavy bodies without other support than the air,
and would soon touch the limits of the heaven itself. All these
consequences would seem most ridiculous if one were only even
imagining them.

There are those who, while they admit these arguments because there is
nothing to oppose them, pretend that nothing prevents the supposition,
for instance, that if the sky is motionless, the earth might turn on
its axis from west to east, making this revolution once a day or in a
very little less time, or that, if they both turn, it is around the
same axis, as we have said, and in a manner conformable to the
relations between them which we have observed.

It has escaped these people that in regard to the appearances of the
planets themselves, nothing perhaps prevents the earth from having the
simpler motion; but they do not realize how very ridiculous their
opinion is in view of what takes place around us and in the air. For
if we grant them that the lightest things and those composed of the
subtlest parts do not move, which would be contrary to nature, while
those that are in the air move visibly more swiftly than those that
are terrestrial; if we grant them that the most solid and heavy bodies
have a swift, steady movement of their own, though it is true however
that they obey impelling forces only with difficulty; they would be
obliged to admit that the earth by its revolution has a movement more
rapid than the movements taking place around it, since it would make
so great a circuit in so short a time. Thus the bodies which do not
rest on it would appear always to have a motion contrary to its own,
and neither the clouds, nor any missile or flying bird would appear to
go towards the east, for the earth would always outstrip them in this
direction, and would anticipate them by its own movement towards the
east, with the result that all the rest would appear to move backwards
towards the west.

If they should say that the atmosphere is carried along by the earth
with the same speed as the earth's own revolution, it would be no less
true that the bodies contained therein would not have the same
velocity. Or if they were swept along with the air, no longer would
anything seem to precede or to follow, but all would always appear
stationary, and neither in flight nor in throwing would any ever
advance or retreat. That is, however, what we see happening, since
neither the retardation nor the acceleration of anything is traceable
to the movement of the earth.




APPENDIX B.

"TO HIS HOLINESS, PAUL III, SUPREME PONTIFF,

PREFACE BY NICHOLAS COPERNICUS TO HIS BOOKS ON REVOLUTIONS."

     (A translation of the _Praefatio_ in Copernicus: _De
     Revolutionibus_; pp. 3-8.)


"I can certainly well believe, most holy Father, that, while mayhap a
few will accept this my book which I have written concerning the
revolutions of the spheres of the world, ascribing certain motions to
the sphere of the earth, people will clamor that I ought to be cast
out at once for such an opinion. Nor are my ideas so pleasing to me
that I will not carefully weigh what others decide concerning them.
And although I know that the meditations of philosophers are remote
from the opinions of the unlearned, because it is their aim to seek
truth in all things so far as it is permitted by God to the human
reason, nevertheless I think that opinions wholly alien to the right
ought to be driven out. Thus when I considered with myself what an
absurd fairy-tale people brought up in the opinion, sanctioned by many
ages, that the earth is motionless in the midst of the heaven, as if
it were the center of it, would think it if I were to assert on the
contrary that the earth is moved; I hesitated long whether I would
give to the light my commentaries composed in proof of this motion, or
whether it would indeed be more satisfactory to follow the example of
the Pythagoreans and various others who were wont to pass down the
mysteries of philosophy not by books, but from hand to hand only to
their friends and relatives, as the letter of Lysis to Hipparchus
proves.[439] But verily they seemed to me not to have done this, as
some think, from any dislike to spreading their teachings, but lest
the most beautiful things and those investigated with much earnestness
by great men, should be despised by those to whom spending good work
on any book is a trouble unless they make profit by it; or if they are
incited to the liberal study of philosophy by the exhortations and the
example of others, yet because of the stupidity of their wits they are
no more busily engaged among philosophers than drones among bees. When
therefore I had pondered these matters, the scorn which was to be
feared on account of the novelty and the absurdity of the opinion
impelled me for that reason to set aside entirely the book already
drawn up.

[Footnote 439: See Prowe: _Nic. Cop._: III, 128-137.]

"But friends, in truth, have brought me forth into the light again,
though I long hesitated and am still reluctant; among these the
foremost was Nicholas Schoenberg, Cardinal of Capua, celebrated in all
fields of scholarship. Next to him is that scholar, my very good
friend, Tiedeman Giese, Bishop of Culm, most learned in all sacred
matters, (as he is), and in all good sciences. He has repeatedly urged
me and, sometimes even with censure, implored me to publish this book
and to suffer it to see the light at last, as it has lain hidden by me
not for nine years alone, but also into the fourth 'novenium'. Not a
few other scholars of eminence also pleaded with me, exhorting me that
I should no longer refuse to contribute my book to the common service
of mathematicians on account of an imagined dread. They said that
however absurd in many ways this my doctrine of the earth's motion
might now appear, so much the greater would be the admiration and
goodwill after people had seen by the publications of my commentaries
the mists of absurdities rolled away by the most lucid demonstrations.
Brought to this hope, therefore, by these pleaders, I at last
permitted my friends, as they had long besought me, to publish this
work.

"But perhaps your Holiness will not be so shocked that I have dared to
bring forth into the light these my lucubrations, having spent so much
work in elaborating them, that I did not hesitate even to commit to a
book my conclusions about the earth's motion, but that you will
particularly wish to hear from me how it came into my mind to dare to
imagine any motion of the earth, contrary to the accepted opinion of
mathematicians and in like manner contrary to common sense. So I do
not wish to conceal from your Holiness that nothing else moved me to
consider some other explanation for the motions of the spheres of the
universe than what I knew, namely that mathematicians did not agree
among themselves in their examinations of these things. For in the
first place, they are so completely undecided concerning the motion of
the sun and of the moon that they could not observe and prove the
constant length of the great year.[440] Next, in determining the
motions of both these and the five other planets, they did not use the
same principles and assumptions or even the same demonstrations of the
appearances of revolutions and motions. For some used only homocentric
circles; others, eccentrics and epicycles, which on being questioned
about, they themselves did not fully comprehend. For those who put
their trust in homocentrics, although they proved that other diverse
motions could be derived from these, nevertheless they could by no
means decide on any thing certain which in the least corresponded to
the phenomena. But these who devised eccentrics, even though they seem
for the most part to have represented apparent motions by a number [of
eccentrics] suitable to them, yet in the meantime they have admitted
quite a few which appear to contravene the first principles of
equality of motion. Another notable thing, that there is a definite
symmetry between the form of the universe and its parts, they could
not devise or construct from these; but it is with them as if a man
should take from different places, hands, feet, a head and other
members, in the best way possible indeed, but in no way comparable to
a single body, and in no respect corresponding to each other, so that
a monster rather than a man would be constructed from them. Thus in
the process of proof, which they call a system, they are found to have
passed over some essential, or to have admitted some thing both
strange and scarcely relevant. This would have been least likely to
have happened to them if they had followed definite principles. For if
the hypotheses they assumed were not fallacious, everything which
followed out of them would have been verified beyond a doubt. However
obscure may be what I now say, nevertheless in its own place it will
be made more clear.

[Footnote 440: _i.e._, the 15,000 solar years in which all the
heavenly bodies complete their circuits and return to their original
positions.]

"When therefore I had long considered this uncertainty of traditional
mathematics, it began to weary me that no more definite explanation of
the movement of the world machine established in our behalf by the
best and most systematic builder of all, existed among the
philosophers who had studied so exactly in other respects the minutest
details in regard to the sphere. Wherefore I took upon myself the task
of re-reading the books of all the philosophers which I could obtain,
to seek out whether any one had ever conjectured that the motions of
the spheres of the universe were other than they supposed who taught
mathematics in the schools. And I found first that, according to
Cicero, Nicetas had thought the earth was moved. Then later I
discovered according to Plutarch that certain others had held the
same opinion; and in order that this passage may be available to all,
I wish to write it down here:

     "But while some say the earth stands still, Philolaus the
     Pythagorean held that it is moved about the element of fire
     in an oblique circle, after the same manner of motion that
     the sun and moon have. Heraclides of Pontus and Ecphantus
     the Pythagorean assign a motion to the earth, not
     progressive, but after the manner of a wheel being carried
     on its own axis. Thus the earth, they say, turns itself upon
     its own center from west to east."[441]

[Footnote 441: Plutarch: _Moralia: De Placitis Philosophorum_, Lib.
III, c. 13 (V. 326).]

When from this, therefore, I had conceived its possibility I myself
also began to meditate upon the mobility of the earth. And although
the opinion seemed absurd, yet because I knew the liberty had been
accorded to others before me of imagining whatsoever circles they
pleased to explain the phenomena of the stars, I thought I also might
readily be allowed to experiment whether, by supposing the earth to
have some motion, stronger demonstrations than those of the others
could be found as to the revolution of the celestial sphere.

Thus, supposing these motions which I attribute to the earth later on
in this book, I found at length by much and long observation, that if
the motions of the other planets were added to the rotation of the
earth and calculated as for the revolution of that planet, not only
the phenomena of the others followed from this, but also it so bound
together both the order and magnitude of all the planets and the
spheres and the heaven itself, that in no single part could one thing
be altered without confusion among the other parts and in all the
universe. Hence, for this reason, in the course of this work I have
followed this system, so that in the first book I describe all the
positions of the spheres together with the motions I attribute to the
earth; thus this book contains a kind of general disposition of the
universe. Then in the remaining books, I bring together the motions of
the other planets and all the spheres with the mobility of the earth,
so that it can thence be inferred to what extent the motions and
appearances of the other planets and spheres can be solved by
attributing motion to the earth. Nor do I doubt that skilled and
scholarly mathematicians will agree with me if, what philosophy
requires from the beginning, they will examine and judge, not casually
but deeply, what I have gathered together in this book to prove these
things. In order that learned and unlearned may alike see that in no
way whatsoever I evade judgment, I prefer to dedicate these my
lucubrations to your Holiness rather than to any one else; especially
because even in this very remote corner of the earth in which I live,
you are held so very eminent by reason of the dignity of your position
and also for your love of all letters and of mathematics that, by your
authority and your decision, you can easily suppress the malicious
attacks of calumniators, even though proverbially there is no remedy
against the attacks of sycophants.

[Illustration: A photographic facsimile (reduced) of a page from
Mulier's edition (1617) as "corrected" according to the _Monitum_ of
the Congregations in 1620. The first writer merely underlined the
passage with marginal comment that this was to be deleted by
ecclesiastical order. The second writer scratched out the passage and
referred to the second volume of Riccioli's _Almagestum Novum_ for the
text of the order. The earlier writer was probably the librarian of
the Florentine convent from which this book came, and wrote this soon
after 1620. The later writer did his work after 1651, when Riccioli's
book was published. This copy of the _De Revolutionibus_ is now in the
Dartmouth College Library.]

If perchance there should be foolish speakers who, together with those
ignorant of all mathematics, will take it upon themselves to decide
concerning these things, and because of some place in the Scriptures
wickedly distorted to their purpose, should dare to assail this my
work, they are of no importance to me, to such an extent do I despise
their judgment as rash. For it is not unknown that Lactantius, the
writer celebrated in other ways but very little in mathematics, spoke
somewhat childishly of the shape of the earth when he derided those
who declared the earth had the shape of a ball.[442] So it ought not
to surprise students if such should laugh at us also. Mathematics is
written for mathematicians to whom these our labors, if I am not
mistaken, will appear to contribute something even to the
ecclesiastical state the headship of which your Holiness now occupies.
For it is not so long ago under Leo X when the question arose in the
Lateran Council about correcting the Ecclesiastical Calendar. It was
left unsettled then for this reason alone, that the length of the year
and of the months and the movements of the sun and moon had not been
satisfactorily determined. From that time on, I have turned my
attention to the more accurate observation of these, at the suggestion
of that most celebrated scholar, Father Paul, a bishop from Rome, who
was the leader then in that matter. What, however, I may have achieved
in this, I leave to the decision of your Holiness especially, and to
all other learned mathematicians. And lest I seem to your Holiness to
promise more about the value of this work than I can perform, I now
pass on to the undertaking.

[Footnote 442: These two sentences the Congregations in 1620 ordered
struck out, as part of their "corrections."]




APPENDIX C.

     THE DRAMA OF UNIVERSAL NATURE: in which are considered the
     efficient causes and the ends of all things, discussed in a
     connected series of five books, by JEAN BODIN, (Frankfort,
     1597).

     _Book V_: On the Celestial Bodies: their number, movement,
     size, harmony and distances compared with themselves and
     with the earth. Sections 1 and 10 (in part) and 12
     (entire).

     BODIN, JEAN: _Universae Naturae Theatrum in quo rerum omnium
     effectrices causa et fines contemplantur, et continuae series
     quinque libris discutiuntur_. Frankfort, 1597. Book V
     translated into English by the writer and compared with the
     French translation by Francois de Fougerolles, (Lyons,
     1597).


_Section 1_: On the definition and the number of the spheres.

MYSTAGOGUE: ... Now to prove that the heavens have a nature endowed
with intelligence I need no other argument than that by which
Theophrastus and Alexander prove they are living, for, they say, if
the heavens did not have intelligence, they would be greatly inferior
in dignity and excellence to men. That is why Aben-Ezra,[443] having
interpreted the Hebrew of these two words of the Psalm: "The heavens
declare," has written that the phrase _Sapperim_ (declare) in the
judgment of all Hebrews is appropriate to such great intelligence.
Also he who said "When the morning stars sang together and shouted for
joy,"[444] indicated a power endowed with intelligence, as did the
Master of Wisdom[445] also when he said that God created the heavens
with intelligence.

[Footnote 443: As Rabbi David testified on the 19th Psalm [these
footnotes are by Bodin].]

