ship, took his thumb off the mike button and grabbed for his own
weapon. Gibbons, like a true scientist, stood by with his mouth open,
too interested to be scared.

Then the Balakian spoke, and Corelli and I gaped wider than Gibbons. As
I said before, Balak is some 20,000 light-years from Earth, and to our
knowledge we were the first human beings ever to come within a hundred
parsecs of the place.

"Please don't shoot, gentlemen," he said to us in Terran. "My name is
Gaffa, and I assure you that I am quite friendly."

       *       *       *       *       *

I had to give Gibbons credit for being fast on his mental feet; he had
taken over before Corelli and I could get our mouths closed, and was
talking to the native as if this sort of thing happened every time we
made planetfall.

"You speak Terran fluently," Gibbons said. "Or is this some sort of
telepathic contact that creates the illusion of oral communication?"

The native grinned delightedly. "The contact is oral. We learned your
language from an independent planet-hunter named Haslop, who was
wrecked here some years ago."

In Solar Exploitations you learn to expect the unexpected, but to me
this was stretching coincidence clear out of joint. We had the latest
zero-interval-transference drive made, and I couldn't believe that any
independent planet-staker could have beaten us here with outmoded
equipment.

"A Terran?" I asked. "Where is he now?"

"Coming up," Gaffa said. "With my fellows."

A couple of dozen other Balakians, looking exactly like him, bore down
on us through the dwarf shrubbery, and with them were two lanky Terrans
dressed in loose shirt-and-drawers ensembles which obviously had been
made on Balak. Even at a distance the Terrans looked disturbingly alike,
and when they got closer I could see that they were identical twins.

"You don't count so good, chum," I said. "I see _two_ Terrans."

"Only one," Gaffa corrected, grinning wider. "The other is one of us."

I didn't believe it, of course. Corelli didn't get it, either; his eyes
had a glazed look, and he was shaking his head like a man with a gnat in
his ear.

One of the Terrans rushed up to us with tears in his eyes and his
Adam's apple bobbing, so overcome with emotion that I was afraid he
might kiss us.

"I'm Ira Haslop," he said in a choked voice. "I've been marooned here
for twenty-two eternal years, and I never thought I'd see a Terran face
again. And now--"

He stopped, but not for breath. The other skinny Terran had grabbed his
arm and swung him around.

"What the hell do you think you're doing, you masquerading nightmare?"
the second one yelled. "_I'm_ Ira Haslop, and you damn well know it! If
you think you're going to pass yourself off as me and go home to Earth
in my place...."

The first Haslop gaped at him for a moment; then he slapped the other's
hand off his arm and shook a bony fist in his face.

"So that's your game! That's why these grinning freaks made you look
like me and threw us together all these years--they've planned all along
to ring in a switch and send you home instead of me! Well, it won't
work!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The second Haslop swung on him then and the two of them went to the mat
like a pair of loose-drawered tigers, cursing and gouging. The grinning
natives separated them after a moment and examined them carefully for
damage, chattering away with great satisfaction in their own language.

Corelli and Gibbons and I stared at each other like three fools. It was
impossible to think that either of the two men could be anything but
what he claimed to be, a perfectly normal and thoroughly angry Terran;
but when each of them swore that one of them--the other one, of
course--was an alien, and the natives backed up the accusation, what
else could we believe?

Gaffa, who seemed to be a sort of headman, took over and explained the
situation--which seemed to be an incredibly long-range gag cooked up by
these octopod jokers, without the original Haslop's knowledge, against
the day when another Terran ship might land on Balak. Their real intent,
Gaffa said, was to present us with a problem that could be solved only
by a species with a real understanding of its own kind. If we could
solve it, his people stood ready to assist us in any way possible. If
not....

I didn't like the sound of it, so I reached for my heat-gun again. So
did Captain Corelli and Gibbons, but we were too slow.

