
Sleep overtakes one suddenly and strangely at times. Without intending
to even close one eye, Mark was off into dreamland with a promptness
that was surprising. He settled back against the tree and slept standing
up. But his neglected duty troubled his subconscious mind. He was
uneasy. In his dreams he was troubled by nameless dread. He awoke at
last seemingly with a scream of human agony in his ears.

Had something happened to his comrades during his brief defection?
Mark sprang erect and looked over the sleeping camp. Every person was
in his place, but the fire was low. It had been, perhaps, an imagined
sound that aroused him so suddenly.

He threw more wood on the fire and stepped out upon the ice to get
more of the fuel he had previously cut into handy lengths. This
morainial deposit which offered rootage for the trees and bushes was
but a narrow streak--a sort of an island on the glacier. They had
carried the bear meat out to a small sink in the ice where there were
great slabs of the hard crystal which were easily packed over the meat.
As Mark started for the wood he heard a noise out on the ice in the
direction of their cache. He picked up his rifle again quickly and
started for the spot. Something was disturbing the meat, and Mark did
not lack courage. His rifle was loaded and, thanks to Andy, he was a
good shot. The old hunter took pride in training the boys to shoot
well.

The youth did not stop to ask what manner of enemy it was disturbing
their cache. And it never entered his head to disturb the camp. He ran
right out upon the glacier and had advanced to within a few yards of
the spot before he learned what he was up against, for a huge block
of ice hid the cache from his view.

Around this ice-block, from either side, as though they had been waiting
purposely to ambuscade him, shot several animals, who charged him
without as much as a whine.

"Dogs!" thought Mark, remembering the Alaskans that Phineas Roebach
had been forced to abandon. "They have gone mad."

But the next moment he saw his mistake. They were wolves--huge, gaunt,
shaggy fellows, with gaping jaws displaying rows of ferocious teeth.
They charged him in awful silence, their great claws scratching over
the ice.

There were eight or ten of them in sight and they were only a few yards
away from the youth when he first saw them. But instantly Mark dropped
to one knee to steady himself, put the rifle to his shoulder, and
opened fire.

Four shots he placed in quick succession. Two of the wolves rolled
over and over upon the ice, and a third limped off after the remainder,
who darted behind the ice-block again. Mark leaped up, uttering a shout
of triumph, and followed them, believing that he had beaten the pack
thus easily.

But the moment he came around the obstruction he found himself in the
midst of the actual pack. He was not charged by a dozen of the fierce
creatures, but by more than half a hundred.

The wolves had raided the cache already, having torn away the blocks
of ice, and were feasting on the half-frozen bear meat. Mark did not
think at that moment of driving them away, however; he wanted to get
away himself.

His shots had aroused the camp, although he was some distance from it.
But when his friends ran out upon the ice they did not see him, and
nobody for the minute suspected what had happened or where the youth
had gone. The two bodies of the wolves were not at first sighted.

Mark did not have a chance to use his rifle again. The wolves seemed
to rush him from all sides, and a huge gray fellow leaped against him,
knocking the rifle from the lad's grasp and rolling him over and over,
half stunned, upon the ice.

By marvelous good fortune none of the savage beasts followed him for
the moment. The wounded wolf took up their attention. They pitched
upon him and before Mark could rise to his feet the savage brutes had
torn their wounded comrade limb from limb.

The ice was stained crimson and their slobbering jaws ran blood. A
more terrifying sight the youth had seldom seen. He could not reach
his rifle, and the bulk of the pack was between him and the way he had
come. He therefore leaped away in the other direction, running from
instead of toward his friends.

He passed through the thinning pack without being touched, although
several of the beasts snapped at him and the clashing of their fangs
sent cold chills up and down his spine. Then he leaped away at top
speed across the ice.

It was a natural move, but a very unwise one. The wolves tore their
comrade to pieces and bolted the pieces in about sixty seconds. Then
they wheeled en masse and shot off across the glacier after the boy.

Mark ran about as fast as he had ever run before. Fortunately he had
spurs in his boot-soles and therefore he did not slip on the ice. But
suddenly he found that he was crossing a smooth sheet of new ice--the
surface of a lake in the glacier. This lake had frozen after the sun
went down and Mark felt the new ice bend under him as he ran.

The moonlight revealed his path before him plainly; but the now yapping
pack behind took up so much of his attention that Mark did not take
a careful view of the surface of the thinly frozen lake.

The leaders were all but upon him in a very few moments. As the first
wolf leaped, Mark threw himself sideways and ran off at a tangent,
holding his feet much better than did the brutes. They went scratching
along the smooth ice for some yards before they could change their
course.

The turn, however, put Mark in a serious position. He found the thin
ice cracking loudly under his feet. He glanced ahead. There was a
streak of open water.

He tried to turn again, but this time his spurs slipped. He went down
on the ice. The first two wolves were a-top of him and one seized his
arm. But luckily it was protected by his thick coat sleeve.

Then the wolves darted back from the prone, sliding body of the boy.
They saw their peril; Mark could not help himself.

With a shriek and splash he was struggling in the deadly cold water
of the lake. He plunged beneath the black surface while the yapping
pack halted upon the very verge of the broken ice.




CHAPTER XXII

THE WOLF TRAIL


The hole into which Mark fell was not many yards across; but when he
came to the surface of the icy water he found that the edge of the
strong ice was fringed with open jaws and lolling, blood-red tongues.
The wolves had surrounded the open bit of water and were prepared to
welcome him with wide jaws wherever he sought to climb out.

The lad knew well enough that he was helpless against these foes. To
seek to reach the ice would be to give himself up to the savage brutes.
Nor could he remain long afloat in this ice-cold water. He was already
chilled to his very marrow.

Mark was in a perilous position indeed. He could bear up but a few
moments. He knew that if he again sank beneath the surface he would
never rise again.

And so he struggled mightily to keep his head above water. The wolves
did not dare leap in to seize him; they did not have to. In their
canine minds they probably knew that the boy would have to come to
them. But fortunately for Mark the wolves had given tongue when they
chased him over the ice. Otherwise the boy's friends might not have
been warned of his predicament until too late to be of assistance to
him.

But the moment the wolves gave tongue Andy Sudds had started with a
whoop for the cache of bear meat. Jack and Phineas Roebach followed
with their weapons.

Coming in sight of the slavering pack, as they whined about the open
water-hole in the lake, Andy advised his companions as to the situation
and they deployed so as to shoot into the pack of wolves without sending
their bullets in the direction of the half-drowned Mark.

All using magazine rifles, they were enabled to send such a fusillade
into the wolves that the pack was scattered in a few moments. Then
they ran on to the edge of the broken ice, finding at least a dozen
dead brutes lying about the water-hole.

Jack lay down and reached his gun barrel out to his chum and by its
aid Mark got to the edge of the ice and scrambled out of the water.
They ran him back to the campfire in short order and then Andy set out
to make a second attack upon the wolves, the pack having returned to
eat up their comrades.

However, the beasts had already been punished enough. They could not
stand before the old hunter, and ran howling down the glacier.

"One thing about it," Andy Sudds said, "we can make up our minds there
is an outlet from this field of ice in that direction. To escape we
have only to follow the wolf trail."

They were not in shape to travel at once, however. Jack's hand pained
him frightfully after his work in helping Mark escape from the water,
and Mark, himself had a serious chill before sunrise. Treated by the
professor, however, the youth quickly recovered from his plunge into
the lake.

But it was decided, nevertheless, to wait over another of the short,
torrid days before leaving the trees, for the traveling by night would
be much more practicable. So they were leisurely eating another meal
of bear steak when the sun touched the horizon with rosy light.

The dawn broke in what Jack termed "record time," and Washington White
gave vent to his surprise in characteristic language:

"I done seed de sun rise in eb'ry clime, f'om de Arctic t'rough de
tropical to the Antarctic kentries. But de speed wid w'ich disher sun
pops up is enough ter tear de bastin 't'reads loose from de Universe--it
suah is! I finds mahself," continued Wash, reflectively,
"circumnavigatin' ma mind to de eend dat disher 'sperience we is all
goin' t'rough is a hallucination ob de brain. In odder words, we is
all climbin' trees an' makin' a noise like de nuts wot grows dere. Do
you hear me?"

"We hear you," said Jack. "And if you think you're crazy, all right.
I don't feel like joining you in the foolish factory yet awhile."

"I more than half believe the darkey's right," muttered Phineas Roebach.
"This experience is enough to turn the brain of any man. I don't myself
believe half the things we are seeing."

The heat of the sun, as soon as it had well risen, was a fact that
could scarcely be doubted, however. They were glad to seek the shade
of the fir trees, and the surface of the glacier began to melt with
a rapidity that not only surprised, but startled them.

A flood of water, like a great river, began to sweep by the narrow bit
of earth on which they were encamped. The roar of the falling water
into the crevasse from which they had so fortunately escaped soon
became deafening.

They all had to remove their outer garments. The smell of the heated
fir branches was like the odor of a forest on a hot August afternoon.
Professor Henderson watched the melting of the ice with a serious face.
When Mark asked him what he thought threatened their safety, the old
scientist replied:

"I _am_ serious, that is true, my boy. I see in this terrible heat the
threat of a great and sudden change in this glacier. We must start as
soon as the freeze comes on to-night, and travel as fast as we can
toward the far end. Mr. Roebach knows the trail, I believe?"

"I've been over it several times; but I must say that the glacier has
sunk a whole lot since I was across it before," the oil man declared.

"We can follow the wolves," said Andy Sudds, stoutly. "They knew their
way out."

"That is true, we will hope," Professor Henderson said. "For I must
state that I believe our peril is very great."

"How so, sir?" Jack queried.

"We do not know how soon this glacier may move on."

"Another earthquake?" cried Mark.

"Oh, gollyation! I suttenly hopes not," wailed Wash.

"No. I do not think we need apprehend any further seismic disturbance.
Such gaseous trouble as there is in the heart of this island will find
escape--if I do not mistake--through Mr. Roebach's oil well."

"Then what is troubling you, sir?" queried the boys in chorus.

"The knowledge I possess of the nature of glaciers leads me to fear
this peril," replied the aged scientist. "Under the immediate conditions
this vast river of ice may move forward at any moment."

"Impossible, I tell you!" interrupted Phineas Roebach. "I tell you
this is a 'dead' glacier. It has not been in motion for ages. I have
seen the face of it at the lower end of this valley. There is only a
small stream of water trickling from under it, and the forest has grown
right up to the base of the ice wall."

"And how big a stream do you suppose is flowing from beneath the glacier
now, and working its way toward what was once the Arctic Ocean--or
Beaufort Sea?" queried the professor.

"Why--why---"

"Exactly," concluded Mr. Henderson, sharply. "You had not thought of
that. You see this vast amount of water pouring into yonder crevasse?
Water cannot run up hill. It is bound to seek a lower level. It must
force its way down the valley, beneath the glacier, and so stream out
from beneath the ice at the far end.

"Gradually this flow of water is going to wear away the ice--is going
to loosen the entire glacier. And then, suddenly, with no warning at
all, the field will plunge forward--break up, sink, grind itself to
powder against these cliffs! And where will we be?"

"My goodness gracious gollyation!" cried Washington White. "I wants
to git out o' disher right away--me an' Buttsy is ready ter go ter
onct, an' no mistake!"

"What will you do--swim?" queried Jack, pointing to the river that was
now washing the shore of the strip of soil on which they stood--a river
which seemed to stretch the entire breadth of the glacier.

Jack and Mark were deeply impressed by the good sense of the professor's
observations; and both Andy and Roebach were disturbed. They watched
the disintegration of the ice with considerable worriment. It seemed
to melt away much quicker during these hours of sunshine than it had
on the previous occasion when the orb of day shone fully upon the
surface of the island in the air.

The soil they had camped upon began to crumble away, too, for the heat
was insidiously melting the ice under the morainial deposit. At the
time which should be high noon--when the sun was directly overhead in
its course--one end of the patch of soil, forest and all, slumped into
the water with a loud crash, and at once the fierce current tore the
rubbish apart and carried it onward to the brink of the crevasse, into
the maw of which it fell.

"Wash is perfectly right in his statement," Jack Darrow said. "This
is no place for any of us. As soon as the ice freezes up after the sun
sets we must travel as fast as we can after the wolves."

"And I wish we could travel as fast as they can," muttered Andy Sudds.

"I wish we had Mr. Roebach's dogs and sleds," said Mark.

"All right. As long as you're wishing, though, why not wish for the
right thing?" demanded Jack.

"And what is that, Master Jack?" asked the oil man.

"Wish we were aboard the _Snowbird_ and that she was all right. That's
what _I_ wish."

"And I reckon the boy's right," said Phineas Roebach, with a sigh. "As
much as I object to flying through the air, an airship now would be
a God-send indeed."

What bear meat the wolves had not destroyed the water now washed away.
The party had only that which Andy had smoked over the fire. But this
was easily carried and their packs were not heavy when they prepared
to leave the camp as soon after sunset as the frost would allow.

The terrific change from the heat of midsummer to the cold of midwinter,
and all within something near twenty-four hours, was hard indeed to
