
"If I let even one nerve tendril slack, Colonel, I would go to pieces
entirely," Stein said precisely, in the way a man speaks who has learned
the language from text books. "So I do not think of our ship at all. I
think of mankind. I wonder if mankind is as ready as our ship. I wonder
if man will do any better on the planets than he has done here."

"Well, of course," Colonel Jennings answered with sympathy in his voice,
"under Hitler and all the things you went through, I don't blame you for
being a little bitter. But not all mankind is like that, you know. As
long as you've been in our country, Professor, you've never looked
around you. You've been working on this, never lifting your head...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He jerked in annoyance as a red light blinked over the emergency
circuit, and a buzzing, sharp and repeated, broke into this moment when
he felt he was actually reaching, touching Stein, as no one had before.

He dragged the phone toward him and began speaking angrily into its
mouthpiece before he had brought it to his lips.

"What the hell's the matter now? They're not going to call it off again!
Three times now, and...."

He broke off and frowned as the crackling voice came through the
receiver, the vein on his temple pulsing in his stress.

"I beg your pardon, General," he said, much more quietly.

The two men turned from their radar scopes and watched him
questioningly. He shrugged his shoulders, an indication to them of his
helplessness.

"You're not going to like this, Jim," the general was saying. "But it's
orders from Pentagon. Are you familiar with Senator O'Noonan?"

"Vaguely," Jennings answered.

"You'll be more familiar with him, Jim. He's been newly appointed
chairman of the appropriations committee covering our work. And he's
fought it bitterly from the beginning. He's tried every way he could to
scrap the entire project. When we've finished this test, Jim, we'll have
used up our appropriations to date. Whether we get any more depends on
him."

"Yes, sir?" Jennings spoke questioningly. Political maneuvering was not
his problem, that was between Pentagon and Congress.

"We must have his support, Jim," the general explained. "Pentagon hasn't
been able to win him over. He's stubborn and violent in his reactions.
The fact it keeps him in the headlines--well, of course that wouldn't
have any bearing. So Pentagon invited him to come to the field here to
watch the test, hoping that would win him over." The general hesitated,
then continued.

"I've gone a step farther. I felt if he was actually at the center of
control, your operation, he might be won over. If he could actually
participate, press the activating key or something, if the headlines
could show he was working with us, actually sent the test ship on its
flight...."

"General, you can't," Jennings moaned. He forgot rank, everything.

"I've already done it, Jim," the general chose to ignore the outburst.
"He's due there now. I'll look to you to handle it. He's got to be won
over, Colonel. It's your project." Considering the years that he and the
general had worked together, the warm accord and informality between
them, the use of Jennings' title made it an order.

"Yes, sir," he said.

"Over," said the general formally.

"Out," whispered Jennings.

The two men looked at him questioningly.

"It seems," he answered their look, "we are to have an observer. Senator
O'Noonan."

"Even in Germany," Professor Stein said quietly, "they knew enough to
leave us alone at a critical moment."

"He can't do it, Jim," Major Eddy looked at Jennings with pleading eyes.

"Oh, but he can," Jennings answered bitterly. "Orders. And you know what
orders are, don't you, Major?"

"Yes, sir," Major Eddy said stiffly.

Professor Stein smiled ruefully.

Both of them turned back to their instrument boards, their radar
screens, to the protective obscurity of subordinates carrying out an
assignment. They were no longer three men coming close together, almost
understanding one another in this moment of waiting, when the world and
all in it had been shut away, and nothing real existed except the
silvery spire out there on the desert and the life of it in the controls
at their fingertips.

"Beep, minus fifteen minutes!" the first time signal sounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Colonel Jennings, sir!"

The senator appeared in the low doorway and extended a fleshy hand. His
voice was hearty, but there was no warmth behind his tones. He paused on
the threshold, bulky, impressive, as if he were about to deliver an
address. But Jennings, while shaking hands, drew him into the bunker,
pointedly, causing the senator to raise bushy eyebrows and stare at him
speculatively.

"At this point everything runs on a split second basis, Senator," he
said crisply. "Ceremony comes after the test." His implication was that
when the work was done, the senator could have his turn in the
limelight, take all the credit, turn it into political fodder to be
thrown to the people. But because the man was chairman of the
