

Advancing by leaps and bounds, and getting over the ground in a manner
most surprising, Mark soon found himself on the edge of the great,
yawning crater, into which his chum Jack had started to slide. I say
started, for, fortunately, the lad had been saved from death but by a
narrow margin.

As Mark gazed down into the depths, which seemed fathomless, and which
were as black as night, he saw his friend clinging to a rocky
projection on the side of the extinct volcano. Jack had managed to
grasp a part of the rough surface as he slid down it after his reckless
jump. He looked up and saw Mark.

"Oh, Mark, can't you save me?" he gasped. "Call Professor Henderson!"

"I'll get you up, don't worry!" called Mark, as confidently as he
could. "Hold tight, Jack. What has become of your life-torch?"

"I have it here by me. I didn't drop it, and it's on a piece of the
rock near my head. Otherwise I couldn't breathe. Oh, this place is
fearfully deep. I guess it hasn't any bottom."

"Now, keep still, and don't think about that. Save your strength, hold
fast, and I'll get you up."

But, having said that much, Mark was not so sure how next to proceed.
It was going to be no easy task to haul up Jack, and that without ropes
or other apparatus. Another matter that added to the danger was the
necessity of keeping the life-torch close to one's face in order to
prevent death by the poisonous gases.

Mark's first impulse was to hasten back and call the two professors,
but he looked over the desolate landscape, and could not see them, and
he feared that if he went away Jack might slip and fall into the
unknown depths of the crater.

"I've got to get him out alone," decided Mark. "But how can I do it?"

He crawled cautiously nearer to the edge of the extinct volcano and
looked down. A few loose stones, dislodged by his weight, rattled down
the sides.

"Look out!" cried Jack quickly, "or you'll fall, too!"

"I'll be careful," answered Mark, and then he drew away out of danger,
with a queer feeling about his heart, which was beating furiously. Mark
had hoped to be able to make his way down the side of the crater to
where his chum was and help him up. But a look at the steep sides and
the uncertain footing afforded by the loose rocks of lava-like
formation showed that this could not be done.

"I've got to think of a different scheme," decided Mark, and, spurred
on by the necessity of acting quickly if he was to save Jack, he fairly
forced his brain to work. For he saw by the strained look on his chum's
face that Jack could not hold out much longer.

"I have it!" cried Mark at length. "My fur coat! I can cut it into
strips of hide and make a rope. Then I can lower it down to Jack and
haul him up."

He did not think, for the moment, of the cold he would feel when he
stripped off the fur garment, and when it did come to him in a flash he
never hesitated.

"After all, I've often been out without an overcoat on cold days," he
said to himself. "I guess I can stand it for a while, and when Jack is
up I can run back to the projectile and keep warm that way."

To think was to act, and Mark laid down his life-torch to take off the
big fur coat. The next instant he had toppled over, almost in a faint,
and, had he not fallen so that his head was near the small perforated
box on the end of the steel rod, whence came the life-giving gas, the
lad might have died.

He had forgotten, for the instant, the necessity of always keeping the
torch close to his face to prevent the poisonous gases of the moon from
overpowering him. Mark soon revived while lying on the ground, and,
rising, with his torch in his hand, he looked about him.

"I've got to have my two hands to work with," he mused, "and yet I've
got to hold this torch close to my face. Say, a fellow ought to have
three hands if he's going to visit the moon. What can I do?"

In an instant a plan came to him. He thrust the pointed end of the
steel rod in the crevice of some rocks, and it stood upright, so that
the perforated box of chemicals was on a level with his face.

"There," said Mark aloud, "I guess that will work. I can use both my
hands now." The plan was a good one. Next, taking off his coat, the lad
proceeded to cut it into strips, working rapidly. He called to Jack
occasionally, bidding him keep up his courage. "I'll soon have you
out," he said cheeringly.

In a few minutes Mark had a long, stout strip of hide, and, taking his
life-torch with him, he advanced once more to the edge of the crater.
He stuck the torch in between some rocks, as before, and looked down at
Jack.

"I--I can't hold on much longer," gasped the unfortunate lad. "Hurry,
Mark!"

"All right. I'm going to haul you up now. Can you hold on with one hand
long enough to slip the loop of this rope over your shoulders?"

"I guess so. But where did you get a rope?"

"I made it--cut up my fur coat."

"But you'll freeze!"

"Oh, I guess not. Here it comes, Jack. Get ready!"

Mark lowered the hide rope to his chum. The latter, who managed to get
one toe on a small, projecting rock, while he held on with his right
hand, used his left to adjust the loop over his shoulders and under his
arms.

"Are you all ready?" asked Mark.

"Yes, but can you pull me up?"

"Sure. I'm six times as strong as when on the earth. Hold steady now,
and keep the torch close to your face."

Mark had placed some pieces of his fur coat under the rope where it
passed over the edge of the mouth of the crater to prevent the jagged
rocks from cutting the strips of hide.

"Here you come!" he cried to Jack, and he began to haul, taking care to
keep his own head near his torch, which was stuck upright. Mark had
spoken truly when he said he possessed much more than his usual
strength. Any one who has tried to haul up a person with a rope from a
hole, and with no pulleys to adjust the strain of the cable, knows what
a task it is. But to Mark, on the moon, it was comparatively easy.

Hand over hand he pulled on the hide rope until, with a final heave, he
had Jack out of his perilous position. He had pulled him up from the
mouth of the crater, and the thick fur coat Jack wore had prevented the
sharp rocks from injuring him. In another moment he stood beside Mark,
a trifle weak and shaky from his experience, but otherwise unhurt.

"How did you happen to go down there?" asked Mark.

"Not from choice, I assure you," answered Jack. "I couldn't see the
crater when I jumped, as it was hidden by some rocks, and I was into it
before I knew it. But don't stand talking here. Put on my coat. I don't
need it. I'm warm."

"I will not. I'm not a bit cold. But we may as well get back to the
projectile, for they'll be worrying about us." Thereupon Mark broke
into a run, for, now that the exertion of hauling up Jack was over, he
began to feel cool, and the chilling atmosphere of the moon struck
through to his bones.

In a short time the two lads were back at the _Annihilator_, where they
found Professors Roumann and Henderson getting a bit anxious about
them. Their adventure was quickly related, and the boys were cautioned
to be more careful in the future.

"This moon is a curious, desolate place," said Mr. Henderson, "and you
can't behave on it as you would on the earth. We have discovered some
curious facts regarding it, and when we get back I am going to write a
book on them. But I think we have seen enough for the present, so we'll
stay in the rest of the day and plan for farther trips."

"Aren't we going to look for those diamonds?" asked Jack, who had
almost fully recovered from his recent experience.

"Oh, yes, we will look around for them," assented Mr. Roumann. "I
think, after a day or so, we will move our projectile to another part
of the moon. We want to see as much of it as possible."

They sat discussing various matters, and, while doing so, Washington
White peered into the living cabin.

"Has yo' got one ob dem torch-light processions t' spare?" he asked.

"Torch-light processions?" queried Mark. "What do you think this is, an
election, Wash?"

"I guess he means a life-torch," suggested Jack. "Are you going out,
Wash?"

"Yais, sah, I did think I'd take a stroll around. Maybe I kin find a
diamond fo' my tie."

Laughing, Jack provided the colored man with one of the torches,
instructing him how to use it, and presently Washington was seen
outside, walking gingerly around, as though he expected to go through
the crust of the moon any moment. Pretty soon, however, he got more
courage and tramped boldly along, peering about on the ground for all
the world, as Mark said, as if he was looking for chestnuts.

They paid no attention to the cook for some little time until, when the
boys and the two professors were in the midst of a discussion as to
where would be the best place to move the projectile next, they heard
him running along the corridor toward the cabin.

"Wash is in a hurry," observed Jack.

The next instant they sprang to their feet at the sight of the
frightened face of the colored man peering in on them. He was as near
white as a negro can ever be, which is a sort of chalk color, and his
eyes were wide open with fear.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack.

"A ghost! I done seen de ghost ob a dead man!" gasped the colored man.

"A ghost?" repeated Mark.

"Yais, sah, right out yeah! He's lyin' down in a hole--a dead man.
Golly! but I'se a scared coon, I is!" and Washington looked over his
shoulder as though he feared the "ghost" had followed him.




CHAPTER XXII

A BREAKDOWN


At first they were inclined to regard the announcement of Washington
lightly, but the too evident fright of the colored man showed that
there was some basis for his fear.

"Tell us just what you saw, and where it was," said Mr. Henderson. "Was
the man alive, Washington?"

"No, sah. How could a ghost be alive? Dey is all dead ones, ghosts am!"

"There are no such things as ghosts," said Mr. Henderson sternly.

"Den how could I see one?" demanded the cook triumphantly, as if there
was no further argument.

"Well, tell us about it," suggested Jack.

"It were jest dis way," began Washington earnestly, and with occasional
glances over his shoulder, "I were walkin' along, sort ob lookin' fer
dem sparklin' diamonds, an' I didn't see none, when all on a suddint I
looked down in a hole, and dere I seen HIM!" and he brought out the
word with a jerk.

"Saw what--who?" asked Mr. Roumann.

"De ghost--de dead man. He were lyin' all curled up, laik he were
asleep, an' when I seed him, I didn't stop t' call him t' dinner, yo'
can make up yo' minds t' dat all."

"Can you show us the place?" inquired Jack.

"Yais, sah, massa Jack, dat's what I kin. I'll point it out from dish
yeah winder, but I ain't g'wine dar ag'in; no, sah, 'scuse me!"

"Well, show us then," suggested Mark. "I wonder what it can be?" he
went on.

"Maybe one of the people who came from Mars after the diamonds, who was
forgotten and left here, and who died," said Jack.

"It's possible," murmured Mr. Henderson. "However, we'll go take a
look. Get on your fur coats, boys, and take the life-torches. Will you
come, Andy?"

"Sure. It's got to be more than a ghost to scare me," said the hunter.

They emerged from the projectile and walked in the direction Washington
had pointed, holding their gas torches near their heads and talking of
what they might see.

"This will be evidence in favor of my diamond theory," declared Jack.
"It shows that the Martians were here."

"Wait and see what it is," suggested his chum.

They walked along a short distance farther, and then Mark spoke.

"That ought to be the place over there," he said, pointing to a
depression between two tall pinnacles of black rock.

Jack sprang forward, and a moment later uttered a cry of astonishment.

"Here it is!" he called. "A dead man!"

"A dead man?" echoed Professor Henderson.

"A petrified man," added Jack, in awe-struck tones. "He's turned to
stone."

A few seconds later they were all grouped around the strange object--it
was a man no longer, but had once been one. It was a petrified human
being, a full-grown man, to judge by the size, and it was a solid image
in stone, even the garments with which he had been clothed being turned
to rock.

For a moment no one spoke, and they gazed in silence at what was an
evidence of former life on the moon. The man was huddled up, with the
knees drawn toward the stomach and the arms bent around the body, as if
the man had died in agony. The features were scarcely distinguishable.

"That man was never an inhabitant of Mars," spoke Professor Henderson,
in a low voice. "He is much too large, and he has none of the
characteristics of the Martians."

"I agree with you," came from Mr. Roumann.

"Then who is he?" asked Jack.

"I think," said the aged scientist, "that we are now gazing on all that
was once mortal of one of the inhabitants of the moon."

"An inhabitant of the moon?" gasped Mark.

"Yes; why not?" went on Mr. Henderson. "I believe the moon was once a
planet like our earth--perhaps even a part of it, and I think that it
was inhabited. In time it cooled so that life could no longer be
supported, or, at least, this side of the moon presents that
indication. The people were killed--frozen to death, and by reason of
the chemical action of the gases, or perhaps from the moon being
covered with water in which was a large percentage of lime, they were
turned to stone. That is what happened to this poor man."

"Such a thing is possible," admitted Professor Roumann gravely.

And, indeed, it is, as the writer can testify, for in the Metropolitan
Museum in New York there are the remains of an ancient South American
miner, whose body has been turned into solid copper. The corpse, of
which the features are partly distinguishable, was found four hundred
feet down in an old copper mine, where the dripping from hidden
springs, the waters of which were rich in copper sulphate, had
converted the man's body into a block of metal, retaining its natural
shape. The body is drawn up in agony, and there is every indication
that the man was killed by a cave-in of the mine. Some of his tools
were found near him.

