"His name is Kennedy. Oh, by the way, I'm not supposed to tell anybody;
they want to spring it on the world as a surprise or something. But
you're different, Colin. I'm excited; I want to talk to somebody about
it."

"Sure," he said. "You had a session already?"

"Yes, my first was today. It's a funny place to do research--Kennedy's
got a big suite on Fifth Avenue, right up in the classy district.
Beautiful office. The name of his outfit is Sentiment, Inc."

"Hm. Why should a research-team take such a name? Well, go on."

"Oh, there isn't much else to tell. Kennedy was very nice. He took me
into a laboratory full of all sorts of dials and meters and blinking
lights and os--what do you call them? Those things that make wiggly
pictures."

"Oscilloscopes. You'll never make a scientist, my dear."

She grinned. "But I know one scientist who'd like to--Never mind!
Anyway, he sat me down in a chair and put bands around my wrists and
ankles--just like the hot squat--and a big thing like a beauty-parlor
hair-drier over my head. Then he fiddled with his dials for awhile,
making notes. Then he started saying words at me, and showing me
pictures. Some of them were very pretty; some ugly; some funny; some
downright horrible.... Anyway, that's all there was to it. After a
couple of hours he gave me a check for a hundred dollars and told me to
come back tomorrow."

"Hm." Fraser rubbed his chin. "Apparently he was measuring the electric
rhythms corresponding to pleasure and dislike. I'd no idea anybody'd
made an encephalograph that accurate."

"Well," said Judy, "I've told you why we're celebrating. Now come on,
the regular orchestra's tuning up. Let's dance."

They had a rather wonderful evening. Afterward Fraser lay awake for a
long time, not wanting to lose a state of happiness in sleep. He
considered sleep a hideous waste of time: if he lived to be ninety, he'd
have spent almost thirty years unconscious.

       *       *       *       *       *

Judy was engaged for the next couple of evenings, and Fraser himself was
invited to dinner at Sworsky's the night after that. So it wasn't till
the end of the week that he called her again.

"Hullo, sweetheart," he said exuberantly. "How's things? I refer to
Charles Addams Things, of course."

"Oh--Colin." Her voice was very small, and it trembled.

"Look, I've got two tickets to _H. M. S. Pinafore_. So put on your own
pinafore and meet me."

"Colin--I'm sorry, Colin. I can't."

"Huh?" He noticed how odd she sounded, and a leadenness grew within him.
"You aren't sick, are you?"

"Colin, I--I'm going to be married."

"_What?_"

"Yes. I'm in love now; really in love. I'll be getting married in a
couple of months."

"But--but--"

"I didn't want to hurt you." He heard her begin to cry.

"But who--how--"

"It's Matthew," she gulped. "Matthew Snyder."

He sat quiet for a long while, until she asked if he was still on the
line. "Yeah," he said tonelessly. "Yeah, I'm still here, after a
fashion." Shaking himself: "Look, I've got to see you. I want to talk to
you."

"I can't."

"You sure as hell can," he said harshly.

They met at a quiet little bar which had often been their rendezvous.
She watched him with frightened eyes while he ordered martinis.

"All right," he said at last. "What's the story?"

"I--" He could barely hear her. "There isn't any story. I suddenly
realized I loved Matt. That's all."

"_Snyder!_" He made it a curse. "Remember what you told me about him
before?"

"I felt different then," she whispered. "He's a wonderful man when you
get to know him."

_And rich._ He suppressed the words and the thought. "What's so
wonderful specifically?" he asked.

"He--" Briefly, her face was rapt. Fraser had seen her looking at him
that way, now and then.

"Go on," he said grimly. "Enumerate Mr. Snyder's good qualities. Make a
list. He's courteous, cultured, intelligent, young, handsome,
amusing--To hell! _Why_, Judy?"

"I don't know," she said in a high, almost fearful tone. "I just love
him, that's all." She reached over the table and stroked his cheek. "I
like you a lot, Colin. Find yourself a nice girl and be happy."

His mouth drew into a narrow line. "There's something funny here," he
said. "Is it blackmail?"

"No!" She stood up, spilling her drink, and the flare of temper showed
him how overwrought she was. "He just happens to be the man I love.
That's enough out of you, good-bye, Mr. Fraser."

He sat watching her go. Presently he took up his drink, gulped it
barbarously, and called for another.




2


Juan Martinez had come from Puerto Rico as a boy and made his own way
ever since. Fraser had gotten to know him in the army, and they had seen
each other from time to time since then. Martinez had gone into the
private-eye business and made a good thing of it; Fraser had to get past
a very neat-looking receptionist to see him.

"Hi, Colin," said Martinez, shaking hands. He was a small, dark man,
with a large nose and beady black eyes that made him resemble a
sympathetic mouse. "You look like the very devil."

"I feel that way, too," said Fraser, collapsing into a chair. "You can't
go on a three-day drunk without showing it."

"Well, what's the trouble? Cigarette?" Martinez held out a pack.
"Girl-friend give you the air?"

"As a matter of fact, yes; that's what I want to see you about."

"This isn't a lonely-hearts club," said Martinez. "And I've told you
time and again a private dick isn't a wisecracking superman. Our work is
ninety-nine percent routine; and for the other one percent, we call in
the police."

"Let me give you the story," said Fraser. He rubbed his eyes wearily as
he told it. At the end, he sat staring at the floor.

"Well," said Martinez, "it's too bad and all that. But what the hell,
there are other dames. New York has more beautiful women per square inch
than any other city except Paris. Latch on to somebody else. Or if you
want, I can give you a phone number--"

"You don't understand," said Fraser "I want you to investigate this; I
want to know why she did it."

Martinez squinted through a haze of smoke. "Snyder's a rich and powerful
man," he said. "Isn't that enough?"

"No," said Fraser, too tired to be angry at the hint. "Judy isn't that
kind of a girl. Neither is she the kind to go overboard in a few days,
especially when I was there. Sure, that sounds conceited, but dammit, I
_know_ she cared for me."

"Okay. You suspect pressure was brought to bear?"

"Yeah. It's hard to imagine what. I called up Judy's family in Maine,
