him the immodest thought of wondering if perhaps his cap visor might not
be worn a little more rakishly to one side. He must father a custom,
something distinctive of those who had been to Mars--

"Another canal, sir."

Below them, a straight line of gray-green stretched to the horizon,
contrasting sharply with the red ferrous oxide of the landscape. An
entire planet of ferrous oxide--iron--steel for the already starving
technology of the Western Alliance. The captain felt a momentary
irritation that even this narrow swath displaced the precious iron ore.

Obviously these canals served no purpose. His ship had circled the
planet at its equator, and again from pole to pole. Canals everywhere,
but nothing else. Enough time and fuel had been wasted. They must land.
Obviously there was no intelligent life. But the history of the moment
must not be marred by any haste. There must be no question within the
books yet to be written. There must be no accredited voice of criticism
raised.

"My compliments to Mr. Berkeley," he said harshly to Lt. Atkinson, "and
would he kindly step to the control room?" He paused and added dryly,
"At his convenience."

Mister Berkeley, indeed. What was it they called the civilian--an
ethnologist? A fellow who was supposed to be an authority on races,
civilizations, mores and customs of groups. Well, the man was excess
baggage. There would be no races to contact here. A good thing, too.
These civilian experts with their theories--show them a tooth and
they'll dream up a monster. Show them a fingernail paring and they'll
deduce a civilization from it. Nonsense!

"You wanted to see me, Captain?" The voice was young, quiet, controlled.

                                  ----

Without haste, Captain Griswold turned and faced Berkeley. Not only a
theorist, but a young theorist. These super-bright young men with their
sharp blue eyes. A lot of learning and no knowledge. A lot of wisdom and
no common sense. He carefully controlled his voice, concealing his lack
of respect for the civilian.

"Well, Mr. Berkeley, we have quartered the globe. We have seen no
evidence of civilization."

"You discount the canals, Captain?" Berkeley asked, as if more from
curiosity than refutation.

"I must discount them," the captain  answered  decisively. "Over all the
planet we have seen no buildings, not even ruins, no evidence at all
that intelligence exists here."

"I consider straight lines, running half the length of a world, to be
evidence of something, sir." It was a flat statement, given without
emphasis.

Arguments! Arguments! Little men who have to inflate themselves into a
stature of importance--destroy the sacred history of the moment. But
quietly now. There must be no memory of petty conflict.

"Where are their buildings, Mr. Berkeley?" he asked with patient
tolerance. "Where are their factories? The smoke from their factories?
The highways? The transportation facilities? Where are the airplanes?
Even this thin air would support a fast jet. I do not require they have
spaceships, Mr. Berkeley, to concede them intelligence. I do not require
they be the equal of Man. I also have some scientific training. And my
training tells me I cannot recognize the existence of something where
there is no evidence at all."

"The canals," Berkeley answered. His voice also was controlled, for he,
too, knew the history of this moment. But his concern was not for his
own name in the history books. He knew only too well what its writers
did to individuals for the sake of expediency. His concern was that this
moment never be one of deep shame for Man. "Perhaps they have no
buildings, no factory smoke, because they don't need them. Perhaps they
don't have highways because they don't want to go anywhere. Perhaps
their concept of living is completely unlike ours."

                                  ----

Griswold shrugged his shoulders. "We speak an entirely different
language, Mr. Berkeley."

"I'm afraid you're right, Captain," Berkeley sighed. "And it might be a
tragic thing that we do. Remember, European man spoke a different
language from that of the American Indian, the Mayan, Polynesian,
African, Indonesian--" He broke off as if the list were endless. "I ask
only that we don't hasten into the same errors all over again."

"We can't hover here above the surface forever," Griswold said
irritably. "We have quartered the globe. The other experts are anxious
to land, so they can get to their work. We have made a search for your
civilization and we have not found it."

"I withdraw all objections to landing, Captain. You are entirely
