
THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT


is a distinct paper from the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. THE SUPPLEMENT is
issued weekly; every number contains 16 octavo pages, with handsome
cover, uniform in size with SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Terms of subscription
for SUPPLEMENT, $5.00 a year, postage paid, to subscribers. Single
copies 10 cents. Sold by all news dealers throughout the country.

COMBINED RATES.--The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and SUPPLEMENT will be sent
for one year, postage free, on receipt of _seven dollars_. Both papers
to one address or different addresses, as desired.

The safest way to remit is by draft, postal order, or registered
letter.

Address MUNN & CO., 37 Park Bow, N. Y.

--> Subscriptions received and single copies of either paper sold by
all the news agents.




PUBLISHERS' NOTICE TO MAIL SUBSCRIBERS.


Mail subscribers will observe on the printed address of each paper the
time for which they have prepaid. Before the time indicated expires,
to insure a continuity of numbers, subscribers should remit for
another year. For the convenience of the mail clerks, they will please
also state when their subscriptions expire.

New subscriptions will be entered from the time the order is received;
but the back numbers of either the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN or the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT will be sent from January when desired.
In this case, the subscription will date from the commencement of the
volume, and the latter will be complete for preservation or binding.

       *       *       *       *       *




VOL. XXXVII., NO. 2. [NEW SERIES.] _Thirty-second Year._

NEW YORK, SATURDAY, JULY 14, 1877.


       *       *       *       *       *




TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT,

NO. 80,

FOR THE WEEK ENDING JULY 14, 1877.


I.  ENGINEERING AND MECHANICS.--Wrought Iron Bridge Designs:
    by WILLIAM O. DOUGLAS. A method of construction whereby the
    safety of the structure is not dependent on any single member.
    2 engravings.--Steel Wire Hawsers.

    Health and Sewage of Towns; by ALFRED CARPENTER, M.D., C.S.S.
    A practical experience of the Dry system.

    Carlisle Bridge, Dublin, 1 engraving--Extinction of Fires.--Important
    Dutch Enterprise.

    Foot Bridge across the River Ness at Inverness; by C. R. MANNERS,
    Engineer. 13 illustrations.

    Radiating Steam Hercules for the St. Heliers' Harbor Works, Jersey.
    2 figures.--New Meat Trucks.--New Horseshoe.--Scott's Wheel-Cutting
    and Moulding Machine. 3 figures.

    Compound Engine with Rope Driving Gear; by BENJAMIN GOODFELLOW,
    Engineer. 3 engravings.--Differential Screw Pipe Joint.
    6 figures.

    Pipes for Gas and Other Purposes (continued from SUPPLEMENT No.
    77). Main-laying continued, with 4 figures.--Fittings of Gas and
    Water Pipes; Includes the average "life" of pipes; an account of
    various soils, and amount of corrosion in each; Professor Barff's
    new iron-preserving process, and other processes in practical use
    for preserving iron pipe; proving pipe; the utility of various
    metals, and directions for pipe-laying: various fittings,
    illustrated in 16 figures.

II. TECHNOLOGY.--The Sizing of Cotton Goods; a paper read before the
    Society of Arts, by W. THOMPSON, F.R.S. A very full and clear
    description, embracing: An account of the process of weaving,
    explaining the object and utility of size. A table of sizing
    mixtures in which are enumerated all the substances used, (1) for
    giving adhesive properties to the size, (2) to give weight and
    body to the yarn, (3) for softening the size or yarn, and (4) for
    preserving the size from mildew and decomposition.
    Tests for these substances and directions for mixing, so as to
    obtain the results required. Proportions of sizing. Use of flour
    in size. Weighting materials, China clay and its substitutes.
    "Softenings" and oils for softening. East winds. Glycerin, grape
    sugar, mildew preventives, and tape sizing. "Slashing," packing,
    mildew, damaged goods, etc.--Notes on Garment Dyeing. Giving
    preparation of garments with cotton warps, green on garments with
    cotton warps, brown on the same, etc.

III. LIGHT, HEAT, ELECTRICITY, ETC.--On the Minute Measurements
    of Modern Science. By ALFRED M. MAYER. Article IX. The dividing
    engine and methods of making accurate linear scales.
    8 illustrations.

IV. NATURAL HISTORY, ETC.--Catastrophism, or the Evolution of
    Environment. An address by Clarence King before the Sheffield
    Scientific School of Yale College, New Haven, Conn.

V.  AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE.--Pencils of Silver Nitrate.--The Black
    Poplar.--Tree Leaves as a Fertilizer.--Improving Pastures.--Lawns
    and Hay.--Thoroughbred Pigs.--Shall Country Houses have Cellars?

VI. MISCELLANEOUS.--The New German Patent Law: being the Full
    Text of the New Law for Patents, passed July 1, 1877, covering all
    the States of the German Empire.


Terms.--SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, _five
dollars_. One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, _seven dollars_. CLUBS.--One
extra copy of the SUPPLEMENT will be supplied gratis for every club of
five SUPPLEMENT subscribers at $5.00 each.

All the back numbers of the SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price 10 cents each.

NOW READY.--The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT for 1876, Complete
in two large volumes. Over 800 quarto pages; over 2,000 engravings.
Embracing History of the Centennial Exhibition. New Illustrated.
Instructions in Mechanical Drawing. Many valuable papers, etc. Price
five dollars for the two volumes, stitched in paper; or six dollars
and fifty cents, handsomely bound in stiff covers.

Remit by postal order. Address

MUNN & CO. PUBLISHERS, 37 Park Row, New York.

--> Single copies of any desired number of the SUPPLEMENT sent to any
address on receipt of 10 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *




CARRYING PEACE INTO AFRICA.


To carry war into Africa has been a proverb ever since Rome vowed the
destruction of Carthage. But the Carthagenian invasion was a modern
episode in Africa's experiences of that nature. On one of the earlier
monuments of Egypt there is figured a slave-hunter's raid upon an
Ethiopian village, the horrid details of which are said by travelers
to be an accurate picture of a slave raid of to-day. The same
murderous work has been going on incessantly for at least 4,000 years:
how much longer there is no telling. For all these ages the African
borders have known war and war only, and of the most destructive and
barbarizing nature.

Recently, under the influence of Sir Samuel Baker, Colonel Gordon, and
the civilized world in general, the Khedive of Egypt has carried war
into the interior in the interests of peace: a conquest in a measure
justified by the suppression of inter-tribal war for the filling of
slave pens, and the abolition of the slave trade down the Nile. A
similar reform has been effected on the east coast by the pressure of
English power on the Sultan of Zanzibar. And the immediate effect of
these two movements has been to prevent the butchery or enslavement of
not less than half a million negroes annually.

A still more promising invasion of Africa has just been decided upon
in the International Geographical Conference in Brussels: an invasion
wholly in the interests of peace and civilization. At the meeting,
a year ago, it was declared advisable to establish, by international
effort, a line of permanent commercial stations from Bagomoyo, on the
coast of Zanzibar, to St. Paul de Loanda, on the opposite Atlantic
coast; the first stations to be at Ujiji, where Stanley found
Livingstone, on the eastern shore of lake Tanganyika; at Nyangwe,
Livingstone's furthest point northward on the Lualaba; and at some
point further west on the route of Cameron, to be fixed in the
dominions of Muata Yamvo, one of the most powerful chiefs of Central
Africa. At the second conference, which ended June 24, arrangements
were made for sending out the first expedition toward Tanganyika.

The object of the proposed stations is the development of civilization
by commerce, not by religious propaganda. Primarily they will serve
as bases of operation for explorers of the interior, a sort of
_entrepots_, where the explorer may supply himself with provisions,
instruments, and goods, and thus save the cost and embarrassment of
an army of porters from the coast. They will also serve as places of
refuge for explorers in times of sickness and other reverses, which
have hitherto so terribly hampered explorers. The heads of these
pioneer establishments are to be men of scientific training and proved
executive ability; and each will be aided by a physician-naturalist
and a few skilled artisans. The points thus far chosen are on a line
regularly traveled by the caravans of Arab traders, carrying coffee,
tea, sugar, arms, and woven goods to permanent Arab residences and
trading stations in the interior. An agent of the London Missionary
Society has already begun the survey of a route for ox teams as far
as lake Tanganyika; and Cameron has expressed the opinion that a light
narrow-gauge railway could be constructed from the coast to the lake
at a cost not exceeding four thousand dollars a mile. The traffic
along such a road, he thinks, would soon pay interest on the outlay.

The unexplored region thus to be opened up to civilization and
commerce (other than in human beings) is larger than the United
States east of the Mississippi. Around it is a still larger region of
partially explored country of unequalled fertility, abounding in great
lakes and navigable rivers, and for the most part so high above
the sea that the products of the tropics mingle with those of
the temperate zone. The cereals, durah, maize, rice, sugar cane,
starch-yielding roots and tubers, cotton, coffee, tobacco, spices,
gums and caoutchouc, dye-stuffs and medicinal plants, the banana,
fig, date, orange, and the vine are among the known products of this
region; and all are capable of becoming important staples of foreign
commerce. The country is not less rich in coal, iron, copper, gold,
and other valuable minerals. The climate, though moist from abundant
rain, is less debilitating than India or Brazil; and everywhere, away
from the miasmatic coast regions and the marshes of the lower river
courses, European explorers have found small cause for complaining of
excessive heat or unhealthiness. On the elevated plateaus which cover
so large a part of Central Africa, the climate is like that of the
sanitariums of India; while among the mountains the finest climates of
the world are fairly rivalled. Stanley found in the mountainous region
between the great lakes and within a degree of the equator every
climatic condition and every element of landscape beauty that could
attract and delight a white colony. It was a perfect alpine country,
with mountains rising from twelve to fifteen thousand feet, yet free
from alpine cold and snow. Countless torrents from the hills watered
ever-verdant valleys as beautiful as those of Tyrol, lying under a
brilliant equatorial sun, yet with a climate as cool and equable as
any European might desire. Further south, among the mountains about
Lake Nyassa, the same features are presented on a grander scale:
a country aptly described as a second Switzerland of gigantic
proportions.

There can be no question of the ability of Europeans to sustain
themselves in the greater part of the interior-certainly on all the
higher plateaus-nor of the possibility of building up in Central
Africa a great civilized empire. Nature offers every facility, and the
native population seem to be well fitted for productive industry. In
every respect they are physically and morally superior to the negroes
of the coast, and only need protection and the encouragement of
legitimate commerce to weld them into a great nation. Already
they stand on the borders of civilization. They are intelligent,
industrious, and not unskillful in the manufacture of iron and copper
ornaments, utensils, and weapons. The arts of tanning, spinning,
weaving, dyeing, mat-making, etc., are widely diffused among them, and
many of their products are remarkable for their fineness and
strength. They carry on agriculture with considerable success;
and, notwithstanding the chronic state of insecurity incident to
slave-hunting, their wealth in cattle is very great. As soon as the
disturbing and impoverishing influence of the slave traffic is abated,
and a market provided for the products of peace, the advancement of
the people in civilization is likely to go on with great rapidity.
As the source of raw materials which we need, and as a market for the
surplus manufactures of Europe and America, the country offers, to say
the least, many attractions; and it will not be surprising if, within
fifty years, thriving commercial stations will be founded on all
its great lakes and rivers, and connected with the outer world by
telegraphy, railways, and steamship lines.

       *       *       *       *       *




ADDRESS OF CLARENCE KING ON CATASTROPHISM.


Mr. Clarence King lately delivered an interesting address before the
Sheffield Scientific School of Yale College, New Haven, Conn., under
the title of "Catastrophism, or the Evolution of Environment," which
promises to evoke considerable discussion. We subjoin an abstract of
the principal features of the address, which is quite lengthy. The
full text will be found in our SUPPLEMENTS, Nos. 80, 81.

Mr. King refuted the doctrine of slow evolution as taught by Huxley
and Darwin, and declared that the surface of the earth and climate had
been subject to sudden and catastrophic mutation, which included in
its environment all types of life.

He reasoned that marine fossils are found entombed in rocky beds far
remote from present seas; and that these beds were once sea bottoms
that have been upheaved by convulsions of Nature. The earliest history
of mankind is pregnant with catastrophe, and we have historic story
and biblical record of its sudden and destructive energy. He called
to mind the vast and massive eruptions of the Pliocene basalt as seen
upon our own continent.

The great obvious changes in the rocky crust were referred to a few
processes; the sub-aerial decay of continents, delivery by streams
of land-detritus into the sea, the spreading out of these comminuted
materials upon a pelagic floor, and lastly upheaval, by which oceanic
beds were lifted up into subsequent land masses. All these processes
he declared to have been more rapid in the past than now. Suddenness,
world-wide destructiveness, were the characteristics of geological
changes. Periods of calm, like the present, are suddenly terminated by
brief catastrophic epochs. Successive faunas and floras were created
only to be extinguished by general cataclysms.

He believed in recurrent, abrupt accelerations of crust change, so
violent as to destroy all life on the globe. He declared the idea to
be the survival of a prehistoric terror, and was backed up by breaks
