a bridge, about which more or less controversy had arisen as to their
practical safety, and the test was made under, as near as possible, actual
conditions of attachment and loading. The annexed drawing shows the form
and proportion of the beam and connection with the posts, together with
the position of the track stringers. The actual static loads to which the
beam could be subjected by the heaviest engines in use on the road, with
weight of floor, is 40,000 lb. at each stringer bearing, the strains
computed therefrom being as follows: Flange strains at _m_, 3,800 lb. per
square inch; at _a_, 5,700 lb. per square inch; at _b_, 6,400 lb. per
square inch. Shear strains in web, between _a_ and _b_, 2,600 lb. per
square inch. Shear strains in web, between _a_ and end, 8,000 lb. per
square inch at least section, or where the web is 2 feet 4 inches deep, or
42 diameters between angle iron.

[1] Abstract of a paper read before the American Society of Civil
Engineers, November 16, 1887.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

_Rivets._--All rivets 7/8 inch diameter, or 15/26 inch when driven to fill
holes; area of section, 0.6 square inch; bearing area, diameter x 3/8
plate = 0.35 square inch, and for 1/2 inch plate 0.47 square inch. Post
attachment, considering all the twenty-six rivets doing duty, yields
rivet strain as follows: In shear, single 5,000 lb. per square inch: and
bearing area--1/2 inch plate--6,600 lb. per square inch.

_Connection of 3/8 Web to Flange Angles._--Taking the forty rivets between
ends of girder and second stringer, the horizontal strain difference is
162,000 lb., the rivets being strained 3,400 lb. per square inch double
shear, and 11,600 lb. per square inch bearing area. Taking distance from
ends to first stringer, the horizontal strain difference is 105,000 lb.,
yielding on twenty rivets 4,200 lb. per square inch double shear, and
15,000 lb. per square inch bearing area. Taking a short distance of 2 feet
from ends, the horizontal strain is 70,000 lb. on ten rivets, giving 5,800
lb. per square inch double shear, and 20,000 lb. per square inch bearing
area. In these girders the weakness feared was in the end flange riveting
and shear in end web, and caused the test recorded below. The test was
recently made at the works of the Keystone Bridge Company, by means of
hydraulic power applied at stringer points. Convenience made it necessary
to make the test with the beam blocked up horizontal on the ground, so
that the weight of the beam is necessarily neglected. The beam was
connected with a pair of posts, precisely as in the actual structure,
between which an additional girder was framed as a reaction base for the
rams. The annexed diagram shows the general arrangements. The hydraulic
power was derived from the testing machine plant of the Keystone
establishment, and the deflections measured from a fine wire parallel to
the lower flange, and about 3 inches therefrom. The diameter of the ram
was 10 inches; area 78.54 inches. The record was as follows:

   Gauge    Load on               Deflections.   Total
  reading.  each ram.               _b_  _b_'     load.
              lb.                   in.   in.     lb.

   565       44,375                 1/8   1/8    177,500
  1130       88,750                 5/16  5/16   355,000
  1412      110,900                 3/8   3/8    443,600
       No permanent set in above
  1695      133,125 uncertain.      --    --     532,500
       Permanent set scant 1/32 inch.
  1980      155,500 not recorded.   --    --     622,000
       Permanent set 5/32 inch.
  2080 Failure commenced.           --    --     653,500

Failure commenced through giving way of angle irons, beginning in a fine
seam in the first bend of the lower flange from the end support, the seam
being along the root of the angle, which continual pressure tore apart
across the angle as shown, when the web commenced to tear like a sheet of
paper, in direction and manner as exhibited on plate herewith--from
photograph. From some cause not apparent the deflections were not similar
at the symmetrical end rams, _a_, the point where the web failed--left
side--being sharply deflected. While the angles showed root fracture at
the opposite point, the web did not fail or show indications of so doing,
the deflection being on an easy curve. With the extreme yielding of the
lower flange angles, the angle brackets connecting girder with posts
commenced to go, tearing likewise along the root, and stripping the heads
from the extreme upper rivets as shown. The internal diaphragm connecting
the channel sides of the posts was unaffected. The rivets connecting the
ruptured flange with web appeared as perfect as when driven, and no
indication was disclosed, as far as it was possible to tell, of the holes
in the web elongating or any upsetting of bearing surface. There is no
telling what the web and rivets would have borne had not the solid angle
irons given way at the first bend. It is to be noted that flange plate
with leg of angle attached thereto was intact, showing no indication of
rupture.

_Discussion._--Taking that stage of the experiment when a permanent set
was first noted--viz., 1/32 inch--the recorded load was 532,500 lb., or as
near as may be 3-1/3 times the basis on which the calculations in the
first part of this paper were made--40,000 lb. on each stringer, or
160,000 lb. total. Applying this ratio to the preceding computations, the
iron would be apparently strained as follows:

             { _m_ 3,800 x 3-1/3 = 12,600 lb. per square inch (psi).
  Flanges at { _a_ 5,700 x 3-1/3 = 19,000 psi.
             { _b_ 6,400 x 3-1/3 = 21,200 psi.

  Web.  { Between _a_ and _b_, 2,600 x 3-1/3 = 8,700 lb. per square inch.
        { At least section, 8,000 x 3-1/3 = 26,600 psi.

          { Post attachment:
          {  Bearing area,  6,600 x 3-1/3 = 22,000 lb. per square inch.
          {  Single shear,  5,000 x 3-1/3 = 16,600 psi.
  Rivets. { Web and flange connections, end rivets:
          {  Bearing area, 20,000 x 3-1/3 = 66,600 psi.
          {  Double shear,  5,800 x 3-1/3 = 19,300 psi.

When failure in angles was first noted, the recorded load was 653,500 lb.,
or slightly more than four times the computed basis of load, which would
increase the above strains about one-fifth, giving a calculated flange
strain when angle failed of some 15,000 lb. per square inch, and bearing
area strain on end flange and web rivets about 80,000 lb. per square inch,
neither of which could possibly be true, or the web would have torn out
from the rivets, and the flanges be perfectly sound, well within elastic
limits, although in the last case it is to be noted that the horizontal
table of the flange was perfectly sound, the flange failure commencing
primarily with a long split along the weld of the angle iron root,
throwing the whole flange duty upon the vertical legs of the angle iron,
when a rupture strain was quickly reached. Had the angles been rolled from
a solid ingot, or on the German method of developing from a flat instead
of from the ordinary welded pile, the strength of this beam would have
been largely increased. The prime weakness in this beam was due,
therefore, to the mode of manufacturing the angle irons, which were weak
along the weld at the root. This was also shown in the end bracket angles
uniting the beam to the posts. The writer deduces from this experiment
that a plate web is an exceedingly stiff member, much stiffer than is
commonly supposed; that the customary method of proportioning
rivets--viz., the horizontal component between any two given points
divided by allowable bearing pressure per square inch equals number of
rivets required--is not true, and that the friction due to power riveting
has enormous value. This beam was reported to the company interested as
practically safe by the writer, on general considerations, before the
experiment was made, and the opinion reaffirmed after the experiment.

       *       *       *       *       *

London Bridge cost $10,000,000. It is 900 feet long and 54 feet wide.
100,000 persons pass over it every twenty-four hours. The lamp posts are
made from cannon taken during the Peninsular War.




                         HYDRAULIC TUBE PRESS.


Forming metal tubes from circular plates by pressing or forcing them, by
the aid of mandrels, through dies or annular rings, though comparatively a
modern manufacture, is carried on to a considerable extent, and with the
improvements that are almost daily being made in it, and the rapidly
extending use of such tubes, this extraordinary process bids fair to
become a most important manufacture.

[Illustration]

The press illustrated here was designed and made by Messrs. Henry Bessemer
& Co., of Sheffield, for Mr. Samuel Walker, of Birmingham, for the
manufacture of tubes of large size, and also for making hollow steel
projectiles.

The press is made entirely of Bessemer steel, and is of the three-column
construction, a strong casting of triangular form serving as a base of the
press; into this casting the three columns fit, and carry on their upper
ends a like casting, forming a top or entablature. Into this top casting
the main cylinder is fixed mouth downward, concentric with the machine.
Two small cylinders for giving the return or upward stroke rest mouth
upward in the bottom casting at opposite sides. The two rams of these
cylinders pass through the ends of, and carry, a crosshead, upon which the
main ram rests. The two lifting rams are made long enough to pass through
holes in the top casting, and thus form guides to the crosshead and
mandrel.

The main ram is 24 in. in diameter, and has a stroke of 12 ft. The press
is worked at a pressure of 3 tons per square inch, giving a down force of
1,300 tons. The two lifting rams are each 8-1/2 in. in diameter, and give an
upward force of 300 tons. This large upward force is required for
stripping the tubes off the mandrels, in addition to raising the main ram
crosshead, etc.

Referring to the engraving, the main cylinder is seen at the top with the
main ram carrying the crosshead, to which are connected the two lifting
rams, the cylinders for which extend below ground. By this arrangement a
reciprocating motion is obtained, rams only being used, the central ram
giving the downward thrust, and the two smaller side rams giving the
upward stroke.

Mr. Walker has this press in operation, and from a disk of steel 3 ft. in
diameter, having a mean thickness of about 4 in., he has raised a tube or
cylinder with a solid end to it 3 ft. 6 in. long and 12 in. in diameter,
of a uniform thickness of about 1 in., and sanguine hopes are entertained
of producing greater results. Messrs. Bessemer & Co. are now making a
larger press of similar construction.--_Engineering._




        TIMBER, AND SOME OF ITS DISEASES.[2] By H. MARSHALL WARD.


                                  VI.

If we turn our attention for a moment to the illustrations in the first
article, it will be remembered that our typical log of timber was clothed
in a sort of jacket termed the cortex, the outer parts of which constitute
what is generally known as the bark. This cortical covering is separated
from the wood proper by the cambium, and I pointed out that the cells
produced by divisions on the outside of the cambium cylinder are employed
to add to the cortex.

[2] Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 644, page 10281.

Now this cortical jacket is a very complicated structure, since it not
only consists of numerous elements, differing in different trees, but it
also undergoes some very curious changes as the plant grows up into a
tree. It is beyond the purpose of these articles to enter in detail into
these anatomical matters, however; and I must refer the reader to special
text books for them, simply contenting myself here with general truths
which will serve to render clearer certain statements which are to follow.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--A piece of the cambium and cortical jacket of a
young oak, at the end of the first year. It may be regarded as consisting
of three parts, in addition to the cambium, C_a_. Beginning from the
outside, we have: 1. Cork cells, X, formed from the cork cambium, C.C_a_:
the cells developed on the inside of the latter, C_l_, are termed
collenchyma, and go to add to the cortex. 2. The cortex proper, consisting
of parenchyma cells, _pa_, some of which contain crystals. 3. The inner or
secondary cortex (termed _phloem_ or bast), developed chiefly by the
activity of the cambium, C_a_: this phloem consists of hard bast fibers,
_hb_, sieve tubes, S, and cells, _c_, and is added to internally by the
cambium, C_a_, each year. It is also traversed by medullary rays, M_r_,
which are continuations of those in the wood. The dotted line, [psi], in
the cortical parenchyma indicates where the new cork cambium will be
developed: when this is formed, all the tissues (e.g. _pa_, C_l_) lying on
the outside of the new cork will die, and constitute (together with the
cork) the true _bark_.]

It is possible to make two generalizations, which apply not only to the
illustration (Fig. 20) here selected, but also to most of our timber
trees. In the first place, the cortical jacket, taken as a whole, consists
not of rigid lignified elements, such as the tracheids and fibers of the
wood, but of thin-walled, soft, elastic elements of various kinds, which
are easily compressed or displaced, and for the most part easily killed or
injured--I say for the most part easily injured, because, as we shall see
immediately, a reservation must be made in favor of the outermost tissue,
or cork and bark proper, which is by no means so easily destroyed, and
acts as a protection to the rest.

The second generalization is, that since the cambium adds new elements to
the cortex on the inside of the latter, and since the cambium cylinder as
a whole is traveling radially outward--_i.e._, further from the pith--each
year, as follows from its mode of adding the new annual rings of wood on
to the exterior of the older ones, it is clear that the cortical jacket as
a whole must suffer distention from within, and tend to become too small
for the enlarging cylinder of rigid wood and growing cambium combined.
Indeed, it is not difficult to see that unless certain provisions are made
for keeping up the continuity of the cortical tissues, they must give way
under the pressure from within. As we shall see, such a catastrophe is in
part prevented by a very peculiar and efficient process.

Before we can understand this, however, we must take a glance at the
structural characters of the whole of this jacket (Fig. 20). While the
branch or stem is still young, it may be conveniently considered as
consisting of three chief parts.

(1) On the outside is a thin layer of flat, tabular cork cells (Fig. 20,
C_o_), which increase in number by the activity of certain layers of cells
along a plane parallel to the surface of the stem or branch. These cells
(C.C_a_) behave very much like the proper cambium, only the cells divided
off from them do not undergo the profound changes suffered by those which
are to become elements of the wood and inner cortex. The cells formed on
the outside of the line C.C_a_ in fact simply become cork cells; while
those formed on the inside of the line C.C_a_ become living cells (C_l_)
very like those I am now going to describe.

(2) Inside this cork-forming layer is a mass of soft, thin-walled "juicy"
cells, _pa_, which are all living, and most of which contain granules of
chlorophyl, and thus give the green color to the young cortex--a color
which becomes toned down to various shades of olive, gray, brown, etc., as
the layers of cork increase with the age of the part. It is because the
corky layers are becoming thicker that the twig passes from green to gray
or brown as it grows older. Now, these green living cells of the cortex
are very important for our purpose, because, since they contain much food
material and soft juicy contents of just the kind to nourish a parasitic
fungus, we shall find that, whenever they are exposed by injury, etc.,
they constitute an important place of weakness--nay, more, various fungi
are adapted in most peculiar ways to get at them. Since these cells are
for the most part living, and capable of dividing, also, we have to
consider the part they play in increasing the extent of the cortex.

(3) The third of the partly natural, partly arbitrary portions into which
we are dividing the cortical jacket is found between the green, succulent
cells (_pa_) of the cortex proper (which we have just been considering)
and the proper cambium, C_a_, and it may be regarded as entirely formed
directly from the cambium cells. These latter, developed in smaller
numbers on the outside, toward the cortex, than on the inside, toward the
wood, undergo somewhat similar changes in shape to those which go to add
to the wood, but they show the important differences that their walls
remain unlignified, and for the most part very thin and yielding, and
retain their living contents. For the rest, we may neglect details and
refer to the illustration for further particulars. The tissue in question
is marked by S, _c_, _hb_ in the figure, and is called _phloem_ or bast.

A word or two as to the functions of the cortex, though the subject
properly demands much longer discussion. It may be looked upon as
especially the part through which the valuable substances formed in the
leaves are passing in various directions to be used where they are wanted.
When we reflect that these substances are the foods from which everything
in the tree--new cambium, new roots, buds, flowers, and fruit, etc.--are
to be constructed, it becomes clear that if any enemy settles in the
cortex and robs it of these substances, it reduces not only the general
powers of the tree, but also--and this is the point which especially
interests us now--its timber-producing capacity. In the same way, anything
which cuts or injures the continuity of the cortical layers results in
diverting the nutritive substances into other channels. A very large class
of phenomena can be explained if these points are understood, which would
be mysterious, or at least obscure, otherwise.

Having now sketched the condition of this cortical jacket when the branch
or stem is still young, it will be easy to see broadly what occurs as it
thickens with age.

In the first place, it is clear that the continuous sheet of cork (C_o_)
must first be extended, and finally ruptured, by the pressure exerted from
within. It is true, this layer is very elastic and extensible, and
impervious to water or nearly so--in fact, it is a thin layer or skin,
with properties like those of a bottle cork--but even it must give way as
the cylinder goes on expanding, and it cracks and peels off. This would
expose the delicate tissues below, if it were not for the fact that
another layer of cork has by this time begun to form below the one which
is ruptured: a cork-forming layer arises along the line [phi] and busily
produces another sheet of this protective tissue in a plane more or less
exactly parallel with the one which is becoming cracked. This new
cork-forming tissue behaves as before: the outer cells become cork, the
inner ones add to the green succulent parenchyma cells (_pa_). As years go
on, and this layer in its turn splits and peels, others are formed further
inward, and if it is remembered that a layer of cork is particularly
impervious to water and air, it is easy to understand that each successive
sheet of cork cuts off all the tissues on its exterior from participation
in the life processes of the plant: consequently we have a gradually
increasing _bark_ proper, formed of the accumulated cork layers and other
dead tissues.

A great number of interesting points, important in their proper
connections, must be passed over here. Some of these refer to the anatomy
of the various "barks"--the word "bark" being commonly used in commerce to
mean the whole of the cortical jacket--the places of origin of the cork
layer, and the way in which the true bark peels off: those further
interested here may compare the plane, the birch, the Scotch pine, and the
elm, for instance, with the oak. Other facts have reference to the
chemical and other substances found in the cells of the cortex, and which
make "barks" of value commercially. I need only quote the alkaloids in
cinchona, the fibers in the malveceae, the tannin in the oaks, the coloring
matter in _Garcinia_ (gamboge), the gutta percha from _Isonandra_, the
ethereal oil of cinnamon, as a few examples in this connection, since our
immediate subject does not admit of a detailed treatment of these
extremely interesting matters.

The above brief account may suffice to give a general idea of what the
cortical jacket covering our timber is, and how it comes about that in the
normal case the thickening of the cylinder is rendered possible without
exposing the cambium and other delicate tissues: it may also serve to show
why bark is so various in composition and other characters. But it is also
clear that this jacket of coherent bark, bound together by the elastic
sheets of cork, must exert considerable pressure as it reacts on the
softer, living, succulent parts of the cortex, trapped as they are between
the rigid wood cylinder and the bark; and it is easy to convince
ourselves that such is the case. By simply cutting a longitudinal slit
through the cortex, down to near the cambium, but taking care not to
injure the latter, the following results may be obtained. First, the bark
gapes, the raw edges of the wound separating and exposing the tissues
below; next in course of time the raw edges are seen to be healed over
with cork--produced by the conversion of the outer cells into cork cells.
As time passes, provided no external interference occurs, the now rounded
and somewhat swollen cork-covered edges of the wound will be found closing
up again; and sooner or later, depending chiefly on the extent of the
wound and the vigor of the tree, the growing lips of the wound will come
together and unite completely.

But examination will show that although such a slit wound is so easily
healed over, it has had an effect on the wood. Supposing it has required
three years to heal over, it will be found that the new annual rings of
wood are a little thicker just below the slit; this is simply because the
slit had released the pressure on the cambium. The converse has also been
proved to be true--_i.e._, by increasing the pressure on the cambium by
means of iron bands, the annual rings below the bands are thinner and
denser than elsewhere.

But we have also seen that the cambium is not the only living tissue below
the bark: the cortical parenchyma (_pa_) and the cells (_c_) of the inner
cortex (technically the phloem) are all living and capable of growth and
division, as was described above. The release from pressure affects them
also; in fact, the "callus," or cushion of tissue which starts from the
lips of the wound and closes it over, simply consists of the rapidly
growing and dividing cells of this cortex, _i.e._, the release from
pressure enables them to more than catch up the enlarging layer of cortex
around the wound.

An elegant and simple instance of this accelerated growth of the cortex
and cambium when released from the pressure of other tissues is exhibited
in the healing over of the cut ends of a branch, a subject to be dealt
with later on; and the whole practice of propagation by slips or cuttings,
the renewal of the "bark" of cinchonas, and other economic processes,
depend on these matters.

In anticipation of some points to be explained only if these phenomena are
understood, I may simply remark here that, obviously, if some parasite
attacks the growing lips of the "callus" as it is trying to cover up the
wound, or if the cambium is injured below, the pathological disturbances
thus introduced will modify the result: the importance of this will appear
when we come to examine certain disturbances which depend upon the attacks
of fungi which settle on these wounds before they are properly healed
over. In concluding this brief sketch of a large subject, it may be noted
that, generally speaking, what has been stated of branches, etc., is also
true of roots; and it is easy to see how the nibbling or gnawing of small
animals, the pecking of birds, abrasions, and numerous other things, are
so many causes of such wounds in the forest.

                          (_To be continued._)




                   SIBLEY COLLEGE LECTURES.--1887-88.

      BY THE CORNELL UNIVERSITY NON-RESIDENT LECTURERS IN MECHANICAL
                              ENGINEERING.

             III.--THE EVOLUTION OF THE MODERN MILL.[3]

                  By C. J. H. WOODBURY, Boston, Mass.


                              BELT TOWERS.

The distribution of power has not always received the judicious treatment
which its importance deserves. There are but few references to this
question in the books on the subject, and these treat of methods that are
not in accordance with the application of the art in its present state.

[3] Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 647, page 10331.

The lecture was illustrated by about fifty views on the screen, which
cannot be reproduced here, showing photographs of mills and mechanical
drawings of the methods of construction alluded to in the lecture.

The early form of the distribution of power consisted in placing a
vertical shaft extending through the whole mill and distributing the power
at each story by means of beveled gears, generally of skew-beveled form.
The mechanical defects of such a method of distributing power, with regard
to protection, repairs, and necessary care, are readily apparent, and
there have also been many severe accidents caused by the breaking of teeth
in these gears.

The present method of distributing power in this country is entirely by
lines of belts extending up through what is known as a belt tower, which
constitutes an element of great fire hazard to a mill. In some cases the
belts are carried from story to story, covered by a casing of wood, and in
other instances the tower forms a flue which may be the means of the rapid
spread of fire throughout the building.

Before the introduction of automatic sprinklers there was not, I believe,
a single instance of a fire entering the lower portion of a belt tower
during working hours without accomplishing the destruction of the mill.
Since the equipment of such places with automatic sprinklers, there have
been several fires of this nature extinguished with nearly nominal damage.
That is to say, the hazard of fire starting in such places is beyond the
capacity of any apparatus other than automatic sprinklers to cope with it.

It would be impossible to arrange the distribution of power in many mills
to conform to conditions of safety without reorganizing the whole plant,
which would, of course, be impracticable. But in many instances
modifications can be introduced which will diminish the hazard to a great
degree. When the pulleys and belting are covered with sheathing in each
room, the continuity of these flues can be broken by removing this
sheathing down to the height of four or five feet above the floor, so that
the covering will merely constitute a physical protection to any one
approaching the belting.

The best method of arranging the belt tower has been in the case of a mill
at Fall River, which was erected upon the ruins of a building destroyed by
a fire originating in the belt tower. The machinery is driven by a steam
engine situated in an ell projecting from one side at about the middle of
the mill; and the main belt communicates to pulleys in a stone masonry
tower located directly inside the walls of the main mill; and thence,
from pulley to pulley, the power is communicated to each floor by shafting
passing through holes left in the tower, and in no instances by means of
