"This well has been located on the south side of Lookout Hill, near the
lake, and work was commenced upon it late in the season. After a careful
consideration of various methods for sinking the well, it was decided to
build the wall and then to excavate the material from within, trusting
to the weight of the wall to force it down. Sixteen feet of the wall
were laid securely bolted together, before the excavation was commenced.
A derrick with a boom fifty-five feet in length was set up near the
wall, so that the sweep of the boom commanded the interior of it.
Iron buckets containing fourteen cubic feet each were obtained, and a
six-horse power hoisting engine purchased. With these appliances the
excavation was commenced, and carried on with slight interruption until
the work was suspended on account of the frost."

The well is now completed, and is one of the most important features of
the Park. It is worthy to rank as a feat of engineering skill with, any
of the great works of modern times. The Commissioners decided to put its
powers to the test yesterday afternoon, but owing to the unpropitious
weather of the forenoon the trial was postponed. Nevertheless,
Commissioners Stranahan, Fiske, and Haynes, with Mr. Martin, engineer in
charge, and Mr. John Y. Culyer, his assistant, were at the well. During
the last summer some difficulties were encountered in the sinking of the
wall, which were set down by superficial observers as the utter failure
of the enterprise. Mr. Stranahan received but little encouragement from
his fellow Commissioners, some of whom had never seen greater works
of engineering than the construction of street sewers. He assumed the
responsibility of seeing the work through, feeling that the whole thing
depended entirely upon the ability of the engineers, in which he had
abundant faith. All obstacles were surmounted; the work proceeded and
the well is now finished, and so far as is known, is understood to be
the largest one in the world.

The outer wall is fifty feet in diameter, two feet thick, and fifty-four
feet high. The inner curb, or wall, is thirty-five feet in diameter and
two feet thick, having a depth of ten feet. The masonry, as seen from
the top of the structure, is a marvel of neatness and solidity. The
water surface in the well is thirteen feet above high-tide level, and
the depth of water in the well is fourteen feet. The pump foundations
are entirely independent of the walls. This plan was adopted so as to
obviate any possible difficulty which might arise from displacement. The
pump is the Worthington patent, and, with a pressure of forty pounds, is
capable of raising one million gallons of water every twenty-four hours
a height of 176 feet, and is competent to a lift of 180 feet.

The boiler house is a neat, pressed-brick structure trimmed with Ohio
stone, standing on the surface near the mouth of the well. The interior
of the well is reached by a spiral stairway built in the wall, and
commencing in the boiler house. In this way the engineer is able to
reach the pump. It is a fact worthy of notice in connection with the
construction of the wall, or rather the sinking of it, that the outer
wall rests upon four feet of wooden cribwork, two feet thick, and having
an iron shield. The inner wall is built upon a similar crib only two
feet deep, also shielded with iron.

The Commissioners were led to the construction of this well in presence
of the danger at any time of some accident taking place in connection
with the Brooklyn Water Works which would render it necessary for the
Water Board to cut off the Park supply so as to secure the citizens from
suffering. This well has more than the necessary capacity to supply the
Park abundantly with water, yielding most when most is needed. This is
established by the discovery that the time of drought from which the
well is, or may be, likely to suffer, occurs in the Fall. Besides these
facts, it further appears that in order to furnish the supply of water
to the Park the Water Board would have to go through the process of
pumping their water twice to convey it to the required elevation, equal
to 225 feet from its original level.

The work of the well will be to supply the pools at an elevation of 133
feet. From the pools the water is conducted to the lake. Besides this,
there is an independent connection with the lake by which, as necessity
may suggest, the water can be directed to the lake, a lift of only
seventy feet. The lake, when completed, will occupy an area of fifty
acres, which will be kept continually supplied with fresh water, the
arrangements being such, or to be such, as will insure a permanent
change of water, and prevent any of the evils that may arise from
stagnancy. The well is fed from the earth, consisting of a circuit of
two miles, with a fall of five feet to the mile. For this reason it does
not appear easy to exhaust the supply, as when the water is pumped out
to four or five feet from the surface of the well it is replaced at a
rate equal to the demand. Every allowance has been made for evaporation
from the lake and pools, and the supply is regarded as inexhaustible.
Another important fact here suggests itself; that is, that sufficient
rain falls during the season in the area of two miles around the well
to make the supply perennial. The Prospect Park well is a credit to
Brooklyn.--_New York Times_.

       *       *       *       *       *




PAPER FOR BUILDING.


Our readers will find in another column an advertisement of this new
building material which is now attracting much attention in the West,
and of which we have received very favorable reports. It has been
recently tested in Chicago with the result we are informed of fully
establishing its utility. It is said that a house twenty-two feet long,
sixteen wide, and fourteen high, can be covered on the outside for less
than $9; and a house thirty-six feet by twenty-two, and twenty feet
high, for $20. The building can be done at any season, and can be
finished with great speed, and there are said to be numerous other
advantages connected with the use of the paper. It differs from ordinary
paper in consistency, compactness and solidity. In the manufacture it
is subjected to a pressure of hundreds of tuns, which squeezes out the
liquid matter, leaving a substance of the right thickness. It is said to
be proof against damp and gnawing of vermin, and it being an excellent
non-conductor of heat, must make a warm dwelling in winter and a cool
one in summer. It is used in the place of plastering for inside walls.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prussian Government has military maps of every foot of its territory
so complete that every hill, ravine, brooklet, field, and forest is
delineated with perfect accuracy. It is a common boast of Prussian
military men, that within the space of eight days 848,000 men can be
concentrated to the defense of any single point within the kingdom, and
every man of them will be a trained and well-equipped soldier.

       *       *       *       *       *




Improved Muzzle-Pivoting Gun.


We are indebted for the following able description and criticism of this
Prussian gun to our able contemporary, _The Engineer_.

Viewed as a piece of mechanism, nothing can well be more beautiful
in mutual adaptation of parts to the fulfillment of given and
rather recondite movements, and in point of execution, than this
muzzle-pivoting arrangement of Herr Gruson's; but having said this we
are compelled to add, as impartial engineering critics, that it is
nothing more.

[Illustration: GRUSON'S SYSTEM OF MUZZLE-PIVOTING APPLIED TO MONITORS.]

A very few words of description, aided by the very clear engraving
annexed, will suffice to make the arrangement plain to every mechanical
reader. The entire structure is metallic, chiefly of cast iron or of
steel. Upon the platform of the casemate, or deck of the ship, or
turret, is laid the heavy bed or traverse plate, cast hollow in iron,
holding the vertical pivot at its forward end, on which the gun slide
traverses in azimuth, and at its rear end the segment plate, bolted down
and separately adjustable as to position upon the bedplate. The slide is
also a ponderous hollow casting, the upper surfaces of which, on which
the gun carriage runs forward or recoils, are curvilinear in a vertical
plane, so that the inclination to the horizon is greatest at the rear
end. At the rear end of the slide it traverses upon two heavy cast-iron
turned conical rollers, which are geared together and actuated by the
winch handle and spur gear, seen in our engraving; by these the slide
is practically held fast in any position on the bedplate. The gun
itself--in the model, a steel breech-loader, on the Prussian regulation
system, very slightly modified--is sustained between two high and
ponderous cheek plates of cast iron, which constitute the sides of the
carriage, and which are connected together strongly at the lower edges
by a heavy base or bottom plate, and at the top by two light cross
distance bolts. The muzzle and breech extremities of the piece project
well beyond those cheeks. Along the bottom of the trough of the
carriage, directly under the gun, lies a nearly horizontal hydraulic
press cylinder, the pump and handle actuating which are seen in the
figures to the proper left of the gun, and the supply of water for which
is contained in the hollow bottom of the carriage. On each side cheek of
the carriage is formed, by curved planing, a circular segmental race,
opening inward or toward each other, rectangular in cross section and
into each of which is fitted a segmental block just filling it up, and
occupying a portion of its length so as to slide easily up or downward
through the whole range of the arc or segment.

The center point of the length of each of those blocks carries one side
of the gun, which is connected also with the two heavy radius bars
seen outside the cheeks, and pivoted close to the segment races on the
outside, and with a system of link work between the gun itself and the
crosshead of the ram of the hydraulic cylinder, which gives motion
to the gun in elevation or depression, through a vertical arc, the
imaginary center of which, and of the segments of the side cheeks, is
situated in the horizontal diameter across the muzzle of the gun. This
is in brief the muzzle-pivoting part of the arrangement, of which, were
it worth while to go into its details, we should need some further
diagrams to make it quite clear. Nor is it worth while to go into
the description of various minor points of refinement about the gun
mounting, such as the very exposed long tangent scale seen in the
figure, by which the elevation or depression is read off, nor the still
more exposed and rather ricketty arrangement by which the rear sight
is arranged to rise and fall with the gun, and allowance for dispart
avoided. The recoil of the gun is resisted through and by the segment
blocks in the side cheeks, and by the heavy radius bars, etc., and
thus transferred to the carriage itself. This moves upon four
eccentro-concentric rollers, in all respects identical with those
brought before the Ordnance Select Committee of Woolwich by Mr. Mallet,
in 1858--then rejected, after some time adopted, and brought into use in
our own service, where they are now universal, and from which they have
been adopted into every artillery in the world, and, we understand,
without the slightest recognition of the inventor's rights. On the axle
of each of these rollers is keyed a circular eccentric cam plate, those
at the same side being connected together by a linking bar so as to move
in concert. Adjustable tripping plates attached to the sides of the
slide, are so arranged that when the loaded gun has been run forward its
carriage base rests hard down, with its full weight upon the top faces
of the slide, and thus the recoil is made under the full resistance due
to the friction of the entire load. Arrived at the highest point, it
rests there until loaded. The cam plates being then given a slight
motion of rotation by the help of socket levers--the rectangular
projections to be received by which are seen on the top edges of the cam
plates in the figure--the carriage, by its own commenced descent, gets
again upon its rollers, and runs forward upon these at once into firing
position. The two elevated horns which are seen standing up at the rear
part of the slide above the roller frame are designed to receive the
thump of the two short buffer-blocks--seen at the rear part of each
carriage cheek--in the event of the recoil not being wholly expended in
raising the weight of gun and carriage, etc., along the curved racers
of the slide. These buffer-blocks bear against plugs of vulcanized
india-rubber secured in the bottoms of the buffer cylinders.

We have thus, though very briefly, described the whole of this mounting.
As a carefully thought out and elaborated piece of elegant mechanical
complication Herr Gruson's muzzle-pivoting carriage attracted much
attention at Paris, in 1867, and its merits were regarded as great by
those whose thoughts went little further perhaps. We should have been
glad had it been in our power to have joined in its praise. We are,
however, obliged honestly to say that, however highly creditable to its
designer as an ingenious and capable mechanism, it shows that he has
never realized to himself as a practical artillerist the primary, most
absolute, and indispensable conditions of construction for a serviceable
muzzle-pivoting gun for either land or sea service.

As to the general merits, or general conditions, of muzzle-pivoting,
however, once in doubt at first, these are admitted now by all; and
the latter resolve themselves almost into this--that system of
muzzle-pivoting must be best which, while preserving the essential point
of leaving the muzzle of the gun free of any direct attachment, i.e.,
with an imaginary, not an actual, pivot of vertical arc motion, shall be
_the simplest possible_ in its parts, have the least details, the fewest
parts capable of being struck by splinters or shot, and all its parts of
such materials and character as to receive the smallest amount of injury
if so struck. In every one of these aspects Herr Gruson's mounting is at
fault. With parts and movements far more ingeniously adapted than those
of the crude and unskillfully designed muzzle-pivoting carriages of
Captain Heathorn, also exhibited at Paris, and much exhibited and
exposed since, the Gruson mounting is even more complicated, expensive,
and liable to injury of every sort to which a gun carriage can be
conceived liable. We may even venture to affirm that ponderous as
was the mass of cast iron, etc., in the Paris model carrying only a
12-pounder gun, were it all enlarged in such ratio as might appear to
suit for a 10-inch 25-tun rifled gun of the British type, the almost
proverbial relations, between weight, velocity of impulse, and
brittleness of cast iron, would show themselves, in the whole machine
going to pieces within a very few rounds.

       *       *       *       *       *




Stock Feeding by Clock Work.


Mr. F. B. Robinson, of North Haven, Conn., has invented a very neat
arrangement, whereby horses or stock can be fed at any time required
with certainty and without personal attention at the time of feeding.
His invention consists of a hopper with a drop bottom in which the
provender is placed. A latch secures the drop bottom, the latch engaging
with a spring catch. A simple arrangement of clock work on the principle
of the alarm clock, may be set to release the spring at any hour or
minute desired, when the drop falls and the provender falls through a
chute into the feeding trough. This invention may be adapted to feeding
any number of horses or cattle, only one clock being required. We regard
the invention as one of much value. By its use much neglect of careless
attendants may be obviated, and a farmer without help, might leave home
for an evening's entertainment, or absent himself on business, without
fear that his stock would suffer. Besides being so convenient the cost
of the apparatus is a mere bagatelle.

       *       *       *       *       *




Milk, and What Comes of It.


Orange County has long been a laud flowing with milk and--butter. Three
or four of these most beautiful autumn days were spent by us, says a
writer in _Harper's Weekly_, among the farmers which are supposed to
butter our New York city bread, and qualify our tea and coffee. Recent
mechanical improvements have taken away much of the traditional romance
of the farm, but, on the whole, the loss is more than made up by the
gain of perfect system and wonderful adaptation. Instead of four or
five cows, known by such names as Brindle, Bess, and Sukey, milked by
rosy-cheeked maidens, we have now droves of fifty or a hundred, milked
by men, who know them only as "good" or "poor milkers."

In some fine farms a large and luxuriant pasture, with running brooks
and border of woodlands, affords, with the herd feeding in it, a
beautiful picture; and the substantial barns constructed to keep the
cattle comfortably cool in summer and warm in winter, with ample
drinking troughs and stalls for fastening up at night, are indicative of
the good shelter at hand when winter storms drive the cows indoors. To
the farmyards the cows are brought night and morning, in summer, to be
milked. The strained milk is put into large cans holding forty quarts,
such as the milkmen use in distributing it through the city. These cans
are then put into tanks made in some cool running stream, where the
water comes nearly to the top of the can. Frequent stirring is necessary
until the animal heat is quite gone. The milk is then fit to be sent
to the cars. This process can never safely be omitted for, paradoxical
though it may seem, milk is "fresher" and sweeter when it reaches the
consumer if it is delayed at the farm for at least twelve hours. Even
in hot weather, it is more certain to keep sweet when twenty-four or
thirty-six hours elapse between the milking and the using in the city.

There has been much discussion as to the best means of cooling milk
for market, and patent pails have been tried in which the milk passes
directly from the cow through small, coiled tubes surrounded by ice.
But this rapid cooling does not work well, and practical experience
indicates that the old simple process is the best. Every well-appointed
farm must have, therefore, a cool and unfailing stream of water. There
are two such streams in one of the farms we visited. One passes through
the barn, furnishing drinking troughs for the cattle, and a tank for
cooling milk in winter. The other, running through the pasture, supplies
a trout-breeding pond, and furnishes a tank for summer use. In a little
