upon said carriage, of the cup, C, and tube connecting said cup with the
pump, substantially in the manner and for the purposes herein shown and
described.

3d, The method of operating the pump by connecting the piston rod of the
same with a friction wheel, actuated by the rotation of the shaft
which is being turned in the machine, in the manner herein shown and
specified.


72,149.--FINGER BAR FOR HARVESTER.--Walter A. Wood, Hoosick Falls, N.Y.

I claim, bevelling off the front upper corner of the finger bar,
to afford a seat for the sickle or scythe bar, to vibrate upon, in
combination with beveling off the lower side of the finger bar, for the
reception of the guard finger.


72,150.--CURTAIN FIXTURE.--William H. Woods, Philadelphia, Pa.

I claim the lever dog, e, with the cross foot, e, engaging and
disengaging the teeth of the rack, b b, in combination with the
swivelled knob, d, having a cross bar, g, and working in the slot, a
a, of the racket case, A, substantially as and for the purpose herein
described.


72,151.--CHIMNEY.--Ebenezer S. Phelps, Jr., Wyanet, Ill.

I claim the device above described, consisting of the iron box, A, and
drawer, B, constructed and arranged as shown, when used in combination
with the chimney, D, substantially in the manner and for the purposes
specified.

       *       *       *       *       *

REISSUES.

62,057.--BRICK MACHINE.--Philip H. Kells, Adrian, Mich. Dated March
19,1867. Reissue 2,810.

I claim, 1st, The combination of the annular mold bed, B, and the
central hub or support, C, substantially as described and represented.

2d, The adjustable wedge-shaped cut off, d, arranged and employed in the
manner and for the purpose explained.

3d, Ihe arrangement upon the mold wheel of the two pug mills on opposite
portions, substantially as described.

4th, An annular mold wheel, provided with cogs or gear teeth upon its
periphery, and mounted upon a central hub or support, substantially as
and for the purpose set forth.

       *       *       *       *       *

DESIGNS.

2,846.--MASONIC BADGE--Virgil Price, New York city.

2,847.--COOK'S STOVE.--Russell Wheeler, Utica, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR REISSUES.


_Application has been made to the Commissioner of Patents for the
Reissue of the following Patents, with new claims as subjoined.
Parties who desire to oppose the grant of any of these reissues should
immediately address MUNN & Co., 37 Park Row, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *


40,571.--ROTARY ENGINE.--Metropolitan Rotary Engine Co. (assignees by
mesne assignments of Adolph Mulochan), New York city. Dated Nov. 10,
1863. Application for reissue received and filed Sept. 27, 1867.

1st, The combination with the outer stationary case, d, and its
concentric inner cylinder or flanges, x, of the eccentric wheel, ring or
rim, c, fast to the rotating shaft and carrying radial slides or pistons
for simultaneous action and exposure to the steam or fluid in chambers,
y and z, on opposite sides or peripheries of the ring, c, essentially as
herein set forth.

2d, The pipes, i l n o, and valves or cocks k k' m' and m', in
combination--with the ring c and pistons acting in the steam spaces, y
and z, substantially as specified.


2,821 (whole No. 33,825).--LAMP.--Charles W. Cahoon, Portland Me Dated
Dec. 3, 1861. Application for reissue received and filed Nov 23 1867.

1st, A lever with chimney fastenings having that part of it on which
the chimney rests extended so as to form a deflector substantially as
described.

2d, The deflector board or flat shaped or nearly so when made not
only as a deflector but partly as a chimney holder substantially as
described.

3d, The combination of the said deflector with the conical foraminous
piece of metal and the cylindrical tubular air screen for the purpose of
forming the air chamber, A, protecting the flame and admitting the air
from below the same, substantially as described.

4th, The combination with the lever for raising the chimney of the
deflector air screen and foraminous piece of metal, substantially as and
for the purposes specified.

5th, The ring surrounding the wiek tube a little above the top of the
same with the standards, s s, substantially as and for the purposes
specified.

6th, A chimney holder having a projection for manipulating the same,
chimney fastenings, a deflector and a joint substantially as and for the
purposes set forth.

7th, The combination of the ring, f, supports, s s, and air screen, c,
substantially as and for the purpose set forth.

8th, The combination of the glass body of a lamp with a metallic handle,
substantially as and for the purpose set forth.


61,956.--COOKING STOVE.--J.J. Savage Troy, N.Y. Dated Feb. 12, 1867
Application for reissue received and filed Dec. 4, 1867.

1st, I claim constructing a heating stove with its fuel door way or
aperture, B, below, and forward of its flame or combustion chamber and
contiguous to or adjoining its fire box, A, in manner substantially as
and for the purposes herein set forth.

2d, I claim the combination of the fuel door way or aperture, B, and
the firebox, A, extended contiguously thereunder as applied to heating
stoves, in manner substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

3d, I claim in combination with a heating stove having its fuel door
way in the position as herein described, the employment therewith of a
lifting lever, F, substantially in manner as and for the purposes herein
set forth.

4th, I claim, in a heating stove, in combination with a fire box, back
lining plates and its fuel door way or aperture, B, the arrangement of a
front lining plate, E, in position between the flame chamber, C, and the
said fuel aperture in manner substantially as and for the purpose set
forth.

5th, In combination with a lever lifter, F, applied to heating stoves in
manner as herein described, I claim the employment of a holding hook, b,
and catch ridge, e, substantially as and for the purpose set forth.

6th, I claim so constructing a heating stove in manner substantially as
described herein that fresh fuel may be cast directly into its fire box
below and between ignited fuel or coke therein, in manner substantially
as herein set forth for the purposes specified.


16,944.--GUN POWDER KEG.--Henry E. Irenee L. and Eugene Du Pont
(assignees of James Wilson and William Wilson, J. and Charles Green
for themselves) Wilmington, Del. Dated March 31, 1857. Application for
reissue received and filed Nov. 30, 1867.

1st, As a new article of manufacture a keg or can with a series of
corrugations representing hoops which give combined strength and finish.

2d, Casting the female screw for the stopper on a tap or mandrel, as set
forth.

3d, The extra ring or boss, D, and head, C, as set forth.


62,693.--MACHINE FOR CUTTING THREADS ON BOLTS.--Schweitzer Patent Bolt
Co. (assignees of Franzis Schweizer), New York city. Dated March 5,
1867. Application for reissue received and filed Nov. 30, 1867.

1st, The sliding or movable heads, N O, in combination with the lever,
P, and cutter or dies, a b, substantially as and for the purpose
described.

2d, The adjustable lever, P, provided with arms, d e, substantially as
and for the purpose set forth.

3d, The elastic rest, g, constructed and operating substantially as and
for the purpose shown and described.


53,169.--MARKING WHEEL.--Horace Holt, New York city. Dated Jan. 23,
1866. Application for reissue received and filed Nov. 30, 1867.

1st, The combination of the type wheel, A, inking roller, C, and handle,
B, substantially as and for the purpose described.

2d, The ink reservoir, e, in combination with the roller, C, type wheel,
A, and handle, B, substantially as and for the purpose set forth.

3d, The projecting flanges, b, on the type wheel, A, constructed and
operating substantially as and for the purpose described.

4th, The stop, h, in combination with the type wheel, A, and handle, B,
substantially as and for the purpose set forth.

5th, Ihe spring, g, in combination with the stop, h, type wheel, A, and
handle, B, substantially as and for the purpose described.


18,872.--BORING MACHINE.--A. Wyckoff (assignee by mesne assignments of
La Fayette Stevens), Elmira, N.Y. Dated Dec. 15, 1857. Application for
reissue received and filed Nov. 29, 1867.

1st, Ihe hollow cylindrical stock of an annular auger in combination
with a spiral flange with such a pitch as will remove the cuttings
horizontally as made and deliver them from the opening of the annular
kerf, substantially as set forth.

2d, The combination of a hollow annular bit having their cutting lips
projecting in the direction of the rotation of the bit, a hollow
cylindrical stock and a spiral flange substantially as described.

3d, An annular bit formed in one piece and used in combination with
a hollow cylindrical stock for cutting an annular kerf in a stick of
timber, substantially as set forth.

4th, Ihe loose independent collar, f, provided with knife edges, g g,
to keep it from turning for the purpose of furnishing a bearing for the
head of the auger while in operation.

5th, The sharp annular spur, c, for the purpose of centering and guiding
the auger and at the same time leaving a core of the material bored in
the center of the auger, in the manner specified.

6th, The oblique traversing rests, O O, in combination with the screws,
t t, and dogs, Q, for the purpose of adjusting the timber to the auger
as described and holding it firmly while under the operation of the
auger.


66,608.--DREDGING MACHINE.--James H. McLean, St Louis, Mo. Dated July 9,
1867. Application for reissue received and filed Nov. 8, 1867.

1st, The adjustable dredging frame, C, when such adjustment is produced
by a derrick, i i, and fall, when constructed and operated substantially
as shown and specified,

2d, The scoops, d, of a dredging machine having circular vertical
cutting edges in advance of the usual lateral cutting edge, W, Fig. 1,
when constructed and operating substantially as shown and specified.

3d, In combination with the dredging vessel the pins, L, for the purpose
of moving the same, substantially as described.

4th, The dredger, the receiving and discharging apron and the derrick
of a dredging machine all in combination, when constructed and operated
substantially as shown and specified.


49,992.--SLEEPING CAR.--George M. Pullman, Chicago Ill., assignee of
Ben. Field, Albion, N.Y., and George M. Pullman, Chicago, Ill. Dated
Sept. 19 1865. Application for reissue received and filed Nov. 26, 1867.

1st, The berth, A, permanently connected with the side of the car by
hinges, B, in combination with the recess to receive the same when
turned up, substantially as described.

2d, The employment in combination with the berth, A, as described of
jointed suspenders to support the inner side of the berth that will
fold together to permit the berth to be turned up, substantially as
described.

3d, The employment in combination with the berth, A, as described of the
sliding partition, I, substantially as described.

4th, The employment in combination with the berth, A, as described, of
the movable head board, J, substantially as described.

5th, The employment in combination with the berth, A, as described of
a counterpoise to facilitate the handling of the same substantially as
described.

6th, Constructing a car seat with the back and seat cushions hinged
together and disconnected from the seat frame so that the back cushion
may be placed on the seat frame and the seat cushion extended to meet
the seat cushion of the opposite chair, substantially as described.


48,555.--DOOR BOLT.--The Stanley Works (assignees of William H. Hart),
New Britain, Conn. Dated July 4, 1865. Application for reissue received
and filed Oct 29 1867.

1st, Making the barrel of a door or shutter bolt of sheet metal,
substantially as shown and described.

2d, The bolt catch or keeper with the base plate formed with a flanch
at right angles, substantially as described, that it may be secured by
screws parallel with the axis of the bolt, substantially as described.


29,430.--INDEX DOOR PLATE.--E.M. Montague, Boston, Mass., assignee of
Nathan Ames, Saugus Center, Mass. Dated July 31, 1860. Application for
reissue received and filed Oct. 15, 1866.

1st, In use in a door plate of a tablet or slate and an adjustable plate
or disk having figures or readable signs or characters for the purposes
specified and set forth.

2d, In combination with the above door plate a rotating disk, C, marked
with the hours and parts of an hour, as shown in Fig. 2, said disk being
confined in the center to a spindle, D, which passes through the door,
substantially as and for the purpose described.

3d, The spring, S, arranged, combined and operating substantially as
described.


65,018.--STEAM GENERATOR GAGE LOCK.--Thomas Shaw, Philadelphia, Pa.
Dated May 21, 1867. Application for reissue received and filed Oct. ll,
1867.
