In their spiral of seats, the passengers looked silently and gravely
upon the cylinder base where Cragley and his staff were gathered over
the apparatus. A dull glow of cloudy light coming in through the
transparent interstices of the descending cylinder softened and
counteracted the glow of the radium lights. An intangible feeling of
depression hung in the air.

"Elevation, five hundred feet!" announced one of the crew from his
position at the altitude dial.

"Make a landing," ordered Cragley. "We can't be very far from where the
_C-49_ fell. If there's enough of the ship left, we may be able to
discover the cause of this accident."

Down through the lush vegetation, the cylinder felt its way, dropping
very slowly. Finally it came to rest on a knoll.

"How far are we from the ship?" queried the captain.

"About seventeen hundred feet south of it, I'd say."

"We'll go outside and get organized. We've got to get that platinum
shipment off the _C-49_ and get into communication with headquarters at
Deliphon somehow. The proximity detector tells us we're over two
hundred miles from there."

One of the passengers spoke up with a suggestion. "Can't we go the rest
of the way in this? You can send back for what's left of the ship. I've
an important reason for arriving in Deliphon quickly. If--"

"Not a chance," cut in Cragley, both amused and annoyed. "The cylinder
wouldn't take us anywhere. All the cylinder is good for is an emergency
descent. It has no driving power."

       *       *       *       *       *

Preparations were made for a trip to the wrecked space ship.

"Might I go with you and the men, Captain?" I ventured.

"Sure, Hantel, come along! I'll have to leave part of the crew here with
the passengers and the cylinder, so I'm glad to have a few volunteers."

"Count on me, then," another of the passengers spoke up.

I recognized him as Chris Brady. He was a man about my own age, possibly
younger, perhaps in his late twenties. Brady and I had become friends
during the trip, having spent many hours together. This was my second
trip to the clouded planet. Brady had made many trips to Venus, spending
considerable time among the colonies. I had learned much about the man
which had interested me.

Our party consisted of Cragley, Brady, three of the crew, four other
passengers and myself. Well armed, we set out through the yellow jungle
in search of the remains of the _C-49_. Quentin insisted that it was not
far away according to the proximity detector which was especially
attuned to the bulk and metal composition of the space ship.

Progress was difficult in spots, and we found it necessary to hack our
way through lush growths of vegetation, taking numerous detours around
interlaced verdure. We were out of sight of the cylinder almost
immediately.

One of the passengers who had volunteered to accompany us complained at
the prospects of becoming lost. Cragley calmed the man's anxiety with a
brief explanation of the directometer he carried. It was an elaborate
perfection of the old compass. On a square plate, our position was
always designated in relation to the _C-49_. By telescopic condensation
of the field, Cragley was capable of bringing Deliphon on the
instrument. It was well over two hundred miles beyond us.

"If Quentin doesn't have that televisor fixed by the time we get back,
we are in a jam."

"There's the ship!"

We looked where the pointing arm of Brady designated. The wrecked space
ship lay imbedded in the murky waters of a swamp, fully one-third of its
bulk out of sight. Above, the torn and tangled mass of vegetation bore
witness to the rapid descent of the craft. Mighty branches were torn
away from giant trees. The ship itself was enwrapped by interlaced
creepers which it had ripped loose from the upper foliage.

We waded through warm, stagnant water which teemed with marine life. We
were halfway to the side of the _C-49_ when a cry from behind startled
me into action. I turned and stared into the gaping jaws of a terrifying
serpent wriggling through the shallow water on many legs. Several
electric pistols flashed almost simultaneously. The loathesome monster
turned belly up, floating dead upon the surface of the swamp water.

From then on, we advanced more cautiously. Coming alongside the crushed
hull of the interplanetary liner, we made an inspection of its position.
The space ship lay nearly right side up, the decks slanting a bit
sharply to one side. Upon the outer deck of the _C-49_, Cragley
scratched his head and looked the situation over.

"Not so bad as I'd feared," was his comment. "Wouldn't be much else but
junk here if it hadn't been for the jungle breaking the fall." Cragley
pointed upward to the strong barrier of interlaced foliage. "I hope to
discover just why it was we fell."

"Wasn't there an explosion?" I inquired. "There was a great shock just
before you opened the door to my stateroom. For a moment I thought we'd
struck the planet."

"Yes--there was an explosion," Cragley replied, a bit reluctant to voice
the admission. "It occurred somewhere in the mechanism operating our
radium repellors. That's why the ship started falling. Its weight was
left partly free against the gravity of Venus. We had to leave so
quickly there was no time for inspection."

One by one, we descended into the wrecked _C-49_. In that part of the
ship which lay lowest below water level, tiny streams of dirty water
trickled between wrenched plates, forming pools of water which rose
slowly about us. Cragley and his men inspected the radium repellors.
They whispered strangely among themselves. A steely glint shone
resolutely in Captain Cragley's eyes.

"There's deviltry been done here," he stated fiercely. "The _C-49_ was
deliberately wrecked by someone on board!"

Heavy silence followed his words. One of the crew returned from the
vault room. He announced to the captain that the _C-49's_ shipment of
platinum was intact as they had left it. Captain Cragley turned the
matter over in his mind. He was an astute man. Having smelled out a
conspiracy, he was planning the best way he knew to thwart it. The
platinum itself presented an obvious motive. Finally he spoke.

"You passengers are to go up into the observation room and wait for us.
Under no condition are you to leave the room and wander about the ship."

Captain Cragley's orders were obeyed to the letter.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the observation chamber, Brady asked my opinion of the discovery
Captain Cragley had made. "What's up, anyways?"

I shook my head. Brady was plainly nervous. Others of the passengers who
had accompanied us shared his apprehension. Fully a half hour had passed
and still Cragley and his men put in no appearance. Outside, myriads of
life flew, crawled and swam about the damaged craft.

Presently, Cragley and his three men emerged from the lower levels of
the _C-49_. They presented an uncouth spectacle bedraggled as they were
with grime and dirty water. In their arms they carried many small boxes.
Though small, each box was extremely heavy, being loaded with a fortune
in platinum bars.

"We'll return to the cylinder," said Cragley. "There's important work to
be done."
