lounge.

Unless you had a vivid imagination of the type which had remained with
Markham Gray down through the years, a few minutes at a time would have
been enough. With rare exception, the view on the screen seemed almost
like a still; a velvety blackness with pin-points of brilliant light,
unmoving, unchanging.

But even Markham Gray, with his ability to dream and to discern that
which is beyond, found himself twisting with ennui after thirty minutes
of staring at endless space. He wished that there was a larger number of
passengers aboard. The half-dozen businessmen and their women and
children had left him cold and he was doing his best to avoid them. Now,
if there had only been one good chess player--

Co-pilot Bormann was passing through the lounge. He nodded to the
distinguished elderly passenger, flicked his eyes quickly,
professionally, over the vision screen and was about to continue on his
way.

Gray called idly, "Hans, I thought the space patrols very seldom got out
here."

"Practically never, sir," the other told him politely, hesitating
momentarily. Part of the job was to be constantly amiable, constantly
watchful of the passengers out here in deep space--they came down with
space cafard at the drop of a hat. Markham Gray reminded Bormann of
pictures of Benjamin Franklin he'd seen in history books, and ordinarily
he didn't mind spending a little time now and then talking things over
with him. But right now he was hoping the old duffer wasn't going to
keep him from the game going on forward with Captain Post and the
steward.

"Just noticed one on the screen," the elderly journalist told him
easily.

The co-pilot smiled courteously. "You must have seen a meteorite, sir.
There aren't any--"

Markham Gray flushed. "I'm not as complete a space neophyte as your
condescending air would indicate, Lieutenant. As a matter of fact, I'll
stack my space-months against yours any day."

Bormann said soothingly, "It's not that, sir. You've just made a
mistake. If a ship was within reasonable distance, the alarms would be
sounding off right now. But that's not all, either. We have a complete
record of any traffic within a considerable distance, and I assure you
that--"

Markham Gray pointed a finger at the lower left hand corner of the
screen. "Then what is that, Lieutenant?" he asked sarcastically.

The smile was still on the co-pilot's face as he turned and followed the
direction of the other's finger. The smile faded. "I'll be a _makron_!"
he blurted. Spinning on his heel, he hurried forward to the bridge,
muttering as he went.

The older man snorted with satisfaction. Actually, he shouldn't have
been so snappy with the young man; he hated to admit he was growing
cranky with age. He took up his half completed manuscript again. He
really should finish this article, though, space knew, he hadn't enough
material for more than a few paragraphs. Triton was a barren satellite
if he'd ever seen one--and he had.

He had almost forgotten the matter ten minutes later when the ship's
public address system blurted loudly.

BATTLE STATIONS! BATTLE STATIONS! ALL CREW MEMBERS TO EMERGENCY
STATIONS. ALL PASSENGERS IMMEDIATELY TO THEIR QUARTERS. BATTLE STATIONS!

Battle Stations?

Markham Gray was vaguely familiar with the fact that every Solar System
spacecraft was theoretically a warcraft in emergency, but it was
utterly fantastic that--

He heaved himself to his feet, grunting with the effort, and,
disregarding the repeated command that passengers proceed to their
quarters, made his way forward to the bridge, ignoring the hysterical
confusion in passengers and crew members hurrying up and down the ship's
passageways.

It was immediately obvious, there at the craft's heart, that this was no
farce, at least not a deliberate one. Captain Roger Post, youthful
officer in command of the _Neuve Los Angeles_, Lieutenant Hans Bormann
and the two crew members on watch were white-faced and shaken,
momentarily confused in a situation which they had never expected to
face. The two officers stood before the bridge vision screen watching,
wide-eyed, that sector of space containing the other vessel. They had
enlarged it a hundred-fold.

