

The conversation turned into a discussion of the possibilities of their
new form. Whether they would need sleep was a moot point, and they were
discussing the advisability of training mechanics as doctors when the
first footsteps announced themselves.

They belonged to a man whose face, ornamented by a neat Van Dyke in
wire, gave him the appearance of a physician of the more fleshly life,
but who turned out to be a lawyer, named Roberts. He was delighted with
the extraordinary youthfulness and vitality he felt in the new
incarnation. Fully dressed in morning clothes, he bore the information
that he was one of a group of four who had achieved the metal
transformation atop the French building. He promptly plunged into a
discussion of technicalities with Ben that left the other two out of it,
and they moved off to the Seventh Avenue side of the building to see
whether any more people were visible.

"Do you miss the people much?" asked Murray, by way of making
conversation.

"Not a bit," she confessed. "My chief emotion is delight over not having
to go to the de la Poers' tea tomorrow afternoon. Though I suppose we
will miss them as time goes on."

"I don't know about that," Murray replied. "Life was getting pretty
complicated and artificial--at least for me. There were so many things
one had to do before one began living--you know, picking the proper
friends and all that."

The girl nodded understandingly. "I know what you mean. My mother would
throw a fit if she knew I were here talking to you right now. If I met
you at a dance in Westchester it would be perfectly all right for me to
stay out with you half the night and drink gin together, but meeting you
in daylight on the street--oh, boy!"

"Well," Murray sighed, "that tripe is all through with now. What do you
say we get back and see how the rest are getting along?"

They found them still in the midst of their argument.

"--evidently some substance so volatile that the mere contact with
animal tissue causes a reaction that leaves nothing of either the
element or the tissue," Ben was saying. "You note that these metal bands
reproduce the muscles almost perfectly."

"Yes," the lawyer replied, "but they are too flexible to be any metal I
know. I'm willing to grant your wider knowledge of chemistry, but it
doesn't seem reasonable. All I can think of is that some outside agency
has interfered. These joints, for instance--," he touched Ben's elbow,
"--and what about the little rubber pads on your fingers and toes and
the end of your nose?"

There was a universal motion on the part of the others to feel of their
noses. It was as the lawyer had said--they were, like the fingers and
toes, certainly very much like rubber--and movable!

"Don't know," said Ben. "Who did it, though? That's what boggles your
scheme. Everybody's changed to metal and nobody left to make the changes
you mention. However, let's go get the rest of your folks. I wonder if
we ought to have weapons. You two wait here."

He clanked off with the lawyer to the taxi. A moment later, the tooting
of the horn announced their return. The party consisted, beside Roberts
himself, of his daughter, Ola Mae, a girl of sixteen, petulant over the
fact that her high-heeled shoes were already breaking down under her
weight; a Japanese servant named Yoshio; and Mrs. Roberts, one of those
tall and billowy women of the earlier life who, to the irritation of the
men, turned out to be the strongest of any of them. Fat, apparently, had
no metallic equivalent, and her ample proportions now consisted of bands
of metal that made her extraordinarily powerful.

With these additions the little group adjourned to Times Square to watch
the billowing clouds of smoke rising above the ruins of the opera house.

"What next?" asked Gloria, seating herself on the curbstone.

"Look for more people," said Murray. "Surely we can't be the only frogs
in the puddle."

"Why not?" put in Ben, argumentatively, with a swing of his arm toward
the wreckage-strewn square. "You forget that this catastrophe has
probably wiped out all the animal life of the world, and we seven owe
our survival to some fortunate chance."

The Japanese touched him on the arm. "Perhaps sir can inform inquirer,
in such case, what is curious avian object?" he said, pointing upward.

They heard the beat of wings as he spoke and looked up together to see,
soaring fifty feet past their heads a strange parody of a bird, with
four distinct wings, a long feathered tail, and bright intelligent eyes
set in a dome-like head.

There was a moment of excited babbling.

"What is it?"

"Never saw anything like it before."

"Did the comet do _that_ to chickens?" And then, as the strange creature
disappeared among the forest of spires to the east, the voice of the
lawyer, used to such tumults, asserted its mastery over the rest.

"I think," he said, "that whatever that bird is, the first thing to be
done is find a headquarters of some kind and establish a mode of life."

"How about finding more people?" asked Gloria. "The more the
merrier--and there may be some who don't know how nice castor oil is."
She smiled a metallic smile.

"The fire--" began Ben.

"It would keep some people away."

       *       *       *       *       *

They debated the point for several minutes, finally deciding that since
those present had all come from the top floors or penthouses of tall
buildings, the search should be confined to such localities. Each was to
take a car--there were any number for the taking around Times
Square--and cover a certain section of the city, rallying at sundown to
the Times building, where Ola Mae and Murray, who could not drive, were
to be left.

Roberts was the first one back, swinging a big Peugeot around with the
skill of a racing driver. He had found no one, but had a curious tale.
In the upper floors of the New Waldorf three of the big windows were
smashed in, and in one corner of the room, amid a maze of chairs
fantastically torn as though by a playful giant, a pile of soft cloths.
In the midst of this pile, four big eggs reposed. He had picked up one
of the eggs, and after weighing the advisability of bringing it with
him, decided he had more important things to do. The owners of the nest
did not appear.

As he emerged from the building, however, the quick motion of a shadow
across the street caused him to look up in time to catch a glimpse of
one of the four-winged birds they had seen before, and just as he was
driving the car away, his ears were assailed by a torrent of screeches
and "skrawks" from the homecomer. He did not look up until the shadow
fell across him again when he perceived the bird was following close
behind him, flying low, and apparently debating the advisability of
attacking him.

Roberts waved his arms and shouted; it had not the slightest effect on
the bird, which, now that it was closer, he perceived to move its hind
wings only, holding its fore-wings out like those of an airplane. He
wished he had a weapon of some kind; lacking one, he drew the car up to
the curb and ran into a building. The bird alighted outside and began to
peck the door in, but by the time it got through Roberts had climbed a
maze of stairs, and though he could hear it screaming throatily behind
him, it did not find him and eventually gave up the search.

The end of this remarkable tale was delivered to an enlarged audience.
Gloria had arrived, bringing a chubby little man who announced himself
as F. W. Stevens.

"The boy plunger?" queried Murray absent-mindedly, and realized from
Gloria's gasp that he had said the wrong thing.

"Well, I operate in Wall Street," Stevens replied rather stiffly.

Ben came with three recruits. At the sight of the first, Murray gasped.
Even in the metal caricature, he had no difficulty in recognizing the
high, bald forehead, the thin jaws and the tooth-brush moustache of
Walter Beeville, the greatest living naturalist. Before dark the others
were back--Yoshio with one new acquisition and Mrs. Roberts, whose
energy paralleled her strength, with no less than four, among them an
elaborately gowned woman who proved to be Marta Lami, the Hungarian
dancer who had been the sensation of New York at the time of the
catastrophe.

They gathered in the Times Square drug store in a strange babble of
phonographic voices and clang of metal parts against the stone floor and
soda fountains. It was Roberts who secured a position behind one of
these erstwhile dispensers of liquid soothing-syrup and rapped for
order.

"I think the first thing to be done," he said, when the voices had grown
quiet in answer to his appeal, "is to organize the group of people here
and search for more. If it had not been for the kindness of Mr. Ruby
here, my family and I would not have known about the necessity of using
oil on this new mechanical make-up nor of the value of electrical
current as food. There may be others in the city in the same state. What
is the--ah--sense of the gathering on this topic?"

Stevens was the first to speak. "It's more important to organize and
elect a president," he said briefly.

"A very good idea," commented Roberts.

"Well, then," said Stevens, ponderously, "I move we proceed to elect
officers and form as a corporation."

"Second the motion," said Murray almost automatically.

"Pardon me." It was the voice of Beeville the naturalist. "I don't think
we ought to adopt any formal organization yet. It hardly seems
necessary. We are practically in the golden age, with all the resources
of an immense city at the disposal of--fourteen people. And we know very
little about ourselves. All the medical and biological science of the
world must be discarded and built up again. At this very moment we may
be suffering from the lack of something that is absolutely necessary to
our existence--though I admit I cannot imagine what it could be. I think
the first thing to do is to investigate our possibilities and establish
the science of mechanical medicine. As to the rest of our details of
existence, they don't matter much at present."

A murmur of approval went round the room and Stevens looked somewhat put
out.

"We could hardly adopt anarchy as a form of government," he offered.

"Oh, yes we could," said Marta Lami, "Hurray for anarchy. The Red Flag
forever. Free love, free beer, no work!"

"Yes," said Gloria, "what's the use of all this metallizing, anyway? We
got rid of a lot of old applesauce about restrictions and here you want
to tie us up again. More and better anarchy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Say," came a deep and raucous voice from one of the newcomers. "Why
don't we have just a straw boss for a while till we see how things work
out? If anyone gets fresh the straw boss can jump him, or kick him out,
but those that stick with the gang have to listen to him. How's that?"

"Fine," said Ben, heartily. "You mean have a kind of Mussolini for a
while?"

"That's the idea. You ought to be it."

There was a clanging round of metallic applause as three or four people
clapped their hands.

"There is a motion--" began Roberts.

"Oh, tie a can to it," said Gloria, irreverently, "I nominate Ben Ruby
as dictator of the colony of New York for--three months. Everybody
that's for it, stick up your hands."

Eleven hands went up. Gloria looked around at those who remained
recalcitrant and concentrated her gaze on Stevens. "Won't you join us,
Mr. Stevens?" she asked sweetly.

"I don't think this is the way to do things," said the Wall Street man
with a touch of asperity. "It's altogether irregular and no permanent
good can result from it. However, I will act with the rest."

"And you, Yoshio?"

"I am uncertain that permission is granted to this miserable worm to
vote."

"Certainly. We're all starting from scratch. Who else is there? What
about you, Mr. Lee?"

"Oh, I know him too well."

The rest of the opposition dissolved in laughter and Ben made his way to
the place by the counter vacated by Roberts.

"The first thing we can do is have some light," he ordered. "Does
anyone know where candles can be had around here? I suppose there ought
to be some in the drug store across the street, but I don't know where
and there's no light to look by."

"How about flashlights? There's an electrical and radio store up the
block."

"Fine, Murray you go look. Now Miss Roberts, will you be our secretary?
I think the first thing to do is to get down the name and occupation of
everyone here. That will give us a start toward finding out what we can
do. Ready? Now you, Miss Rutherford, first."

"My name is Gloria Rutherford and I can't do anything but play tennis,
drink gin and drive a car."

The rest of the replies followed: "F. W. Stevens, Wall Street,"
"Theodore Roberts, lawyer," "Archibald Tholfsen, chess-player," "H. M.
Dangerfield, editor," "Francis X. O'Hara, trucking business," (this was
the loud-voiced man who had cut the Gordian knot of the argument about
organization). "Are you a mechanic, too?" asked Ben.

"Well, not a first class one, but I know a little about machinery."

"Good, you're appointed our doctor."

"Paul Farrelly, publisher," "Albert F. Massey, artist"--the voices
droned on in the uncertain illumination of the flashlights.

"Very well, then," said Ben at the conclusion of the list. "The first
thing I'll do is appoint Walter Beeville director of research. Fact
number one for him is that we aren't going to need much of any sleep. I
don't feel the need of it at all, and I don't seem to see any signs
among you. O'Hara will help him on the mechanical side.... I suggest
that as Mr. Beeville will need to observe all of us we make the
Rockefeller Institute our headquarters. He will have the apparatus there
to carry on his work. Let's go."




CHAPTER III

Rebellion


They whirled away to the east side of the city and up Second Avenue like
a triumphal cortege, blissfully disregarding the dead traffic lights,
though now and then they had to dodge the ruins of some truck or taxi
that had come out second best from an argument with an elevated pillar
where the driver's hand had been frozen at the wheel. At Forty-ninth
Street Ben's car, in the lead, swung in to the curb and pulled up.

"What is it?" ... "Is this the place?" ... "Anything wrong?"

An illuminating voice floated up. "Electric store, get all the
flashlights and batteries you can. We're going to need them."

A few moments later they were at the great institution, strangely dark
and silent now after all its years of ministering to the sick, with a
line of rust showing redly on the tall iron fence that surrounded the
grounds. They trooped into the reception room, flickering their lights
here and there like fireflies. Ben mounted a chair.

"Just a minute, folks," he began. "I want to say something.... What we
have to do here is build civilization up all over again. Undoubtedly
there are more people alive--if not in New York, then in other places.
We have two jobs--to get in touch with them and to find out what we can
do. Mr. Beeville is going to find out about the second one for us, but
we can do a lot without waiting for him.

"In the first place, there's that funny-looking bird that we all saw and
that chased Roberts. There may be others like it and a lot of new queer
forms of animal life around that would be dangerous to us. Therefore, I
think it's in line to get some weapons. Miss Lami, you and Mr. Tholfsen
are delegated to dig up a hardware store and find guns and
cartridges.... Now for the rest, I'm open to suggestions."

Everybody spoke at once. "Wait a minute," said Ben. "Let's take things
in order. What was your idea, Mr. Stevens?"

"Organize regular search parties."

"And a good idea, too. We don't even need to wait for daylight.
Everybody who can drive, get a car and trot along."

"X-ray machines are going to be awfully useful in my work," offered
Beeville. "I wonder if there isn't some way of getting enough current to
run one."

"As far as I remember, this building supplies its own current. Murray,
you and Massey trot down and get a fire up under one of the boilers.
Anything else?"

"Yes," came from Dangerfield, the editor. "It seems to me that the first
thing anyone else in the world would try to do if he found himself made
into a tin doll like this is get hold of a radio. How about opening up a
broadcasting station?"

"I don't know whether you can get enough power, but you can try. Go to
it. Do you know anything about radio?"

"A little."

"All right. Pick whoever you want for an assistant and try it out. Any
more ideas?"

"What day is it?" asked Ola Mae Roberts.

Nobody had thought of it, and it suddenly dawned on the assemblage that
the last thing they remembered was when the snow on the roof-tops
bespoke a chilly February, while now all the trees were in leaf and the
air was redolent of spring.

"Why--I don't know," said Ben. "Anybody here got any ideas on how to
find out?"

"It would take an experienced astronomer and some calculation to
determine with accuracy," said Beeville. "We'd better set an arbitrary
date."

"O. K. Then it's May 1, 1947. That's two years ahead of time, but it
will take that long to find out what it really is."

The assumption that sleep would be unnecessary proved correct. All night
long, cars roared up to the door and away again on their quests. The
number of people found was small--the cream had apparently been gathered
that morning. O'Hara brought in a metallic scrubwoman from one of the
downtown buildings, the tines that represented her teeth showing stains
of rust where she had incautiously drunk water; Stevens turned up with a
slow-voiced young man who proved to be Georgios Pappagourdas, the
attache of the Greek consulate whose name had been in the papers in
connection with a sensational divorce case; and Mrs. Roberts came in
with two men, one of them J. Sterling Vanderschoof, president of the
steamship lines which bore his name.

At dawn Dangerfield came in. He had set up a powerful receiving set by
means of storage batteries but could find no messages on the air, and
could find no source of power sufficient for him to broadcast.

The morning, therefore, saw another and somewhat less optimistic
conference. As it was breaking up Ben said, "You Tholfsen, take Stevens,
Vanderschoof and Lee and get a truck, will you? You'll find one about
half a block down the street. Go up to one of the coal pits and get some
fuel for our boilers here. We haven't too large a supply."

There was a clanking of feet as they left and Ben turned into the
