    fine specimen trees and cut out all those that interfere with them.
    The selection must also favor trees which are best adapted to the
    local soil and climatic conditions and those which will add to the
    beauty of the place. In this respect the method of marking will be
    different from that used in commercial forestry, where the aim is to
    net the greatest profit from the timber. In pure forestry practice,
    one sees no value in such species as dogwood, ironwood, juneberry,
    sumac and sassafras, and will therefore never allow those to grow up
    in abundance and crowd out other trees of a higher market value. But
    on private estates and in park woodlands where beauty is an
    important consideration, such species add wonderful color and
    attractiveness to the forest scene, especially along the roads and
    paths, and should be favored as much as the other hardier trees. One
    must not mark too severely in one spot or the soil will be dried out
    from exposure to sun and wind. When the gaps between the trees are
    too large, the trees will grow more slowly and the trunks will
    become covered with numerous shoots or suckers which deprive the
    crowns of their necessary food and cause them to "die back." Where
    the trees are tall and slim or on short and steep hillsides, it is
    also important to be conservative in marking in order that the stand
    may not be exposed to the dangers of windfall. No hard-and-fast rule
    can be laid down as to what would constitute a conservative
    percentage of trees to cut down. This depends entirely on the local
    conditions and on the exposure of the woodlot. But in general it is
    not well to remove more than twenty per cent of the stand nor to
    repeat the cutting on the same spot oftener than once in five or six
    years. The first cutting will, of course, be the heaviest and all
    subsequent cuttings will become lighter and lighter until the
    woodlot is put in good growing condition. On private estates and
    parks, where beauty is the chief aim, the woodland should be kept as
    natural, informal and as thick as possible. Where the woodland is
    cut up by many paths and drives, density of vegetation will add to
    the impression of depth and distance.

Protection: This subject has already been discussed considerably in the
    previous study on Forestry, and here it becomes necessary merely to
    add a few suggestions with special reference to private and park
    woodlands.

    Guarding woodlands from _fire_ is the most important form of
    protection. Surface fires are very common on small woodland holdings
    and the damage done to the standing vegetation is generally
    underestimated. An ordinary ground or surface fire on a woodland
    area will burn up the leaf-litter and vegetable mold, upon which the
    trees depend so much for food and moisture, and will destroy the
    young seedlings on the ground. Where the fire is a little more
    severe, the older trees are badly wounded and weakened and the
    younger trees are frequently killed outright. Insects and disease
    find these trees an easy prey, and all related forest conditions
    commence to deteriorate.

    Constant watchfulness and readiness to meet any emergency are the
    keynote of effective fire protection. Notices similar to the one
    shown in Fig. 143 often help to prevent fires. It is also helpful to
    institute strict rules against dropping lighted matches or tobacco,
    or burning brush when the ground is very dry, or leaving smouldering
    wood without waiting to see that the fire is completely out. There
    should be many roads and foot-paths winding through the woodland in
    order that they may serve as checks or "fire lanes" in time of fire.
    These roads and paths should be kept free from brush and leaves and
    should be frequently patrolled. When made not too wide,
    unpretentious and in conformity with the natural surroundings, such
    drives and paths can become a very interesting feature of the place,
    winding through the woodland, exposing its charms and affording
    opportunity for pleasant driving and walking. The borders of the
    paths can be given special attention by placing the more beautiful
    native shrubs in prominent positions where they can lend increased
    attractiveness.

    In case of fire, it should be possible to call for aid by telephone
    directly from the woodland and to find within easy reach the tools
    necessary to combat fire. It is also important to obtain the
    co-operation of one's neighbors in protecting the adjoining
    woodlands, because the dangers from insects, disease and fire
    threatening one bit of woodland area are more or less dependent upon
    the conditions in the adjoining woodland.

[Illustration: FIG. 143.--Poster Suitable for Private Woodlands and
Forest Parks. The translations in Italian and Polish have been used by
the writer in this particular instance to meet the local needs.]

    As to other forms of protection, passing mention may be made of the
    importance of keeping out cattle, sheep and hogs from the woods, of
    eliminating all insects and disease, of keeping the ground free from
    brush and other inflammable material, of retaining on the ground all
    fallen leaves and keeping the forest well stocked with little trees
    and shrubs.

Forest lands may be exempted from taxation: In New York and other States
    there exists a State law providing for exemption or reduction in
    taxes upon lands which are planted with forest trees or maintained
    as wooded areas. The object of the law is to encourage home forestry
    and to establish fairness in the agricultural land-tax law by
    placing forest lands in the same category with other crop-producing
    lands. For detailed information and a copy of the law, one should
    address the local State Forestry Commission.




CHAPTER VIII

OUR COMMON WOODS: THEIR IDENTIFICATION, PROPERTIES AND USES


Woods have different values for various practical purposes because of
their peculiarities in structure. A knowledge of the structural parts of
wood is therefore necessary as a means of recognizing the wood and of
determining why one piece is stronger, heavier, tougher, or better
adapted for a given service than another.

Structure of wood: If one examines a cross-section of the bole of a
    tree, he will note that it is composed of several distinct parts, as
    shown in Fig. 145. At the very center is a small core of soft tissue
    known as the _pith_. It is of much the same structure as the pith of
    cornstalk or elder, with which all are familiar. At the outside is
    the _bark_, which forms a protective covering over the entire woody
    system. In any but the younger stems, the bark is composed of an
    inner, live layer, and an outer or dead portion.

    Between the pith at the center and the bark at the outside is the
    wood. It will be noted that the portion next to the bark is white or
    yellowish in color. This is the _sapwood_. It is principally through
    the sapwood that the water taken in by the roots is carried up to
    the leaves. In some cases the sapwood is very thin and in others it
    is very thick, depending partly on the kind of tree, and partly on
    its age and vigor. The more leaves on a tree the more sapwood it
    must have to supply them with moisture.

[Illustration: FIG. 144.--Pine Wood. (Magnified 30 times.)]

    Very young trees are all sapwood, but, as they get older, part of
    the wood is no longer needed to carry sap and it becomes
    _heartwood_. Heartwood is darker than the sapwood, sometimes only
    slightly, but in other instances it may vary from a light-brown
    color to jet black. It tends to fill with gums, resins, pigments and
    other substances, but otherwise its structure is the same as that of
    the sapwood.

[Illustration: FIG. 145.--Cross-section of Oak.]

    The wood of all our common trees is produced by a thin layer of
    cells just beneath the bark, the _cambium_. The cambium adds new
    wood on the outside of that previously formed and new bark on the
    inside of the old bark. A tree grows most rapidly in the spring, and
    the wood formed at that time is much lighter, softer and more
    porous than that formed later in the season, which is usually quite
    hard and dense. These two portions, known as _early wood_ or spring
    wood, and _late wood_ or summer wood, together make up one year's
    growth and are for that reason called _annual rings_. Trees such as
    palms and yucca do not grow in this way, but their wood is not
    important enough in this country to warrant a description.

[Illustration: FIG. 146.--White Oak Wood. (Magnified 20 times.)]

    If the end of a piece of oak wood is examined, a number of lines
    will be seen radiating out toward the bark like the spokes in a
    wheel. These are the _medullary rays_. They are present in all
    woods, but only in a few species are they very prominent to the
    unaided eye. These rays produce the "flakes" or "mirrors" that make
    quartersawed (radially cut) wood so beautiful. They are thin plates
    or sheets of cells lying in between the other wood cells. They
    extend out into the inner bark.

    While much may be seen with the unaided eye, better results can be
    secured by the use of a good magnifying glass. The end of the wood
    should be smoothed off with a very sharp knife; a dull one will
    tear and break the cells so that the structure becomes obscured.
    With any good hand lens a great many details will then appear which
    before were not visible. In the case of some woods like oak, ash,
    and chestnut, it will be found that the early wood contains many
    comparatively large openings, called _pores_, as shown in Figs. 146
    and 147. Pores are cross-sections of vessels which are little
    tube-like elements running throughout the tree. The vessels are
    water carriers. A wood with its large pores collected into one row
    or in a single band is said to be _ring-porous_. Fig. 146 shows such
    an arrangement. A wood with its pores scattered throughout the
    year's growth instead of collected in a ring is _diffuse-porous_.
    Maple, as shown in Fig. 152, is of this character.

[Illustration: FIG. 147.--Example of the Black Oak Group. (Quercus
coccinea.) (Magnified 20 times.)]

    All of our broadleaf woods are either ring-porous or diffuse-porous,
    though some of them, like the walnut, are nearly half way between
    the two groups.

    If the wood of hickory, for example, be examined with the magnifying
    lens, it will be seen that there are numerous small pores in the
    late wood, while running parallel with the annual rings are little
    white lines such as are shown in Fig. 149. These are lines of _wood
    parenchyma_. Wood parenchyma is found in all woods, arranged
    sometimes in tangential lines, sometimes surrounding the pores and
    sometimes distributed over the cross-section. The dark, horn-like
    portions of hickory and oak are the _woodfibers_. They give the
    strength to wood.

    In many of the diffuse-porous woods, the pores are too small to be
    seen with the unaided eye, and in some cases they are not very
    distinct even when viewed with a magnifier. It is necessary to study
    such examples closely in order not to confuse them with the woods of
    conifers.

    The woods of conifers are quite different in structure from
    broadleaf woods, though the difference may not always stand out
    prominently. Coniferous woods have no pores, their rays are always
    narrow and inconspicuous, and wood parenchyma is never prominent.
    The woods of the pines, spruces, larches, and Douglas fir differ
    from those of the other conifers in having _resin ducts_, Fig. 144.
    In pines these are readily visible to the naked eye, appearing as
    resinous dots on cross-sections and as pin scratches or dark lines
    on longitudinal surfaces. The presence or absence of resin ducts is
    a very important feature in identifying woods, hence it is very
    important to make a careful search for them when they are not
    readily visible.

How to identify a specimen of wood: The first thing to do in identifying
    a piece of wood is to cut a smooth section at the end and note
    (without the magnifier) the color, the prominence of the rays and
    pores, and any other striking features. If the pores are readily
    visible, the wood is from a broadleaf tree; if the large pores are
    collected in a ring it belongs to the ring-porous division of the
    broadleaf woods. If the rays are quite conspicuous and the wood is
    hard and heavy, it is oak, as the key given later will show. Close
    attention to the details of the key will enable one to decide to
    what group of oaks it belongs.

    In most cases the structure will not stand out so prominently as in
    oak, so that it is necessary to make a careful study with the hand
    lens. If pores appear, their arrangement, both in the early wood and
    in the late wood, should be carefully noted; also whether the pores
    are open or filled with a froth-like substance known as _tyloses_.
    Wood parenchyma lines should be looked for, and if present, the
    arrangement of the lines should be noted.

[Illustration: FIG. 148.--(Magnified about 8 times.)]

    If no pores appear under the magnifying lens, look closely for resin
    ducts. If these are found, note whether they are large or small,
    numerous or scattered, open or closed, lighter or darker than the
    wood. Note also whether the late wood is very heavy and hard,
    showing a decided contrast to the early wood, or fairly soft and
    grading into the early wood without abrupt change. Weigh the piece
    in your hand, smell a fresh-cut surface to detect the odor, if any,
    and taste a chip to see if anything characteristic is discoverable.
    Then turn to the following key:



KEY



I. WOODS WITHOUT PORES--CONIFERS OR SO-CALLED "SOFTWOODS"


A. Woods with resin ducts.

1. Pines. Fig. 144. Resin ducts numerous, prominent, fairly evenly
    distributed. Wood often pitchy. Resinous odor distinct. Clear
    demarcation between heart and sapwood. There are two groups of
    pines--soft and hard.

  (a) Soft Pines. Wood light, soft, not strong, even-textured, very
    easy to work. Change from early wood to late wood is gradual and the
    difference in density is not great.

  (b) Hard Pines. Wood variable but typically rather heavy, hard and
    strong, uneven textured, fairly easy to work. Change from early wood
    to late wood is abrupt and the difference in density and color is
    very marked, consequently alternate layers of light and dark wood
    show. The wood of nearly all pines is very extensively employed in
    construction work and in general carpentry.

2. Douglas fir. Resin ducts less numerous and conspicuous than in the
    pines, irregularly distributed, often in small groups. Odorless or
    nearly so. Heartwood and sapwood distinct. The wood is of two kinds.
    In one the growth rings are narrow and the wood is rather light and
    soft, easy to work, reddish yellow in color; in the other the growth
    rings are wide, the wood is rather hard to work, as there is great
    contrast between the weak early wood and the very dense late wood of
    the annual rings.

    Douglas fir is a tree of great economic importance on the Pacific
    Coast. The wood is much like hard pine both in its appearance and
    its uses.

3. Spruces. Resin ducts few, small, unevenly distributed; appearing
    mostly as white dots. Wood not resinous; odorless. The wood is white
    or very light colored with a silky luster and with little contrast
    between heart and sapwood. It is a great deal like soft pine, though
    lighter in color and with much fewer and smaller resin ducts. The
    wood is used for construction, carpentry, oars, sounding boards for
    musical instruments, and paper pulp.

4. Tamarack. Resin ducts the same as in the spruces. The color of the
    heartwood is yellowish or russet brown; that of the distinct sapwood
    much lighter. The wood is considerably like hard pine, but lacks the
    resinous odor and the resin ducts are much fewer and smaller.

    The wood is used largely for cross-ties, fence posts, telegraph and
    telephone poles, and to a limited extent for lumber in general
    construction.


B. Woods without resin ducts.

1. Hemlock. The wood has a disagreeable, rancid odor, is splintery, not
    resinous, with decided contrast between early and late wood. Color
    light brown with a slight tinge of red, the heart little if any
    darker than the sapwood. Hemlock makes a rather poor lumber which is
    used for general construction, also for cross-ties, and pulp.

2. Balsam fir. Usually odorless, not splintery, not resinous, with
    little contrast between early and late wood. Color white or very
    light brown with a pinkish hue to the late wood. Heartwood little if
    any darker than the sapwood. Closely resembles spruce, from which it
    can be distinguished by its absence of resin ducts.

    The wood is used for paper pulp in mixture with spruce. Also for
    general construction to some extent.

3. Cypress. Odorless except in dark-colored specimens which are somewhat
