slight force of gravity on the moon has been appealed to as a reason why
volcanic explosions on the lunar globe should produce incomparably
greater effects than upon the earth, where the ejected materials are so
much heavier. The same force that would throw a volcanic bomb a mile
high on the earth could throw it six miles high on the moon. The giant
cannon that we have placed in one of our coast forts, which is said to
be able to hurl a projectile to a distance of fifteen miles, could send
the same projectile ninety miles on the moon. An athlete who can clear a
horizontal bar at a height of six feet on the earth could clear the same
bar at a height of thirty-six feet on the moon. In other words, he could
jump over a house, unless, indeed, the lunarians really are giants, and
live in houses proportioned to their own dimensions and to the size of
their mountains. In that case, our athlete would have to content himself
with jumping over a lunarian, whose head he could just clear--with the
hat off.

These things are not only amusing, but important. There can be no
question that the force of gravity on the moon actually is as slight as
it has just been described. So, even without calling in imaginary
inhabitants to lend it interest, the comparative inability of the moon
to arrest bodies in motion becomes a fact of much significance. It has
led to the theory that meteorites may have originally been shot out of
the moon's great volcanoes, when those volcanoes were active, and may
have circulated about the sun until various perturbations have brought
them down upon the earth. A body shot radially from the surface of the
moon would need to have a velocity of only about a mile and a half in a
second in order to escape from the moon's control, and we can believe
that a lunar volcano when in action could have imparted such a velocity,
all the more readily because with modern gunpowders we have been able to
give to projectiles a speed one half as great as that needed for
liberation from lunar gravity.

Another consequence of the small gravitative power of the moon bears
upon the all-important question of atmosphere. According to the theory
of Dr. Johnstone Stoney, heretofore referred to, oxygen, nitrogen, and
water vapor would all gradually escape from the moon, if originally
placed upon it, because, by the kinetic theory, the maximum velocities
of their molecules are greater than a mile and a half per second. The
escape would not occur instantly, nor all at once, for it would be only
the molecules at the upper surface of the atmosphere which were moving
with their greatest velocity, and in a direction radial to the center of
the moon, that would get away; but in the course of time this gradual
leakage would result in the escape of all of those gases.[16]

[Footnote 16: The discovery of free hydrogen in the earth's atmosphere,
by Professor Dewar, 1901, bears upon the theory of the escape of gases
from a planet, and may modify the view above expressed. Since hydrogen
is theoretically incapable of being permanently retained in the free
state by the earth, its presence in the atmosphere indicates either that
there is an influx from space or that it emanates from the earth's
crust. In a similar way it may be assumed that atmospheric gases can be
given off from the crust of the moon, thus, to a greater or less extent,
supplying the place of the molecules that escape.]

After it had been found that, to ordinary tests, the moon offered no
evidence of the possession of an atmosphere, and before Dr. Stoney's
theory was broached, it was supposed by many that the moon had lost its
original supply of air by absorption into its interior. The oxygen was
supposed to have entered into combination with the cooling rocks and
minerals, thus being withdrawn from the atmosphere, and the nitrogen was
imagined to have disappeared also within the lunar crust. For it seems
to have always been tacitly assumed that the phenomenon to be accounted
for was not so much the _absence_ of a lunar atmosphere as its
_disappearance_. But disappearance, of course, implies previous
existence. In like manner it has always been a commonly accepted view
that the moon probably once had enough water to form lakes and seas.

These, it has been calculated, could have been absorbed into the lunar
globe as it cooled off. But Johnstone Stoney's theory offers another
method by which they could have escaped, through evaporation and the
gradual flight of the molecules into open space. Possibly both methods
have been in operation, a portion of the constituents of the former
atmosphere and oceans having entered into chemical combinations in the
lunar crust, and the remainder having vanished in consequence of the
lack of sufficient gravitative force to retain them.

But why, it may be asked, should it be assumed that the moon ever had
things which it does not now possess? Perhaps no entirely satisfactory
reply can be made. Some observers have believed that they detected
unmistakable indications of alluvial deposits on lunar plains, and of
the existence of beaches on the shores of the "seas." Messrs. Loewy and
Puiseux, of the Paris Observatory, whose photographs of the moon are
perhaps the finest yet made, say on this subject:

"There exists, from the point of view of relief, a general similarity
between the 'seas' of the moon and the plateaux which are covered to-day
by terrestrial oceans. In these convex surfaces are more frequent than
concave basins, thrown back usually toward the verge of the depressed
space. In the same way the 'seas' of the moon present, generally at the
edges, rather pronounced depressions. In one case, as in the other, we
observe normal deformations of a shrinking globe shielded from the
erosive action of rain, which tends, on the contrary, in all the
abundantly watered parts of the earth to make the concave surfaces
predominate. The explanation of this structure, such as is admitted at
present by geologists, seems to us equally valid for the moon."[17]

[Footnote 17: Comptes Rendus, June 26, July 3, 1899.]

It might be urged that there is evidence of former volcanic activity on
the moon of such a nature that explosions of steam must have played a
part in the phenomena, and if there was steam, of course there was
water.

But perhaps the most convincing argument tending to show that the moon
once had a supply of water, of which some remnant may yet remain below
the surface of the lunar globe, is based upon the probable similarity in
composition of the earth and the moon. This similarity results almost
equally whether we regard the moon as having originated in a ring of
matter left off from the contracting mass that became the earth, or
whether we accept the suggestion of Prof. G.H. Darwin, that the moon is
the veritable offspring of the earth, brought into being by the
assistance of the tidal influence of the sun. The latter hypothesis is
the more picturesque of the two, and, at present, is probably the more
generally favored. It depends upon the theory of tidal friction, which
was referred to in Chapter III, as offering an explanation of the manner
in which the rotation of the planet Mercury has been slowed down until
its rotary period coincides with that of its revolution.

The gist of the hypothesis in question is that at a very early period in
its history, when the earth was probably yet in a fluid condition, it
rotated with extreme rapidity on its axis, and was, at the same time,
greatly agitated by the tidal attraction of the sun, and finally huge
masses were detached from the earth which, ultimately uniting, became
the moon.[18]

[Footnote 18: The Tides, by G.H. Darwin, chapter xvi.]

Born in this manner from the very substance of the earth, the moon would
necessarily be composed, in the main, of the same elements as the globe
on which we dwell, and is it conceivable that it should not have carried
with it both air and water, or the gases from which they were to be
formed? If the moon ever had enough of these prime requisites to enable
it to support forms of life comparable with those of the earth, the
disappearance of that life must have been a direct consequence of the
gradual vanishing of the lunar air and water. The secular drying up of
the oceans and wasting away of the atmosphere on our little neighbor
world involved a vast, all-embracing tragedy, some of the earlier scenes
of which, if theories be correct, are now reenacted on the
half-desiccated planet Mars--a planet, by the way, which in size, mass,
and ability to retain vital gases stands about half-way between the
earth and the moon.

One of the most interesting facts about the moon is that its surface
affords evidence of a cataclysm which has wiped out many, and perhaps
nearly all, of the records of its earlier history, that were once
written upon its face. Even on the earth there have been geological
catastrophes destroying or burying the accumulated results of ages of
undisturbed progress, but on the moon these effects have been
transcendent. The story of the tremendous disaster that overtook the
moon is partly written in its giant volcanoes. Although it may be true,
as some maintain, that there is yet volcanic action going on upon the
lunar surface, it is evident that such action must be insignificant in
comparison with that which took place ages ago.

There is a spot in the western hemisphere of the moon, on the border of
a placid bay or "sea," that I can never look at without a feeling of awe
and almost of shrinking. There, within a space about 250 miles in length
by 100 in width, is an exhibition of the most terrifying effects of
volcanic energy that the eye of man can anywhere behold. Three immense
craters--Theophilus, 64 miles across and 3-1/2 miles deep; Cyrillus, 60
miles across and 15,000 feet deep; and Catharina, 70 miles across and
from 8,000 to 16,000 feet deep--form an interlinked chain of mountain
rings, ridges, precipices, chasms, and bottomless pits that take away
one's breath.

But when the first impression of astonishment and dismay produced by
this overwhelming spectacle has somewhat abated, the thoughtful observer
will note that here the moon is telling him a part of her wonderful
story, depicted in characters so plain that he needs no instruction in
order to decipher their meaning. He will observe that this ruin was not
all wrought at once or simultaneously. Theophilus, the crater-mountain
at the northwestern end of the chain, whose bottom lies deepest of all,
is the youngest of these giants, though the most imposing. For a
distance of forty miles the lofty wall of Theophilus has piled itself
upon the ruins of the wall of Cyrillus, and the circumference of the
circle of its tremendous crater has been forcibly thrust within the
original rim of the more ancient crater, which was thus rudely compelled
to make room for its more vigorous rival and successor.

The observer will also notice that Catharina, the huge pit at the
southeastern end of the chain, bears evidence of yet greater age. Its
original walls, fragments of which still stand in broken grandeur,
towering to a height of 16,000 feet, have, throughout the greater part
of their circuit, been riddled by the outbreak of smaller craters, and
torn asunder and thrown down on all sides.

In the vast enclosure that was originally the floor of the
crater-mountain Catharina, several crater rings, only a third, a
quarter, or a fifth as great in diameter, have broken forth, and these
in turn have been partially destroyed, while in the interior of the
oldest of them yet smaller craters, a nest of them, mere Etnas,
Cotopaxis, and Kilaueas in magnitude, simple pinheads on the moon, have
opened their tiny jaws in weak and ineffective expression of the waning
energies of a still later epoch, which followed the truly heroic age of
lunar vulcanicity.

This is only one example among hundreds, scattered all over the moon,
which show how the surface of our satellite has suffered upheaval after
upheaval. It is possible that some of the small craters, not included
within the walls of the greater ones, may represent an early stage in
the era of volcanic activity that wrecked the moon, but where larger and
smaller are grouped together a certain progression can be seen, tending
finally to extinction. The internal energies reached a maximum and then
fell off in strength until they died out completely.

It can hardly be supposed that the life-bearing phase of lunar
history--if there ever was one--could survive the outbreak of the
volcanic cataclysm. North America, or Europe, if subjected to such an
experience as the continental areas of the moon have passed through,
would be, in proportion, worse wrecked than the most fearfully battered
steel victim of a modern sea fight, and one can readily understand that,
in such circumstances, those now beautiful and populous continents would
exhibit, from a distance, scarcely any token of their present
topographical features, to say nothing of any relics of their occupation
by living creatures.

There are other interesting glimpses to be had of an older world in the
moon than that whose scarred face is now beautified for us by distance.
Not far from Theophilus and the other great crater-mountains just
described, at the upper, or southern, end of the level expanse called
the "Sea of Nectar," is a broad, semicircular bay whose shores are
formed by the walls of a partially destroyed crater named Fracastorius.
It is evident that this bay, and the larger part of the "Sea of Nectar,"
have been created by an outwelling of liquid lavas, which formed a
smooth floor over a portion of the pre-existing surface of the moon, and
broke down and submerged a large part of the mountain ring of
Fracastorius, leaving the more ancient walls standing at the southern
end, while, outlined by depressions and corrugations in the rocky
blanket, are certain half-defined forms belonging to the buried world
beneath.

Near Copernicus, some years ago, as Dr. Edward S. Holden pointed out,
photographs made with the great Lick telescope, then under his
direction, showed, in skeleton outline, a huge ring buried beneath some
vast outflow of molten matter and undiscerned by telescopic observers.
And Mr. Elger, who was a most industrious observer and careful
interpreter of lunar scenery, speaks of "the undoubted existence of the
relics of an earlier lunar world beneath the smooth superficies of the
_maria_."

Although, as already remarked, it seems necessary to assume that any
life existing in the moon prior to its great volcanic outburst must have
ceased at that time, yet the possibility may be admitted that life could
reappear upon the moon after its surface had again become quiet and
comparatively undisturbed. Germs of the earlier life might have
survived, despite the terrible nature of the catastrophe. But the
conditions on the moon at present are such that even the most confident
advocates of the view that the lunar world is not entirely dead do not
venture to assume that anything beyond the lowest and simplest organic
forms--mainly, if not wholly, in the shape of vegetation--can exist
there. The impression that even such life is possible rests upon the
accumulating evidence of the existence of a lunar atmosphere, and of
visible changes, some apparently of a volcanic character and some not,
on the moon's surface.

Prof. William H. Pickering, who is, perhaps, more familiar with the
telescopic and photographic aspects of the moon than any other American
astronomer, has recorded numberless instances of change in minute
details of the lunar landscapes. He regards some of his observations
made at Arequipa as "pointing very strongly to the existence of
vegetation upon the surface of the moon in large quantities at the
present time." The mountain-ringed valley of Plato is one of the places
in the lunar world where the visible changes have been most frequently
observed, and more than one student of the moon has reached the
conclusion that something very like the appearances that vegetation
would produce is to be seen in that valley.

Professor Pickering has thoroughly discussed the observations relating
to a celebrated crater named Linne in the _Mare Serenitatis_, and after
reading his description of its changes of appearance one can hardly
reject his conclusion that Linne is an active volcanic vent, but
variable in its manifestations. This is only one of a number of similar
instances among the smaller craters of the moon. The giant ones are
evidently entirely extinct, but some of the minor vents give occasional
signs of activity. Nor should it be assumed that these relatively slight
manifestations of volcanic action are really insignificant. As Professor
Pickering shows, they may be regarded as comparable with the greatest
volcanic phenomena now witnessed on the earth, and, speaking again of
Plato, he says of its evidences of volcanic action:

"It is, I believe, more active than any area of similar size upon the
earth. There seems to be no evidences of lava, but the white streaks
indicate apparently something analogous to snow or clouds. There must be
a certain escape of gases, presumably steam and carbonic acid, the
former of which, probably, aids in the production of the white
markings."[19]

[Footnote 19: Annals of Harvard College Observatory, vol. xxxii, part
ii, 1900.]

To Professor Pickering we owe the suggestion that the wonderful rays
emanating from Tycho consist of some whitish substance blown by the
wind, not from Tycho itself, but from lines of little volcanic vents or
craters lying along the course of the rays. This substance may be
volcanic powder or snow, in the form of minute ice crystals. Mr. Elger
remarks of this theory that the "confused network of streaks" around
Copernicus seems to respond to it more happily than the rays of Tycho
do, because of the lack of definiteness of direction so manifest in the
case of the rays.

As an encouragement to amateur observers who may be disposed to find out
for themselves whether or not changes now take place in the moon, the
following sentence from the introduction to Professor Pickering's
chapter on Plato in the Harvard Observatory Annals, volume xxxii, will
prove useful and interesting:
