a woman was washed up to the foot of the river stairs of the House of
Ptah, and the stone and chain were found among the weeds which filled
the cavity of the chest. They were taken with all reverence to the High
Priest, who bore them to the Pharaoh, and, amidst great rejoicing, hung
them round his neck. Then from Pharaoh to Pharaoh it came down through
the centuries until it fell into the possession of her who wrought the
ruin of the Ancient Land. She gave the stone to her lover, and from his
body it was taken by a priest of the Ancient Faith who once was
Anemen-Ha, and is now Phadrig Amena, the degenerate worker of mean
marvels which the ignorant of these days would call miracles did they
not take them for conjuring tricks.

"Since then it remained hidden, seen only by the successors of him who
rescued it from the plunderers of the body of Antony, until, seemingly
in the way of trade, yet doubtless for some deep reason which is not
revealed to me, it came back into my hands again. Such so far, Highness,
is the end of the story of the Stone of Horus."

"And doubtless more yet remains to be written or told," said the Prince
seriously, for he was really impressed in spite of his scepticism. Then,
after a little pause, he continued: "Phadrig, you have said that the
stone is dangerous to any but its possessor. I wish to possess it. Name
your price, and, to half my fortune, you shall have it."

"The stone, Highness," replied the Egyptian, with the shadow of a smile
flickering across his lips, "never has been, and never can be, sold for
money, so I could not sell it, even if money had value for me, which it
has not. There is only one price for it."

"And what is that?"

"A human life--perchance many lives--but all to be paid in succession by
him or her who buys it, unless he or she shall attain to the Perfect
Knowledge."

"Give it to me, then!" exclaimed Oscarovitch, holding out his hand. "The
life I have I will gladly pay for it in the hope of laying it on the
breast of the living Nitocris. As I do not believe in any others, I will
throw them in. Give it to me!"

"It is a perilous possession, Highness, for one who has not even
attained to the Greater Knowledge, as I have. Let me warn you to think
again, for once you take it from me the price must be paid to the
uttermost pang of the doom that it may bring with it."

"I care nothing about your knowledges, Phadrig," laughed the Prince,
still holding out his hand. "It is enough for me to know that it is the
most glorious gem on earth, and that it shall help me to win the
divinest woman on earth. So, once more, give it to me!"

"Take it, then, Highness," said the Egyptian, with a ring of solemnity
in his voice. "Take, and with it all that the High Gods may have in
store for you!"

He dropped the more than priceless gem into his hand with as little
reluctance as he would have given him a brass trinket. Then he turned
away to take another cigar, leaving Oscarovitch gazing in silent ecstasy
at, as he thought, his easily-come-by treasure. Then the Prince went to
a large panel picture fixed to the wall on the left-hand side of the
fireplace, touched it with his finger, and it swung aside, disclosing
the door of a small safe built into the wall. He unlocked this, placed
the stone in an inner drawer, closed the safe, and put the picture back
in its place.

When he sat down again, he said:

"My good friend, I know that it is useless for me to thank you, for even
if you wanted thanks I could not do justice to the occasion, as they say
in speeches: but I want to ask you just one more question, and then I
won't keep you any longer from that delightful Oriental Club of yours
which I suppose you are bound to. Now that I have got the stone I am, as
you may well believe, more than anxious to find the lady to whom it
shall belong--again, as I suppose you would say. To my great disgust,
the Professor and his daughter have disappeared from the sphere of
London society for a holiday _a deux_, and have, apparently with intent,
left all their friends in ignorance of their destination. Have you any
idea of it? I know that that Coptic woman whom you employ has been
ordered to keep a sharp watch on the movements of Miss Nitocris."

"Yes, Highness," replied Phadrig, "and she has obeyed her orders. The
day before they left she waylaid that pretty maid of Miss Marmion's on
the Common, and told her fortune. Of course, she talked the usual jargon
about lovers and letters and going on a journey, and the maid quite
innocently let out that she was going with her master and mistress by
steamer to Denmark and up the coast of Norway, and then over to Iceland
by the passenger steamers, and that she did not like the idea at all,
because she knew that she would be very seasick."

"Excellent! the very thing!" exclaimed the Prince. "It couldn't be
better if I had arranged it myself. My yacht is down in the Solent
waiting for Cowes Week. I'll be afloat to-morrow. Give that woman a
ten-pound note from me with my blessing. Now, I shall leave everything
else to you. Do what you think fit with regard to our friends of the
International. Kill as many of their spies as you can with safety, and
make the chiefs believe that they are fighting the Devil himself. And
now, good-night."

When Peter Petroff brought him the papers the next morning, the Prince
took up the _Telegraph_, and turned to the page devoted to the minor
events of the previous day. His eye was almost immediately caught by a
paragraph headed:

     "SUICIDE IN THE WATERLOO ROAD

     "Shortly after seven last evening the passers-by on the eastern
     side of this thoroughfare were startled by hearing the report of a
     firearm, apparently coming from the office of Mr Isaac Josephus at
     138a. Constable 206 Q., who was on point-duty near the spot, had
     seen Mr Josephus enter the office with his key only a few minutes
     before, walking in a rather curious way, and staring straight
     before him. As the door was locked, the officer thought it his duty
     to force it. The door of the inner office was also locked, and when
     this was opened, the unfortunate man was found lying across the
     desk with a bullet wound in his temple. His right hand still
     clutched a cheap revolver which was loaded in five chambers. There
     appears at present to have been no reason for the rash act. Mr
     Josephus was a broker dealing chiefly in curios and antique
     jewellery. Although not in a large way of business, his affairs are
     understood to have been in a prosperous condition. What makes the
     tragedy all the more strange is the fact that suicide is almost
     unknown among persons of the Jewish faith."

Oscarovitch felt a little shiver run down his back as he read the
commonplace lines. The man who had done this had been in this room with
him a few hours before, and one of the means of murder was now in his
safe. It would have been just as easy for Phadrig to have caused him to
look upon the fatal gem, left a bottle of poison with him, and told him
to take it as medicine on going to bed. The only difference would have
been that there would have been a very much greater sensation in the
papers.

Nicol Hendry was reading the paragraph about the same time. His eyes
contracted, and he stroked his beard with slow motions of his hand. The
hand was steady, but even his nerves quivered a little. He divined
instantly how the suicide-murder had been brought about, and this very
fact, coupled with the absolute impossibility of proving anything, made
the affair all the more disquieting.

"So that is the sort of thing we've got to fight, is it? I don't like
it. Still, it goes far to prove that the Professor was perfectly right
when he told me to keep a sharp eye on Mr Phadrig Amena."




CHAPTER XX

THROUGH THE CENTURIES


As they discovered that the sea journey to Copenhagen would be somewhat
tedious and uninteresting, and that the steamers were not exactly
palatial, Nitocris and her father decided at the last minute to cross to
Ostend, spend a day there and go on to Cologne, put in a couple of days
more among its venerable and odorous purlieus, and two more at Hamburg,
so that, while the present-day inhabitants were asleep, they might, as
Nitocris somewhat flippantly put it, take a trip back through the
centuries, and watch the great city grow from the little wooden village
of the Ubii and the Roman colony of Agrippina into the Hanse Town of the
thirteenth century: watch the laying of the first stone of the mighty
Dom, the up-rising of the glorious fabric, and the crowning of the last
tower in 1880.

During the journey from Hamburg to Copenhagen, Nitocris, reclining
comfortably in a corner of their compartment in the long, easily-moving
car, entertained herself with a review of these extraordinary
experiences from the point of view of her temporal life, and found them
not only extraordinary, but also very curious. She had already learnt
that the connecting link between the two existences, when once the
border had been passed, was Will: but Will of a far more intense and
exalted character than that which was necessary as an incentive to
action on the lower plane. There was naturally something that seemed
extra-human in the mysterious force which was capable of bidding the
present-day world vanish like a shadow into either the future or the
past, its solid-seeming substance melt away like "the airy fabric of a
vision," and summon in an instant, too brief to be measured, the past
from the grave where it lay buried beneath the dust of uncounted ages,
or the future from the womb of unborn things.

But to her, at least at first, the strangest part of the new revelation
was this: When her will had carried her across the confines of the
tri-dimensional world, and she saw the centuries marshalled and
motionless before her, she felt not the slightest sense of wonder or
awe. She was simply a being apart, moving along their ranks and passing
them in review, herself unseen and unknown save by that other being who,
in this state, was no longer her father or even her friend, but merely a
companion endowed with power and intelligence equal to her own. Her
human hopes and fears and loves and passions had, as it were, been left
behind. The men and things she saw were absolutely real to her, as they
had been to the men of other days, or would be in days to come; but she
herself was a pure Intelligence which saw and acted and thought with
perfect clearness, but with absolutely no feeling save that of
intellectual interest.

She saw armies meet in the shock of battle without a thrill of fear or
horror; towns and cities roared up to the unheeding heavens in flame and
smoke, and left her standing unmoved amidst their ruins; she heard the
screams of agony that rang through the torture chambers without a
quiver, and watched the long, pale lines of the martyrs to what in the
earth-life was called Religion pass to the stake without a quiver of
pity or a thrill of disgust. She stood face to face with the great ones
of the earth who have graven their names deep upon the tablets of Time
without reverence or admiration; and she witnessed the most heroic deeds
and the most atrocious crimes with neither respect for the one nor
hatred for the other.

Human history was in her eyes merely a logical sequence of necessary
events, neither good nor bad in themselves, but only as they were viewed
from this standpoint or that, by the oppressor or the oppressed, the
slayer or the slain, the robber or the robbed, the governor or the
governed. She learned that human emotion is merely a matter of time and
space. One century does not feel the loves and hates of another, and the
sorrows of Here have no real sympathy with the sufferings of There.
Beyond the Border all these were merely matters of intense intellectual
interest.

But when she returned to the temporal life the memory of them was
marvellous and terrible. Her heart throbbed with pity and burned with
righteous anger. Horror seemed to take hold of her soul and shake it
with earthquake shudders when she thought that what she had seen but a
few time-moments ago had really come to pass; and she longed for the
power to show all this to the men and women of her own passing day, and
bid them have done with the poor, shadowy images of themselves, which,
had they really been gods, would have made of human life something
better and happier and nobler than the ghastly tragedy which, as she had
seen with her own eyes, it had been. But she knew that such a power was
not hers. She, like her father, had, through the toil and strife and
stress of many lives of mingled good and evil, knowledge and ignorance,
won her way to the Perfect Knowledge; and so she knew that all these
poor kings and slaves, conquerors and conquered, torturers and tortured,
were all doing the same thing, were all groping their way through the
shadows and the night towards the dawn and the light, through the hell
of ignorance to the heaven of knowledge.

And now, too, since the Wisdom of the Ages was hers, she saw that over
all the vast, weltering swarm of struggling immortals, hung the
inevitable decree of silent, impersonal destiny. "As ye live, so shall
ye die; as ye end, so shall ye begin again--in knowledge or ignorance,
in good or evil, life after life, death after death, world without
end."

It was clear to her now why "some are born to honour and some to
dishonour": some to happiness and some to misery, each in his or her
degree; why the liver of a good life was happy, no matter what his place
in the earth-life might be: and why the evil liver, no matter how high
he might stand in his own or others' sight, carried the canker of past
misdeeds in his heart. Standing, as she now did, in the midway of the
present, looking with single gaze on past and future, she saw at once
the honest striver after good in his yesterday-life rise to his reward
in the life of to-day, and the dishonest rich and powerful sitting in
the high places of to-day cast down into the gutterways of to-morrow.
Life had ceased to be a riddle to her now.

What with their halts at Ostend, Cologne, and Hamburg, the
thirty-three-hour journey lengthened itself out very pleasantly into a
week; and so, when the famous city on the Sound was reached, they were
as fresh and unfatigued as they were on the morning that they left "The
Wilderness." Of course, they put up at the Hotel d'Angleterre, and here
they enjoyed themselves quietly for four days, for of all European
capitals, Copenhagen is one of the pleasantest in which to idle a few
fine summer days away.

On the evening of the fourth day they were just sitting down to their
table by one of the windows overlooking the Oestergade when Nitocris
happened to look up towards the door through which the diners were
trickling in an irregular stream of well-dressed men and women. For a
moment her eyes became fixed. Then she bent her head over the table, and
said:

"Dad, there is Prince Oscarovitch. I wonder what he is doing here? He is
alone: please go and ask him to join us. I will tell you why
afterwards."

They exchanged glances, and the Professor got up and went towards the
door, while his daughter got through a considerable amount of hard
thinking in a very short time. She was, of course, perfectly conversant
with his share in the Zastrow affair, so far as her father had yet gone
with it; but she determined that when Copenhagen had gone to sleep that
night they would cross the Border and pay a visit to the Castle of
Trelitz at the time of the tragedy, and follow it out as far as it had
gone.

It has already been shown that on her first meeting with the Prince she
conceived an aversion from him which was then inexplicable save by the
ordinary theory of natural antipathy: but now she knew that she had been
Nitocris, Queen of Egypt, when he was Menkau-Ra, the Lord of War, who
would have forced her to wed him by the might and terror of the sword,
and the will of a blind and blood-intoxicated populace. She had hated
him then even to death, and now she hated him still in life; wherefore
she desired to make his closer acquaintance on the earth-plane on which
they had met once more after many lives.

As he had been in those far-off days, so he was now, a splendid specimen
of aristocratic humanity. Many eyes had followed her as she had walked
to her table, but there were more people in the room now, and as the
Prince walked towards her beside the famous Professor who had puzzled
all the mathematicians of Europe, the whole crowd of guests was looking
at nothing but these three.

"This is indeed good fortune, Miss Marmion, and as good as it is
unexpected--which, perhaps makes it all the better! Who would have
thought of finding you in Copenhagen?" he said, as he bowed low over her
hand.

"If there is any reason at all for it, Prince, it is that my father and
I always like to take our holidays at irregular times and in unexpected
places: by which, I mean places where we do not expect to meet all our
acquaintances," she replied, as she sat down. "I think we manage to bore
each other quite enough in London, and we like each other all the better
when we meet again."

"Is not that rather an ungracious speech, Niti, seeing that one of the
said acquaintances has only just chanced to join us?" said the Professor
mildly.

"You mean as regards the Prince?" she laughed. "Certainly not. His
Highness is hardly an acquaintance--yet. You know we have only had the
pleasure of meeting him once: and then, of course, I said _all_ our
acquaintances. There might be exceptions."

These words, spoken with a quite indescribable charm, were, as he
thought, quite the sweetest that Oscarovitch had heard for many a day.
It had been perfectly easy for a man with his official influence to
trace by telegraph every movement that the Marmions had made after he
had guessed that they would travel by either Calais or Ostend. He had
wired for his yacht, the _Grashna_, to meet him at Dover, run across to
Ostend, found that they had left there for Cologne with through tickets
for Copenhagen, again guessed rightly that they would spend a few days
there and in Hamburg, and then steam away for the Sound.

The farther north he travelled, the farther he left Phadrig and his
phantasies behind, and the nearer he came to the belief that, if he had
only a fair chance and the field to himself, as he intended to have, he
would not find very much difficulty in convincing Nitocris that there
was no comparison at all between the humble naval officer she had left
behind to do his work on his dirty little destroyer, and the millionaire
Prince who could give her one of the noblest names in Europe and
everything that the heart of woman could desire. And now these
sweetly-spoken words and the glance which accompanied them, her
undisguised pleasure at the chance meeting, and her father's very
evident approval of his presence, quickly but finally convinced him
that he had come to a perfectly just conclusion.

Of course, there was the memory of another woman, only a little less
fair than Nitocris, who had shut herself up yonder in the gloomy Castle
of Trelitz, acting the farce of her official sorrow for love of him, and
pining for the time when the finding of her betrayed husband's corpse
should leave her free, after a decent interval of mock-mourning, to join
her lot with his: but what did that matter? Was it not as easy to get
rid of a woman as a man? Was not the fatal beauty of the Horus Stone at
his command now that he was its possessor for good or evil? A
well-arranged suicide might easily be taken by the world as the
excusable, if deplorable, result of her mysterious bereavement.

The conversation during dinner naturally turned on ways and means of
travelling, and, when the Professor had sketched out their plans,
Oscarovitch said with an admirably simulated deference:

"My dear sir, I most sincerely hope that you and Miss Marmion will not
think that I am presuming on an acquaintance which, if only a new one
now, may perhaps one day be older, if I venture to suggest another way
of making your tour. I am an old voyager in these waters, and I can
assure you that the steamers, though vastly improved, have not quite
reached the standard of the Atlantic liner."

"Oh, but you know, Prince, we didn't expect it," interrupted Nitocris.
"Neither my father nor I have the slightest objection to roughing it a
little. In fact, that is half the fun of wandering."

"And slow travelling between stated points, not always of the greatest
or any interest, together with the enforced company of a promiscuous
crowd of tourists and commercial travellers, who, by the way, are mostly
German, and therefore of nature and necessity disagreeable, would about
make up the other half," said Oscarovitch, leaning back in his chair
with a low laugh. "No, no, my dear Miss Marmion, I am afraid you would
not find that the reality quite squared with the anticipation. Now, may
I risk the suspicion of presumption and offer an alternative
proposition?"

"Why not?" said Nitocris with a smile, and a glance which dazzled him.
"I'm sure it is very kind of you to take so much interest in our poor
little attempt to get away for a while from the madding crowd who are
doing the round of the same stale, weary pleasures that they try so hard
to enjoy year after year, and then come back _so_ tired, after all."

"Then," he replied, looking at them alternately, "as I have your
permission, I would suggest that, instead of rushing from fixed point to
fixed point in crowded steamers and the shackles of Company or
Government regulations, you should take possession of a fairly
comfortable steam yacht of a little over a thousand tons which will be
entirely at your disposal, and will run you from anywhere to anywhere
you choose at any speed you like, from five to thirty-five knots an
hour, with properly trained servants to attend to you, and, as the
advertisements say, 'every possible comfort and convenience.'"

"Which, of course, means that you have got your yacht here, and are so
very kind as to ask us to become your guests for a time," said the
Professor, with a suspicion of stiffness. "It is more than generous of
you, Prince, but really----"

"But really, my dear sir," Oscarovitch interrupted, with a gesture of
deprecation, "I can assure you that, so far as I am concerned, there is
no kindness, to say nothing of generosity. It is pure selfishness. This
is my position. I have managed to escape for a time from the toils of
official work and worry, and the almost equally irksome bonds of that
form of penal servitude which is called Society. Like you, I have fled
overseas, but, unlike you, I have no company but my own, and I have had
a great deal too much of that already, though I have only been three
days and nights at sea. I have no plans, I have got nothing to do and
nowhere to go; and so, if you and Miss Marmion would take pity on my
loneliness all the generosity would be on your side. Of course, I cannot
presume to ask you to change your plans all at once, but if you will
sleep on my proposition and come and lunch with me to-morrow on board
the _Grashna_ and take a run up the Sound, say, to Elsinore, you may be
able to come to a decision."

It was a lovely night, and so they took their coffee and liqueurs, and
the two men their smokes on the balcony overlooking the Oestergade,
which might be called the Rue de la Paix of Copenhagen, and watched the
well-dressed crowds sauntering to and fro past the brilliantly lighted
shops; and Nitocris, who seemed to her father to be in singularly high
spirits, sent the conversation rippling over all manner of subjects with
the exception of politics and the Fourth Dimension. Oscarovitch was
becoming more and more fascinated as the light-winged minutes sped by,
and he took but little pains to conceal the fact. Nitocris, of course,
saw this, and simulated a delightful unconsciousness. The Professor was,
for the time being, completely mystified. He knew that his daughter
hated the Prince with a thorough cordiality, and yet he had never seen
her make herself so entirely charming to any man, not even excepting
Merrill himself, as she was to this man, her enemy of the Ages. He could
have solved the problem instantly by crossing the Border, but then the
sudden vanishing of a famous scientist from the midst of the brilliant
company on the balcony would have set all the newspapers in Europe
chattering, with consequences which would have been the reverse of
pleasant both to his daughter and himself.

However, he had not long to wait, for Nitocris soon rose, saying that
she must go to Jenny, her maid, to see about packing arrangements for
to-morrow; and the Prince, after another cigarette and liqueur, took his
