
He plugged into the snapper-boat's communicator and called, "Ready,
Santos?"

"Ready, Lieutenant."

He braced himself against acceleration and flipped the speed control to
full power. The fighting rocket rammed out from the asteroid, snapping him
back against the seat. He made a quick check. Gunsight on, fuel tanks
almost full, propulsion tubes racked handy to his hand, space patches
ready to be grabbed and slapped on in case an enemy shot holed helmet or
suit.

They drove toward the enemy cruiser at top speed, swerving in a great arc
as the sun pulled at them. The enemy's big boat was out of the ship, its
jets firing as it started for the asteroid.

Rip leaned over his illuminated gunsight. The boat showed up clearly, the
rings of the sight framing it. He estimated distance and the pull of the
sun, then squeezed the trigger on the speed control handle. The cannon in
the nose spat flame. He watched tensely and saw the charge explode on the
hull of the Connie cruiser. He had underestimated the sun's drag. He
compensated and tried again.

He missed. Now that he was closer and the charge had less distance to
travel, he had overestimated the sun's effect. He gritted his teeth. The
next shot would be at close range.

The fighting rocket closed space, and the landing boat loomed large in the
sight. He fired again and the shot blew metal loose from the top of the
boat's hull. A hit, but not good enough. He leaned over the sight to fire
again, but before he had sighted an explosion blew the landing boat
completely around.

Koa and Pederson had scored a hit from the asteroid!

The big boat fired its side jets and spun around on course again. Flame
bloomed from its side as Connie gunners tried to get the range on the
snapper-boat.

Rip was within reach now. He fired at point-blank range and flashed over
the boat as its front end exploded. Santos, firing from the rear, hit it
again as the snapper-boat passed.

Rip threw the rocket into a turn that rammed him against the top of his
harness. He steadied on a line with the crippled Connie craft. It was hard
hit. The bow jets flickered fitfully, and the stern tubes were dead. He
sighted, fired. A charge hit the boat aft and blew its stern tubes off
completely.

And at the same moment, a Connie gunner got a perfect bead on the
snapper-boat.

Space blew up in Rip's face. The snapper-boat slewed wildly as the Connie
shot took effect. Rip worked his controls frantically, trying to
straighten the rocket out more by instinct than anything else.

His eyes recovered from the blinding flash and he gulped as he saw the
raw, twisted metal where the boat's nose had been. He managed to correct
the boat's twisting by using the stern tubes, but he was no longer in full
control.

For a moment panic gripped him. Without full control he couldn't get back
to the asteroid! Then he forced himself to steady down. He sized up the
situation. They were still underway, the stern tubes pushing, but their
trajectory would take them right under the crippled Connie boat. The sun
was blazing into the fighting rocket with such intensity that he had
trouble seeing.

There was nothing he could do but pass close to the Connie. The enemy
gunners would fire, but he had to take his chances. He looked down at the
asteroid and saw an orange trail as Koa launched another rocket.

The shot from the asteroid ticked the bottom of the Connie boat and
exploded. The Connie rolled violently. Tubes flared as the pilot fought to
correct the roll. He slowed the spinning as Rip and Santos passed, just
long enough for a Connie gunner to get in a final shot.

The shell struck directly under Rip. He felt himself pushed violently
upward, and at the same moment he reacted, by hunch and not by reason. He
rammed the controls full ahead and the dying rocket cut space, curving
slowly as flaming fuel spurted from the ruptured tanks.

Rip yelled, "Santos! You all right?"

"I think so. Lieutenant, we're on fire!"

"I know it. Get ready to abandon ship."

When the main mass of fuel caught, the rocket would become an inferno. Rip
smashed at the escape hatch above his head, grabbed propulsion tubes from
the rack and called, "Now!"

He pulled the release on his harness, stood up on the seat, and thrust
with all his leg power. He catapulted out of the burning snapper-boat into
space.

Santos followed a second later and the crippled rocket twisted wildly
under the two Planeteers.

"Don't use the propulsion tubes," Rip called. "Slow down with your air
bottles." He thrust the tubes into his belt, found his air bottles, and
pointed two of them in the direction they had been traveling. He wanted to
come to a stop, to let the wild snapper-boat get away from them.

The compressed air bottles did the trick. He and Santos slowed down as the
little jets overcame the inertia that was taking them along with the
burning boat. The boat was spiraling now, and burning freely. It moved
away from them, its stern jets firing weakly as fuel burned in the tank.

Rip took a look toward the enemy cruiser. The assault boat was no longer
showing an exhaust. Instead, it was being dragged rapidly away from the
Connie cruiser by the pull of the sun. At least they had hit it in time to
prevent launching of the atomic guided missiles. Or, he thought, perhaps
the enemy had never intended using them. The principal effect, besides
killing the Planeteers, would have been to drive the asteroid into the sun
at an even faster rate.

The enemy assault boat was no longer a menace. Its occupants would be
lucky if they succeeded in saving their own lives.

            [Illustration: Rip and Santos Fell Through Space]

                    Rip and Santos Fell Through Space


Rip wondered what the Connie cruiser commander would try now. Only one
thing remained, and that was to set the cruiser down on the asteroid. If
the Connie tried, he would arrive at just about the time set for releasing
the nuclear charge. And that would be the end of the cruiser--and probably
of the Planeteers as well.

Santos asked coolly, "Lieutenant, wouldn't you say we're in sort of a bad
spot?"

Rip had been so busy sizing up the situation that he hadn't thought about
his own predicament. Now he looked down and suddenly realized that he was
floating free in space, a considerable distance above the asteroid, and
with only small propulsion tubes for power.

He gasped, "Great space! We're in a mess, Santos."

The Filipino corporal asked, still in a calm voice, "How long before we're
dragged into the sun, sir?"

Rip stared. Santos had used the same tone he might have used in asking for
a piece of Venusian _chru_. An officer couldn't be less calm, so Rip
replied in a voice he hoped was casual, "I wouldn't worry, Santos. We
won't know it. The heat will get through our suits long before then."

In fact, the heat should be overloading their ventilating systems right
now. In a few minutes the cooling elements would break down and that would
be the end. He listened for the accelerated whine as the ventilating
system struggled under the increased heat load, and heard nothing.

Funny. Had it overloaded and given out already? No, that was impossible.
He would be feeling the heat on his body if that were the case.

He looked for an explanation and realized for the first time that they
weren't in the sunlight at all. They were in darkness. His searching
glance told him they were in the cone of shadow stretching out from behind
the asteroid. The thorium rock was between them and the sun!

His lips moved soundlessly. Major Joe Barris had been right! _In a jam,
trust your hunch._ He had acted instinctively, not even thinking what he
was doing as he used the last full power of the stern tubes to throw them
into the shadow cone.

And he knew in the same moment that it could save their lives. The sun's
pull would only accelerate their fall toward the asteroid. He said
exultantly, "We're staying out of high vack, Santos. Light off a
propulsion tube. Let's get back to the asteroid."

He pulled a tube from his belt, held it above his head, and thumbed the
striker mechanism. The tube flared, pushing downward on his hand. He held
steady and plummeted feet first toward the rock.

Santos was only a few seconds behind him. Rip saw the corporal's tube
flare and knew that everything was all right, at least for the moment,
even though the asteroid was still a long way down.

He looked upward at the Connie cruiser and saw that it was moving. Its
exhaust increased in length and deepened slightly in color as Rip watched,
his forehead creased in a frown. What was the Connie up to?

Then he saw side jets flare out from the projecting control tubes and knew
the ship was maneuvering. Rip realized suddenly that the cruiser was going
to pick up the crippled assault boat.

He hadn't expected such a humane move after his first meeting with the
Connie cruiser when the commander had been willing to sacrifice his own
men. This time, however, there was a difference, he saw. The commander
would lose nothing by picking up the assault boat, and he would save a few
men. Rip supposed that manpower meant something, even to Consops.

His propulsion tube reached brennschluss, and for a few moments he
watched, checking his speed and direction. Then, before he lit off another
tube, he checked his chronometer. The illuminated dial registered 2301.
They had just four minutes to get to the asteroid!

He spoke swiftly. "Waste no time in lighting off, Santos. That nuclear
charge goes in four minutes!"

The Filipino corporal said merely, "Yessir."

Rip pulled a tube from his belt, held it overhead, and triggered it. His
flight through space speeded up but he wasn't at all sure they would make
it. He turned up his helmet communicator to full power and called, "Koa,
can you hear me?"

The sergeant-major's reply was faint in his helmet. "I hear you weakly. Do
you hear me?"

"Same way," Rip replied. "Get this, Koa. Don't fail to explode that charge
at twenty-three-oh-five. Can you see us?"

The reply was very slightly stronger. "I will explode the charge as
ordered, Lieutenant. We can see a pair of rocket exhausts, but no boats.
Is that you?"

"Yes. We're coming in on propulsion tubes."

Koa waited for a long moment, then: "Sir, what if you're not with us by
twenty-three-oh-five?"

"You know the answer," Rip retorted crisply.

Of course Koa knew. The nuclear blast would send Rip and Santos spinning
into outer space, perhaps crippled, burned, or completely irradiated. But
the lives of two men couldn't delay the blast that would save the lives of
eight others, not counting prisoners.

Rip estimated his speed and course and the distance to the asteroid. He
was increasingly sure that they wouldn't make it, and the knowledge was
like the cold of space in his stomach. It would be close, but not close
enough. A minute would make all the difference.

For a few heartbeats he almost called Koa and told him to wait that extra
minute, to explode the nuclear charge at 2306, at the very last second.
But even Planeteer chronometers could be off by a few seconds and he
couldn't risk it. His men had to be given some leeway.

The decision made, he put his mind to the problem. There must be some way
out. There must be!

He surveyed the asteroid. The nuclear charge was on his left side, pretty
close to the sun line. At least he and Santos could angle to the right, to
get as far away from the blast as possible.

The edge of the asteroid's shadow was barely visible. That it was visible
at all was due to the minute particles of matter and gas that surrounded
the sun, even millions of miles out into space. He reduced helmet power
and told Santos, "Angle to the right. Get as close to the edge of shadow
as you can without being cooked."

As an afterthought, he asked, "How many tubes do you have?"

"One after this, sir. I had three."

Rip also had one left. That was correct, because snapper-boats carried
three in each man's position.

"Save the one you have left," he ordered.

He didn't know yet what use they would be, but it was always a good idea
to have some kind of reserve.

The Connie cruiser was sliding up to the crippled assault boat. Rip took a
quick look, then shifted his hands, and angled toward the edge of shadow.
When he was within a few feet he reversed the direction of the tube to
keep from shooting out into sunlight. A second or two later the tube
burned out.

Santos was several yards away and slightly above him. Rip saw that the
Planeteer was all right and turned his attention to the cruiser once more.
It was close enough to the assault boat to haul it in with grappling
hooks. The hooks emerged and engaged the torn metal of the boat, then drew
it into the waiting port. The massive air door slid closed.

The question was, would the Connie try to set his ship down on the
asteroid? Rip grinned without mirth. Now would be a fine time. His
chronometer showed a minute and half to blast time.

He took another look at his own situation. He and Santos were getting
close to the asteroid, but there was still over a half mile earth distance
to go. They would cover perhaps three-fourths of that distance before Koa
fired the charge.

He had a daring idea. How long could he and Santos last in direct
sunlight? The effect of the sun in the open was powerful enough to make
lead run like water. Their suits could absorb some heat and the
ventilating system could take care of quite a lot. They might last as much
as three minutes, with luck.

They had to take a risk with the full knowledge that the odds were against
them. But if they didn't take the risk, the blast would push them outward
from the asteroid-into full sunlight. The end result would be the same.

"We're not going to make it, Santos," he began.

"I know it, sir," Santos replied.

Rip thought, anyone with that much coolness and sheer nerve rated some
kind of special treatment. And the Filipino corporal had shown his ability
time and time again. He said, "I should have known you knew, _Sergeant_
Santos. We still have a slight chance. When I give the word, use an air
bottle to push you into the sunlight. When I give the word again, light
off your remaining tube."

"Yessir," Santos replied. "Thank you for the promotion. I hope I live to
collect the extra rating."

"Same here," Rip agreed fervently. His eyes were on his chronometer, and
with his free hand he took another air bottle. When the chronometer
registered exactly one minute before blast time, he called, "Now!" He
triggered the bottle and moved from shadow into glaring sunlight. A slight
motion of the bottle turned him so his back was to the sun, then he used
the remaining compressed air to push him downward along the edge of
shadow. The sun's gravity tugged at him.

He pulled the last tube from his belt and held it ready while he watched
his chronometer creep around. With five seconds to go, he called to Santos
and fired it. Acceleration pushed at him.

In the same moment, the nuclear charge exploded.





CHAPTER SIXTEEN - RIDE THE GRAY PLANET!


A mighty hand reached out and shoved Rip, sweeping him through space like
a dust mote. He clutched his propulsion tube with both hands and fought to
hold it steady.

He swiveled his head quickly, searching for Santos, and saw the Filipino a
dozen rods away, still holding fast to his tube.

From the far horizon of the asteroid the incandescent fire of the nuclear
blast stretched into space, turning from silver to orange to red as it
cooled.

Rip knew they had escaped the heat and blast of the explosion, but there
was a question of how much of the prompt radiation they had absorbed.
During the first few seconds, a nuclear blast vomited gamma radiation and
neutrons in all directions. He and Santos certainly had gotten plenty. But
how much? Putting their dosimeters into a measuring meter aboard a cruiser
would tell them. His low-level colorimeter had long since reached maximum
red, and his high-level dosimeter could be read only on a measuring
device.

Meanwhile, he had other worries. Radiation had no immediate effect. At
