This space was V-shaped, washed by equal streams on either side of the
prong of rock by water which spouted from the face of a sheer cliff not
too far away, with force enough to spray several feet beyond its exit
point. Shann seeing that and guessing at its significance, drew a deep
breath, and heard the ghost of an answering chuckle from his companion.

"Yes, that's where we came out, boy. Like to make a return trip?"

Shann shook his head, and then wished that he had not so rashly made
that move, for the world swung in a dizzy whirl. Things had happened too
fast. For the moment it was enough that they were out of the underground
ways, back under the amber sky, feeling the bite of Warlock's sun.

Steadying his head with both hands, Shann turned slowly, to survey what
might lie at their backs. The water, pouring by on either side,
suggested that they were again on an island. Warlock, he thought
gloomily, seemed to be for Terrans a succession of islands, all hard to
escape.

The tangle of rocks did not encourage any exploration. Just gazing at
them added to his weariness. They rose, tier by tier, to a ragged crown
against the sky. Shann continued to sit staring at them.

"To climb that...." His voice trailed into the silence of complete
discouragement.

"You climb--or swim," Thorvald stated. But, Shann noted, the Survey
officer was not in a hurry to make either move.

Nowhere in that wilderness of rock was there the least relieving bit of
purple foliage. Nor did any clak-claks or leather-headed birds tour the
sky over their heads. Shann's thirst might have been partially assuaged,
but his hunger remained. And it was that need which forced him at last
into action. The barren heights promised nothing in the way of food,
but remembering the harvest the wolverines had taken from under the
rocks along the river, he got to his feet and lurched out on the reef
which had been their salvation, hunting some pool which might hold an
edible captive or two.

So it was that Shann made the discovery of a possible path consisting of
a ledge running toward the other end of the island, if this were an
island where they had taken refuge. The spray of the water drenched that
way, feeding small pools in the uneven surface, and strips of yellow
weed trailed in slimy ribbons back below the surface of the waves.

He called to Thorvald and gestured to his find. And then, close
together, linking hands when the going became hazardous, the men
followed the path. Twice they made finds in the pools, finned or clawed
grotesque creatures, which they killed and ate, wolfing down the few
fragments of odd-tasting flesh. Then, in a small crevice, which could
hardly be dignified by the designation of "cave," Thorvald chanced upon
a quite exciting discovery--a clutch of four greenish eggs, each as
large as his doubled fist.

Their outer covering was more like tough membrane than true shell, and
the Terrans worried it open with difficulty. Shann shut his eyes, trying
not to think of what he mouthed as he sucked his share dry. At least
that semi-liquid stayed put in his middle, though he expected disastrous
results from the experiment.

More than a little heartened by this piece of luck, they kept on, though
the ledge changed from a reasonably level surface to a series of rising,
unequal steps, drawing them away from the water. At long last they came
to the end of that path. Shann leaned back against a convenient spur of
rock.

"Company!" he alerted Thorvald.

The Survey officer joined him to share an outcrop of rock from which
they were provided with an excellent view of the scene below, and it
was a scene to hold their full attention.

That soft sweep of sand which had floored the cavern of the fog lay here
also, a gray-blue carpet sloping gently out of the sea. For Shann had no
doubt that the wide stretch of water before them was the western ocean.
Walling the beach on either side, and extending well out into the water
so that the farthest piles were awash except for their crowns, were
pillars of stone, shaped with the same finish as that slab which had
provided them a ladder of escape. And because of the regularity of their
spacing, Shann did not believe them works of nature.

Grouped between them now were the players of the drama. One of the
Warlockian witches, her gem body patterns glittering in the sunlight,
was walking backward out of the sea, her hands held palms together,
breast high, in a Terran attitude of prayer. And following her something
swam in the water, clearly not another of her own species. But her
actions suggested that by some invisible means she was drawing that
water dweller after her. Waiting on shore were two others of her kind,
viewing her actions with close attention, the attention of scholars for
an instructor.

"Wyverns!"

Shann looked inquiringly at his companion. Thorvald added a whisper of
explanation. "A legend of Terra--they were supposed to have a snake's
tail instead of hind legs, but the heads.... They're Wyverns!"

Wyverns. Shann liked the sound of that word; to his mind it well fitted
the Warlockian witches. And the one they were watching in action
continued her steady backward retreat, rolling her bemused captive out
of the water. What emerged into the blaze of sunlight was one of those
fork-tailed sea dwellers such as the Terrans had seen die after the
storm. The thing crawled out of the shallows, its eyes focused in a
blind stare on the praying hands of the Wyvern.

She halted, well up on the sand, when the body of her victim or
prisoner--Shann was certain that the fork-tail was one or the
other--was completely out of the water. Then, with lightning speed, she
dropped her hands.

Instantly fork-tail came to life. Fanged jaws snapped. Aroused, the
beast was the incarnation of evil rage, a rage which had a measure of
intelligence to direct it into deadly action. And facing it, seemingly
unarmed and defenseless, were the slender, fragile Wyverns.

Yet none of the small group of natives made any attempt to escape. Shann
thought them suicidal in their indifference as fork-tail, short legs
sending the fine sand flying in a dust cloud, made a rush toward its
enemies.

The Wyvern who had led the beast ashore did not move. But one of her
companions swung up a hand, as if negligently waving the monster to a
stop. Between her first two digits was a disk. Thorvald caught at
Shann's arm.

"See that! It's a copy of the one I had; it must be!"

They were too far away to be sure it was a duplicate, but It was
coin-shaped and bone-white. And now the Wyvern swung it back and forth
in a metronome sweep. Fork-tail skidded to a stop, its head
beginning--reluctantly at first, and then, with increasing speed--to
echo that left-right sweep. This Wyvern had the sea beast under control,
even as her companion had earlier held it.

Chance dictated what happened next. As had her sister charmer, the
Wyvern began a backward withdrawal up the length of the beach, drawing
the sea thing in her wake. They were very close to the foot of the drop
above which the Terrans stood, fascinated, when the sand betrayed the
witch. Her foot slipped into a hole and she was thrown backward, her
control disk spinning out of her fingers.

At once the monster she had charmed shot forth its head, snapped at that
spinning trifle--and swallowed it. Then the fork-tail hunched in a
posture Shann had seen the wolverines use when they were about to
spring. The weaponless Wyvern was the prey, and both her companions were
too far away to interfere.

Why he moved he could not have explained. There was no reason for him
to go to the aid of the Warlockian, one of the same breed who had ruled
him against his will. But Shann sprang, landing in the sand on his hands
and knees.

The sea thing whipped around, undecided between two possible victims.
Shann had his knife free, was on his feet, his eyes on the beast's,
knowing that he had appointed himself dragon slayer for no good reason.




15. DRAGON SLAYER


"Ayeeee!" Sheer defiance, not only of the beast he fronted, but of the
Wyverns as well, brought that old rallying cry to his lips--the call
used on the Dumps of Tyr to summon gang aid against outsiders. Fork-tail
had crouched again for a spring, but that throat-crackling blast
appeared to startle it.

Shann, blade ready, took a dancing step to the right. The thing was
scaled, perhaps as well armored against frontal attack as was the
shell-creature he had fought with the aid of the wolverines. He wished
he had the Terran animals now--with Taggi and his mate to tease and
feint about the monster, as they had done with the Throg hound--for he
would have a better chance. If only the animals were here!

Those eyes--red-pitted eyes in a gargoyle head following his every
movement--perhaps those were the only vulnerable points.

Muscles tensed beneath that scaled hide. The Terran readied himself for
a sidewise leap, his knife hand raised to rake at those eyes. A brown
shape with a V of lighter fur banding its back crossed the far range of
Shann's vision. He could not believe what he saw, not even when a
snarling animal, slavering with rage, came at a lumbering gallop to
stand beside him, a second animal on its heels.

Uttering his own battle cry, Taggi attacked. The fork-tail's head swung,
imitating the movements of the wolverine as it had earlier mimicked the
swaying of the disk in the Wyvern's hand. Togi came in from the other
side. They might have been hounds keeping a bull in play. And never had
they shown such perfect team work, almost as if they could sense what
Shann desired of them.

That forked tail lashed viciously, a formidable weapon. Bone, muscles,
scaled flesh, half buried in the sand, swept up a cloud of grit into the
face of the man and the animals. Shann fell back, pawing with his free
hand at his eyes. The wolverines circled warily, trying for the attack
they favored--the spring to the shoulders, the usually fatal assault on
the spine behind the neck. But the armored head of the fork-tail, slung
low, warned them off. Again the tail lashed, and this time Taggi was
caught and hurled across the beach.

Togi uttered a challenge, made a reckless dash, and raked down the
length of the fork-tail's body, fastening on that tail, weighing it to
earth with her own poundage while the sea creature fought to dislodge
her. Shann, his eyes watering from the sand, but able to see, watched
that battle for a long second, judging that fork-tail was completely
engaged in trying to free its best weapon from the grip of the
wolverine. The latter clawed and bit with a fury which suggested Togi
intended to immobilize that weapon by tearing it to shreds.

Fork-tail wrenched its body, striving to reach its tormentor with fangs
or clawed feet. And in that struggle to achieve an impossible position,
its head slued far about, uncovering the unprotected area behind the
skull base which usually lay under the spiny collar about its shoulders.

Shann went in. With one hand he gripped the edge of that collar--its
serrations tearing his flesh--and at the same time he drove his knife
blade deep into the soft underfolds, ripping on toward the spinal
column. The blade nicked against bone as the fork-tail's head slammed
back, catching Shann's hand and knife together in a trap. The Terran was
jerked from his feet, and flung to one side with the force of the
beast's reaction.

Blood spurted up, his own blood mingled with that of the monster. Only
Togi's riding of the tail prevented Shann's being beaten to death. The
armored snout pointed skyward as the creature ground the sharp edge of
its collar down on the Terran's arm. Shann, frantic with pain, drove his
free fist into one of those eyes.

Fork-tail jerked convulsively; its head snapped down again and Shann was
free. The Terran threw himself back, keeping his feet with an effort.
Fork-tail was writhing, churning up the sand in a cloud. But it could
not rid itself of the knife Shann had planted with all his strength, and
which the blows of its own armored collar were now driving deeper and
deeper into its back.

It howled thinly, with an abnormal shrilling. Shann, nursing his
bleeding forearm against his chest, rolled free from the waves of sand
it threw about, bringing up against one of the rock pillars. With that
to steady him, he somehow found his feet, and stood weaving, trying to
see through the rain of dust.

The convulsions which churned up that concealing cloud were growing more
feeble. Then Shann heard the triumphant squall from Togi, saw her brown
body still on the torn tail just above the forking. The wolverine used
her claws to hitch her way up the spine of the sea monster, heading for
the mountain of blood spouting from behind the head. Fork-tail fought to
raise that head once more; then the massive jaw thudded into the sand,
teeth snapping fruitlessly as a flood of grit overrode the tongue,
packed into the gaping mouth.

How long had it taken--that frenzy of battle on the bloodstained beach?
Shann could have set no limit in clock-ruled time. He pressed his
wounded arm tighter to him, lurched past the still twitching sea thing
to that splotch of brown fur on the sand, shaping the wolverine's
whistle with dry lips. Togi was still busy with the kill, but Taggi lay
where that murderous tail had thrown him.

Shann fell on his knees, as the beach around him developed a curious
tendency to sway. He put his good hand to the ruffled back fur of the
motionless wolverine.

"Taggi!"

A slight quiver answered. Shann tried awkwardly to raise the animal's
head with his own hand. As far as he could see, there were no open
wounds; but there might be broken bones, internal injuries he did not
have the skill to heal.

"Taggi?" He called again gently, striving to bring that heavy head up on
his knee.

"The furred one is not dead."

For a moment Shann was not aware that those words had formed in his
mind, had not been heard by his ears. He looked up, eyes blazing at the
Wyvern coming toward him in a graceful glide across the crimsoned sand.
And in a space of heartbeats his thrust of anger cooled into a stubborn
enmity.

"No thanks to you," he said deliberately aloud. If the Wyvern witch
wanted to understand him, let her make the effort; he did not try to
touch her thoughts with his.

Taggi stirred again, and Shann glanced down quickly. The wolverine
gasped, opened his eyes, shook his miniature bear head, scattering
pellets of sand. He sniffed at a dollop of blood, the dark, alien blood,
spattered on Shann's breeches, and then his head came up with a
reassuring alertness as he looked to where his mate was still worrying
the now quiet fork-tail.

With an effort, Taggi got to his feet, Shann aiding him. The man ran his
hand down over ribs, seeking any broken bones. Taggi growled a warning
once when that examination brought pain in its wake, but Shann could
detect no real damage. As might a cat, the wolverine must have met the
shock of that whip-tail stroke relaxed enough to escape serious injury.
Taggi had been knocked out, but now he was able to navigate again. He
pulled free from Shann's grip, lumbering across the sand to the kill.

Someone else was crossing that strip of beach. Passing the Wyvern as if
he did not see them, Thorvald came directly to Shann. A few seconds
later he had the torn arm stretched across his own bent knee, examining
the still bleeding hurt.

"That's a nasty one," he commented.

Shann heard the words and they made sense, but the instability of his
surroundings was increasing, while Thorvald's handling sent sharp stabs
of pain up his arm and somehow into his head, where they ended in red
bursts to cloud his sight.

Out of the reddish mist which had fogged most of the landscape there
emerged a single object, a round white disk. And in Shann's clouded mind
a well-rooted apprehension stirred. He struck out with his one hand, and
through luck connected. The disk flew out of sight. His vision cleared
enough so he could sight the Wyvern who had been leaning over Thorvald's
shoulder centering her weird weapon on him. Making a great effort, Shann
got out the words, words which he also shaped in his mind as he said
them aloud: "You're not taking me over--again!"

There was no emotion to be read on that jewel-banded face or in her
unblinking eyes. He caught at Thorvald, determined to get across his
warning.

"Don't let them use those disks on us!"

"I'll do my best."

Only the haze had taken Thorvald again. Did one of the Wyverns have a
disk focused on them? Were they being pulled into one of those blank
periods, to awaken as prisoners once more--say, in the cavern of the
veil? The Terran fought with every ounce of will power to escape
unconsciousness, but he failed.

This time he did not awaken half-drowning in an underground stream or
facing a green mist. And there was an ache in his arm which was somehow
reassuring with the very insistence of pain. Before opening his eyes,
his fingers crossed the smooth slick of a bandage there, went on to
investigate by touch a sleep mat such as he had found in the cavern
structure. Was he back in that web of rooms and corridors?

Shann delayed opening his eyes until a kind of shame drove him to it. He
first saw an oval opening almost the length of his body as it was
stretched only a foot of two below the sill of that window. And through
its transparent surface came the golden light of the sun--no green mist,
no crystals mocking the stars.

The room in which he lay was small with smooth walls, much like that in
which he had been imprisoned on the island. And there were no other
furnishings save the mat on which he rested. Over him was a light cover
netted of fibers resembling yarn, with feathers knotted into it to
provide a downy upper surface. His clothing was gone, but the single
covering was too warm and he pushed it away from his shoulders and chest
as he wriggled up to see the view beyond the window.

His torn arm came into full view. From wrist to elbow it was encased in
an opaque skin sheath, unlike any bandage of his own world. Surely that
had not come out of any Survey aid pack. Shann gazed toward the window,
but beyond lay only a reach of sky. Except for a lemon cloud or two
ruffled high above the horizon, nothing broke that soft amber curtain.
He might be quartered in a tower well above ground level, which did not
match his former experience with Wyvern accommodations.

"Back with us again?" Thorvald, one hand lifting a door panel, came in.
His ragged uniform was gone, and he wore only breeches of a sleek green
material and his own scuffed-and-battered boots.
