She sat up straight and tucked her sweater tightly into her skirt,
emphasizing her good figure. To a male friend Don would have described
the figure as outstanding. She had mocking eyes, a pert nose and a mouth
of such moist red softness that it seemed perpetually waiting to be
kissed. All in all she could have been the queen of a campus much more
densely populated with co-eds than Cavalier was.

"You may call me Alis," she said. "And I'm nineteen."

Don grinned. "Going on?"

"Three months past. How old are _you_, Mr. Cort?"

"Don's the name I've had for twenty-six years. Please use it."

"Gladly. And now, Don, unless you want another cup of coffee, I'll go
with you to the end of the world."

"On such short notice?" Don was intrigued. Last night the redhead from
the club car had repelled an advance that hadn't been made, and this
morning a blonde was apparently making an advance that hadn't been
solicited. He wondered where Geneva Jervis was, but only vaguely.

"I'll admit to the _double entendre_," Alis said. "What I meant--for
now--was that we can stroll out to where Superior used to be attached to
the rest of Ohio and see how the Earth is getting along without us."

"Delighted. But don't you have any classes?"

"Sure I do. Non-Einsteinian Relativity 1, at nine o'clock. But I'm a
demon class-cutter, which is why I'm still a Senior at my advanced age.
On to the brink!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They walked south from the campus and came to the railroad track. The
train was standing there with nowhere to go. It had been abandoned
except for the conductor, who had dutifully spent the night aboard.

"What's happening?" he asked when he saw them. "Any word from down
there?"

"Not that I know of," Don said. He introduced him to Alis Garet. "What
are you going to do?"

"What _can_ I do?" the conductor asked.

"You can go over to Cavalier and have breakfast," Alis said. "Nobody's
going to steal your old train."

The conductor reckoned as how he might just do that, and did.

"You know," Don said, "I was half-asleep last night but before the train
stopped I thought it was running alongside a creek for a while."

"South Creek," Alis said. "That's right. It's just over there."

"Is it still? I mean hasn't it all poured off the edge by now? Was that
Superior's water supply?"

Alis shrugged. "All I know is you turn on the faucet and there's water.
Let's go look at the creek."

They found it coursing along between the banks.

"Looks just about the same," she said.

"That's funny. Come on; let's follow it to the edge."

The brink, as Alis called it, looked even more awesome by daylight.
Everything stopped short. There were the remnants of a cornfield, with
the withered stalks cut down, then there was nothing. There was South
Creek surging along, then nothing. In the distance a clump of trees,
with a few autumn leaves still clinging to their branches, simply ended.

"Where is the water going?" Don asked. "I can't make it out."

"Down, I'd say. Rain for the Earth-people."

"I should think it'd be all dried up by now. I'm going to have a look."

"Don't! You'll fall off!"

"I'll be careful." He walked cautiously toward the edge. Alis followed
him, a few feet behind. He stopped a yard from the brink and waited for
a spell of dizziness to pass. The Earth was spread out like a
topographer's map, far below. Don took another wary step, then sat down.

"Chicken," said Alis. She laughed uncertainly, then she sat down, too.

"I still can't see where the water goes," Don said. He stretched out on
his stomach and began to inch forward. "You stay there."

Finally he had inched to a point where, by stretching out a hand, he
could almost reach the edge. He gave another wriggle and the fingers of
his right hand closed over the brink. For a moment he lay there,
panting, head pressed to the ground.

"How do you feel?" Alis asked.

"Scared. When I get my courage back I'll pick up my head and look."

Alis put a hand out tentatively, then purposefully took hold of his
ankle and held it tight. "Just in case a high wind comes along," she
said.

"Thanks. It helps. Okay, here we go." He lifted his head. "Damn."

"What?"

"It still isn't clear. Do you have a pocket mirror?"

"I have a compact." She took it out of her bag with her free hand and
tossed it to him. It rolled and Don had to grab to keep it from going
over the edge. Alis gave a little shriek. Don was momentarily unnerved
and had to put his head back on the ground. "Sorry," she said.

Don opened the compact and carefully transferred it to his right hand.
He held it out beyond the edge and peered into it, focusing it on the
end of the creek. "Now I've got it. The water _isn't_ going off the
edge!"

"It isn't? Then where is it going?"

"Down, of course, but it's as if it's going into a well, or a vertical
tunnel, just short of the edge."

"Why? How?"

"I can't see too well, but that's my impression. Hold on now. I'm coming
back." He inched away from the edge, then got up and brushed himself
off. He returned her compact. "I guess you know where we go next."

"The other end of the creek?"

"Exactly."

South Creek did not bisect Superior, as Don thought it might, but flowed
in an arc through a southern segment of it. They had about two miles to
go, past South Creek Bridge--which used to lead to Ladenburg, Alis
said--past Raleigh Country Club (a long drive would really put the ball
out of play, Don thought) and on to the edge again.

But as they approached what they were forced to consider the source of
the creek, they found a wire fence at the spot. "This is new," Alis
said.

The fence, which had a sign on it, WARNING--ELECTRIFIED, was
semicircular, with each end at the edge and tarpaulins strung behind it
so they could see the mouth of the creek. The water flowed from under
the tarp and fence.

"Look how it comes in spurts," Alis said.

"As if it's being pumped."

Smaller print on the sign said: _Protecting mouth of South Creek, one of
two sources of water for Superior. Electrical charge in fence is
sufficient to kill._ It was signed: _Vincent Grande, Chief of Police,
Hector Civek, Mayor_.

"What's the other source, besides the faucet in your bathroom?" Don
asked.

"North Lake, maybe," Alis said. "People fish there but nobody's allowed
to swim."

"Is the lake entirely within the town limits?"

"I don't know."

"If it were on the edge, and if I took a rowboat out on it, I wonder
what would happen?"

"I know one thing--I wouldn't be there holding your ankle while you
found out."

She took his arm as they gazed past the electrified fence at the Earth
below and to the west.

"It's impressive, isn't it?" she said. "I wonder if that's Indiana way
over there?"

He patted her hand absent-mindedly. "I wonder if it's west at all. I
mean, how do we know Superior is maintaining the same position up here
as it used to down there?"

"We could tell by the sun, silly."

"Of course," he said, grinning at his stupidity. "And I guess we're not
high enough to see very far. If we were we'd be able to see the Great
Lakes--or Lake Erie, anyway."

They were musing about the geography when a plane came out of a
cloudbank and, a second later, veered sharply. They could make out UAL
on the underside of a wing. As it turned they imagined they could see
faces peering out of the windows. They waved and thought they saw one or
two people wave back. Then the plane climbed toward the east and was
gone.

"Well," Don said as they turned to go back to Cavalier, "now we know
that they know. Maybe we'll begin to get some answers. Or, if not
answers, then transportation."

"Transportation?" Alis squeezed the arm she was holding. "Why? Don't you
like it here?"

"If you mean don't I like you, the answer is yes, of course I do. But if
I don't get out of this handcuff soon so I can take a bath and get into
clean clothes, you're not going to like me."

"You're still quite acceptable, if a bit whiskery." She stopped, still
holding his arm, and he turned so they were face to face. "So kiss me,"
she said, "before you deteriorate."

They were in the midst of an extremely pleasant kiss when the brief case
at the end of Don's handcuff began to talk to him.




III


Much of the rest of the world was inclined to regard the elevation of
Superior, Ohio, as a Fortean phenomenon in the same category as flying
saucers and sea monsters.

The press had a field day. Most of the headlines were whimsical:

     TOWN TAKES OFF

     SUPERIOR LIVES UP TO NAME

     A RISING COMMUNITY

The city council of Superior, Wisconsin, passed a resolution urging its
Ohio namesake to come back down. The Superiors in Nebraska, Wyoming,
Arizona and West Virginia, glad to have the publicity, added their
voices to the plea.

The Pennsylvania Railroad filed a suit demanding that the state of Ohio
return forthwith one train and five miles of right-of-way.

The price of bubble gum went up from one cent to three for a nickel.

In Parliament a Labour member rose to ask the Home Secretary for
assurances that all British cities were firmly fastened down.

An Ohio waterworks put in a bid for the sixteen square miles of hole
that Superior had left behind, explaining that it would make a fine
reservoir.

A company that leased out big advertising signs in Times Square offered
Superior a quarter of a million dollars for exclusive rights to
advertising space on its bottom, or Earthward, side. It sent the offer
by air mail, leaving delivery up to the post office.

In Washington, Senator Bobby Thebold ascertained that his red-haired
secretary, Jen Jervis, had been aboard the train levitated with Superior
and registered a series of complaints by telephone, starting with the
Interstate Commerce Commission and the railroad brotherhoods. He asked
the FBI to investigate the possibility of kidnaping and muttered about
the likelihood of it all being a Communist plot.

A little-known congressman from Ohio started a rumor that raising of
Superior was an experiment connected with the United States earth
satellite program. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration
issued a quick denial.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two men talked earnestly in an efficient-looking room at the end of one
of the more intricate mazes in the Pentagon Building. Neither wore a
uniform but the younger man called the other sir, or chief, or general.

"We've established definitely that Sergeant Cort was on that train, have
we?" the general asked.

"Yes, sir. No doubt about it."

"And he has the item with him?"

"He must have. The only keys are here and at the other end. He couldn't
open the handcuff or the brief case."

"The only _known_ keys, that is."

"Oh? How's that, General?"

"The sergeant can open the brief case and use the item if we tell him
how."

"You think it's time to use it? I thought we were saving it."

"That was before Superior defected. Now we can use it to more advantage
than any theoretical use it might be put to in the foreseeable future."

"We could evacuate Cort. Take him off in a helicopter or drop him a
parachute and let him jump."

"No. Having him there is a piece of luck. No one knows who he is. We'll
assign him there for the duration and have him report regularly. Let's
go to the message center."

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator Bobby Thebold was an imposing six feet two, a muscular 195, a
youthful-looking 43. He wore his steel-gray hair cut short and his skin
was tan the year round. He was a bachelor. He had been a fighter pilot
in World War II and his conversation was peppered with Air Force slang,
much of it out of date. Thebold was good newspaper copy and one segment
of the press, admiring his fighting ways, had dubbed him Bobby the Bold.
The Senator did not mind a bit.

At the moment Senator Thebold was pacing the carpet in the ample working
space he'd fought to acquire in the Senate Office Building. He was
momentarily at a loss. His inquiries about Jen Jervis had elicited no
satisfaction from the ICC, the FBI, or the CIA. He was in an
alphabetical train of thought and went on to consider the CAA, the CAB
and the CAP. He snapped his fingers at CAP. He had it.

The Civil Air Patrol itself he considered a la-de-da outfit of gentleman
flyers, skittering around in light planes, admittedly doing some good,
but by and large nothing to excite a former P-38 pilot who'd won a
chestful of ribbons for action in the Southwest Pacific.

Ah, but the PP. There was an organization! Bobby Thebold had been one of
the founders of the Private Pilots, a hard-flying outfit that zoomed
into the wild blue yonder on week ends and holidays, engines aroar,
propellers aglint, white silk scarves aflap. PP's members were wealthy
industrialists, stunt flyers, sportsmen--the elite of the air.

PP was a paramilitary organization with the rank of its officers
patterned after the Royal Air Force. Thus Bobby Thebold, by virtue of
his war record, his charter membership and his national eminence, was
Wing Commander Thebold, DFC.

Wing Commander Thebold swung into action. He barked into the intercom:
"Miss Riley! Get the airport. Have them rev up _Charger_. Tell them I'll
be there for oh-nine-fifty-eight take-off. Ten-hundred will do. And get
my car."

_Charger_ was Bobby the Bold's war surplus P-38 Lightning, a sleek,
twin-boomed two engine fighter plane restored to its gleaming, paintless
aluminum. Actually it was an unarmed photo-reconnaissance version of the
famous war horse of the Pacific, a fact the wing commander preferred to
ignore. In compensation, he belted on a .45 whenever he climbed into the
cockpit.

Thebold got onto Operations in PP's midwestern headquarters in Chicago.
He barked, long distance:

"Jack Perley? Group Captain Perley, that is? Bobby, that's right. Wing
Commander Thebold now. We've got a mission, Jack. Scramble Blue
Squadron. What? Of course you can; this is an emergency. We'll
rendezvous north of Columbus--I'll give you the exact grid in half an
hour, when I'm airborne. Can do? Good-o! ETA? Eleven-twenty EST. Well,
maybe that is optimistic, but I hate to see the day slipping by. Make it
eleven-forty-five. What? Objective? Objective Superior! Got it?
Okay--roger!"

Wing Commander Bobby Thebold took his Lindbergh-style helmet and goggles
from a desk drawer, caressing the limp leather fondly, and put them in a
dispatch case. He gave a soft salute to the door behind which Jen Jervis
customarily worked, more as his second-in-command than his secretary,
and said half aloud:

"Okay, Jen, we're coming to get you."

He didn't know quite how, but Bobby the Bold and Charger would soon be
on their way.

       *       *       *       *       *

Don Cort regretfully detached himself from Alis Garet.

"What was that?" he said.

"That was me--Alis the love-starved. You could be a bit more gallant.
Even 'How was that?,' though corny, would have been preferable.

"No--I mean I thought I heard a voice. Didn't you hear anything?"

"To be perfectly frank--and I say it with some pique--I was totally
absorbed. Obviously you weren't."

"It was very nice." The countryside, from the edge to the golf course,
was deserted.

"Well, thanks. Thanks a bunch. Such enthusiasm is more than I can bear.
I have to go now. There's an eleven o'clock class in magnetic flux that
I'm simply dying to audit."

She gave her shoulder-length blonde hair a toss and started back. Don
hesitated, looked suspiciously at the brief case dangling from his
wrist, shook his head, then followed her. The voice, wherever it came
from, had not spoken again.

"Don't be angry, Alis." He fell into step on her left and took her arm
with his free hand. "It's just that everything is so crazy and nobody
seems to be taking it seriously. A town doesn't just get up and take
off, and yet nobody up here seems terribly concerned."

Alis squeezed the hand that held her arm, mollified. "You've got
lipstick on your whiskers."

"Good. I'll never shave again."

"Ah," she laughed, "gallantry at last. I'll tell you what let's do.
We'll go see Ed Clark, the editor of the Sentry. Maybe he'll give you
some intelligent conversation."

The newspaper office was in a ramshackle one-story building on Lyric
Avenue, a block off Broadway, Superior's main street. It was in an
ordinary store front whose windows displayed various ancient stand-up
cardboard posters calling attention to a church supper, a state fair, an
auto race, and a movie starring H. B. Warner. A dust-covered banner
urged the election as president of Alfred E. Smith.

There was no one in the front of the shop. Alis led Don to the rear
where a tall skinny man with straggly gray hair was setting type.

"Good morning, Mr. Clark," she said. "What's that you're setting--an
anti-Hoover handbill?"

"Hello, Al. How are you this fine altitudinous day?"

"Super. Or should it be supra? I want you to meet Don Cort. Don, Mr.
Clark."

The men shook hands and Clark looked curiously at Don's handcuff.

"It's my theory he's an embezzler," Alis said, "and he's made this his
getaway town."

"As a matter of fact," Don said, "the Riggs National Bank will be
worried if I don't get in touch with them soon. I guess you'd know, Mr.
Clark--is there any communication at all out of town?" By
prearrangement, a message from Don to Riggs would be forwarded to
Military Intelligence.

"I don't know of any, except for the Civek method--a bottle tossed over
the edge. The telegraph and telephone lines are cut, of course. There is
a radio station in town, WCAV, operated from the campus, but it's been
silent ever since the great severance. At least nothing local has come
over my old Atwater Kent."

"Isn't anybody _doing_ anything?" Don asked.

"Sure," Clark said. "I'm getting out my paper--there was even an extra
this morning--and doing job printing. The job is for a jeweler in
Ladenburg. I don't know how I'll deliver it, but no one's told me to
stop so I'm doing it. I guess everybody's carrying on pretty much as
before."

"That's what I mean. Business as usual. But how about the people who do
business out of town? What's Western Union doing, for instance? And the
trucking companies? And the factories? You have two factories, I
understand, and pretty soon there's going to be a mighty big surplus of
kitchen sinks and chewing gum."

"You two go on settling our fate," Alis said. "I'd better get back to
school. Look me up later, Don." She waved and went out.

"Fine girl, that Alis," Clark said. "Got her old man's gumption without
his nutty streak. To answer your question, the Western Union man here is
catching up on his bookkeeping and accepting outgoing messages
contingent on restoration of service. The sink factory made a shipment
two days ago and won't have another ready till next week, so they're
carrying on. They have enough raw material for a month. I was planning
to visit the bubble gum people this afternoon to see how they're doing.
Maybe you'd like to come."

"Yes, I would. I still chew it once in a while, on the sly."

Clark grinned. "I won't tell. Would you like to tidy up, Don? There's a
washroom out back, with a razor and some mysterious running water. Now
_there's_ a phenomenon I'd like to get to the bottom of."

"Thanks. I'll shave with it now and worry about its source later. Do you
think Professor Garet and his magnology cult has anything to do with
it?"

"He'd like to think so, I'm sure." Clark shrugged. "We've been airborne
less than twelve hours. I guess the answers will come in time. You go
clean up and I'll get back to my job."

Don felt better when he had shaved. It had been awkward because he
hadn't been able to take off his coat or shirt, but he'd managed. He was
drying his face when the voice came again. This time there was no doubt
it came from the brief case chained to his handcuff.

"Are you alone now?" it asked.

Startled, Don said, "Yes."

"Good. Speak closer to the brief case so we won't be overheard. This is
Captain Simmons, Sergeant."

"Yes, sir."

"Take out your ID card. Separate the two pieces of plastic. There's a
flat plastic key next to the card. Open the brief case lock with it."

The voice was silent until Don, with the help of a razor blade, had done
as he was directed. "All right, sir; that's done."

"Open the brief case, take out the package, open the package and put the
wrappings back in the brief case."

Again the voice stopped. Don unwrapped something that looked like a flat
cigarette case with two appendages, one a disk of perforated hard rubber
the size of a half dollar, and the other a three-quarter-inch-wide
ribbon of opaque plastic. "I've got it, sir."

"Good. What you see is a highly advanced radio transmitter and receiver.
You can imagine its value in the field. It's a pilot model you were
bringing back from the contractor for tests here. But this seems as
useful a way to test it as any other."

"It's range is fantastic, Captain--if you're in Washington."

"I am. Now. The key also unlocks the handcuff. Unlock it. Strip to the
waist. Bend the plastic strip to fit over your shoulder--either one, as
you choose. Arrange the perforated disk so it's at the base of your
neck, under your shirt collar. The thing that looks like a cigarette
case is the power pack."

Don followed the instructions, rubbing his wrist in relief as the
handcuff came off. The radio had been well designed and its components
went into place as if they had been built to his measure. They tickled a
little on his bare skin, that was all. The power pack was surprisingly
light.

"That's done, sir," Don said.

The answer came softly. "So I hear. You almost blasted my ear off. From
now on, when you speak to me, or whoever's at this end, a barely audible
murmur will be sufficient. Try it."

"Yes, Captain," Don whispered. "I'm trying it now."

"Don't whisper. I can hear you all right, but so could people you
wouldn't want overhearing at your end. A whisper carries farther than
you think. Talk low."

Don practiced while he put his shirt, tie and coat back on.

"Good," Captain Simmons said. "Practice talking without moving your
lips, for occasions when you might have to transmit to us in someone's
view. Now put your handcuff back on and lock it."

"Oh, damn," Don said under his breath.

"I heard that."
