We were greatly relieved by this explanation, which seemed to all of us
perfectly satisfactory.

Yet, really, there was no reason why one language should be any better
than the other for our present purpose. In fact, it might be more useful
to us to know the language of the Martians themselves. Still, we all
felt that we should prefer to know her language rather than that of the
monsters among whom she had lived.

Colonel Smith expressed what was in all our minds when, after listening
to the reasoning of the Professor, he blurted out:

"Thank God, she doesn't speak any of their blamed lingo! By Jove, it
would soil her pretty lips."

"But also that she speaks, too," said the man from Heidelberg, turning
to Colonel Smith with a grin. "We shall both of them eventually learn."

Three entire weeks were passed in this manner. After the first week the
girl herself materially assisted the linguists in their efforts to
ac-quire her speech.

At length the task was so far advanced that we could, in a certain
sense, regard it as practically completed. The Heidelberg professor
declared that he had mastered the tongue of the ancient Aryans. His
delight was unbounded. With prodigious industry he set to work, scarcely
stopping to eat or sleep, to form a grammar of the language.

"You shall see," he said, "it will the speculations of my countrymen
vindicate."

No doubt the Professor had an exaggerated opinion of the extent of his
acquirements, but the fact remained that enough had been learned of the
girl's language to enable him and several others to converse with her
quite as readily as a person of good capacity who has studied under the
instructions of a native teacher during a period of six months can
converse in a foreign tongue.

Immediately almost every man in the squadron set vigorously at work to
learn the language of this fair creature for himself. Colonel Smith and
Sydney Phillips were neck and neck in the linguistic race.

One of the first bits of information which the Professor had given out
was the name of the girl.

It was Aina (pronounced Ah-ee-na).

This news was flashed throughout the squadron, and the name of our
beautiful captive was on the lips of all.

After that came her story. It was a marvelous narrative. Translated into
our tongue it ran as follows:

"The traditions of my fathers, handed down for generations so many that
no one can number them, declare that the planet of Mars was not the
place of our origin.

"Ages and ages ago our forefathers dwelt on another and distant world
that was nearer the sun than this one is, and enjoyed brighter daylight
than we have here.

"They dwelt--as I have often heard the story from my father, who had
learned it by heart from his father, and he from his--in a beautiful
valley that was surrounded by enormous mountains towering into the
clouds and white about their tops with snow that never melted. In the
valley were lakes, around which clustered the dwellings of our race.

"It was, the traditions say, a land wonderful for its fertility, filled
with all things that the heart could desire, splendid with flowers and
rich with luscious fruits.

"It was a land of music, and the people who dwelt in it were very
happy."

While the girl was telling this part of her story the Heidelberg
professor became visibly more and more excited. Presently he could keep
quiet no longer, and suddenly exclaimed, turning to us who were
listening, as the words of the girl were interpreted for us by one of
the other linguists:

"Gentlemen, it is the Vale of Cashmere! Has not my great countryman,
Adelung, so declared? Has he not said that the Valley of Cashmere was
the cradle of the human race already?"

"From the Valley of Cashmere to the planet Mars--what a romance!"
exclaimed one of the bystanders.

Colonel Smith appeared to be particularly moved, and I heard him humming
under his breath, greatly to my astonishment, for this rough soldier was
not much given to poetry or music:

    "Who has not heard of the Vale of Cashmere,
      With its roses the brightest that earth ever gave;
    Its temples, its grottoes, its fountains as clear,
      As the love-lighted eyes that hang 'oer the wave."

Mr. Sydney Phillips, standing by, and also catching the murmur of
Colonel Smith's words, showed in his handsome countenance some
indications of distress, as if he wished he had thought of those lines
himself.

The girl resumed her narrative:

"Suddenly there dropped down out of the sky strange gigantic enemies,
armed with mysterious weapons, and began to slay and burn and make
desolate. Our forefathers could not withstand them. They seemed like
demons, who had been sent from the abodes of evil to destroy our race.

"Some of the wise men said that this thing had come upon our people
because they had been very wicked, and the Gods in Heaven were angry.
Some said they came from the moon, and some from the far-away stars. But
of these things my forefathers knew nothing for a certainty.

"The destroyers showed no mercy to the inhabitants of the beautiful
valley. Not content with making it a desert, they swept over other parts
of the earth.

"The tradition says that they carried off from the valley, which was our
native land, a large number of our people, taking them first into a
strange country, where there were oceans of sand, but where a great
river, flowing through the midst of the sands, created a narrow land of
fertility. Here, after having slain and driven out the native
inhabitants, they remained for many years, keeping our people, whom they
had carried into captivity, as slaves.

"And in this Land of Sand, it is said, they did many wonderful works.

"They had been astonished at the sight of the great mountains which
surrounded our valley, for on Mars there are no mountains, and after
they came into the Land of Sand they built there, with huge blocks of
stone, mountains in imitation of what they had seen, and used them for
purposes my people did not understand.

"Then, too, it is said they left there at the foot of these mountains
that they had made a gigantic image of the great chief who led them in
their conquest of our world."

At this point in the story the Heidelberg professor again broke in,
fairly trembling with excitement:

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," he cried, "is it that you do not understand?
This Land of Sand and of a wonderful fertilizing river--what can it be?
Gentleman, it is Egypt! These mountains of rock that the Martians have
erected, what are they? Gentlemen, they are the great mystery of the
land of the Nile, the Pyramids. The gigantic statue of their leader that
they at the foot of their artificial mountains have set up--gentlemen,
what is that? It is the Sphinx!"

[Illustration: _"Gentlemen," exclaimed the Professor, "these mountains of
rock that the Martians built are the Pyramids of Egypt. The gigantic
statue of their leader is THE GREAT SPHINX!"_]

The professor's agitation was so great that he could not go on further.
And indeed there was not one of us who did not fully share his
excitement. To think that we should have come to the planet Mars to
solve one of the standing mysteries of the earth, which had puzzled
mankind and defied all their efforts at solution for so many centuries!
Here, then, was the explanation of how those gigantic blocks that
constitute the great Pyramid of Cheops had been swung to their lofty
elevation. It was not the work of puny man, as many an engineer had
declared that it could not be, but the work of these giants of Mars.

At length, our traditions say, a great pestilence broke out in the Land
of Sand, and a partial vengeance was granted to us in the destruction of
the larger number of our enemies. At last the giants who remained,
fleeing before this scourge of the gods, used the mysterious means at
their command, and, carrying our ancestors with them, returned to their
own world, in which we have ever since lived.

"Then there are more of your people in Mars?" said one of the
professors.

"Alas, no," replied Aina, her eyes filling with tears, "I alone am
left."

For a few minutes she was unable to speak. Then she continued:

"What fury possessed them I do not know, but not long ago an expedition
departed from the planet, the purpose of which, as it was noised about
over Mars, was the conquest of a distant world. After a time a few
survivors of that expedition returned. The story they told caused great
excitement among our masters. They had been successful in their battles
with the inhabitants of the world they had invaded, but as in the days
of our forefathers, in the Land of Sand, a pestilence smote them, and
but few survivors escaped.

"Not long after that, you, with your mysterious ships, appeared in the
sky of Mars. Our masters studied you with their telescopes, and those
who had returned from the unfortunate expedition declared that you were
inhabitants of the world which they had invaded, come, doubtless, to
take vengeance upon them.

"Some of my people who were permitted to look through the telescopes of
the Martians, saw you also, and recognized you as members of their own
race. There were several thousand of us all together, and we were kept
by the Martians to serve them as slaves, and particularly to delight
their ears with music, for our people have always been especially
skillful in the playing of musical instruments, and in songs, and while
the Martians have but little musical skill themselves, they are
exceedingly fond of these things.

"Although Mars had completed not less than five thousand circuits about
the sun since our ancestors were brought as prisoners to its surface,
yet the memory of our distant home had never perished from the hearts of
our race, and when we recognized you, as we believed, our own brothers,
come to rescue us from long imprisonment, there was great rejoicing. The
news spread from mouth to mouth, wherever we were in houses and families
of our masters. We seemed to be powerless to aid you or to communicate
with you in any manner. Yet our hearts went out to you, as in your ships
you hung above the planet, and preparations were secretly made by all
the members of our race for your reception when, as we believed, would
occur, you should effect a landing upon the planet and destroy our
enemies.

"But in some manner the fact that we had recognized you, and were
preparing to welcome you, came to the ears of the Martians."

At this point the girl suddenly covered her eyes with her hands,
shuddering and falling back in her seat.

"Oh, you do not know them as I do!" at length she exclaimed. "The
monsters! Their vengeance was too terrible! Instantly the order went
forth that we should all be butchered, and that awful command was
executed!"

"How, then, did you escape?" asked the Heidelberg professor.

Aina seemed unable to speak for a while. Finally mastering her emotion,
she replied:

"One of the chief officers of the Martians wished me to remain alive.
He, with his aides, carried me to one of the military depots of
supplies, where I was found and rescued," and as she said this she
turned toward Colonel Smith with a smile that reflected on his ruddy
face and made it glow like a Chinese lantern.

"By God!" muttered Colonel Smith, "that was the fellow we blew into
nothing! Blast him, he got off too easy!"

The remainder of Aina's story may be briefly told.

When Colonel Smith and I entered the mysterious building which, as it
now proved, was not a storehouse belonging to a village, as we had
supposed, but one of the military depots of the Martians, the girl, on
catching sight of us, immediately recognized us as belonging to the
strange squadron in the sky. As such she felt that we must be her
friends, and saw in us her only possible hope of escape. For that reason
she had instantly thrown herself under our protection. This accounted
for the singular confidence which she had manifested in us from the
beginning.

Her wonderful story had so captivated our imaginations that for a long
time after it was finished we could not recover from the spell. It was
told over and over again, from mouth to mouth, and repeated from ship to
ship, everywhere exciting the utmost astonishment.

Destiny seemed to have sent us on this expedition into space for the
purpose of clearing off mysteries that had long puzzled the minds of
men. When on the moon we had unexpectedly to ourselves settled the
question that had been debated from the beginning of astronomical
history of the former habitability of that globe.

Now, on Mars, we had put to rest no less mysterious questions relating
to the past history of our own planet. Adelung, as the Heidelberg
professor asserted, had named the Vale of Cashmere, as the probable site
of the Garden of Eden, and the place of origin of the human race, but
later investigators had taken issue with this opinion and the question
where the Aryans originated on the earth had long been one of the most
puzzling that science presented.

This question seemed now to have been settled.

Aina had said that Mars had completed 5,000 circuits about the sun since
her people were brought to it as captives. One circuit of Mars occupies
687 days. More than 9000 years had therefore elapsed since the first
invasion of the earth by the Martians.

Another great mystery--that of the origin of those gigantic and
inexplicable monuments, the great pyramids and the Sphinx, on the banks
of the Nile, had also apparently been solved by us, although these
Egyptian wonders had been the furthest things from our thoughts when we
set out for the planet Mars.

We had traveled more than thirty millions of miles in order to get
answers to questions which could not be solved at home.

But from these speculations and retrospects we were recalled by the
commander of the expedition.

"This is all very interesting and very romantic, gentlemen," he said,
"but now let us get at the practical side of it. We have learned Aina's
language and heard her story. Let us next ascertain whether she can not
place in our hands some key which will place Mars at our mercy. Remember
what we came here for, and remember that the earth expects every man of
us to do his duty."

This Nelson-like summons again changed the current of our thoughts, and
we instantly set to work to learn from Aina if Mars, like Achilles, had
not some vulnerable point where a blow would be mortal.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

_THE FLOOD GATES OF MARS_


It was a curious scene when the momentous interview which was to
determine our fate and that of Mars began. Aina had been warned of what
was coming. We in the flagship had all learned to speak her language
with more or less ease, but it was deemed best that the Heidelberg
professor, assisted by one of his colleagues, should act as interpreter.

The girl, flushed with excitement of the novel situation, fully
appreciating the importance of what was about to occur, and looking more
charming than before, stood at one side of the principal apartment.
Directly facing her were the interpreters, and the rest of us, all with
ears intent and eyes focused upon Aina, stood in a double row behind
them. As heretofore, I am setting down her words translated into our own
tongue, having taken only so much liberty as to connect the sentences
into a stricter sequence than they had when falling from her lips in
reply to the questions which were showered upon her.

"You will never be victorious," she said, "if you attack them openly as
you have been doing. They are too strong and too numerous. They are well
prepared for such attacks, because they have had to resist them before.

"They have waged war with the inhabitants of the asteroid Ceres, whose
people are giants greater than themselves. Their enemies from Ceres have
attacked them here. Hence these fortifications, with weapons pointing
skyward, and the great air fleets which you have encountered."

"But there must be some point," said Mr. Edison, "where we can."

"Yes, yes," interrupted the girl quickly, "there is one blow you can
deal them which they could not withstand."

"What is that?" eagerly inquired the commander.

"You can drown them out."

"How? With the canals?"

"Yes, I will explain to you. I have already told you, and, in fact, you
must have seen for yourselves, that there are almost no mountains on
Mars. A very learned man of my race used to say that the reason was
because Mars is so very old a world that the mountains it once had have
been almost completely leveled, and the entire surface of the planet had
become a great plain. There are depressions, however, most of which are
occupied by the seas. The greater part of the land lies below the level
of the ocean. In order at the same time to irrigate the soil and make it
fruitful, and to protect themselves from overflows by the ocean breaking
in upon them, the Martians have constructed the immense and innumerable
canals which you see running in all directions over the continents.

"There is one period in the year, and that period has now arrived when
there is special danger of a great deluge. Most of the oceans of Mars
lie in the southern hemisphere. When it is Summer in that hemisphere,
the great masses of ice and snow collected around the south pole melt
rapidly away."

"Yes, that is so," broke in one of the astronomers, who was listening
attentively. "Many a time I have seen the vast snow fields around the
southern pole of Mars completely disappear as the Summer sun rose high
upon them."

"With the melting of these snows," continued Aina, "a rapid rise in the
level of the water in the southern oceans occurs. On the side facing
these oceans the continents of Mars are sufficiently elevated to prevent
an overflow, but nearer the equator the level of the land sinks lower.

"With your telescopes you have no doubt noticed that there is a great
bending sea connecting the oceans of the south with those of the north
and running through the midst of the continents."

"Quite so," said the astronomer who had spoken before, "we call it the
Syrtis Major."

"That long narrow sea," Aina went on, "forms a great channel through
which the flood of waters caused by the melting of the southern polar
snows flows swiftly toward the equator and then on toward the north
until it reaches the sea basins which exist there. At that point it is
rapidly turned into ice and snow, because, of course, while it is Summer
in the southern hemisphere it is Winter in the northern.

"The Syrtis Major (I am giving our name to the channel of communication
in place of that by which the girl called it) is like a great safety
valve, which, by permitting the waters to flow northward, saves the
continents from inundation.

"But when mid-Summer arrives, the snows around the pole, having been
completely melted away, the flood ceases and the water begins to recede.
At this time, but for a device which the Martians have employed, the
canals connected with the oceans would run dry, and the vegetation left
without moisture under the Summer sun, would quickly perish.

"To prevent this they have built a series of enormous gates extending
completely across the Syrtis Major at its narrowest point (latitude 25
degrees south). These gates are all controlled by machinery collected at
a single point on the shore of the strait. As soon as the flood in the
Syrtis Major begins to recede, the gates are closed, and, the water
being thus restrained, the irrigating canals are kept full long enough
to mature the harvests."

"The clue! The clue at last!" exclaimed Mr. Edison. "That is the place
where we shall nip them. If we can close those gates now at the moment
of high tide we shall flood the country. Did you say," he continued,
turning to Aina, "that the movement of the gates was all controlled from
a single point?"

"Yes," said the girl. "There is a great building (power house) full of
tremendous machinery which I once entered when my father was taken there
by his master, and where I saw one Martian, by turning a little handle,
cause the great line of gates, stretching a hundred miles across the
sea, to slowly shut in, edge to edge, until the flow of the water toward
the north had been stopped."

"How is the building protected?"

"So completely," said Aina, "that my only fear is that you may not be
