which ply between the ports of Zingara and Argos and the southern
coasts, hugging the shoreline and seldom venturing far into the open
ocean. It was high of stern, with a tall curving prow; broad in the
waist, sloping beautifully to stem and stern. It was guided by the long
sweep from the poop, and propulsion was furnished mainly by the broad
striped silk sail, aided by a jibsail. The oars were for use in tacking
out of creeks and bays, and during calms. There were ten to the side,
five fore and five aft of the small mid-deck. The most precious part of
the cargo was lashed under this deck, and under the fore-deck. The men
slept on deck or between the rowers' benches, protected in bad weather
by canopies. With twenty men at the oars, three at the sweep, and the
shipmaster, the crew was complete.

So the _Argus_ pushed steadily southward, with consistently fair
weather. The sun beat down from day to day with fiercer heat, and the
canopies were run up--striped silken cloths that matched the shimmering
sail and the shining goldwork on the prow and along the gunwales.

They sighted the coast of Shem--long rolling meadowlands with the white
crowns of the towers of cities in the distance, and horsemen with
blue-black beards and hooked noses, who sat their steeds along the shore
and eyed the galley with suspicion. She did not put in; there was scant
profit in trade with the sons of Shem.

Nor did master Tito pull into the broad bay where the Styx river emptied
its gigantic flood into the ocean, and the massive black castles of
Khemi loomed over the blue waters. Ships did not put unasked into this
port, where dusky sorcerers wove awful spells in the murk of sacrificial
smoke mounting eternally from blood-stained altars where naked women
screamed, and where Set, the Old Serpent, arch-demon of the Hyborians
but god of the Stygians, was said to writhe his shining coils among his
worshippers.

Master Tito gave that dreamy glass-floored bay a wide berth, even when a
serpent-prowed gondola shot from behind a castellated point of land, and
naked dusky women, with great red blossoms in their hair, stood and
called to his sailors, and posed and postured brazenly.

Now no more shining towers rose inland. They had passed the southern
borders of Stygia and were cruising along the coasts of Kush. The sea
and the ways of the sea were never-ending mysteries to Conan, whose
homeland was among the high hills of the northern uplands. The wanderer
was no less of interest to the sturdy seamen, few of whom had ever seen
one of his race.

They were characteristic Argosean sailors, short and stockily built.
Conan towered above them, and no two of them could match his strength.
They were hardy and robust, but his was the endurance and vitality of a
wolf, his thews steeled and his nerves whetted by the hardness of his
life in the world's wastelands. He was quick to laugh, quick and
terrible in his wrath. He was a valiant trencherman, and strong drink
was a passion and a weakness with him. Naive as a child in many ways,
unfamiliar with the sophistry of civilization, he was naturally
intelligent, jealous of his rights, and dangerous as a hungry tiger.
Young in years, he was hardened in warfare and wandering, and his
sojourns in many lands were evident in his apparel. His horned helmet
was such as was worn by the golden-haired AEsir of Nordheim; his hauberk
and greaves were of the finest workmanship of Koth; the fine ring-mail
which sheathed his arms and legs was of Nemedia; the blade at his girdle
was a great Aquilonian broadsword; and his gorgeous scarlet cloak could
have been spun nowhere but in Ophir.

So they beat southward, and master Tito began to look for the
high-walled villages of the black people. But they found only smoking
ruins on the shore of a bay, littered with naked black bodies. Tito
swore.

'I had good trade here, aforetime. This is the work of pirates.'

'And if we meet them?' Conan loosened his great blade in its scabbard.

'Mine is no warship. We run, not fight. Yet if it came to a pinch, we
have beaten off reavers before, and might do it again; unless it were
Belit's _Tigress_.'

'Who is Belit?'

'The wildest she-devil unhanged. Unless I read the signs a-wrong, it was
her butchers who destroyed that village on the bay. May I some day see
her dangling from the yard-arm! She is called the queen of the black
coast. She is a Shemite woman, who leads black raiders. They harry the
shipping and have sent many a good tradesman to the bottom.'

From under the poop-deck Tito brought out quilted jerkins, steel caps,
bows and arrows.

'Little use to resist if we're run down,' he grunted. 'But it rasps the
soul to give up life without a struggle.'

       *       *       *       *       *

It was just at sunrise when the lookout shouted a warning. Around the
long point of an island off the starboard bow glided a long lethal
shape, a slender serpentine galley, with a raised deck that ran from
stem to stern. Forty oars on each side drove her swiftly through the
water, and the low rail swarmed with naked blacks that chanted and
clashed spears on oval shields. From the masthead floated a long crimson
pennon.

'Belit!' yelled Tito, paling. 'Yare! Put her about! Into that
creek-mouth! If we can beach her before they run us down, we have a
chance to escape with our lives!'

So, veering sharply, the _Argus_ ran for the line of surf that boomed
along the palm-fringed shore, Tito striding back and forth, exhorting
the panting rowers to greater efforts. The master's black beard
bristled, his eyes glared.

'Give me a bow,' requested Conan. 'It's not my idea of a manly weapon,
but I learned archery among the Hyrkanians, and it will go hard if I
can't feather a man or so on yonder deck.'

Standing on the poop, he watched the serpent-like ship skimming lightly
over the waters, and landsman though he was, it was evident to him that
the _Argus_ would never win that race. Already arrows, arching from the
pirate's deck, were falling with a hiss into the sea, not twenty paces
astern.

'We'd best stand to it,' growled the Cimmerian; 'else we'll all die with
shafts in our backs, and not a blow dealt.'

'Bend to it, dogs!' roared Tito with a passionate gesture of his brawny
fist. The bearded rowers grunted, heaved at the oars, while their
muscles coiled and knotted, and sweat started out on their hides. The
timbers of the stout little galley creaked and groaned as the men fairly
ripped her through the water. The wind had fallen; the sail hung limp.
Nearer crept the inexorable raiders, and they were still a good mile
from the surf when one of the steersmen fell gagging across a sweep, a
long arrow through his neck. Tito sprang to take his place, and Conan,
bracing his feet wide on the heaving poop-deck, lifted his bow. He could
see the details of the pirate plainly now. The rowers were protected by
a line of raised mantelets along the sides, but the warriors dancing on
the narrow deck were in full view. These were painted and plumed, and
mostly naked, brandishing spears and spotted shields.

On the raised platform in the bows stood a slim figure whose white skin
glistened in dazzling contrast to the glossy ebon hides about it. Belit,
without a doubt. Conan drew the shaft to his ear--then some whim or
qualm stayed his hand and sent the arrow through the body of a tall
plumed spearman beside her.

Hand over hand the pirate galley was overhauling the lighter ship.
Arrows fell in a rain about the _Argus_, and men cried out. All the
steersmen were down, pincushioned, and Tito was handling the massive
sweep alone, gasping black curses, his braced legs knots of straining
thews. Then with a sob he sank down, a long shaft quivering in his
sturdy heart. The _Argus_ lost headway and rolled in the swell. The men
shouted in confusion, and Conan took command in characteristic fashion.

'Up, lads!' he roared, loosing with a vicious twang of cord. 'Grab your
steel and give these dogs a few knocks before they cut our throats!
Useless to bend your backs any more: they'll board us ere we can row
another fifty paces!'

In desperation the sailors abandoned their oars and snatched up their
weapons. It was valiant, but useless. They had time for one flight of
arrows before the pirate was upon them. With no one at the sweep, the
_Argus_ rolled broadside, and the steel-baked prow of the raider crashed
into her amidships. Grappling-irons crunched into the side. From the
lofty gunwales, the black pirates drove down a volley of shafts that
tore through the quilted jackets of the doomed sailormen, then sprang
down spear in hand to complete the slaughter. On the deck of the pirate
lay half a dozen bodies, an earnest of Conan's archery.
