"I told you----" said the Big Business Man.

"It was a dangerous method of procedure, but I made it successfully
without mishap.

"Lylda and I were married in native fashion shortly after I reached
Arite."

"How was that; what fashion?" the Very Young Man wanted to know, but the
Chemist went on.

"It was my intention to stay here only a few weeks and then return with
Lylda. She was willing to follow me anywhere I might take her,
because--well, perhaps you would hardly understand, but--women here are
different in many ways than you know them.

"I stayed several months, still planning to leave almost at any time. I
found this world an intensely interesting study. Then, when--Loto was
expected, I again postponed my departure.

"I had been here over a year before I finally gave up my intention of
ever returning to you. I have no close relatives above, you know, no one
who cares much for me or for whom I care, and my life seemed thoroughly
established here.

"I am afraid gentlemen, I am offering excuses for myself--for my
desertion of my own country in its time of need. I have no defense. As
events turned out I could not have helped probably, very much, but
still--that is no excuse. I can only say that your world up there seemed
so very--very--far away. Events up there had become to me only vague
memories as of a dream. And Lylda and my little son were so near, so
real and vital to me. Well, at any rate I stayed, deciding definitely to
make my home and to end my days here."

"What did you do about the drugs?" asked the Doctor.

"I kept them hidden carefully for nearly a year," the Chemist replied.
"Then fearing lest they should in some way get loose, I destroyed them.
They possess a diabolical power, gentlemen; I am afraid of it."

"They called you the Master," suggested the Very Young Man, after a
pause. "Why was that?"

The Chemist smiled. "They do call me the Master. That has been for
several years. I suppose I am the most important individual in the
nation to-day."

"I should think you would be," said the Very Young Man quickly. "What
you did, and with the knowledge you have."

The Chemist went on. "Lylda and I lived with her father and Aura--her
mother is dead you know--until after Loto was born. Then we had a house
further up in the city. Later, about eight years ago, I built this house
we now occupy and Lylda laid out its garden which she is tremendously
proud of, and which I think is the finest in Arite.

"Because of what I had done in the Malite war, I became naturally the
King's adviser. Every one felt me the savior of the nation, which, in a
way, I suppose I was. I never used the drugs again and, as only a very
few of the people ever understood them, or in fact ever knew of them or
believed in their existence, my extraordinary change in stature was
ascribed to some supernatural power. I have always since been credited
with being able to exert that power at will, although I never used it
but that once."

"You have it again now," said the Doctor smiling.

"Yes, I have, thank God," answered the Chemist fervently, "though I hope
I never shall have to use it."

"Aren't you planning to go back with us," asked the Very Young Man,
"even for a visit?"

The Chemist shook his head. "My way lies here," he said quietly, yet
with deep feeling.

A silence followed; finally the Chemist roused himself from his reverie,
and went on. "Although I never again changed my stature, there were a
thousand different ways in which I continued to make myself--well,
famous throughout the land. I have taught these people many things,
gentlemen--like this for instance." He indicated his cigar, and the
chair in which he was sitting. "You cannot imagine what a variety of
things one knows beyond the knowledge of so primitive a race as this.

"And so gradually, I became known as the Master. I have no official
position, but everywhere I am known by that name. As a matter of fact,
for the past year at least, it has been rather too descriptive a
title----" the Chemist smiled somewhat ruefully--"for I have had in
reality, and have now, the destiny of the country on my shoulders."

"You're not threatened with another war?" asked the Very Young Man.

"No, not exactly that. But I had better go on with my story first. This
is a very different world now, gentlemen, from that I first entered
twelve years ago. I think first I should tell you about it as it was
then."

His three friends nodded their agreement and the Chemist continued.

"I must make it clear to you gentlemen, the one great fundamental
difference between this world and yours. In the evolution of this race
there has been no cause for strife--the survival of the fittest always
has been an unknown doctrine--a non-existent problem.

"In extent this Inner Surface upon which we are now living is nearly as
great as the surface of your own earth. From the earliest known times it
has been endowed with a perfect climate--a climate such as you are now
enjoying."

The Very Young Man expanded his chest and looked his appreciation.

"The climate, the rainfall, everything is ideal for crops and for living
conditions. In the matter of food, one needs in fact do practically
nothing. Fruits of a variety ample to sustain life, grow wild in
abundance. Vegetables planted are harvested seemingly without blight or
hazard of any kind. No destructive insects have ever impeded
agriculture; no wild animals have ever existed to harass humanity.
Nature in fact, offers every help and no obstacle towards making a
simple, primitive life easy to live.

"Under such conditions the race developed only so far as was necessary
to ensure a healthful pleasant existence. Civilization here is what you
would call primitive: wants are few and easily supplied--too easily,
probably, for without strife these people have become--well shall I say
effeminate? They are not exactly that--it is not a good word."

"I should think that such an unchanging, unrigorous climate would make a
race deteriorate in physique rapidly," observed the Doctor.

"How about disease down here?" asked the Big Business Man.

"It is a curious thing," replied the Chemist. "Cleanliness seems to be a
trait inborn with every individual in this race. It is more than
godliness; it is the one great cardinal virtue. You must have noticed
it, just in coming through Arite. Personal cleanliness of the people,
and cleanliness of houses, streets--of everything. It is truly
extraordinary to what extent they go to make everything inordinately,
immaculately clean. Possibly for that reason, and because there seems
never to have been any serious disease germs existing here, sickness as
you know it, does not exist."

"Guess you better not go into business here," said the Very Young Man
with a grin at the Doctor.

"There is practically no illness worthy of the name," went on the
Chemist. "The people live out their lives and, barring accident, die
peacefully of old age."

"How old do they live to be?" asked the Big Business Man.

"About the same as with you," answered the Chemist. "Only of course as
we measure time."

"Say how about that?" the Very Young Man asked. "My watch is still
going--is it ticking out the old time or the new time down here?"

"I should say probably--certainly--it was giving time of your own world,
just as it always did," the Chemist replied.

"Well, there's no way of telling, is there?" said the Big Business Man.

"What is the exact difference in time?" the Doctor asked.

"That is something I have had no means of determining. It was rather a
curious thing; when I left that letter for you," the Chemist turned to
the Doctor--"it never occurred to me that although I had told you to
start down here on a certain day, I would be quite at a loss to
calculate when that day had arrived. It was my estimation after my first
trip here that time in this world passed at a rate about two and
two-fifth times faster than it does in your world. That is as near as I
ever came to it. We can calculate it more closely now, since we have
only the interval of your journey down as an indeterminate quantity."

"How near right did you hit it? When did you expect us?" asked the
Doctor.

"About thirty days ago; I have been waiting since then. I sent nearly a
hundred men through the tunnels into the forest to guide you in."

"You taught them pretty good English," said the Very Young Man. "They
were tickled to death that they knew it, too," he added with a
reminiscent grin.

"You say about thirty days; how do you measure time down here?" asked
the Big Business Man.

"I call a day, one complete cycle of sleeping and eating," the Chemist
replied. "I suppose that is the best translation of the Oroid word; we
have a word that means about the same thing."

"How long is a day?" inquired the Very Young Man.

"It seems in the living about the same as your twenty-four hours; it
occupies probably about the interval of time of ten hours in your world.

"You see," the Chemist went on, "we ordinarily eat twice between each
time of sleep--once after rising--and once a few hours before bedtime.
Workers at severe muscular labor sometimes eat a light meal in between,
but the custom is not general. Time is generally spoken of as so many
meals, rather than days."

"But what is the arbitrary standard?" asked the Doctor. "Do you have an
equivalent for weeks, or months or years?"

"Yes," answered the Chemist, "based on astronomy the same as in your
world. But I would rather not explain that now. I want to take you,
later to-day, to see Lylda's father. You will like him. He is--well,
what we might call a scientist. He talks English fairly well. We can
discuss astronomy with him; you will find him very interesting."

"How can you tell time?" the Very Young Man wanted to know. "There is no
sun to go by. You have no clocks, have you?"

"There is one downstairs," answered the Chemist, "but you didn't notice
it. Lylda's father has a very fine one; he will show it to you."

"It seems to me," began the Doctor thoughtfully after a pause, reverting
to their previous topic, "that without sickness, under such ideal living
conditions as you say exist here, in a very short time this world would
be over-populated."

"Nature seems to have taken care of that," the Chemist answered, "and as
a matter of fact quite the reverse is true. Women mature in life at an
age you would call about sixteen. But early marriages are not the rule;
seldom is a woman married before she is twenty--frequently she is much
older. Her period of child-bearing, too, is comparatively
short--frequently less than ten years. The result is few children, whose
rate of mortality is exceedingly slow."

"How about the marriages?" the Very Young Man suggested. "You were going
to tell us."

"Marriages are by mutual consent," answered the Chemist, "solemnized by
a simple, social ceremony. They are for a stated period of time, and are
renewed later if both parties desire. When a marriage is dissolved
children are cared for by the mother generally, and her maintenance if
necessary is provided for by the government. The state becomes the
guardian also of all illegitimate children and children of unknown
parentage. But of both these latter classes there are very few. They
work for the government, as do many other people, until they are of age,
when they become free to act as they please."

"You spoke about women being different than we knew them; how are they
different?" the Very Young Man asked. "If they're all like Lylda I think
they're great," he added enthusiastically, flushing a little at his own
temerity.

The Chemist smiled his acknowledgment of the compliment. "The status of
women--and their character--is I think one of the most remarkable things
about this race. You will remember, when I returned from here the first
time, that I was much impressed by the kindliness of these people.
Because of their history and their government they seem to have become
imbued with the milk of human kindness to a degree approaching the
Utopian.

"Crime here is practically non-existent; there is nothing over which
contention can arise. What crimes are committed are punished with a
severity seemingly out of all proportion to what you would call justice.
A persistent offender even of fairly trivial wrongdoing is put to death
without compunction. There is no imprisonment, except for those awaiting
trial. Punishment is a reprimand with the threat of death if the offense
is committed again, or death itself immediately. Probably this very
severity and the swiftness with which punishment is meted out, to a
large extent discourages wrongdoing. But, fundamentally, the capacity
for doing wrong is lacking in these people.

"I have said practically nothing exists over which contention can arise.
That is not strictly true. No race of people can develop without some
individual contention over the possession of their women. The passions
of love, hate and jealousy, centering around sex and its problems, are
as necessarily present in human beings as life itself.

"Love here is deep, strong and generally lasting; it lacks fire,
intensity--perhaps. I should say it is rather of a placid quality.
Hatred seldom exists; jealousy is rare, because both sexes, in their
actions towards the other, are guided by a spirit of honesty and
fairness that is really extraordinary. This is true particularly of the
women; they are absolutely honest--square, through and through.

"Crimes against women are few, yet in general they are the most
prevalent type we have. They are punishable by death--even those that
you would characterize as comparatively slight offenses. It is
significant too, that, in judging these crimes, but little evidence is
required. A slight chain of proven circumstances and the word of the
woman is all that is required.

"This you will say, places a tremendous power in the hands of women. It
does; yet they realize it thoroughly, and justify it. Although they know
that almost at their word a man will be put to death, practically never,
I am convinced, is this power abused. With extreme infrequency, a female
is proven guilty of lying. The penalty is death, for there is no place
here for such a woman!

"The result is that women are accorded a freedom of movement far beyond
anything possible in your world. They are safe from harm. Their morals
are, according to the standard here, practically one hundred per cent
perfect. With short-term marriages, dissolvable at will, there is no
reason why they should be otherwise. Curiously enough too, marriages are
renewed frequently--more than that, I should say, generally--for
life-long periods. Polygamy with the consent of all parties is
permitted, but seldom practiced. Polyandry is unlawful, and but few
cases of it ever appear.

"You may think all this a curious system, gentlemen, but it works."

"That's the answer," muttered the Very Young Man. It was obvious he was
still thinking of Lylda and her sister and with a heightened admiration
and respect.




CHAPTER XXI

A LIFE WORTH LIVING


The appearance of Lylda at one of the long windows of the balcony,
interrupted the men for a moment. She was dressed in a tunic of silver,
of curious texture, like flexible woven metal, reaching to her knees. On
her feet were little fiber sandals. Her hair was twisted in coils, piled
upon her head, with a knot low at the back of the neck. From her head in
graceful folds hung a thin scarf of gold.

She stood waiting in the window a moment for them to notice her; then
she said quietly, "I am going for a time to the court." She hesitated an
instant over the words. The Chemist inclined his head in agreement, and
with a smile at her guests, and a little bow, she withdrew.

The visitors looked inquiringly at their host.

"I must tell you about our government," said the Chemist. "Lylda plays
quite an important part in it." He smiled at their obvious surprise.

"The head of the government is the king. In reality he is more like the
president of a republic; he is chosen by the people to serve for a
period of about twenty years. The present king is now in--well let us
say about the fifteenth year of his service. This translation of time
periods into English is confusing," he interjected somewhat
apologetically. "We shall see the king to-morrow; you will find him a
most intelligent, likeable man.

"As a sort of congress, the king has one hundred and fifty advisers,
half of them women, who meet about once a month. Lylda is one of these
women. He also has an inner circle of closer, more intimate counselors
consisting of four men and four women. One of these women is the queen;
another is Lylda. I am one of the men.

"The capital of the nation is Arite. Each of the other cities governs
itself in so far as its own local problems are concerned according to a
somewhat similar system, but all are under the central control of the
Arite government."

"How about the country in between, the--the rural population?" asked the
Big Business Man.

"It is all apportioned off to the nearest city," answered the Chemist.
"Each city controls a certain amount of the land around it.

"This congress of one hundred and fifty is the law-making body. The
judiciary is composed of one court in each city. There is a leader of
the court, or judge, and a jury of forty--twenty men and twenty women.
The juries are chosen for continuous service for a period of five years.
Lylda is at present serving in the Arite court. They meet very
infrequently and irregularly, called as occasion demands. A two-thirds
vote is necessary for a decision; there is no appeal."

"Are there any lawyers?" asked the Big Business Man.

"There is no one who makes that his profession, no. Generally the
accused talks for himself or has some relative, or possibly some friend
to plead his case."

"You have police?" the Doctor asked.

"A very efficient police force, both for the cities and in the country.
Really they are more like detectives than police; they are the men I
sent up into the forest to meet you. We also have an army, which at
present consists almost entirely of this same police force. After the
Malite war it was of course very much larger, but of late years it has
been disbanded almost completely.

"How about money?" the Very Young Man wanted to know.

"There is none!" answered the Chemist with a smile.

"Great Scott, how can you manage that?" ejaculated the Big Business Man.

"Our industrial system undoubtedly is peculiar," the Chemist replied,
"but I can only say again, it works. We have no money, and, so far, none
apparently is needed. Everything is bought and sold as an exchange. For
instance, suppose I wish to make a living as a farmer. I have my
land----"

"How did you get it?" interrupted the Very Young Man quickly.

"All the land is divided up _pro rata_ and given by each city to its
citizens. At the death of its owner it reverts to the government, and
each citizen coming of age receives his share from the surplus always
remaining."

