different thing) may be localised to the lens.

C.  The presence of flexure may be confirmed by altering the position
of the points of support with respect to the eyepiece, the lens
maintaining its original position.  The addition of more points of
support will in general reduce the ill effects.  How to get rid of
them I do not know;  they are only serious with large lenses.

D.  Spherical aberration may be located by using stops and zonal
screens, and observing the effect on the image.  Sir H.  Grubb
determines whether any point on the lens requires to be raised or
lowered, by touching the glass at that point with a warm hand or
cooling it by ether.  The effects so produced are the differential
results of the change of figure and of refractive index.  By observing
the effect of the heating or cooling of any part, the operator will
know whether to raise or lower that part, provided that by a suitable
preliminary experiment he has determined the relation between the
effect produced by the change of figure, and that due to the
temperature variation of the refractive index.  In general it is
sufficient to consider the change of shape only and neglect the change
in refractive power.

E.  Marked astigmatism has never been noticed by me, but I should
think that the whole lens surface would require to be repolished or
perhaps reground in this case.

F.  To decide in which surface faults exist is not easy.  By placing a
film of oil between the two surfaces nearly in contact these may be
easily examined.  Thus a mixture of nut and almond oil of the right
proportion, to be found by trial, for the temperature, will have the
same refractive index as the crown glass, and will consequently reduce
any errors of figure in the interior crown surface, if properly
applied between the surfaces.  Similarly the interior of the flint
surface may have its imperfections greatly reduced in effect by using
almond oil alone, or mixed with bisulphide of carbon.  The outer
surfaces, I presume, must be examined by warming or cooling over
suitable areas or zones.

The defects being detected, a matter requiring a great deal of skill
and experience according to Sir H.  Grubb, the next step is to remedy
them; and the remedial measures as applied to the glass constitute the
process of figuring.  There are two ways of correcting local defects,
one by means of small paper or pitch covered tools, which according to
Sir H.  Grubb is dangerous, and according to the experience of Mr.
Cook, and I think of many French opticians, safe and advantageous.

Pitch polishing tools are generally used for figuring.  They are made
by covering a slate backing with squares of pitch.  The backing is
floated with pitch say one-eighth of an inch thick.  This is then
scored into squares by a hot iron rod.  The tool, while slightly warm,
is laid upon the lens surface, previously slightly smeared with dilute
glycerine, until the pitch takes the figure of the glass.  The
polishing material is rouge and water.  Small tools are applied
locally, and probably can only be so applied with advantage for grave
defects.

The other method is longer and probably safer.  It consists in
furnishing the polishing tool with squares of pitch as before.  These
being slightly warm, the lens is placed upon them so that they will
flow to the exact figure also as before.  I presume that the lens is
to be slightly smeared with glycerine, or some equivalent, to keep the
pitch from sticking.  The squares are most thickly distributed where
the abrasion is most required, i.e.  less pitch is melted out by the
iron rod.  This may be supplemented by taking advantage of differences
of hardness of pitch, making some squares out of harder, others out of
softer pitch.  The aim is to produce a polishing tool which will
polish unequally so as to remove the glass chiefly from predetermined
parts of the lens surface.  The tool is worked over the surface of the
lens by the polishing machine, and part of the art consists in
adjusting the strokes to assist in the production of the local
variations required.

A source of difficulty and danger lies in the fact that the pitch
squares are rarely of the same hardness, so that some abrade the glass
more rapidly than others.  This is particularly likely to occur if the
pitch has been overheated.  [Footnote: When pitch is heated till it
evolves bubbles of gas its hardness increases with the duration of the
process.]  The reader must be good enough to regard these remarks as
of the barest possible kind, and not intended to convey more than a
general idea of the nature of the process of figuring.

Sec. 68.  A few remarks on cleaning lenses will fittingly close this part
of the subject.  There is no need to go beyond the following
instructions given by Mr. Brashear in Popular Astronomy, 1894, which
are reproduced here verbatim.

"The writer does not advise the use of either fine chamois skin,
tissue paper, or an old soft silk handkerchief, nor any other such
material to wipe the lenses, as is usually advised.  It is not,
however, these wiping materials that do the mischief, but the dust
particles on the lenses, many of them perhaps of a silicious nature,
which are always harder than optical glass, and as these particles
attach themselves to the wiping material they cut microscopic or
greater scratches on the surfaces of the objective in the process of
wiping.

"I write this article with the hope of helping to solve this
apparently difficult problem, but which in reality is a very simple
one.

"Let us commence by taking the object glass out of its cell.  Take out
the screws that hold the ring in place, and lift out the ring.
Placing the fingers of both hands so as to grasp the objective on
opposite sides, reverse the cell, and with the thumbs gently press the
objective squarely out of the cell on to a book, block of wood, or
anything a little less in diameter than the objective, which has had a
cushion of muslin or any soft substance laid upon it.  One person can
thus handle any objective up to 12 inches in diameter.

"Before separating the lenses it should be carefully noted how they
were put together with relation to the cell, and to one another, and
if they art not marked they should be marked on the edges
conspicuously with a hard lead pencil, so that when separated they may
be put together in the same way, and placed in the same relation to
the cell.  With only ordinary precaution this should be an easy
matter.

"Setting the objective on edge the two lenses may be readily
separated.

"And now as to the cleaning of the lenses.  I have, on rare occasions,
found the inner surfaces of an object glass covered with a curious
film, not caused directly by moisture but by the apparent oxidation of
the tin-foil used to keep the lenses apart.  "A year or more ago a
7-inch objective made by Mr. Clark was brought to me to clean.  It had
evidently been sadly neglected.  The inside of the lenses were covered
with such a film as I have mentioned, and I feared the glass was
ruined.  When taken apart it was found that the tin-foil had oxidised
totally and had distributed itself all over the inner surfaces.  I
feared the result, but was delighted to find that nitric acid and a
tuft of absorbent cotton cut all the deposit off, leaving no stains
after having passed through a subsequent washing with soap and water.

"I mention this as others may have a similar case to deal with.

"For the ordinary cleaning of an objective let a suitable sized
vessel, always a wooden one, be thoroughly cleaned with soap and
water, then half filled with clean water about the same temperature as
the glass.  Slight differences of temperature are of no moment.  Great
differences are dangerous in large objectives.

"I usually put a teaspoonful of ammonia in half a pail of water, and
it is well to let a piece of washed 'cheese cloth' lie in the pail, as
then there is no danger if the lens slips away from the hand, and, by
the way, every observatory, indeed every amateur owning a telescope,
should have plenty of 'cheese cloth' handy.  It is cheap (about 3 cts.
per yard) and is superior for wiping purposes to any 'old soft silk
handkerchief,' chamois skin, etc.  Before using it have it thoroughly
washed with soap and water, then rinsed in clean water, dried and laid
away in a box or other place where it can be kept clean.  When you use
a piece to clean an objective throw it away, it is so cheap you can
afford to do so.

"If the lenses are very dirty or 'dusty,' a tuft of cotton or a
camel's-hair brush may be used to brush off the loose material before
placing the lenses in the water, but no pressure other than the weight
of the cotton or brush should be used.  The writer prefers to use the
palms of the hand with plenty of good soap on them to rub the
surfaces, although the cheese cloth and the soap answers nicely, and
there seems to be absolutely no danger of scratching when using the
hands or the cheese cloth when plenty of water is used;  indeed when I
wish to wipe off the front surface of an objective in use, and the
lens cannot well be taken out, I first dust off the gross particles
and then use the cheese cloth with soap and water, and having gone
over the surface gently with one piece of cloth, throw it away and
take another, perhaps a third one, and then when the dirt is, as it
were, all lifted up from the surface, a piece of dry cheese cloth will
finish the work, leaving a clean brilliant surface, and no scratches
of any kind.

"In washing large objectives in water I generally use a 'tub' and
stand the lenses on their edge.  When thoroughly washed they are taken
out and laid on a bundle of cheese cloth and several pieces of the
same used to dry them.

"I think it best not to leave them to drain dry;  better take up all
moisture with the cloth, and vigorous rubbing will do no harm if the
surfaces have no abrading material on them. I have yet to injure a
glass cleaned in this way.

"This process may seem a rather long and tedious one, but it is not so
in practice, and it pays.

"In some places objectives must be frequently cleaned, not only
because they become covered with an adherent dust, but because that
dust produces so much diffused light in the field as to ruin some
kinds of telescope work.  Mr. Hale of the Kenwood Observatory tells me
he cannot do any good prominence photography unless his objective has
a clean surface; indeed every observer of faint objects or delicate
planetary markings knows full well the value of a dark field free from
diffused light.  The object-glass maker uses his best efforts to
produce the most perfect polish on his lenses, aside from the accuracy
of the curves, both for high light value and freedom from diffused
light in the field, and if the surfaces are allowed to become covered
with dust, his good work counts for little.

"If only the front surface needs cleaning, the method of cleaning
with cheese cloth, soap and water, as described above, answers very
well, but always throw away the first and, if necessary, the second
cloth, then wipe dry with a third or fourth cloth;  but if the
surfaces all need cleaning I know of no better method than that of
taking the objective out of its cell, always using abundance of soap
and water, and keep in a good humor."

Sec. 69.  The Preparation of Flat Surfaces of Rock Salt.

The preliminary grinding is accomplished as in the case of glass,
except that it goes on vastly faster.  The polishing process is the
only part of the operation which presents any difficulty.  The
following is an extract from a paper on the subject, by Mr. J.  A.
Brashear, Pittsburg, Pa, U.S.A, from the Proceedings of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, 1885.  Practically the
same method was shown me by Mr. Cook some years earlier, so that I can
endorse all that Mr. Brashear says, with the following exceptions.  We
consider that for small salt surfaces the pitch is better scored into
squares than provided with the holes recommended by Mr. Brashear.

Mr. Brashear's instructions are as follows.  After alluding to the
difficulty of drying the polished salt surface--which is of course
wet--Mr. Brashear says:-

"Happily I have no trouble in this respect now, and as my method is
easily carried out by any physicist who desires to work with rock salt
surfaces, it gives me pleasure to explain it.  For polishing a prism I
make an ordinary pitch bed of about two and one-half or three times
the area of the surface of the prism to be polished.  While the pitch
is still warm I press upon it any approximately flat surface, such as
a piece of ordinary plate glass.  The pitch bed is then cooled by a
stream of water, and conical holes are then drilled in the pitch with
an ordinary counter sink bit, say one-quarter of an inch in diameter,
and at intervals of half an inch over the entire surface.  This is
done to relieve the atmospheric pressure in the final work.  The upper
surface of the pitch is now very slightly warmed and a true plane
surface (usually a glass one, prepared by grinding and polishing three
surfaces in the ordinary way, previously wetted) is pressed upon it
until the pitch surface becomes an approximately true plane itself.
Fortunately, moderately hard pitch retains its figure quite
persistently through short periods and small changes of temperature,
and it always pays to spend a little time in the preparation of the
pitch bed.

"The polisher being now ready, a very small quantity of rouge and
water is taken upon a fine sponge and equally distributed over its
surface.  The previously ground and fined salt surface (this work is
done the same as in glass working) is now placed upon the polisher and
motion instantly set up in diametral strokes.  I usually walk around
the polisher while working a surface.  It is well to note that motion
must be constant, for a moment's rest is fatal to good results, for
the reason that the surface is quickly eaten away, and irregularly so,
owing to the holes that are in the pitch bed.  Now comes the most
important part of this method.  After a few minutes' work the moisture
will begin to evaporate quite rapidly.  No new application of water is
to be made, but a careful watch must be kept upon the pitch bed, and
as the last vestige of moisture disappears the prism is to be slipped
off the polisher in a perfectly horizontal direction, and if the work
has been well done, a clean, bright, and dry surface is the result.
The surface is now tested by the well-known method of interference
from a perfect glass test plate (see Fig.  178).

"If an error of concavity presents itself the process of polishing is
gone over again, using short diametral strokes.  If the error is one
of convexity, the polishing strokes are to be made along the chords,
extending over the edge of the polisher.  The one essential feature of
this method is the fact that the surface is wiped dry in the final
strokes, thus getting rid of the one great difficulty of pitch
polishing, a method undoubtedly far superior to that of polishing on
broadcloth.  If in the final strokes the surface is not quite cleaned
I usually breathe upon the pitch bed, and thus by condensation place
enough moisture upon it to give a few more strokes, finishing just the
same as before.  In ten minutes I have polished prisms of rock salt in
this manner that have not only shown the D line double, but Professor
Langley has informed me that his assistant, Mr. Keeler (J.  E.), has
seen the nickel line clearly between the D lines.  This speaks for the
superiority of the surfaces over those polished on broadcloth.

"In polishing prisms I prefer to work them on top of the polisher, as
they can be easily held, but as it is difficult to hold lenses or
planes in this way without injuring the surfaces, I usually support
them in a block of soft wood, turned so as to touch only at their
edges, and work the polisher over them. Though it takes considerable
practice to succeed at first, the results are so good that it well
repays the few hours' work it requires to master the few difficulties
it presents."

Fig.  58.

Sec. 70.  Casting Specula for Mirrors.

According to Sir H. Grubb (loc. cit.) the best alloy is made of four
atoms of copper and one of tin;  this gives by weight,
copper 252, tin 117.8.

The copper is melted first in a plumbago crucible;  the tin is added
gradually.  Of course, in the process of melting, even though a little
fine charcoal be sprinkled over the copper, some loss of that metal
will occur from oxidation.  It is convenient in practice, therefore to
reserve a portion of the tin and test the contents of the crucible by
lifting a little of the alloy out and examining it.

The following indications may be noted:  When the copper is in excess
the tint of the alloy is slightly red, and the structure, as shown at
a fractured surface, is coarsely crystalline.  As the proper
proportions are more nearly attained, the crystalline structure
becomes finer, the colour whiter, and the crystals brighter.  The
alloy is ready for use when the maximum brightness is attained and the
grain is fine.

If too much tin be added, the lustre diminishes.  The correct
proportion is, therefore, attained when a further small addition of
tin produces no apparent increase of brightness or fineness of grain.
About three-quarters of the tin may be added at first, and the other
quarter added with testing as described.  The alloy is allowed to cool
until on skimming the surface the metal appears bright and remains so
without losing its lustre by oxidation for a sensible time;  it will
still be quite red-hot.

Fig. 59.                                            Fig.   60.

As the speculum alloy is too difficult to work with ordinary tools, it
is best to cast the speculum of exactly the required shape and size.
This is done by means of a ring of iron turned inside (and out) and on
one edge.  This ring is laid on a plate of  figured iron, and before
the metal is poured the plate (G)  (Figs 59 and 61) is heated to, say,
300 deg. C.  In order to avoid the presence of oxide as far as possible,
the following arrangements for pouring are made.  A portion of the
lower surface of the ring is removed by radial filing until a notch
equal to, say, one-twentieth of the whole circumference is produced.
This is cut to an axial depth of, say, half an inch.

A bar of iron is then dovetailed loosely into the notch (Fig.  60, B),
so that it will rest on the iron plate, and half fill the notch.  The
aperture thus left forms the port of ingress for the hot metal (see
Fig.  61, M).  A bit of sheet iron is attached to the upper surface of
the ring, and lies as a sort of flap, shaped like a deep shovel,
against the outside of the ring overhanging the port (Figs.  59 and 61
at F).  This flap does not quite reach the iron plate, and its sides
are bent so as to be in contact with the ring.  A portion of a smaller
ring is then applied in such a manner as to form a pouring lip or pool
on the outside of the main ring at E, and the metal can only get into
the main ring by passing under the edge of the flap and up through the
port.  This forms an efficient skimming arrangement.  The process of
casting is carried out by pouring steadily into the lip.

To avoid air bubbles it is convenient to cause the metal to spread
slowly over the chill, and Mr. Nasmyth's method of accomplishing this
is shown in the figure (61).  The chill rests on three pins, A B C
(Figs.  59 and 61).  Before pouring begins the chill is tilted up off
C by means of the counterpoise D, which is insufficient to tilt it
after the speculum is poured.  It is important that the chill should
be horizontal at the close of the operation, in order that the
speculum may be of even thickness throughout.  This is noted by means
