
Somehow, the idea of carrying this document in a peddler's pack didn't
make too much sense, either. Too many things could go wrong. He sat
back in the chair and stuck his legs out.

"Well," he told himself, "I can't stay here for the rest of my life.
I'll have to do something." He grinned ruefully.

"The best defense," he quoted, "is a determined and well-directed
offense. So, if you don't know what to do, do anything. Then you'll
find out what to do next."

He snapped the light out and opened the door. At the edge of the water
lock, he breathed deeply a few times. Then he plunged in, closed the
underwater door, and swam rapidly toward the surface of the garden
pool.

                    *      *      *      *      *

He climbed out of the water, strode forward a few steps, then stopped
in consternation. The place was suddenly flooded with light.

An oily voice sounded in his ears.

"Just stand still, young fella. That way, you don't get hurt. Not right
away, anyhow."

Don turned. At the side of the garden, stood a scrawny old man, his
seamed face wrinkled into a sardonic smile. In his hand, he held a
small weapon.

Don recognized it--a khroal. The weapon could put out vibration which
would tear any target to tiny, singing fragments in a few microseconds.
It was a complete anomaly which had been in the possession of the
Khlorisanu for measureless time. Its origin was mystery, its exact
principle of operation a puzzle. But it was easy to duplicate, and it
was one of the most deadly hand weapons known.

He held his hands out.

"Put that thing away," he snapped coldly. "Get it down--quick!"

The older man's smile broadened into happy amusement.

"Oh, funny stuff, eh?" he said joyfully. "I kinda hoped you'd be the
one they'd send. Yeah, I kinda wanted to see you--what you look like,
eh?" He waved the weapon.

"Just stand still, young fella, so old Jake can get a good look at you.
Hey, you look like one of these here natives." The man bobbed his head.

"Woulda fooled me, you know?" He looked reproachful.

"Only, a smart young fella like you, you oughta know better than go and
get that Foree so worried. You know, that fella, he comes in every
night--got a lot of things he wants to talk about. Got theories. Got
plans. Real eager fella. Only tonight, he ain't got nothing. Just
grunts.

"Nothing goes on today, he says." Jake shook his head reproachfully.

"You know, that was careless. You shoulda let him talk anyhow a little,
see. Something like that happens, old Jake, he gets ideas. So I come
out here, to see who comes along." He looked at the package under Don's
arm.

"That the book we're all looking for?" He jerked his head toward a
door.

"Yeah, guess it is. Come on, young fella, that funny stuff, it don't
work so good with old Jake, see? So let's you and me take a nice little
ride. What ya say?"

The khroal remained steadily pointed at its target.

Don hesitated. This was about as far from good as it could get, he
thought. Now who was this? Where did he fit into the situation?

"Who are you?" he demanded.

"Oh, I don't mind telling you that. Name's Jake. Jake Gorham. But come
on. Let's get on our way. We got a nice, long ride, you and me, see?"
Gorham waved his weapon again.

"Come on," he repeated. "Nice young fella like you, he don't wanna get
all scattered around. Shame to mess up this nice pretty little garden,
you know?"

Don hesitated. Of course, he might be able to dive into the pool again.
But the khroal could kick out a cone several feet deep. There was no
escape that way. No way out of the pool, anyway--except through this
garden. He moved in the indicated direction.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Gorham herded him to the courtyard and closed the door. The house
lights filtered through curtains, to show the outline of a flier in the
middle of the court. Gorham urged him toward it.

"All right, young fella," he said, "just stand real quiet for a minute.
I'll get this thing unlocked and start them synchronizer things." He
reached toward the door, then paused.

"Yeah, I been kinda wondering about you," he added conversationally.
"See, I got a smart young fella down there in Oreladar. He's got people
pretty well trained down there by now. Chap named Stern. You hear of
him, maybe?" He chuckled.

"Kinda set him up in business here a few years back, and he's doing
pretty well. Old Jake just hasta hang around--kinda look after things
now and then, this boy shouldn't get in too much trouble, see?" He
cleared his throat.

"See, this Danny, he ain't got too much in the brains department. And
he don't do so good when people get violent. Might say he sorta scares
easy sometimes. Now you, I'd say you were a little different, see? Ya
know, I just might be able to use a real smart young fella like you."
He flipped the khroal up and down negligently.

"Now, don't go making up no mind yet. Like I say, we got time. We have
a nice, long talk on the way to Oreladar. Maybe we work something out,
eh? You know, old Jake, he ain't such a bad guy. You ask Danny. He'll
tell you. We could get along real nice, the three of us." He paused,
considering.

"Oh, maybe you don't like the idea at first," he added. "But we got all
kinds ways to persuade people.

"Got a fella, name's Masterson, down there right now. Danny tries, but
he can't do nothing with him. But he'll come around. You give us a few
more days--a week, maybe, he's going to be a real reasonable fella." He
pulled the flier door open.

"We're getting this country organized, see? One of these days, some
fella's been smart and got in at the right time, he's going to be quite
a guy. Have just about anything he wants, see?" He reached into the
flier and snapped switches. A muted humming sounded through the
courtyard.

"Tell you, though, Kid. Maybe old Jake's not real trusting like he
oughta be. Not just yet a while. Suppose you just turn your back to me
for a minute, eh?"

Don turned slowly, straining his ears.

He could hear the faint sibilance of Gorham's clothing as the man
approached. Then the sound stopped. There was a slight grating noise.

Obviously, then, the man was lifting an arm and shifting his weight.

Don dropped suddenly to the ground, whirling as he went down. He seized
Gorham's legs, lifted, then dashed the man's body to the ground.
Swiftly following up, he seized the gun hand and twisted violently.

Jolted by the sudden fall, Gorham was quiet for a fraction of a second.
Then he burst into explosive action, trying to tear himself free from
Don's restraining grip. He twisted and tried to kick himself free, then
groaned as the twisting pressure ripped at elbow and shoulder tendons.
The khroal rattled on the stones.

Abruptly, Don jerked the tortured arm around and pinned it beneath a
leg. He placed a hand on Gorham's throat and reached for the other arm.

"Aw," whispered Gorham agonizedly, "aw, take it easy, will you? I got
the idea all right. So let me up, we do things your way, huh?" He
looked anxiously at the face which stared down a few inches from his
own.

Don saw the pleading expression on the man's face. For a heartbeat, he
started to relax the pressure on the throat.

Then he remembered another pleading pair of eyes that had looked at
him. The gersal, he remembered, had been just as helpless under his
stick as this man was now under his hands. But given the slightest
chance, it would have had its teeth in his leg. And the poison would
have poured into his veins. He looked again at Gorham.

His hand tightened and drove downward.

Gorham's eyes widened, then glazed. He gave a half-choked squawk. Feet
and body jerked convulsively. Then the hard, taut strength was gone and
the man lay limply. Don raised his hand and put his entire weight
behind the stroke which drove his extended fingers into the soft part
of the man's throat. Then he felt carefully, to be sure there was no
vestige of a pulse.

                    *      *      *      *      *

He got to his feet and stood for a moment, looking down at the crumpled
figure on the stones. Then he brought his hands up, to look at them
appraisingly. He was suddenly aware of a feeling of lightness, of an
uncontrollable desire to go into rapid motion. Any motion would do. His
muscles simply demanded some sort of violent action. It seemed to him
as if he almost floated as he walked over to the book he had thrown as
he whirled on Gorham. He bent over and picked it up, then looked about
the courtyard.

He turned and looked at the flier.

It was warmed up by this time. He moved swiftly over to it, his body
jerking in a peculiar, off-beat cadence as he walked.

As he sat down before the controls, a calm voice echoed in his memory,
going through his mind like a cold breeze.

"Let yourself get emotionally involved in a problem and it'll turn
around and bite you."

He forced himself to sit back, his hands away from the controls.

Then he looked back at the body on the courtyard paving.

[Illustration]

Gorham had implied that he was the power behind the whole present
regime. Maybe he'd been bragging. But again, maybe he hadn't. There had
been a queer, hard force about the man. There had been an aura which
Don had sensed, but could not analyze. One thing was certain. This man
had never been able to work under someone else's orders.

He looked around the interior of the flier.

"It's a Royal Guard job," he told himself.

He could see painted legends, giving cautions and instructions to
whomever should pilot the ship. He felt under the dash.

There was a light board snapped into clips. He pulled it out and turned
on the cabin lights.

Yes, it was all there. Instructions for the identification
devices--description of the identification and warning lights. It gave
the location of switches--the settings for communications. There was
even a small card inserted in a pocket. It gave the communications code
used by patrol fliers in routine communication. Don smiled happily.

Now, he could fly back to the hills. It would only take a few minutes,
and----

Why should he? There was an easier way now.

It would be much easier to ride this flier right on into Oreladar. If
he headed for the hills, questions might be asked which would be hard
to answer. But Oreladar would be the normal place for Gorham to go. And
the Federation compound wasn't too far from the Palace. He could feint
at the Palace landing pad, then---- He nodded and studied the lighting
plan and identification settings.

At last, he nodded in satisfaction, then turned his attention to the
small card with the operations code. It was a simple, systematic
arrangement, obviously arranged for day-to-day use, not for secrecy. He
nodded and clipped it in front of him under the panel light, where he
could see it easily. Then, he looked thoughtfully at the courtyard.

There was a small chance that some guard might decide to come into the
house, he decided. Of course, it was still to be regarded as a private
home, and they had no right to---- He laughed sarcastically.

"That would worry them!" he said aloud.

He got out of the flier and leaned over the body of Gorham. It was
surprisingly light. The man had been carrying almost unbelievable
strength and power of will in a tiny, frail body. Don threw his load
over his shoulder and climbed back into the flier. Then he sat back and
looked dully at the control panel.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Suddenly, he felt completely drained. It was just too much effort to
get this ship off the ground. And that long flight to Oreladar? Just
how much was a guy supposed to do in one day?

He sat supinely for a few minutes, simply staring at a nothingness
beneath the surface of the panel. A small noise from the house aroused
him, and he jerked up. He'd have to move.

Unwillingly, he pulled at the controls and the flier raised from the
paving.

A blast of air hit the side of his face and he turned his head. He'd
forgotten to close the door. He snarled at himself in annoyance, then
leaned over and jerked at the handle. The ship swayed and dipped toward
the lighted streets and he straightened quickly and righted it with a
jerk. Then he snapped off the cabin lights and reached down to set up
the identification patterns.

A tinny voice snapped at him.

"Rano ninety-one, Riandar control. Seven three seven."

Don looked at the code card before him. Yes, there it was. "Return to
station." He glanced at the call sign on the panel before him. He was
Onarati three. He nodded. Only an important official would be in this
flier. Probably Gorham hadn't been bragging so much.

Another voice had acknowledged the order. Don looked at the speaker
grill and shrugged. He set his course southward.

Again and again, the speaker rattled with calls and answers. Riandar
control appeared to be busy tonight. Don smiled.

"The busier they are, the better," he told himself. "Then they can't
bother me." He coughed.

"Wonder how Korentana made out?" He looked overside.

Abruptly, he was aware of another flier close to his. On its top a blue
light blinked glaringly. He looked at it in consternation. Had
they----? But how? He started to pull the control to him and go into
evasive flight. Then he stopped.

"Use your head," he advised himself.

He reached out and scooped up the microphone. For an instant, he looked
into space, thinking, then he spoke.
