The little old lady said calmly: "He was cheating."

"The dealer?" Malone asked. The little old lady nodded. "In _your_
favor?"

"He couldn't have been cheating," Boyd said at the same instant. "Why
would he want to give you all that money?"

The little old lady shook her head. "He didn't want to give it to me,"
she said. "He wanted to give it to the man in the cowboy's suit. His
name is Elliott, by the way--Bernard L. Elliott. And he comes from
Weehawken. But he pretends to be a Westerner so nobody will be
suspicious of him. He and the dealer are in cahoots--isn't that the
word?"

"Yes, Your Majesty," Boyd said. "That's the word." His tone was awed
and respectful, and the little old lady gave a nod and became Queen
Elizabeth I once more.

"Well," she said, "the dealer and Mr. Elliott were in cahoots, and the
dealer wanted to give the hand to Mr. Elliott. But he made a mistake,
and dealt the Jack of clubs to me. I watched him, and, of course, I
knew what he was thinking. The rest was easy."

"My God," Malone said. "Easy." Barbara said: "Did she win?"

"She won," Malone said with what he felt was positively magnificent
understatement.

"Good," Barbara said, and lost interest at once.

Malone had seen the lights of a car in the rear-view mirror a few
minutes before. When he looked now, the lights were still there--but
the fact just didn't register until, a couple of blocks later, the car
began to pull around them on the left. It was a Buick, while Boyd's
was a new Lincoln, but the edge wasn't too apparent yet.

Malone spotted the gun barrel protruding from the Buick and yelled
just before the first shot went off.

Boyd, at the wheel, didn't even bother to look. His reflexes took over
and he slammed his foot down on the brake. The specially-built FBI
Lincoln slowed down instantly. The shotgun blast splattered the glass
of the curved windshield all over--but none of it came into the car
itself.

Malone already had his hand on the butt of the .44 Magnum under his
left armpit, and he even had time to be grateful, for once, that it
wasn't a smallsword. The women were in the back seat, frozen, and he
yelled: "Duck, damn it, duck!" and felt, rather than saw, both of them
sink down onto the floor of the car.

The Buick had slowed down, too, and the gun barrel was swiveling back
for a second shot. Malone felt naked and unprotected. The Buick and
the Lincoln were even on the road now.

Malone had his revolver out. He fired the first shot without even
realizing fully that he'd done so, and he heard a piercing scream from
Barbara in the back seat. He had no time to look back.

A .44 Magnum is not, by any means, a small gun. As handguns go--
revolvers and automatics--it is about as large as a gun can get to be.
An ordinary car has absolutely no chance against it.

Much less the glass in an ordinary car.

The first slug drilled its way through the window glass as though it
were not there, and slammed its way through an even more unprotected
obstacle, the frontal bones of the triggerman's skull. The second slug
from Malone's gun followed it right away, and missed the hole the
first slug had made by something less than an inch.

The big, apelike thug who was holding the shotgun had a chance to pull
the trigger once more, but he wasn't aiming very well. The blast
merely scored the paint off the top of the Lincoln.

The rear window of the Buick was open, and Malone caught sight of
another glint of blued steel from the corner of his eye. There was no
time to shift aim--not with bullets flying like swallows on the way to
Capistrano. Malone thought faster than he had imagined himself capable
of doing, and decided to aim for the driver.

Evidently the man in the rear seat of the Buick had had the same
inspiration. Malone blasted two more high-velocity lead slugs at the
driver of the big Buick, and at the same time the man in the Buick's
rear seat fired at Boyd.

But Boyd had shifted tactics. He'd hit the brakes. Now he came down
hard on the accelerator instead.

The chorus of shrieks from the Lincoln's back seat increased slightly
in volume. Barbara, Malone knew, wasn't badly hurt; she hadn't even
stopped for breath since the first shot had been fired. Anybody who
could scream like that, he told himself, had to be healthy.

As the Lincoln leaped ahead, Malone pulled the trigger of his .44
twice more. The heavy, high-speed chunks of streamlined copper-coated
lead leaped from the muzzle of the gun and slammed into the driver of
the Buick without wasting any time. The Buick slewed across the
highway.

The two shots fired by the man in the back seat went past Malone's
head with a _whizz_, missing both him and Boyd by a margin too narrow
to think about.

But those were the last shots. The only difference between the FBI and
the Enemy seemed to be determination and practice.

The Buick spun into a flat sideskid, swiveled on its wheels and
slammed into the ditch at the side of the road, turning over and over,
making a horrible noise, as it broke up.

Boyd slowed the car again, just as there was a sudden blast of fire.
The Buick had burst into flame and was spitting heat and smoke and
fire in all directions. Malone sent one more bullet after it in a last
flurry of action--saving his last one for possible later emergencies.

Boyd jammed on the brakes and the Lincoln came to a screaming halt. In
silence he and Malone watched the burning Buick roll over and over
into the desert beyond the shoulder.

"My God," Boyd said. "My ears!"

Malone understood at once. The blast from his own still-smoking .44
had roared past Boyd's head during the gun battle. No wonder the man's
ears hurt. It was a wonder he wasn't altogether deaf.

But Boyd shook off the pain and brought out his own .44 as he stepped
out of the car. Malone followed him, his gun trained.

From the rear, Her Majesty said: "It's safe to rise now, isn't it?"

"You ought to know," Malone said. "You can tell if they're still
alive."

There was silence while Queen Elizabeth frowned for a moment in
concentration. A look of pain crossed her face, and then, as her
expression smoothed again, she said: "The traitors are dead. All
except one, and he's--" She paused. "He's dying," she finished. "He
can't hurt you."

There was no need for further battle. Malone reholstered his .44 and
turned to Boyd. "Tom, call the State Police," he said. "Get 'em down
here fast."

He waited while Boyd climbed back under the wheel and began punching
buttons on the dashboard. Then Malone went toward the burning Buick.

He tried to drag the men out, but it wasn't any use. The first two, in
the front seat, had the kind of holes in them people talked about
throwing elephants through. Head and chest had been hit.

Malone couldn't get close enough to the fiercely blazing automobile to
make even a try for the men in the back seat.

                              * * * * *

He was sitting quietly on the edge of the rear seat when the Nevada
Highway Patrol cars drove up next to them. Barbara Wilson had stopped
screaming, but she was still sobbing on Malone's shoulder. "It's all
right," he told her, feeling ineffectual.

"I never saw anybody killed before," she said.

"It's all right," Malone said. "Nothing's going to hurt you. I'll
protect you."

He wondered if he meant it, and found, to his surprise, that he did.
Barbara Wilson sniffled and looked up at him. "Mr. Malone--"

"Ken," he said.

"I'm sorry," she said. "Ken--I'm so afraid. I saw the hole in one of
the men's heads, when you fired--it was--"

"Don't think about it," Malone said. To him, the job had been an
unpleasant occurrence, but a job, that was all. He could see, though,
how it might affect people who were new to it.

"You're so brave," she said.

Malone tightened his arm around the girl's shoulder. "Just depend on
me," he said. "You'll be all right if you--"

The State Trooper walked up then, and looked at them. "Mr. Malone?" he
said. He seemed to be taken slightly aback at the costuming.

"That's right," Malone said. He pulled out his ID card and the little
golden badge. The State Patrolman looked at them, and looked back at
Malone.

"What's with the getup?" he said.

"FBI," Malone said, hoping his voice carried conviction. "Official
business."

"In costume?"

"Never mind about the details," Malone snapped.

"He's an FBI agent, sir," Barbara said. "And what are you?" the
Patrolman said. "Lady Jane Grey?"

"I'm a nurse," Barbara said. "A psychiatric nurse."

"For nuts?"

"For disturbed patients."

The Patrolman thought that over. "Hell, you've got the identity cards
and stuff," he said at last. "Maybe you've got a reason to dress up.
How would I know? I'm only a State Patrolman."

"Let's cut the monologue," Malone said savagely, "and get to
business."

The Patrolman stared. Then he said: "All right, sir. Yes, sir. I'm
Lieutenant Adams, Mr. Malone. Suppose you tell me what happened?"

Carefully and concisely, Malone told him the story of the Buick that
had pulled up beside them, and what happened afterward.

Meanwhile, the other cops had been looking over the wreck. When Malone
had finished his story, Lieutenant Adams flipped his notebook shut and
looked over toward them. "I guess it's okay, sir," he said. "As far as
I'm concerned, it's justifiable homicide. Self-defense. Any reason why
they'd want to kill you?"

Malone thought about the Golden Palace. That might be a reason--but it
might not. And why burden an innocent State Patrolman with the facts
of FBI life?

"Official," he said. "Your chief will get the report."

The Patrolman nodded. "I'll have to take a deposition tomorrow, but--"

"I know," Malone said. "Thanks. Can we go on to our hotel now?"

"I guess," the Patrolman said. "Go ahead. We'll take care of the rest
of this. You'll be getting a call later."

"Fine," Malone said. "Trace those hoods, and any connections they
might have had. Get the information to me as soon as possible."

Lieutenant Adams nodded. "You won't have to leave the state, will
you?" he asked. "I don't mean that you _can't_, exactly--hell, you're
FBI. But it'd be easier--"

"Call Burris in Washington," Malone said. "He can get hold of me--and
if the Governor wants to know where we are, or the State's Attorney,
put them in touch with Burris too. Okay?"

"Okay," Lieutenant Adams said. "Sure." He blinked at Malone. "Listen,"
he said. "About those costumes--"

"We're trying to catch Henry VIII for the murder of Anne Boleyn,"
Malone said with a polite smile. "Okay?"

"I was only asking," Lieutenant Adams said. "Can't blame a man for
asking, now, can you?"

Malone climbed into his front seat. "Call me later," he said. The car
started. "Back to the hotel, Sir Thomas," Malone said, and the car
roared off.


                                  7

Yucca Flats, Malone thought, certainly deserved its name. It was about
as flat as land could get, and it contained millions upon millions of
useless yuccas. Perhaps they were good for something, Malone thought,
but they weren't good for _him_.

The place might, of course, have been called Cactus Flats, but the
cacti were neither as big nor as impressive as the yuccas.

Or was that yucci?

Possibly, Malone mused, it was simply yucks.

And whatever it was, there were millions of it. Malone felt he
couldn't stand the sight of another yucca. He was grateful for only
one thing.

It wasn't summer. If the Elizabethans had been forced to drive in
closed cars through the Nevada desert in the summertime, they might
have started a cult of nudity, Malone felt. It was bad enough now, in
what was supposed to be winter.

The sun was certainly bright enough, for one thing. It glared through
the cloudless sky and glanced with blinding force off the road. Sir
Thomas Boyd squinted at it through the rather incongruous sunglasses
he was wearing, while Malone wondered idly if it was the sunglasses,
or the rest of the world, that was an anachronism. But Sir Thomas kept
his eyes grimly on the road as he gunned the powerful Lincoln toward
the Yucca Flats Labs at eighty miles an hour.

Malone twisted himself around and faced the women in the back seat.
Past them, through the rear window of the Lincoln, he could see the
second car. It followed them gamely, carrying the newest addition to
Sir Kenneth Malone's Collection of Bats.

"Bats?" Her Majesty said suddenly, but gently. "Shame on you, Sir
Kenneth. These are poor, sick people. We must do our best to help
them--not to think up silly names for them. For shame!"

"I suppose so," Malone said wearily. He sighed and, for the fifth time
that day, he asked: "Does Your Majesty have any idea where our spy is
now?"

