counts. We'll have the second spin, and the rest of them, later."

"Gee!" Millicent whispered. "Isn't this _exciting_?"

Forrester ignored the comment. "And remember, I give you my word as a
God that I will not interfere in any way with the workings of chance. Is
that clearly understood?"

The girls murmured agreement.

"Now," Forrester said, "all you girls get into a nice circle. I'll stand
outside."

The girls took a minute or two arranging themselves in a circle, arguing
about who was going to sit next to whom, and whose very proximity was
bound to bring bad luck. The argument gave Forrester a chance to check
on Gerda again. She was whispering softly to Alvin, but they weren't
touching each other. Forrester turned up his hearing to get a better
idea of what was going on.

They had progressed, in the usual manner, from argument to life-history.
Gerda was telling Alvin all about her past.

"... but don't misunderstand me, Alvin. It's just that I was in love
with a very fine young man. An Athenan, he was. A wonderful man, really
wonderful. But he--he was killed in a subway accident some months ago."

"Gosh," Alvin said. "I'm sorry."

"I--I have to tell you this, Alvin, so you'll understand. I still love
him. He was wonderful. And until I get over it, I simply can't ..."

Feeling both ashamed of himself and pleased, as well as sorry for the
poor girl, Forrester quit listening. The Gods had arranged his simulated
death, which, of course, had been a necessity. His disappearance had to
be explained somehow. But he didn't like the idea of Gerda having to
suffer so much.

_My God!_ Forrester thought. _She still loves me!_

It was the first time he had ever heard her say so, flatly, right out in
the open. He wanted to bound and leap and cavort--but he couldn't. He
had to go back to his seven beautiful girls.

He had never felt less like it in his life.

But at least, he consoled himself, Gerda was keeping Alvin at arm's
length. She was being faithful to his memory.

Faithful--because she loved him.

Grimly, he turned back to the girls. "Well, are we all ready now?"

Kathy looked up at him brightly. "Lord Dionysus, it's so dark I can't
even see for sure what's going on. How can we do any judging, if we
can't see?"

Forrester cursed Kathy for pointing out the flaw in his arrangements.
Then, making a nice impartial job of it, he cursed himself for
forgetting that what was perfectly visible to him was dark night to
mortals.

"We can clear that up," he said quickly. "As a matter of fact, I was
just getting around to it. We will now proceed to shed a little light on
the subject--said subject being our old friend Mr. Bottle."

The trick had been taught to him by Venus, but he'd never had a chance
to practice it. This was his first real experience with it, and he could
only hope that it went off as it was supposed to.

He stepped into the middle of the circle, near Ed Symes's stiff body and
held his right hand above his head, thumb and forefinger spread an inch
apart and the other three fingers folded into his palm.

Then he concentrated.

A long second ticked by, while Forrester tried to apply even more neural
pressure. Then ...

A small ball of light appeared between his thumb and forefinger, a
yellow, cold sphere of fire that shed its radiance over the whole group.
Carefully, he withdrew his hand, not daring to breathe. The ball of
yellow fire remained in position, hanging in mid-air.

The muffled gasp from the circle of girls was, Forrester told himself, a
definite tribute.

"Now don't worry about it, girls," he said. "That light's only visible
to the eight of us. Nobody else can see it."

There was another little series of gasps.

Forrester grinned. "Can everybody see each other?"

A murmur of agreement.

"Can everybody see Mr. Bottle here?"

Another murmur.

"In that case, let's go." He stepped outside the circle of girls,
reached in again for Ed Symes's foot, and set the gentleman spinning
once more.

Symes spun with a blinding speed, making a low, whistling noise.
Forrester watched the body spin dizzily, just as anxious as the girls
were to find out who the first winner was going to be. He thought of
Millicent, who chewed gum and made it pop. He thought of Bette, the
inveterate explainer and double-take expert. He tried to think of
Dorothy and Jayne and Beverly and Judy, but the thought of Kathy,
irritating and uncomfortable and too damned bright for her own good, got
annoyingly in the way.

He was rather glad he had promised not to use his powers on the spinning
figure. He was not at all sure which one of the girls he would have
picked for Number One.

And he had, after all, given his word as a God. True, he wasn't quite a
God, only a demi-Deity. But he did feel that Dionysus might object to
his name being used in vain. A promise, he told himself sternly and
with some relief, was a promise.

After some time, Mr. Ed (Bottle) Symes began to slow perceptibly. The
whistling died as Symes began rotating about his abdominal axis at a
more and more leisurely rate. Seconds passed. Symes faced Bette ...
Millicent ... Kathy ... Judy ... Bette again ...

Forrester watched, fascinated.

Finally, Symes came to a halt. All the elaborate instructions in case
the Bottle ended up pointing between two girls had been, Forrester saw,
totally unnecessary. Symes's head was pointing at one girl, and one girl
alone.

She gave a little squeal of delight. The others began chorusing their
congratulations at once, looking no more convincing than the runners-up
in any beauty contest. Their smiles appeared to have been glued on
loosely, and their voices lacked a certain something. Possibly it was
sincerity.

"All right, that's it for now." Forrester turned to the winner. "My
congratulations," he said, wondering just what he was supposed to say.
Not finding any appropriate words, he turned back to the group of six
losers. "The rest of you girls can do me a big favor. Go get a couple of
the Myrmidons to protect you, hunt around for the nearest wine barrel
and confiscate it for me. It's been a thirsty day."

"Gee," Jayne said. "Sure we will, Lord Dionysus."

"Now take your time," Forrester said, and the losers all giggled at
once, like a trained chorus. Forrester grimaced. "Don't come back till
you find a barrel. Then we'll play the game again."

In a disappointed fashion, the six of them trooped off into the darkness
and vanished to mortal eyes. Forrester watched them go and then turned
to the winner, feeling just a little uncertain.

"Well, Kathy," he started. "I--"

She flung herself on him with the avid girlishness of a Bengal tiger.
"I have dreamed of this night since I was but a child! At last I am in
your arms! I love you! Take me! I am yours, all yours!"

"That's nice," Forrester said, taken far aback by the girl's sudden
onslaught. His immediate impulse was to unwind Kathy and set her back on
her own feet, some little distance away, after which he could start
again on a more leisurely basis. After all, he told himself, people
ought to spend more time getting to know each other.

But he remembered, just in time, that he was Dionysus. He conquered his
first impulse and put his arms around her. As he did so, he discovered
that his face was being covered with kisses. Kathy was murmuring little
indistinct terms of endearment into his ear every time she reached it en
route from one side of his face to the other.

Forrester swallowed hard, tightened his grip and planted his lips firmly
on Kathy's. A blaze of startling heat shot through him.

In a small corner at the back of his mind, a scroll unrolled. On it was
written what Vulcan had told him about his mental attitude changing
after Investiture. When he had been plain William Forrester, an attack
like the one Kathy was making on him had pretty much chilled him for a
while. But now he found himself definitely rising to the occasion.

There was a passion to her kiss that he had never felt before, a rising
tide of flame that threatened to char him. The movement of her mouth on
his sent new fires burning throughout his body, and as her hands moved
on him he was awakened to a new world, a world of consuming desires.

He wished his own clothing away, and fumbled for a second at the two
fastenings that held Kathy's _chiton_ in place. Then it was gone and
there was nothing between them. They met, flesh to flesh, in a fiery
embrace that grew as he forced her down and she responded eagerly,
wildly, to his every motion. His lips traveled over her; her entire
body was drowning him once and for all in an unbelievable red haze,
unlike anything he had ever before experienced ... a great wave of
passion that went on and on, rising to a peak he had never dreamed of
until his body shivered with the sensations, and he pressed on, rising
still higher in an ecstasy beyond measure....

His last spasm of tension turned out the God-light.

       *       *       *       *       *

She lay in his arms on the grass, holding him almost as tightly as he
held her. He felt exhausted, but he knew perfectly well that he wasn't.
A God was a God, after all, and Kathy was only the hors d'oeuvres of a
seven-course dinner.

"You're wonderful," Kathy said in a soft whisper at his ear. "Absolutely
wonderful. More wonderful than I could ever dream. I--"

She was interrupted by a strange, harsh voice that bellowed from
somewhere nearby.

"All right, bitch!" it said. "Get the hell up from there! And you too,
buster!"

Forrester jerked his head up in astonishment and froze. Kathy looked up,
fright written all over her face.

The man standing over them in the darkness looked like a prize-fighter,
one who had taken a number of beatings, but always given better than he
had received. His arms were akimbo, his feet planted as firmly as if he
were a particularly stubborn brand of tree. He glared down at them, his
face expressive of anger, hatred--and, Forrester thought dully, a
complete lack of respect for his God.

The man barked: "You heard what I said! On your feet, buster! If I have
to kick your teeth in, I want to do it when you're standing up!"

Forrester's jaw dropped. Then, as the initial shock left him, anger
boiled in to take its place. He toyed with the idea of blasting this
mortal who showed such disrespect to a God. He sprang to his feet,
ready to move, and then stopped.

Maybe the man was crazy. Maybe he was just some poor soul who wasn't
responsible for his own actions. It would be merciful, Forrester
thought, to find out first, and blast the intruder afterward.

He looked around. Twenty yards away, the encircling Myrmidons still
stood, their backs to the scene, as if nothing at all were going on.

Forrester blinked. "How'd you get in here, anyway?"

The man barked a laugh. "None of your business." He turned to Kathy, who
had devoted the previous few seconds to getting her _chiton_ on again.
Hurriedly, Forrester wished back his own costume. Kathy got up, staring
straight back at the intruder. Fear was gone from her face, and a kind
of calmness that Forrester had never seen before possessed her now.

"So!" the intruder bellowed. "The minute my back is turned, off you go!
By the Stars and Galaxy, I--I don't know what to call you! You're worse
than your predecessor! Can't turn anything down! You--"

"Now wait!" Forrester bellowed in his most Godlike voice. "Just hold
still there! Do you know who you're talking to? How dare you--"

And Kathy interrupted him. Forrester stood mute as she stripped the
stranger with a voice like scalding acid. "Listen, you," she said,
pointing a finger at the man. "Who do you think you are--my husband?"

"By the Stars--" the stranger began.

"Don't bother trying to scare me with your big mouth," Kathy went on
imperturbably. "You don't mean a thing to me and you can't order me
around. What's more, you know it. You're not my husband, you big
thug--and you're never going to be. I'll sleep with whomever I please,
and whenever I please, and wherever I please, and that's the way things
are going to be. After all, lard-head, it's my job, isn't it? Got any
questions?"

Her _job_?

Forrester began to wonder just what he had managed to walk into now. But
that was a detail. The important thing was that his Godhood had been
grossly, unbelievably insulted--and at a damned inconvenient time, too!

He stepped between Kathy and the intruder, his eyes flashing fire. "Do
you know who I am? Do you know that--"

"Of course he knows," Kathy put in abruptly. "And if you don't want to
get hurt, I'd advise you to stay out of this little quarrel."

Forrester turned and stared at her.

What the everlasting bloody hell was going _on_?

But there wasn't any time to think. The intruder put his face up near
Forrester's and glared at him. "Sure I know who you are, buster," he
said. "You're a wise guy. You're a Johnny-come-lately. And I know what I
ought to do with you, too--take you apart, limb by limb!"

That did it. Forrester, seeing several shades of red, decided that no
God could possibly object if this ugly blasphemer were blasted off the
face of the Earth. He raised a hand.

And Kathy grabbed it. "_Don't!_" she said in a frightened tone.

The intruder grinned wolfishly at him. "Pay no attention to Little Miss
Sacktime over there, Forrester. You go right ahead and try it! All I
need is an excuse to vaporize you. Just one tiny little excuse--and I'll
do the job so damn quick, your head won't even have time to start
swimming." He set himself. "Go on. Let's see your stuff, Forrester."

Forrester's arm came down, without his being aware of it. There was only
room in his mind for one thought.

The intruder had called him Forrester.

Where had he gotten the name?

And, for that matter, how had he seen the two of them in the darkness?

While the questions were still spinning in Forrester's mind, Kathy threw
herself forward between him and the stranger. "Ares!" she screamed. "You
stupid, jealous idiot! Get some sense into that battle-scarred brain of
yours! Are you completely crazy?"

"Now you listen to me--" the stranger began.

"Listen, nothing! If you want to pick a fight, do it with me--I can
