It was eight o'clock in the morning.  By 8:30 we were suited up for this
new stroll and equipped with our two devices for lighting and breathing.
The double door opened, and accompanied by Captain Nemo with a dozen
crewmen following, we set foot on the firm seafloor where the Nautilus
was resting, ten meters down.

A gentle slope gravitated to an uneven bottom whose depth was
about fifteen fathoms.  This bottom was completely different
from the one I had visited during my first excursion under
the waters of the Pacific Ocean.  Here I saw no fine-grained sand,
no underwater prairies, not one open-sea forest.  I immediately recognized
the wondrous region in which Captain Nemo did the honors that day.
It was the coral realm.

In the zoophyte branch, class Alcyonaria, one finds the order Gorgonaria,
which contains three groups:  sea fans, isidian polyps, and coral polyps.
It's in this last that precious coral belongs, an unusual substance that,
at different times, has been classified in the mineral, vegetable,
and animal kingdoms.  Medicine to the ancients, jewelry to the moderns,
it wasn't decisively placed in the animal kingdom until 1694,
by Peysonnel of Marseilles.

A coral is a unit of tiny animals assembled over a polypary
that's brittle and stony in nature.  These polyps have a unique
generating mechanism that reproduces them via the budding process,
and they have an individual existence while also participating
in a communal life.  Hence they embody a sort of natural socialism.
I was familiar with the latest research on this bizarre zoophyte--
which turns to stone while taking on a tree form, as some naturalists
have very aptly observed--and nothing could have been more fascinating
to me than to visit one of these petrified forests that nature has
planted on the bottom of the sea.

We turned on our Ruhmkorff devices and went along a coral shoal
in the process of forming, which, given time, will someday close
off this whole part of the Indian Ocean.  Our path was bordered
by hopelessly tangled bushes, formed from snarls of shrubs
all covered with little star-shaped, white-streaked flowers.
Only, contrary to plants on shore, these tree forms become attached
to rocks on the seafloor by heading from top to bottom.

Our lights produced a thousand delightful effects while playing over
these brightly colored boughs.  I fancied I saw these cylindrical,
membrane-filled tubes trembling beneath the water's undulations.
I was tempted to gather their fresh petals, which were adorned with
delicate tentacles, some newly in bloom, others barely opened, while
nimble fish with fluttering fins brushed past them like flocks of birds.
But if my hands came near the moving flowers of these sensitive,
lively creatures, an alarm would instantly sound throughout the colony.
The white petals retracted into their red sheaths, the flowers vanished
before my eyes, and the bush changed into a chunk of stony nipples.

Sheer chance had placed me in the presence of the most valuable
specimens of this zoophyte.  This coral was the equal of those fished
up from the Mediterranean off the Barbary Coast or the shores
of France and Italy.  With its bright colors, it lived up to those
poetic names of blood flower and blood foam that the industry
confers on its finest exhibits.  Coral sells for as much as 500
francs per kilogram, and in this locality the liquid strata hid
enough to make the fortunes of a whole host of coral fishermen.
This valuable substance often merges with other polyparies,
forming compact, hopelessly tangled units known as "macciota,"
and I noted some wonderful pink samples of this coral.

But as the bushes shrank, the tree forms magnified.
Actual petrified thickets and long alcoves from some fantastic
school of architecture kept opening up before our steps.
Captain Nemo entered beneath a dark gallery whose gentle slope
took us to a depth of 100 meters.  The light from our glass coils
produced magical effects at times, lingering on the wrinkled roughness
of some natural arch, or some overhang suspended like a chandelier,
which our lamps flecked with fiery sparks.  Amid these shrubs
of precious coral, I observed other polyps no less unusual:
melita coral, rainbow coral with jointed outgrowths, then a few
tufts of genus Corallina, some green and others red, actually a type
of seaweed encrusted with limestone salts, which, after long disputes,
naturalists have finally placed in the vegetable kingdom.
But as one intellectual has remarked, "Here, perhaps, is the actual
point where life rises humbly out of slumbering stone, but without
breaking away from its crude starting point."

Finally, after two hours of walking, we reached a depth of about
300 meters, in other words, the lowermost limit at which coral
can begin to form.  But here it was no longer some isolated bush
or a modest grove of low timber.  It was an immense forest,
huge mineral vegetation, enormous petrified trees linked by garlands
of elegant hydras from the genus Plumularia, those tropical
creepers of the sea, all decked out in shades and gleams.
We passed freely under their lofty boughs, lost up in the shadows
of the waves, while at our feet organ-pipe coral, stony coral,
star coral, fungus coral, and sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia
formed a carpet of flowers all strewn with dazzling gems.

What an indescribable sight!  Oh, if only we could share our feelings!
Why were we imprisoned behind these masks of metal and glass!
Why were we forbidden to talk with each other!  At least let us
lead the lives of the fish that populate this liquid element,
or better yet, the lives of amphibians, which can spend long hours
either at sea or on shore, traveling through their double domain
as their whims dictate!

Meanwhile Captain Nemo had called a halt.  My companions and I
stopped walking, and turning around, I saw the crewmen form
a semicircle around their leader.  Looking with greater care,
I observed that four of them were carrying on their shoulders
an object that was oblong in shape.

At this locality we stood in the center of a huge clearing
surrounded by the tall tree forms of this underwater forest.
Our lamps cast a sort of brilliant twilight over the area,
making inordinately long shadows on the seafloor.  Past the boundaries
of the clearing, the darkness deepened again, relieved only by little
sparkles given off by the sharp crests of coral.

Ned Land and Conseil stood next to me.  We stared, and it
dawned on me that I was about to witness a strange scene.
Observing the seafloor, I saw that it swelled at certain points from
low bulges that were encrusted with limestone deposits and arranged
with a symmetry that betrayed the hand of man.

In the middle of the clearing, on a pedestal of roughly piled rocks,
there stood a cross of coral, extending long arms you would have
thought were made of petrified blood.

At a signal from Captain Nemo, one of his men stepped forward and,
a few feet from this cross, detached a mattock from his belt
and began to dig a hole.

I finally understood!  This clearing was a cemetery, this hole a grave,
that oblong object the body of the man who must have died during
the night!  Captain Nemo and his men had come to bury their companion
in this communal resting place on the inaccessible ocean floor!

No!  My mind was reeling as never before!  Never had ideas of such impact
raced through my brain!  I didn't want to see what my eyes saw!

Meanwhile the grave digging went slowly.  Fish fled here and
there as their retreat was disturbed.  I heard the pick ringing
on the limestone soil, its iron tip sometimes giving off sparks
when it hit a stray piece of flint on the sea bottom.  The hole
grew longer, wider, and soon was deep enough to receive the body.

Then the pallbearers approached.  Wrapped in white fabric made from
filaments of the fan mussel, the body was lowered into its watery grave.
Captain Nemo, arms crossed over his chest, knelt in a posture
of prayer, as did all the friends of him who had loved them. . . .
My two companions and I bowed reverently.

The grave was then covered over with the rubble dug from the seafloor,
and it formed a low mound.

When this was done, Captain Nemo and his men stood up; then they
all approached the grave, sank again on bended knee, and extended
their hands in a sign of final farewell. . . .

Then the funeral party went back up the path to the Nautilus,
returning beneath the arches of the forest, through the thickets,
along the coral bushes, going steadily higher.

Finally the ship's rays appeared.  Their luminous trail guided us
to the Nautilus.  By one o'clock we had returned.

After changing clothes, I climbed onto the platform, and in the grip
of dreadfully obsessive thoughts, I sat next to the beacon.

Captain Nemo rejoined me.  I stood up and said to him:

"So, as I predicted, that man died during the night?"

"Yes, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo replied.

"And now he rests beside his companions in that coral cemetery?"

"Yes, forgotten by the world but not by us!  We dig the graves,
then entrust the polyps with sealing away our dead for eternity!"

And with a sudden gesture, the captain hid his face in his clenched fists,
vainly trying to hold back a sob.  Then he added:

"There lies our peaceful cemetery, hundreds of feet beneath
the surface of the waves!"

"At least, captain, your dead can sleep serenely there, out of
the reach of sharks!"

"Yes, sir," Captain Nemo replied solemnly, "of sharks and men!"





END OF THE FIRST PART




     *Author's Note:  About 106 meters.  An English foot is only 30.4 centimeters.
     *German:  "Bulletin."   Ed.
     *Author's Note:  A pier is a type of wharf expressly set aside for an individual vessel.
     *Author's Note:  Tenders are small steamboats that assist the big liners.
     *Author's Note:   A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that Americans are forever carrying around.
     *Author's Note:  A steward is a waiter on board a steamer.
     *Latin:  nemo means "no one."  Ed.
     *Latin:  "in a class by itself."  Ed.
     **Author's Note:  And sure enough, there's now talk of such a discovery, in which a new set of levers generates
considerable power.  Did its inventor meet up with Captain Nemo?
     *Author's Note:  "Ladyfingers" are small, thin, white clouds with ragged edges.
     *Latin:  a spigot "just for that purpose."  Ed.
     *Latin:  "troubled dreams."  Ed.
2  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas





























8  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



A Runaway Reef  9





A Runaway Reef  11



16  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Pros and Cons  17



18  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



As Master Wishes  19



22  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



As Master Wishes  23



28  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



Ned Land  27



30  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



At Random!  29



 Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



At Random!  31



32  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



At Random!  35





At Random!  37



42  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



At Full Steam  43



46  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



At Full Steam  47



52  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



A Whale of Unknown Species  53



54  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas

"Mobilis in Mobili"  54



"Mobilis in Mobili"  53



54  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas





60  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



"Mobilis in Mobili"  61



62  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas

The Tantrums of Ned Land  62



The Tantrums of Ned Land  61



64  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas





70  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Tantrums of Ned Land  69



76  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Man of the Waters  77



78  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas





80  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas





86  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Nautilus  87



94  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



Everything through Electricity  93



96  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas

Some Figures  96



Some Figures  95



102  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



Some Figures  101





Some Figures  103



112  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Black Current  111





The Black Current 



114  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



An Invitation in Writing  113





Strolling the Plains  121



122  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



Strolling the Plains  123



124  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas

Strolling the Plains  124



Strolling the Plains  125



126  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas





130  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



An Underwater Forest  129



94  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas 94 
Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



131  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas







140  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific  139



148  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



Vanikoro  147



 Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas

The Torres Strait 



The Torres Strait  149



156  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Torres Strait  155



158  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas

Some Days Ashore  158



Some Days Ashore  157



168  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



Some Days Ashore  167



170  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas

The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo  170



The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo  169



180  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo  179



182  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas









184  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



"Aegri Somnia"  131



186  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas





190  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



"Aegri Somnia"  189







192  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Coral Realm  193



194  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas





198  Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas



The Coral Realm  197




