
She brought in the radiogram and put it on his desk before calling
Pelham. She had already read it, of course. It was her job to read such
things.

The detective picked up the sheet of paper and read it.

    THE OPERATION IS ABOUT TO BEGIN. I NEED

    THE OTHER HALF OF MY FORCEPS. COME HOME

    AND JOIN THE BIG PARADE.

                                 MANNHEIM

It took a second for the words to really impress themselves on his mind.
He read them over again.

And the veil began to drop from the closed-off part of his mind.

Memories began to swarm back into his mind--memories that had been
walled off and kept away from his conscious mind by the hypnotic
suggestion implanted so long ago.

Oddly, it did not surprise or shock him. He was an expert at hypnosis,
especially self-hypnosis. He recognized the message for exactly what it
was: a series of code phrases designed to break the blockage that had
been placed in his mind.

His only reaction was to laugh aloud. "By God!" he said. "It worked! It
actually worked! Nearly six years, and I never suspected once!"

The phone hummed. He switched it on. "Mr. Pelham is on the phone, Mr.
Martin," Helen said.

He watched as the florid, smiling face of Pelham, his superior, appeared
on the screen. "What can I do for you, Martin?" he asked.

"I have a favor to ask, Mr. Pelham."

"Anything within reason," Pelham said. "After this BenChaim affair,
you're in good standing around here." He chuckled.

"I want a leave of absence," the detective said.

Pelham looked a little surprised. "Well, I guess you deserve it. You
need a rest, I imagine."

"No," the detective said. "No, it isn't that. I'm going after bigger
game, is all."

"What's that?"

"I'm going to Earth to find the Nipe."




_[19]_


From the very moment he had heard that "Stanley Martin" had arrived to
take charge of the project, Bart Stanton pushed all thoughts of his
brother out of his mind. He had fouled up once by thinking of himself
rather than thinking of what had to be done; he would not make that
mistake again.

Nor, apparently, did Martin have any desire to meet Bart Stanton. He
took control of the project smoothly. Apparently Mannheim had taken into
account the possibility of his own death and had arranged things
accordingly. Although Martin was not a member of the World Police, his
own record showed that he had the ability to handle the job, and an
Executive Session had unanimously accepted Colonel Mannheim's wishes in
the matter. There was little else they could do; the very fact that
Mannheim had died in the way he had, ordering the guard to hold his
fire, had stilled those voices on the Executive Council who had been
wavering before.

Martin had come in to Earth almost secretly, without fanfare, and the
general public was totally unaware that anything at all had happened.

Special messages, going through the channels known to be tapped by the
Nipe, said that it would not be in the public interest to admit that the
Nipe could actually penetrate the defenses of World Police Headquarters,
so the Nipe was not surprised when the public news channels announced
quietly that Colonel Walther Mannheim, the man who had been decorated
twelve years before for the quelling of the Central Brazilian
Insurrection, had died peacefully in his sleep. The funeral was quiet,
but with full honors.

Stanton stopped worrying about such things. Until he had done the job
that he had been rebuilt for, he was determined to make that goal his
sole purpose. As the weeks sped by, he kept determinedly to his regime,
exercising regularly to keep himself in top physical condition, and
studying the three-dimensional motion studies of the Nipe in action.

Only one of these made him ill the first time he watched it, but it was
the only recording of the Nipe actually in the process of killing a
man, so he watched, over and over again, the shots taken from the gun
tower when the Nipe attacked Colonel Mannheim.

A full-sized mockup of the Nipe's body had been built, with the best
approximation possible of the Nipe's bone structure and musculature, and
Stanton worked with it to determine what, if any, were the Nipe's
physical limitations.

His only periods of relative relaxation occurred when he discussed the
psychological peculiarities of the Nipe mind with George Yoritomo.

One afternoon, after a particularly strenuous boxing session, he walked
into Yoritomo's office with a grin on his face. "I've been considering
the problem of the apparent paradox of a high technology in a
ritual-taboo system."

Yoritomo grinned back delightedly and waved Stanton to a chair.
"Excellent! It is always much better if the student thinks these things
out for himself. Now, while I fill this hand-furnace with tobacco and
fire up, you will please explain to me all about it."

Stanton sat down and settled himself comfortably. "All right. In the
first place, there's the notion of religion. In tribal cultures, the
religion is usually--uh--animistic, I think the word is."

Yoritomo nodded silently.

"They believe there are spirits everywhere," Stanton said. "That sort of
belief, it seems to me, would grow up in any race that had imagination,
and the Nipes must have had plenty of that, or they wouldn't have the
technology that we know they do have. Am I on the right track?"

"Very good. _Very_ good," Yoritomo said in approval. "But what evidence
have you that this technology was not given to them by some other, more
advanced race?"

"I hadn't thought of that." Stanton stared into space for a moment, then
nodded his head. "Of course. It would take too long to teach them. It
wouldn't be worth all the trouble it would take to make them unlearn
their fallacies and learn the new facts. It would take generations to do
it unless this hypothetical other race killed off all the adult Nipes
and started the little ones off fresh. And that didn't happen, because
if it had, the ritual-taboo system would have died out, too. So that
other-race theory is out."

"The argument is imperfect," Yoritomo said, "but it will suffice for the
moment. Go on about the religion."

"Okay. Religious beliefs are not subject to pragmatic tests. That is,
the spiritual beliefs aren't. Any belief that _could_ be disproven by
such a test would eventually die out. But beliefs in ghosts or demons or
angels or life after death aren't disprovable by material tests, any
more than they are provable. So, as a race increases its knowledge of
the physical world, its religion would tend to become more and more
spiritual."

"Agreed. Yes. It happened so among human beings," said Yoritomo. "But
how do you link this fact with ritual-taboo?"

"Well, once a belief gains a foothold," Stanton said, "it is very
difficult to wipe it out, even among human beings. Among Nipes, it would
be well-nigh impossible. Once a code of ritual and of social behavior
had been set up, it became permanent."

"For example?" Yoritomo urged.

"Well, shaking hands, for example," Stanton said after a pause. "We
still do that, even if we don't have it fixed solidly in our heads that
we _must_ do it. I suppose it would never occur to a Nipe not to perform
such a ritual."

"Just so," Yoritomo agreed vigorously. "Such things, once established in
the minds of the race, would tend to remain. But it is a characteristic
of a ritual-taboo system that it resists change. Change is evil. Change
is wrong. We must use what we know to be true, not try something that
has never been tried before. In a ritual-taboo system, a thing which is
not ritual is, _ipso facto_, taboo. How, then, can we account for their
high technological achievements?"

"The pragmatic engineering approach, I imagine," Stanton said. "If a
thing works, then go ahead and use it. It is usable. If not, it isn't."

"Approximately," said Yoritomo. "But only approximately. Now it is my
turn to lecture." He put his pipe in an ashtray and held up a long, bony
finger. "Firstly, we must remember that the Nipe is equipped with a
functioning imagination. Secondly, he has in his memory a tremendous
amount of data, all ready at hand. He is capable of working out theories
in his head, you see. Like the ancient Greeks, he finds no need to test
such theories--_unless_ his thinking indicates that such an experiment
would yield something useful. Unlike the Greeks, he has no aversion to
experiment. But he sees no need for useless experiment, either.

"Oh, he would learn, yes. But once a given theory proved workable, how
resistant he would be to a new theory. Innovators, even in our own
culture, have a very hard time working against the great inertia of a
recognized theory. How much harder it would be in a ritual-taboo society
with a perfect memory! How long--how _incredibly_ long--it would take
such a race to achieve the technology the Nipe now has!"

"Hundreds of thousands of years," said Stanton.

Yoritomo shook his head briskly. "Puh! Longer! Much longer!" He smiled
with satisfaction. "I estimate that the Nipe race first invented the
steam engine not less than ten million years ago!"

He kept smiling into the dead silence that followed.

After a long minute, Stanton said: "What about atomic energy?"

"At least two million years ago," Yoritomo said. "I do not think they
have had the interstellar drive more than some fifty thousand years."

"No wonder our pet Nipe is so patient," Stanton said with a touch of awe
in his voice. "How long do you suppose their individual life-span is?"

"Not so long, in comparison," said Yoritomo. "Perhaps no longer than our
own at the least, or perhaps as much as five hundred years. Considering
the tremendous handicaps against them, they have done quite well, I
think. Quite well, indeed, for a race of illiterate cannibals."

"How's that again?" Stanton realized that the scientist was quite
serious.

"Hadn't it occurred to you, my friend, that they must be cannibals?"
Yoritomo asked. "And that they must be very nearly illiterate?"

"No," Stanton admitted, "it hadn't."

"The Nipe, like man, is omnivorous," Yoritomo pointed out.
"Specialization tends to lead any race up a blind alley, and dietary
restrictions are a particularly pernicious form of specialization. A
lion would starve to death in a wheat field. A horse would perish in a
butcher shop full of steaks. A man will survive as long as there is
something around to eat--even if it's another man."

Yoritomo picked up his pipe and began tapping the ashes out of it.
"Also," he went on, "we must remember that Man, early in his career of
becoming top dog on Earth, began using a method of removing the unfit.
Ritual traces of it remain today in some societies--the Jewish Bar
Mitzvah, for instance, or the Christian Confirmation. Before and
immediately after the Holocaust, there were still primitive societies on
Earth--in New Guinea, for instance--which still made a rather hard
ordeal out of the Rite of Passage, the ceremony whereby a boy becomes a
man--if he passes the tests."

Yoritomo was filling his pipe, a look of somber satisfaction on his lean
face. "A few millennia ago, a boy who underwent those tests was killed
outright if he failed. And was eaten. He had not shown the ability to
overrule with reason his animal instincts. Therefore, he was not a human
being, but an animal. What better use for a young and succulent animal
than to provide meat for the common larder?"

"And you think the same process must have been used by the Nipes?"
Stanton asked.

Yoritomo nodded vigorously as he applied a match flame to the tobacco in
his pipe. "The Nipe race must, of necessity, have had some similar
ritualistic tests or they would not have become what they are," he said
when he had puffed the pipe alight. "And we have already agreed that
once the Nipes adopted something of that kind, it remained with them.
Not so? Yes.

"Also, it can be considered extremely unlikely that the Nipe
civilization--if such it can be called--has any geriatric problem. No,
indeed. No old-age pensions, no old folks' homes, no senility. No, nor
any specialists in geriatrics, either. When a Nipe becomes a burden
because of age, he is ritually murdered and eaten with all due
solemnity."

Yoritomo pointed his pipestem at Stanton. "Ah. You frown, my friend.
Have I made them sound heartless, without the finer feelings of which we
humans are so proud? Not so. When Junior Nipe fails his puberty tests,
when Mama and Papa Nipe are sent to their final reward, I have no doubt
that there is sadness in the hearts of their loved ones as the honored
T-bones are passed around the table."

He put the pipe back in his mouth and spoke around it. "My own
ancestors, not too far back, performed a ritual suicide by disemboweling
themselves with a long, sharp knife. Across the abdomen--_so!_--and up
into the heart--_so!_ It was considered very bad form to faint or die
before the job was done. Nearby, a relative or a close friend stood with
a sharp sword, to administer the _coup de grace_ by decapitation. It was
all very sad and very honorable. Their loved ones bore the sorrow with
great pride."

His voice, which had been low and tender, suddenly became very brisk.
"Thank goodness it has gone out of fashion!"

"But how can you be _sure_ they're cannibals?" Stanton asked. "Your
argument sounds logical enough, but you can't be basing your theory on
that alone."

"True! True!" Yoritomo jabbed the air twice with a rapid forefinger.
"Evidence for such a theory would be most welcome, would it not? Very
well, I give you the evidence. He eats human beings, our Nipe."

"That doesn't make him a cannibal," Stanton objected.

"Not _strictly_, perhaps. But consider. The Nipe is not a monster. He is
not a criminal. No. He is a gentleman. He always behaves as a gentleman.
He is shipwrecked on an alien planet. Around him, he sees evidence in
profusion that ours is a technological society. But that is a
contradiction! A paradox!

"For _we_ are not civilized! No! We are not rational! We are not sane!
We do not obey the Laws; we do not perform the Rituals. We are animals.
Apparently intelligent animals, but animals nevertheless. How can this
be?

"_Ha!_ says the Nipe to himself. These animals must be ruled over by
Real People. It is the only explanation. Not so?"

"Colonel Mannheim mentioned that," Stanton said. "Are you implying that
the Nipe thinks there are other Nipes around, running the world from
secret hideouts, like the villains in a Fu Manchu novel?"

"Not quite," said Yoritomo, laughing. "The Nipe is not at all incapable
of learning something new. In point of fact, he is quite good at it, as
witness the fact that he has learned many Earth languages. He picked up
Russian in less than eight months simply by listening and observing.
Like our own race, his undoubtedly evolved a great many languages during
the beginnings of its progress--when there were many tribes, separated
and out of communication with each other. It would not surprise me to
find that most of these languages have survived and that our distressed
astronaut knows them all. A new language would not bother him in the
least.

"Nor would strangely shaped intelligent beings make him unhappy. His
race should be aware, by now, that such things must exist. But it is
very likely that he equates _true_ intelligence with technology, and I
do not think it likely that he has ever met a race higher than the
barbarian level before. Such races were not, of course, human--by his
definition. They showed possibilities, perhaps, but they had not by any
means evolved far enough. And, considering the time span involved in
their own progress toward a technological civilization, it is not at all
unlikely that the Nipe thinks of technology as something that evolves in
a race in the same way that intelligence does--or the body itself.

"So it would not surprise him to find that the Real People of this
system were humanoid in shape instead of--ah--Nipoid? A bad word, but it
will do for the nonce. To find Real People of a different shape is
something new, but he can absorb it because it does not contradict
anything he _knows_.

"_But--!_ Any truly intelligent being that did not obey the Law and
follow the Ritual _would_ be a contradiction in terms. For our Nipe has
no notion of a Real Person without those characteristics. Without those
characteristics, technology is, of course, utterly impossible. Since he
sees technology all around him, it follows that there must be Real
People around somewhere that have those characteristics. Anything else
is unthinkable."

"It seems to me that you're building an awfully involved theory out of
