
This was a slight exaggeration, but it was pardonable because of Sally's
partiality for Joe. He went groggily into the special shower arrangement
in the Platform. In orbit, there would be no gravity, so a tub bath was
unthinkable. The shower cabinet was a cubbyhole with handgrips on all
four sides and straps into which one could slip his feet. When Joe
turned handles, needle sprays sprang at him from all sides, and
simultaneously a ventilator fan began to run. When in space that fan
could draw out what would otherwise become an inchoate mixture of air
and quite weightless water-drops. In space a man might drown in his own
shower bath without the fan. The apparatus for collecting the water
again was complex, but Joe didn't think about that at the moment. He
considered ruefully that however convenient this system might be out in
the Platform's orbit, it left something to be desired on Earth.

But there were clean clothes waiting when he came out. He dressed and
felt brand new and utterly peaceful and rested, and it seemed to him
very much like the way he had often felt on a new spring morning. It was
very, very good!

Then he smelled coffee and became ravenous.

There were the others in the Platform's kitchen, sitting in the chairs
that had straps on them so the crew needn't float about because of
weightlessness. There was an argument in progress. The Chief grinned at
Joe. Mike the midget looked absorbed. Haney was thinking something out,
rather painfully. Sally was busy at the Platform's very special stove.
She had ham and eggs and pancakes ready for Joe to eat.

"Gentlemen," she said, "you are about to eat the first meal ever cooked
in a space ship--and like it!"

She served them and sat companionably down with them all. But her eyes
were very warm when she looked at Joe.

"Leavin' aside what we were arguin' about," said the Chief blissfully,
"Sally here--mind if I call you Sally, ma'am?--she says the slide-rule
guys have given our job the works and they say it's a better job than
they designed. Take a bow, Joe."

Sally said firmly: "When the technical journals are through talking
about the job you did, you'll all four be famous for precision-machining
technique and improvements on standard practices."

"Which," said the Chief sarcastically, "is gonna make us feel fine when
we're back to welding and stuff!"

"No more welding," Sally told him. "Not on this job. The Platform's
closed in. They've started to take down the scaffolding."

The Chief looked startled. Haney asked: "Laying off men yet?"

"Not you," Sally assured him. "Definitely not you. You four have the
very top super-special security rating there is! I think you're the only
four people in the world my father is sure can't be reached, somehow, to
make you harm the Platform."

Mike said abruptly: "Yeah. The Major thought he had headaches before.
Now he's really got 'em!"

Mike hadn't seemed to be listening. He'd acted as if he were feverishly
absorbing the feel of being inside the Platform--not as a workman
building it, but as a man whose proper habitat it would become. But Joe
suddenly realized that his comment was exact. There'd been plenty of
sabotage to prevent the Platform from reaching completion. But now it
was ready to take off in two days. If it was to be stopped, it would
have to be stopped within forty-eight hours by people with plenty of
resources, who for their own evil ends needed it to be stopped. These
last two days would contain the last-ditch, most desperate, most
completely ruthless stepped-up attempts at destruction that could
possibly be made. And Major Holt had to handle them.

But the four at table--five, with Sally--were peculiarly relaxed. The
matter they'd handled had been conspicuous, perhaps, but it was still
only one of thousands that had to be accomplished before the Platform
could take off. But they had the infinitely restful feeling of a job
well done.

"No more welding," said Haney meditatively, "and our job on the gyros
finished. What are we gonna do?"

The Chief said forcefully: "Me, I'm gonna sweep floors or something, but
I'm sure gonna stick around and watch the take-off!"

Joe said nothing. He looked at Sally. She became very busy, making
certain the others did not want more to eat. After a long time Joe said,
with very careful casualness, "Come to think of it, I was getting loaded
up with astrogation theory when I had to stop and pitch in on the gyros.
How's that sick crew member, Sally?"

"I--wouldn't know," answered Sally unconvincingly. "Have some more
coffee?"

Joe made his face go completely expressionless. There was nothing else
to do. Sally hadn't said that his chances looked bad for making the crew
of the Platform when it went out to space. But Sally had ways of knowing
things. She would be sure to keep informed on a matter like that,
because she was wearing Joe's ring and it would have taken a great deal
of discouragement to keep her from finding out good news to tell him.
She didn't have any good news. So it must be bad.

Joe drank his coffee, trying to make himself believe that he'd known all
along he wasn't going to make the crew. He'd started late to learn the
things a crew member ought to know. He'd stopped at the most crucial
part of his training to work on the gyros, which were more crucial
still. He'd slept a day and a half. The platform would take off in
forty-eight hours. He tried to reason carefully that it was common sense
to use a man who was fully trained from the beginning for a place in the
crew, rather than a latecomer like himself. But it wasn't easy to take.

Mike the midget said suddenly: "I got a hunch."

"Shoot it," said the Chief, amiably.

"I got a hunch I know what kind of sabotage will be tried next--and
when," said Mike.

The others looked at him--all but Joe, who stared at the wall.

"There hasn't been one set of guys trying to smash the Platform," said
Mike excitedly. "There's been four or five. Joe found a gang sabotaging
the pushpots that didn't think like the gang that blackmailed Braun. And
the gang that tried to kill us up at Red Canyon may be another. There
could be others: fascists and commies and nationalists and crackpots of
all kinds. And they all know they've got to work fast, even if they have
to help each other. Get it?"

Haney growled.

"I'll buy what you've said so far," said the Chief. "Sure! Those
so-and-sos will all pile in everything they got at the last minute.
They'll even pull together to smash the Platform--and then double-cross
each other afterward. But what'll they do, an' when?"

"This time they'll try outright violence," said Mike coldly, "instead of
sneaking. They'll try something really rough. For sneaking, one time's
as good as another, but for really rough stuff, there's just one time
when the Platform hasn't got plenty of guys around ready to fight for
it."

The Chief whistled softly.

"You mean change-shift time! Which one?"

"The first one possible," said Mike briefly. "After every shift, things
will get tighter. So my guess is the next shift, if they can. And if one
gang starts something, the others will have to jump right in. You see?"

That made sense. One attempt at actual violence, defeated, would create
a rigidity of defense that would make others impossible. If a successful
attempt at violent sabotage was to be made, the efforts of all groups
would have to be timed to the first, or abandoned.

"I could--uh--set up a sort of smoke screen," said Mike. "We'll fake
we're going to smash something--and let those saboteurs find it out.
They'll see it as a chance to do their stuff with us to run interference
for them.--Sally, does your father sure-enough trust us?"

Sally nodded.

"He doesn't talk very cordially, but he trusts you."

"Okay," said Mike. "You tell him, private, that I'm setting up something
tricky. He can laugh off anything his security guys report that I'm
mixed up in. Joe'll see that he gets the whole picture beforehand. But
he ain't to tell anybody--not _any_body--that something is getting
framed up. Right?"

"I'll ask him," said Sally. "He is pretty desperate. He's sure some
last-minute frantic assault on the Platform will be made. But----"

"We'll tip him in plenty of time," said Mike with authority. "In time
for him to play along, but not for a leak to spoil things. Okay?"

"I'll make the bargain," Sally assured him, "if it can be made."

Mike nodded. He drained his coffee cup and slipped down from his chair.

"Come on, Chief! C'mon, Haney!"

He led them out of the room.

Joe fiddled with his spoon a moment, and then said: "The crewman I was
to have subbed for if he didn't get well--he did, didn't he?"

Sally answered reluctantly: "Y-yes."

Joe said measuredly: "Well, then--that's that! I guess it will be all
right for me to stick around and watch the take-off?"

Sally's eyes were misty.

"Of course it will, Joe! I'm so sorry!"

Joe grinned, but even to himself his face seemed like a mask.

"Into each life some rain must fall. Let's go out and see what's been
accomplished since I went to sleep. All right?"

They went out of the Platform together. And as soon as they reached the
floor of the Shed it was plain that the stage had been set for stirring
events.

The top five or six levels of scaffolding had already been removed, and
more of the girders and pipes were coming down in bundles on lines from
giraffelike cranes. There were some new-type trucks in view, too, giants
of the kind that carry ready-mixed concrete through city streets. They
were pouring a doughy white paste into huge buckets that carried it
aloft, where it vanished into the mouths of tubes that seemed to replace
the scaffolding along the Platform's sides.

"Lining the rockets," said Sally in a subdued voice.

Joe watched. He knew about this, too. It had been controversial for a
time. After the pushpots and their jatos had served as the first two
stages of a multiple-rocket aggregation, the Platform carried rocket
fuel as the third stage. But the Platform was a highly special ballistic
problem. It would take off almost horizontally--a great advantage in
fueling matters. This was practical simply because the Platform could be
lifted far beyond effective air resistance, and already have
considerable speed before its own rockets flared.

Moreover, it was not a space ship in the sense of needing rockets for
landing purposes. It wouldn't land. Not ever. And again there was the
fact that men would be riding in it. That ruled out the use of eight- and
ten- and fifteen-gravity acceleration. It had to make use of a long
period of relatively slow acceleration rather than a brief terrific
surge of power. So its very special rockets had been designed as the
answer.

They were solid-fuel rockets, though solid fuels had been long abandoned
for long-range missiles. But they were entirely unlike other solid-fuel
drives. The pasty white compound being hauled aloft was a self-setting
refractory compound with which the rocket tubes would be lined, with the
solid fuel filling the center. The tubes themselves were thin
steel--absurdly thin--but wound with wire under tension to provide
strength against bursting, like old-fashioned rifle cannon.

When the fuel was fired, it would be at the muzzle end of the rocket
tube, and the fuel would burn forward at so many inches per second. The
refractory lining would resist the rocket blast for a certain time and
then crumble away. Crumbling, the refractory particles would be hurled
astern and so serve as reaction mass. When the steel outer tubes were
exposed, they would melt and be additional reaction mass.

In effect, as the rocket fuel was exhausted, the tubes that contained it
dissolved into their own blast and added to the accelerating thrust,
even as they diminished the amount of mass to be accelerated. Then the
quantity of fuel burned could diminish--the tubes could grow smaller--so
the rate of speed gain would remain constant. Under the highly special
conditions of this particular occasion, there was a notable gain in
efficiency over a liquid-fuel rocket design. For one item, the Platform
would certainly have no use for fuel pumps and fuel tanks once it was in
its orbit. In this way, it wouldn't have them. Their equivalent in mass
would have been used to gain velocity. And when the Platform finally
rode in space, it would have expended every ounce of the driving
apparatus used to get it there.

Now the rocket tubes were being lined and loaded. The time to take-off
was growing short indeed.

Joe watched a while and turned away. He felt very good because he'd
finished his job and lived up to the responsibility he'd had. But he
felt very bad because he'd had an outside chance to be one of the first
men ever to make a real space journey--and now it was gone. He couldn't
resent the decision against him. If it had been put up to him, he'd
probably have made the same hard decision himself. But it hurt to have
had even a crazy hope taken away.

Sally said, trying hard to interest him, "These rockets hold an awful
lot of fuel, Joe! And it's better than scientists thought a chemical
fuel could ever be!"

"Yes," said Joe.

"Fluorine-beryllium," said Sally urgently. "It fits in with the
pushpots' having pressurized cockpits. Rockets like that couldn't be
used on the ground! The fumes would be poisonous!"

But Joe only nodded in agreement. He was apathetic. He was uninterested.
He was still thinking of that lost trip in space. He realized that Sally
was watching his face.

"Joe," she said unhappily, "I wish you wouldn't look like that!"

"I'm all right," he told her.

"You act as if you didn't care about anything," she protested, "and you
do!"

"I'm all right," he repeated.

"I'd like to go outside somewhere," she said abruptly, "but after what
happened up at the lake, I mustn't. Would you like to go up to the top
of the Shed?"

"If you want to," he agreed without enthusiasm.

He followed when she went to a doorway--with a security guard beside
it--in the sidewall. She flashed her pass and the guard let them
through. They began to walk up an inclined, endless, curving ramp. It
was between the inner and outer skins of the Shed. There had to be two
skins because the Shed was too big to be ventilated properly, and the
hot desert sunshine on one side would have made "weather" inside.
There'd have been a convection-current motion of the air in the enclosed
space, and minor whirlwinds, and there could even be miniature
thunderclouds and lightning. Joe remembered reading that such things had
happened in a shed built for Zeppelins before he was born.

They came upon an open gallery, and there was a security man looking
down at the floor and the Platform. He had a very good view of all that
went on.

They went around another long circuit of the slanting gallery, dimly
lighted with small electric bulbs. They came to a second gallery, and
saw the Platform again. There was another guard here.

They were halfway up the globular wall now, and were visibly suspended
over emptiness. The view of the Platform was impressive. There were an
astonishing number of rocket tubes being fastened to the outside of that
huge object. Three giant cranes, working together, hoisted a tube to the
last remaining level of scaffolding, and men swarmed on it and fastened
it to the swelling hull. As soon as it was fast, other men hurried into
it with the white pasty stuff to line it from end to end. The tubes
would nearly hide the structure they were designed to propel. But they'd
all be burned away when it reached its destination.

"Wonderful, isn't it?" asked Sally hopefully.

Joe looked, and said without warmth, "It's the most wonderful thing that
anybody ever even tried to do."

Which was true enough, but the zest of it had unreasonably departed for
Joe for the time being. His disappointment was new.

Halfway around again, Sally opened a door, and Joe was almost surprised
out of his lethargy. Here was a watching post on the outside of the
monstrous half-globe. There were two guards here, with fifty-caliber
machine guns under canvas hoods. Their duties were tedious but
necessary. They watched the desert. From this height it stretched out
for miles, and Bootstrap could be seen as a series of white specks far
away with hills behind it.

Ultimately Sally and Joe came to the very top of the Shed into the open
air. From here the steep plating curved down and away in every
direction. The sunshine was savagely bright and shining, but there was a
breeze. And here there was a considerable expanse fenced in--almost an
acre, it seemed. There were metal-walled small buildings with
innumerable antennae of every possible shape for the reception of every
conceivable wave length. There were three radar bowl reflectors turning
restlessly to scan the horizon, and a fourth which went back and forth,
revolving, to scan the sky itself. Sally told Joe that in the very
middle--where there was a shed with a domelike roof which wasn't
metal--there was a wave-guide radar that could spot a plane within three
feet vertically, and horizontally at a distance of thirty miles, with
greater distances in proportion.
