by ladies, who have been much flattered on account of it. There is a
curious case of this kind related in Le Sage's Bachelor of Salamanca, which
is too nicely described to be totally imaginary.

In this situation some ladies apply to what are termed cosmetics under
various names, which crowd the newspapers. Of these the white has destroyed
the health of thousands; a calx, or magistery, of bismuth is supposed to be
sold in the shops for this purpose; but it is either, I am informed, in
part or entirely white lead or cerussa. The pernicious effects of the
external use of those saturnine applications are spoken of in gutta rosea,
Class II. 1. 4. 6. The real calx of bismuth would probably have the same
ill effect. As the red paint is prepared from cochineal, which is an animal
body, less if any injury arises from its use, as it only lies on the skin
like other filth.

The tan of the skin occasioned by the sun may be removed by lemon juice
evaporated by the fire to half its original quantity, or by diluted marine
acid; which cleans the cuticle, by eroding its surface, but requires much
caution in the application; the marine acid must be diluted with water, and
when put upon the hand or face, after a second of time, as soon as the tan
disappears, the part must be washed with a wet towel and much warm water.
Freckles lie too deep for this operation, nor are they in general
removeable by a blister, as I once experienced. See Class I. 2. 2. 9.

It is probable, that those materials which stain silk, or ivory, might be
used to stain the cuticle, or hair, permanently; as they are all animal
substances. But I do not know, that any trials of this kind have been made
on the skin. I endeavoured in vain to whiten the back of my hand by marine
acid oxygenated by manganese, which so instantly whitens cotton.

The cure therefore must be sought from moral writers, and the cultivation
of the graces of the mind, which are frequently a more valuable possession
than celebrated beauty.

13. _Paupertatis timor._ The fear of poverty is one kind of avarice; it is
liable to affect people who have left off a profitable and active business;
as they are thus deprived of their usual exertions, and are liable to
observe the daily expenditure of money, without calculating the source from
whence it flows. It is also liable to occur with a sudden and unexpected
increase of fortune. Mr. ----, a surgeon, about fifty years of age, who was
always rather of a parsimonious disposition, had a large house, with a
fortune of forty thousand pounds, left him by a distant relation; and in a
few weeks became insane from the fear of poverty, lamenting that he should
die in a jail or workhouse. He had left off a laborious country business,
and the daily perception of profit in his books; he also now saw greater
expences going forwards in his new house, than he had been accustomed to
observe, and did not so distinctly see the source of supply; which seems to
have occasioned the maniacal hallucination.--This idea of approaching
poverty is a very frequent and very painful disease, so as to have induced
many to become suicides, who were in good circumstances; more perhaps than
any other maniacal hallucination, except the fear of hell.

The covetousness of age is more liable to affect single men, than those who
have families; though an accumulation of wealth would seem to be more
desirable to the latter. But an old man in the former situation, has no
personal connections to induce him to open his purse; and having lost the
friends of his youth, and not easily acquiring new ones, feels himself
alone in the world; feels himself unprotected, as his strength declines,
and is thus led to depend for assistance on money, and on that account
wishes to accumulate it. Whereas the father of a family has not only those
connections, which demand the frequent expenditure of money, but feels a
consolation in the friendship of his children, when age may render their
good offices necessary to him.

M. M. I have been well informed of a medical person in good circumstances
in London, who always carries an account of his affairs, as debtor and
creditor, in his pocket-book; and looks over it frequently in a day, when
this disease returns upon him; and thus, by counteracting the maniacal
hallucination, wisely prevents the increase of his insanity. Another
medical person, in London, is said to have cured himself of this disease by
studying mathematics with great attention; which exertions of the mind
relieved the pain of the maniacal hallucination.

Many moral writers have stigmatised this insanity; the covetous, they say,
commit crimes and mortify themselves without hopes of reward; and thus
become miserable both in this world and the next. Thus Juvenal:

  Cum furor haud dubius, cum sit manifesta phrenitis,
  Ut locuples moriaris, egenti vivere fato!

The covetous man thought he gave good advice to the spendthrift, when he
said, "Live like me," who well answered him,

  ----------"Like you, Sir John?
  "That I can do, when all I have is gone!"
                          POPE.

14. _Lethi timor._ The fear of death perpetually employs the thoughts of
these patients; hence they are devising new medicines, and applying to
physicians and quacks without number. It is confounded with
hypochondriasis, Class I. 2. 4. 10. in popular conversation, but is in
reality an insanity.

A young gentleman, whom I advised to go abroad as a cure for this disease,
assured me, that during the three years he was in Italy and France he never
passed a quarter of an hour without fearing he should die. But has now for
above twenty years experienced the contrary.

The sufferers under this malady are generally at once discoverable by their
telling you, amidst an unconnected description of their complaints, that
they are nevertheless not afraid of dying. They are also easily led to
complain of pains in almost any part of the body, and are thus soon
discovered.

M. M. As the maniacal hallucination has generally arisen in early infancy
from some dreadful account of the struggles and pain of dying, I have
sometimes observed, that these patients have received great consolation
from the instances I have related to them of people dying without pain.
Some of these, which I think curious, I shall concisely relate, as a part
of the method of cure.

Mr. ----, an elderly gentleman, had sent for me one whole day before I
could attend him; on my arrival he said he was glad to see me, but that he
was now quite well, except that he was weak, but had had a pain in his
bowels the day before. He then lay in bed with his legs cold up to the
knees, his hands and arms cold, and his pulse scarcely discernible, and
died in about six hours. Mr. ----, another gentleman about sixty, lay in
the act of dying, with difficult respiration like groaning, but in a kind
of stupor or coma vigil, and every ten or twelve minutes, while I sat by
him, he waked, looked up, and said, "who is it groans so, I am sure there
is somebody dying in the room," and then sunk again into a kind of sleep.
From these two cases there appeared to be no pain in the act of dying,
which may afford consolation to all, but particularly to those who are
afflicted with the fear of death.

15. _Orci timor._ The fear of hell. Many theatric preachers among the
Methodists successfully inspire this terror, and live comfortably upon the
folly of their hearers. In this kind of madness the poor patients
frequently commit suicide; although they believe they run headlong into the
hell, which they dread! Such is the power of oratory, and such the debility
of the human understanding!

Those, who suffer under this insanity, are generally the most innocent and
harmless people; who are then liable to accuse themselves of the greatest
imaginary crimes, and have so much intellectual cowardice, that they dare
not reason about those things, which they are directed by their priests to
believe, however contradictory to human apprehension, or derogatory to the
great Creator of all things. The maniacal hallucination at length becomes
so painful, that the poor insane flies from life to become free from it.

M. M. Where the intellectual cowardice is great, the voice of reason is
ineffectual; but that of ridicule may save many from those mad-making
doctors; though it is too weak to cure those, who are already hallucinated.
Foot's Farces are recommended for this purpose.

16. _Satyriasis._ An ungovernable desire of venereal indulgence. The remote
cause is probably the stimulus of the semen; whence the phallus becomes
distended with blood by the arterial propulsion of it being more strongly
excited than the correspondent venous absorption. At the same time a new
sense is produced in the other termination of the urethra; which, like
itching, requires some exterior friction to facilitate the removal of the
cause of the maniacal actions, which may probably be increased in those
cases by some associated hallucinations of ideas. It differs from
priapismus chronicus in the desire of its appropriated object, which is not
experienced in the latter, Class I. 1. 4. 6. and from the priapismus
amatorius, Class II. 1. 7. 9. in the maniacal actions in consequence of
desire. The furor uterius, or nymphomania, is a similar disease.

M. M. Venesection. Cathartics. Torpentia. Marriage.

17. _Ira._ Anger is caused by the pain of offended pride. We are not angry
at breaking a bone, but become quite insane from the smallest stroke of a
whip from an inferior. Ira furor brevis. Anger is not only itself a
temporary madness, but is a frequent attendant on other insanities, and as,
whenever it appears, it distinguishes insanity from delirium, it is
generally a good sign in fevers with debility.

An injury voluntarily inflicted on us by others excites our exertions of
self-defence or of revenge against the perpetrator of it; but anger does
not succeed in any great degree unless our pride is offended; this idea is
the maniacal hallucination, the pain of which sometimes produces such
violent and general exertions of our muscles and ideas, as to disappoint
the revenge we meditate, and vainly to exhaust our sensorial power. Hence
angry people, if not further excited by disagreeable language, are liable
in an hour or two to become humble, and sorry for their violence, and
willing to make greater concessions than required.

M. M. Be silent, when you feel yourself angry. Never use loud oaths,
violent upbraidings, or strong expressions of countenance, or
gesticulations of the arms, or clenched fists; as these by their former
associations with anger will contribute to increase it. I have been told of
a sergeant or corporal, who began moderately to cane his soldiers, when
they were awkward in their exercise, but being addicted to swearing and
coarse language, he used soon to enrage himself by his own expressions of
anger, till toward the end he was liable to beat the delinquents
unmercifully.

18. _Rabies._ Rage. A desire of biting others, most frequently attendant on
canine madness. Animals in great pain, as in the colica saturnina, are said
to bite the ground they lie upon, and even their own flesh. I have seen
patients bite the attendants, and even their own arms, in the epilepsia
dolorifica. It seems to be an exertion to relieve pain, as explained in
Sect. XXXIV. 1. 3. The dread of water in hydrophobia is occasioned by the
repeated painful attempts to swallow it, and is therefore not an essential
or original part of the disease called canine madness. See Class III. 1. 1.
15.

There is a mania reported to exist in some parts of the east, in which a
man is said to run a muck; and these furious maniacs are believed to have
induced their calamity by unlucky gaming, and afterwards by taking large
quantities of opium; whence the pain of despair is joined with the energy
of drunkenness; they are then said to sally forth into the most populous
streets, and to wound and slay all they meet, till they receive their own
death, which they desire to procure without the greater guilt, as they
suppose, of suicide.

M. M. When there appears a tendency to bite in the painful epilepsy, the
end of a rolled-up towel, or a wedge of soft wood, should be put into the
mouth of the patient. As a bullet is said sometimes to be given to a
soldier, who is to be severely flogged, that he may by biting it better
bear his punishment.

19. _Citta._ A desire to swallow indigestible substances. I once saw a
young lady, about ten years of age, who filled her stomach with the earth
out of a flower-pot, and vomited it up with small stones, bits of wood, and
wings of infects amongst it. She had the bombycinous complexion, and looked
like a chlorotic patient, though so young; this generally proceeds from an
acid in the stomach.

M. M. A vomit. Magnesia alba. Armenian bole. Rhubarb. Bark. Steel. A
blister. See Class I. 2. 4. 5.

20. _Cacositia._ Aversion to food. This may arise, without disease of the
stomach, from connecting nauseous ideas to our usual food, as by calling a
ham a hog's a----. This madness is much inculcated by the stoic philosophy.
See Antoninus' Meditations. See two cases of patients who refused to take
nourishment, Class III. 1. 2. 1.

Aversions to peculiar kinds of food are thus formed early in life by
association of some maniacal hallucination with them. I remember a child,
who on tasting the gristle of sturgeon, asked what gristle was? And being
told it was like the division of a man's nose, received an ideal
hallucination; and for twenty years afterwards could not be persuaded to
taste sturgeon.

The great fear or aversion, which some people experience at the sight of
spiders, toads, crickets, and the like, have generally had a similar
origin.

M. M. Associate agreeable ideas with those which disgust; as call a spider
ingenious, a frog clean and innocent; and repress all expressions of
disgust by the countenance, as such expressions contribute to preserve, or
even to increase, the energy of the ideas associated with them; as
mentioned above in Species 17. Ira.

21. _Syphilis imaginaria._ The fear that they are infested with the
venereal disease, when they have only deserved it, is a very common
insanity amongst modest young men; and is not to be cured without applying
artfully to the mind; a little mercury must be given, and hopes of a cure
added weekly and gradually by interview or correspondence for six or eight
weeks. Many of these patients have been repeatedly salivated without curing
the mind!

22. _Psora imaginaria._ I have twice seen an imaginary itch, and twice an
imaginary diabaetes, where there was not the least vestige of either of
those diseases, and once an imaginary deafness, where the patient heard
perfectly well. In all these cases the hallucinated idea is so powerfully
excited, that it is not to be changed suddenly by occular sensation, or
reason. Yet great perseverance in the frequently presenting contrary ideas
will sometimes slowly remove this hallucination, or in great length of time
oblivion, or forgetfulness, performs a cure, by other means in vain
attempted.

23. _Tabes imaginaria._ This imaginary disease, or hallucination, is caused
by the supposed too great frequency of parting with the semen, and had long
imposed upon the physician as well as the patient, till Mr. John Hunter
first endeavoured to shew, that in general the morbid effects of this
pollution was in the imagination; and that those were only liable to those
effects in general, who had been terrified by the villainous books, which
pretend to prevent or to cure it, but which were purposely written to vend
some quack medicine. Most of those unhappy patients, whom I have seen, had
evidently great impression of fear and self-condemnation on their minds,
and might be led to make contradictory complaints in almost any part of the
body, and if their confessions could be depended on, had not used this
pollution to any great excess.

M. M. 1. Assure them if the loss of the semen happens but twice a week, it
will not injure them. 2. Marry them. The last is a certain cure; whether
the disease be real or imaginary. Cold partial bath, and astringent
medicines frequently taken, only recal the mind to the disease, or to the
delinquency; and thence increase the imaginary effects and the real cause,
if such exists. Mr. ---- destroyed himself to get free from the pain of
fear of the supposed ill consequences of self-pollution, without any other
apparent disease; whose parents I had in vain advised to marry him, if
possible.

24. _Sympathia aliena._ Pity. Our sympathy with the pleasures and pains of
others distinguishes men from other animals; and is probably the foundation
of what is termed our moral sense and the source of all our virtues. See
Sect. XXII. 3. 3. When our sympathy with those miseries of mankind, which
we cannot alleviate, rises to excess, the mind becomes its own tormentor;
and we add to the aggregate sum of human misery, which we ought to labour
to diminish; as in the following eloquent lamentation from Akenside's
Pleasures of Imagination, Book II. 1. 200.

  ----------------Dark,
  As midnight storms, the scene of human things
  Appear'd before me; deserts, burning sands,
  Where the parch'd adder dies; the frozen south;
  And desolation blasting all the west
  With rapine and with murder. Tyrant power
  Here sits enthroned in blood; the baleful charms
  Of superstition there infect the skies,
  And turn the sun to horror. Gracious Heaven!
  What is the life of man? Or cannot these,
  Not these portents thy awful will suffice?
  That, propagated thus beyond their scope,
  They rise to act their cruelties anew
  In my afflicted bosom, thus decreed
  The universal sensitive of pain,
  The wretched heir of evils not its own!

A poet of antiquity, whose name I do not recollect, is said to have written
a book describing the miseries of the world, and to have destroyed himself
at the conclusion of his task. This sympathy, with all sensitive beings,
has been carried so far by some individuals, and even by whole tribes, as
the Gentoos, as not only to restrain them from killing animals for their
support, but even to induce them to permit insects to prey upon their
bodies. Such is however the condition of mortality, that the first law of
nature is, "Eat or be eaten." We cannot long exist without the destruction
of other animal or vegetable beings, either in their mature or their
embryon state. Unless the fruits, which surround the seeds of some
vegetables, or the honey stolen from them by the bee, may be said to be an
exception to this assertion. See Botanic Garden, P. I. Cant. I. l. 278.
Note. Hence, from the necessity of our nature, we may be supposed to have a
right to kill those creatures, which we want to eat, or which want to eat
us. But to destroy even insects wantonly shews an unreflecting mind or a
depraved heart.

Nevertheless mankind may be well divided into the selfish and the social;
that is, into those whose pleasures arise from gratifying their appetites,
and those whose pleasures arise from their sympathizing with others. And
according to the prevalence of these opposing propensities we value or
dislike the possessor of them.

In conducting the education of young people, it is a nice matter to inspire
them with so much benevolent sympathy, or compassion, as may render them
good and amiable; and yet not so much as to make them unhappy at the sight
of incurable distress. We should endeavour to make them alive to sympathize
with all remediable evils, and at the same time to arm them with fortitude
to bear the sight of such irremediable evils, as the accidents of life must
frequently present before their eyes. About this I have treated more at
large in a plan for the conduct of a boarding school for ladies, which I
intend to publish in the course of the next year.

25. _Educatio heroica._ From the kinds and degrees of insanities already
enumerated, the reader will probably recollect many more from his own
observation; he will perceive that all extraordinary exertions of voluntary
action in consequence of some false idea or hallucination, which strongly
affects us, may philosophically, though not popularly, be termed an
insanity; he will then be liable to divide these voluntary exertions into
disagreeable, pernicious, detestable, or into meritorious, delectable, and
even amiable, insanities. And will lastly be induced to conceive, that a
good education consists in the art of producing such happy hallucinations
of ideas, as may be followed by such voluntary exertions, as may be termed
meritorious or amiable insanities.

The old man of the mountain in Syria, who governed a small nation of people
called Assassines, is recorded thus to have educated those of his army who
were designed to assassinate the princes with whom he was at war. A young
man of natural activity was chosen for the purpose, and thrown into a deep
sleep by opium mixed with his food; he was then carried into a garden made
to represent the paradise of Mahomet, with flowers of great beauty and
fragrance, fruits of delicious flavor, and beautiful houries beckoning him
into the shades. After a while, on being a second time stupified with
opium, the young enthusiast was reconveyed to his apartment; and on the
next day was assured by a priest, that he was designed for some great
exploit, and that by obeying the commands of their prince, immortal
happiness awaited him.

Hence it is easy to collect how the first impressions made on us by
accidental circumstances in our infancy continue through life to bias our
affections, or mislead our judgments. One of my acquaintance can trace the
origin of his own energies of action from some such remote sources; which
justifies the observation of M. Rousseau, that the seeds of future virtues
or vices are oftener sown by the mother, than the tutor.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Volition._

GENUS I.

_With decreased Actions of the Muscles._

Our muscles become fatigued by long contraction, and cease for a time to be
excitable by the will; owing to exhaustion of the sensorial power, which
resides in them. After a short interval of relaxation the muscle regains
its power of voluntary contraction; which is probably occasioned by a new
supply of the spirit of animation. In weaker people these contractions
cease sooner, and therefore recur more frequently, and are attended with
shorter intervals of relaxation, as exemplified in the quickness of the
pulse in fevers with debility, and in the tremors of the hands of aged or
feeble people.

After a common degree of exhaustion of the sensorial power in a muscle, it
becomes again gradually restored by the rest of the muscle; and even
accumulated in those muscles, which are most frequently used; as in those
which constitute the capillaries of the skin after having been rendered
torpid by cold. But in those muscles, which are generally obedient to
volition, as those of locomotion, though their usual quantity of sensorial
power is restored by their quiescence, or in sleep (for sleep affects these
parts of the system only), yet but little accumulation of it succeeds. And
this want of accumulation of the sensorial power in these muscles, which
are chiefly subservient to volition, explains to us one cause of their
greater tendency to paralytic affection.

It must be observed, that those parts of the system, which have been for a
time quiescent from want of stimulus, as the vessels of the skin, when
exposed to cold, acquire an accumulation of sensorial power during their
inactivity; but this does not happen at all, or in much less quantity, from
their quiescence after great expenditure of sensorial power by a previous
excessive stimulus, as after intoxication. In this case the muscles or
organs of sense gradually acquire their natural quantity of sensorial
power, as after sleep; but not an accumulation or superabundance of it. And
by frequent repetitions of exhaustion by great stimulus, these vessels
cease to acquire their whole natural quantity of sensorial power; as in the
schirrous stomach, and schirrous liver, occasioned by the great and
frequent stimulus of vinous spirit; which may properly be termed irritative
paralysis of those parts of the system.

In the same manner in common palsies the inaction of the paralytic muscle
seems not to be owing to defect of the stimulus of the will, but to
exhaustion of sensorial power. Whence it frequently follows great exertion,
as in Sect. XXXIV. 1. 7. Thus some parts of the system may cease to obey
the will, as in common paralysis; others may cease to be obedient to
sensation, as in the impotency of age; others to irritation, as in
schirrous viscera; and others to association, as in impediment of speech;
yet though all these may become inexcitable, or dead, in respect to that
kind of stimulus, which has previously exhausted them, whether of volition,
or sensation, or irritation, or association, they may still in many cases
be excited by the others.

SPECIES.

1. _Lassitudo._ Fatigue or weariness after much voluntary exertion. From
the too great expenditure of sensorial power the muscles are with
difficulty brought again into voluntary contraction; and seem to require a
greater quantity or energy of volition for this purpose. At the same time
they still remain obedient to the stimulus of agreeable sensation, as
appears in tired dancers finding a renovation of their aptitude to motion
on the acquisition of an agreeable partner; or from a tired child riding on
a gold-headed cane, as in Sect. XXXIV. 2. 6. These muscles are likewise
still obedient to the sensorial power of association, because the motions,
when thus excited, are performed in their designed directions, and are not
broken into variety of gesticulation, as in St. Vitus's dance.

A lassitude likewise frequently occurs with yawning at the beginning of
ague-fits; where the production of sensorial power in the brain is less
than its expenditure. For in this case the torpor may either originate in
the brain, or the torpor of some distant parts of the system may by
sympathy affect the brain, though in a less proportionate degree than the
parts primarily affected.

2. _Vacillatio senilis._ Some elderly people acquire a see-saw motion of
their bodies from one side to the other, as they sit, like the oscillation
of a pendulum. By these motions the muscles, which preserve the
perpendicularity of the body, are alternately quiescent, and exerted; and
are thus less liable to fatigue or exhaustion. This therefore resembles the
tremors of old people above mentioned, and not those spasmodic movements of
the face or limbs, which are called tricks, described in Class IV. 1. 3. 2.
which originate from excess of sensorial power, or from efforts to relieve
disagreeable sensation, and are afterwards continued by habit.

3. _Tremor senilis._ Tremor of old age consists of a perpetual trembling of
the hands, or of the head, or of other muscles, when they are exerted; and
is erroneously called paralytic; and seems owing to the small quantity of
animal power residing in the muscular fibres. These tremors only exist when
the affected muscles are excited into action, as in lifting a glass to the
mouth, or in writing, or in keeping the body upright; and cease again, when
no voluntary exertion is attempted, as in lying down. Hence these tremors
evidently originate from the too quick exhaustion of the lessened quantity
of the spirit of animation. So many people tremble from fear or anger, when
too great a part of the sensorial power is exerted on the organs of sense,
so as to deprive the muscles, which support the body erect, of their due
quantity.

4. _Brachiorum paralysis._ A numbness of the arms is a frequent symptom in
hydrops thoracis, as explained in Class I. 2. 3. 14. and in Sect. XXIX. 5.
2.; it also accompanies the asthma dolorificum, Class III. 1. 1. 11. and is
owing probably to the same cause in both. In the colica saturnina a
paralysis affects the wrists, as appears on the patient extending his arm
horizontally with the palm downwards, and is often attended with a tumor on
the carpal or metacarpal bones. See Class IV. 1. 2. 10.

Mr. M----, a miner and well-sinker, about three years ago, lost the power
of contracting both his thumbs; the balls or muscles of the thumbs are much
emaciated, and remain paralytic. He ascribes his disease to immersing his
hands too long in cold water in the execution of his business. He says his
hands had frequently been much benumbed before, so that he could not
without difficulty clench them; but that they recovered their motion, as
soon as they began to glow, after he had dried and covered them.

In this case there existed two injurious circumstances of different kinds;
one the violent and continued action of the muscles, which destroys by
exhausting the sensorial power; and the other, the application of cold,
which destroys by defect of stimulus. The cold seems to have contributed to
the paralysis by its long application, as well as the continued exertion;
but as during the torpor occasioned by the exposure to cold, if the degree
of it be not so great as to extinguish life, the sensorial power becomes
accumulated; there is reason to believe, that the exposing a paralytic limb
to the cold for a certain time, as by covering it with snow or iced water
for a few minutes, and then covering it with warm flannel, and this
frequently repeated, might, by accumulation of sensorial power, contribute
to restore it to a state of voluntary excitability. As this accumulation of
sensorial power, and consequent glow, seems, in the present case, several
times to have contributed to restore the numbness or inability of those
muscles, which at length became paralytic. See Class I. 2. 3. 21.

M. M. Ether externally. Friction. Saline warm bath. Electricity.

5. _Raucedo paralytica._ Paralytic hoarseness consists in the almost total
loss of voice, which sometimes continues for months, or even years, and is
occasioned by inability or paralysis of the recurrent nerves, which serve
the muscles of vocality, by opening or closing the larynx. The voice
generally returns suddenly, even so as to alarm the patient. A young lady,
who had many months been affected with almost a total loss of voice, and
had in vain tried variety of advice, recovered her voice in an instant, on
some alarm as she was dancing at an assembly. Was this owing to a greater
exertion of volition than usual? like the dumb young man, the son of
Croesus, who is related to have cried out, when he saw his father's life
endangered by the sword of his enemy, and to have continued to speak ever
afterwards. Two young ladies in this complaint seemed to be cured by
electric shocks passed through the larynx every day for a fortnight. See
Raucedo catarrhalis, Class II. 1. 3. 5.

M. M. An emetic. Electric shocks. Mustard-seed, a large spoonful swallowed
whole, or a little bruised, every morning. Valerian. Burnt sponge. Blisters
on each side of the larynx. Sea-bathing. A gargle of decoction of seneca.
Friction. Frequent endeavours to shout and sing.

6. _Vesicae urinariae paralysis._ Paralysis of the bladder is frequently a
symptom in inirritative fever; in this case the patient makes no water for
a day or two; and the tumor of the bladder distended with urine may be seen
by the shape of the abdomen, as if girt by a cord below the navel, or
distinguished by the hand. Many patients in this situation make no
complaint, and suffer great injury by the inattention of their attendants;
the water must be drawn off once or twice a day by means of a catheter, and
the region of the bladder gently pressed by the hand, whilst the patient be
kept in a sitting or erect posture.

M. M. Bark. Wine. Opium, a quarter of a grain every six hours. Balsam of
copaiva or of Peru. Tincture of cantharides 20 drops twice a day, or
repeated small blisters.

7. _Recti paralysis._ Palsy of the rectum. The rectum intestinum, like the
urinary bladder in the preceding article, possesses voluntary power of
motion; though these volitions are at times uncontrollable by the will,
when the acrimony of the contained feces, or their bulk, stimulate it to a
greater degree. Hence it happens, that this part is liable to lose its
voluntary power by paralysis, but is still liable to be stimulated into
action by the contained feces. This frequently occurs in fevers, and is a
bad sign as a symptom of general debility; and it is the sensibility of the
muscular fibres of this and of the urinary bladder remaining, after the
voluntarity has ceased, which occasions these two reservoirs so soon to
regain, as the fever ceases, their obedience to volition; because the
paralysis is thus shewn to be less complete in those cases than in common
hemiplegia; as in the latter the sense of touch, though perhaps not the
sense of pain, is generally destroyed in the paralytic limb.

M. M. A sponge introduced within the sphincter ani to prevent the constant
discharge, which should have a string put through it, by which it may be
retracted.

8. _Paresis voluntaria._ Indolence; or inaptitude to voluntary action. This
debility of the exertion of voluntary efforts prevents the accomplishment
of all great events in life. It often originates from a mistaken education,
in which pleasure or flattery is made the immediate motive of action, and
not future advantage; or what is termed duty. This observation is of great
value to those, who attend to the education of their own children. I have
seen one or two young married ladies of fortune, who perpetually became
uneasy, and believed themselves ill, a week after their arrival in the
country, and continued so uniformly during their stay; yet on their return
to London or Bath immediately lost all their complaints, and this
repeatedly; which I was led to ascribe to their being in their infancy
surrounded with menial attendants, who had flattered them into the
exertions they then used. And that in their riper years, they became torpid
for want of this stimulus, and could not amuse themselves by any voluntary
employment; but required ever after, either to be amused by other people,
or to be flattered into activity. This I suppose, in the other sex, to have
supplied one source of ennui and suicide.

9. _Catalepsis_ is sometimes used for fixed spasmodic contractions or
tetanus, as described in Sect. XXXIV. 1. 5. and in Class III. 1. 1. 13. but
is properly simply an inaptitude to muscular motion, the limbs remaining in
any attitude in which they are placed. One patient, whom I saw in this
situation, had taken much mercury, and appeared universally torpid. He sat
in a chair in any posture he was put, and held a glass to his mouth for
many minutes without attempting to drink, or withdrawing his hand. He never
spoke, and it was at first necessary to compel him to drink broth; he
recovered in a few weeks without relapse.

10. _Hemiplegia._ Palsy of one side consists in the total disobedience of
the affected muscles to the power of volition. As the voluntary motions are
not perpetually exerted, there is little sensorial power accumulated during
their quiescence, whence they are less liable to recover from torpor, and
are thus more frequently left paralytic, or disobedient to the power of
volition, though they are sometimes still alive to painful sensation, as to
the prick of a pin, and to heat; also to irritation, as in stretching and
yawning; or to electric shocks. Where the paralysis is complete the patient
seems gradually to learn to use his limbs over again by repeated efforts,
as in infancy; and, as time is required for this purpose, it becomes
difficult to know, whether the cure is owing to the effect of medicines, or
to the repeated efforts of the voluntary power.

The dispute, whether the nerves decussate or cross each other before they
leave the cavities of the skull or spine, seems to be decided in the
affirmative by comparative anatomy; as the optic nerves of some fish have
been shewn evidently to cross each other; as seen by Haller, Elem. Physiol.
t. v. p. 349. Hence the application of blisters, or of ether, or of warm
fomentations, should be on the side of the head opposite to that of the
affected muscles. This subject should nevertheless be nicely determined,
before any one should trepan for the hydrocephalus internus, when the
disease is shewn to exist only on one side of the brain, by a squinting
affecting but one eye; as proposed in Class I. 2. 5. 4. Dr. Sommering has
shewn, that a true decussation of the optic nerves in the human subject
actually exists, Elem. of Physiology by Blumenbach, translated by C.
Caldwell, Philadelphia. This further appears probable from the oblique
direction and insertion of each optic nerve, into the side of the eye next
to the nose, in a direct line from the opposite side of the brain.

The vomiting, which generally attends the attack of hemiplegia, is
mentioned in Sect. XX. 8. and is similar to that attending vertigo in
sea-sickness, and at the commencement of some fevers. Black stools
sometimes attend the commencement of hemiplegia, which is probably an
effusion of blood from the biliary duct, where the liver is previously
affected; or some blood may be derived to the intestines by its escaping
from the vena cava into the receptacle of chyle during the distress of the
paralytic attack; and may be conveyed from thence into the intestines by
the retrograde motions of the lacteals; as probably sometimes happens in
diabaetes. See Sect. XXVII. 2. Palsy of one side of the face is mentioned
in Class II. 1. 4. 6. Paralysis of the lacteals, of the liver, and of the
veins, which are described in Sect. XXVIII. XXX. and XXVII. do not belong
to this class, as they are not diseases of voluntary motions.

M. M. The electric sparks and shocks, if used early in the disease, are
frequently of service. A purge of aloes, or calomel. A vomit. Blister.
Saline draughts. Then the bark. Mercurial ointment or sublimate, where the
liver is evidently diseased; or where the gutta rosea has previously
existed. Sudden alarm. Frequent voluntary efforts. Externally ether.
Volatile alcali. Fomentation on the head. Friction. When children, who have
suffered an hemiplegia, begin to use the affected arm, the other hand
should be tied up for half an hour three or four times a day; which obliges
them at their play to use more frequent voluntary efforts with the diseased
limb, and thus sooner to restore the dissevered associations of motion.

Dr. J. Alderson has lately much recommended the leaves of rhus toxicodendon
(sumach), from one gr. to iv. of the dried powder to be taken three or four
times a day. Essay on Rhus Toxic. Johnson, London, 1793. But it is
difficult to know what medicine is of service, as the movements of the
muscles must be learned, as in infancy, by frequent efforts.

11. _Paraplegia._ A palsy of the lower half of the body divided
horizontally. Animals may be conceived to have double bodies, one half in
general resembling so exactly the other, and being supplied with separate
sets of nerves; this gives rise to hemiplegia, or palsy of one half of the
body divided vertically; but the paraplegia, or palsy of the lower parts of
the system, depends on an injury of the spinal marrow, or that part of the
brain which is contained in the vertebrae of the back; by which all the
nerves situated below the injured part are deprived of their nutriment, or
precluded from doing their proper offices; and the muscles, to which they
are derived, are in consequence disobedient to the power of volition.

This sometimes occurs from an external injury, as a fall from an eminence;
of which I saw a deplorable instance, where the bladder and rectum, as well
as the lower limbs, were deprived of so much of their powers of motion, as
depended on volition or sensation; but I suppose not of that part of it,
which depends on irritation. In the same manner as the voluntary muscles in
hemiplegia are sometimes brought into action by irritation, as in
stretching or pendiculation, described in Sect. VII. 1. 3.

But the most frequent cause of paraplegia is from a protuberance of one of
the spinal vertebrae; which is owing to the innutrition or softness of
bones, described in Class I. 2. 2. 17. The cure of this deplorable disease
is frequently effected by the stimulus of an issue placed on each side of
the prominent spine, as first published by Mr. Pott. The other means
recommended in softness of bones should also be attended to; both in
respect to the internal medicines, and to the mechanical methods of
supporting, or extending the spine; which last, however, in this case
requires particular caution.

12. _Somnus._ In sleep all voluntary power is suspended, see Sect. XVIII.
An unusual quantity of sleep is often produced by weakness. In this case
small doses of opium, wine, and bark, may be given with advantage. For the
periods of sleep, see Class IV. 2. 4. 1.

The subsequent ingenious observations on the frequency of the pulse, which
sometimes occurs in sleep, are copied from a letter of Dr. Currie of
Liverpool to the author.

    "Though rest in general perhaps renders the healthy pulse slower, yet
    under certain circumstances the contrary is the truth. A full meal
    without wine or other strong liquor does not increase the frequency of
    my pulse, while I sit upright, and have my attention engaged. But if I
    take a recumbent posture after eating, my pulse becomes more frequent,
    especially if my mind be vacant, and I become drowsy; and, if I
    slumber, this increased frequency is more considerable with heat and
    flushing.

    "This I apprehend to be a general truth. The observation may be
    frequently made upon children; and the restless and feverish nights
    experienced by many people after a full supper are, I believe, owing to
    this cause. The supper occasions no inconvenience, whilst the person is
    upright and awake; but, when he lies down and begins to sleep,
    especially if he does not perspire, the symptoms above mentioned occur.
    Which may be thus explained in part from your principles. When the
    power of volition is abolished, the other sensorial actions are
    increased. In ordinary sleep this does not occasion increased frequency
    of the pulse; but where sleep takes place during the process of
    digestion, the digestion itself goes on with increased rapidity. Heat
    is excited in the system faster than it is expended; and operating on
    the sensitive actions, it carries them beyond the limitation of
    pleasure, producing, as is common in such cases, increased frequency of
    pulse.

    "It is to be observed, that in speaking of the heat generated under
    these circumstances, I do not allude to any chemical evolution of heat
    from the food in the process of digestion. I doubt if this takes place
    to any considerable degree, for I do not observe that the parts
    incumbent on the stomach are increased in heat during the most hurried
    digestion. It is on some parts of the surface, but more particularly on
    the extremities of the body, that the increased heat excited by
    digestion appears, and the heat thus produced arises, as it should
    seem, from the sympathy between the stomach and the vessels of the
    skin. The parts most affected are the palms of the hands and the soles
    of the feet. Even there the thermometer seldom rises above 97 or 98
    degrees, a temperature not higher than that of the trunk of the body;
    but three or four degrees higher than the common temperature of these
    parts, and therefore producing an uneasy sensation of heat, a sensation
    increased by the great sensibility of the parts affected.

    "That the increased heat excited by digestion in sleep is the cause of
    the accompanying fever, seems to be confirmed by observing, that if an
    increased expenditure of heat accompanies the increased generation of
    it (as when perspiration on the extremities or surface attends this
    kind of sleep) the frequent pulse and flushed countenance do not occur,
    as I know by experiment. If, during the feverish sleep already
    mentioned, I am awakened, and my attention engaged powerfully, my pulse
    becomes almost immediately slower, and the fever gradually subsides."

From these observations of Dr. Currie it appears, that, while in common
sleep the actions of the heart, arteries, and capillaries, are strengthened
by the accumulation of sensorial power during the suspension of voluntary
action, and the pulse in consequence becomes fuller and slower; in the
feverish sleep above described the actions of the heart, arteries, and
capillaries, are quickened as well as strengthened by their consent with
the increased actions of the stomach, as well as by the stimulus of the new
chyle introduced into the circulation. For the stomach, and all other parts
of the system, being more sensible and more irritable during sleep, Sect.
XVIII. 15. and probably more ready to act from association, are now exerted
with greater velocity as well as strength, constituting a temporary fever
of the sensitive irritated kind, resembling the fever excited by wine in
the beginning of intoxication; or in some people by a full meal in their
waking hours. Sect. XXXV. 1.

On waking, this increased sensibility and irritability of the system ceases
by the renewed exertions of volition; in the same manner as more violent
exertions of volition destroy greater pains; and the pulse in consequence
subsides along with the increase of heat; if more violent efforts of
volition are exerted, the system becomes still less affected by sensation
or irritation. Hence the fever and vertigo of intoxication are lessened by
intense thinking, Sect. XXI. 8; and insane people are known to bear the
pain of cold and hunger better than others, Sect. XXXIV. 2. 5; and lastly,
if greater voluntary efforts exist, as in violent anger or violent
exercise, the whole system is thrown into more energetic action, and a
voluntary fever is induced, as appears by the red skin, quickened pulse,
and increase of heat; whence dropsies and fevers with debility are not
unfrequently removed by insanity.

Hence the exertion of the voluntary power in its natural degree diminishes
the increased sensibility, and irritability, and probably the increased
associability, which occurs during sleep; and thus reduces the frequency of
the pulse in the feverish sleep after a full meal. In its more powerful
state of exertion, it diminishes or destroys sensations and irritations,
which are stronger than natural, as in intoxication, or which precede
convulsions, or insanity. In its still more powerful degree, the
superabundance of this sensorial power actuates and invigorates the whole
moving system, giving strength and frequency to the pulse, and an universal
glow both of colour and of heat, as in violent anger, or outrageous
insanities.

If, in the feverish sleep above described, the skin becomes cooled by the
evaporation of much perspirable matter, or by the application of cooler
air, or thinner clothes, the actions of the cutaneous capillaries are
lessened by defect of the stimulus of heat, which counteracts the increase
of sensibility during sleep, and the pulsations of the heart and arteries
become slower from the lessened stimulus of the particles of blood thus
cooled in the cutaneous and pulmonary vessels. Hence the admission of cold
air, or ablution with subtepid or with cold water, in fevers with hot skin,
whether they be attended with arterial strength, or arterial debility,
renders the pulse slower; in the former case by diminishing the stimulus of
the blood, and in the latter by lessening the expenditure of sensorial
power. See Suppl. I. 8. and 15.

13. _Incubus._ The night-mare is an imperfect sleep, where the desire of
locomotion is vehement, but the muscles do not obey the will; it is
attended with great uneasiness, a sense of suffocation, and frequently with
fear. It is caused by violent fatigue, or drunkenness, or indigestible
food, or lying on the back, or perhaps from many other kinds of uneasiness
in our sleep, which may originate either from the body or mind.

Now as the action of respiration is partly voluntary, this complaint may be
owing to the irritability of the system being too small to carry on the
circulation of the blood through the lungs during sleep, when the voluntary
power is suspended. Whence the blood may accumulate in them, and a painful
oppression supervene; as in some haemorrhages of the lungs, which occur
during sleep; and in patients much debilitated by fevers. See Somnus
interruptus, Class I. 2. 1. 3. and I. 2. 1. 9.

Great fatigue with a full supper and much wine, I have been well informed
by one patient, always produced this disease in himself to a great degree.
Now the general irritability of the system is much decreased by fatigue, as
it exhausts the sensorial power; and secondly, too much wine and
stimulating food will again diminish the irritability of some parts of the
system, by employing a part of the sensorial power, which is already too
small, in digesting a great quantity of aliment; and in increasing the
motions of the organs of sense in consequence of some degree of
intoxication, whence difficulty of breathing may occur from the
inirritability of the lungs, as in Class I. 2. 1. 3.

M. M. To sleep on a hard bed with the head raised. Moderate supper. The
bark. By sleeping on a harder bed the patient will turn himself more
frequently, and not be liable to sleep too profoundly, or lie too long in
one posture. To be awakened frequently by an alarm clock.

14. _Lethargus._ The lethargy is a slighter apoplexy. It is supposed to
originate from universal pressure on the brain, and is said to be produced
by compressing the spinal marrow, where there is a deficiency of the bone
in the spina bifida. See Sect. XVIII. 20. Whereas in the hydrocephalus
there is only a partial pressure of the brain; and probably in nervous
fevers with stupor the pressure on the brain may affect only the nerves of
the senses, which lie within the skull, and not those nerves of the medulla
oblongata, which principally contribute to move the heart and arteries;
whence in the lethargic or apoplectic stupor the pulse is slow as in sleep,
whereas in nervous fever the pulse is very quick and feeble, and generally
so in hydrocephalus.

In cases of obstructed kidneys, whether owing to the tubuli uriniferi being
totally obstructed by calculous matter, or by their paralysis, a kind of
drowsiness or lethargy comes on about the eighth or ninth day, and the
patient gradually sinks. See Class I. 1. 3. 9.

15. _Syncope epileptica_, is a temporary apoplexy, the pulse continuing in
its natural state, and the voluntary power suspended. This terminates the
paroxysms of epilepsy.

When the animal power is much exhausted by the preceding convulsions, so
