"Shut up and do what I say!" Raoul growled. "I want to get this done and
ride after those other Indians."

Men were running for their horses and leaping into the saddle
brandishing rifles. Without leaders or orders, they rode off across the
creek with drunken whoops in the direction Armand had pointed out.

White Bear felt sick as he saw that many of the men who remained were
grinning avidly. How, he wondered, could their deaths give such pleasure
to these men?

Desperate to find help, he searched the ring of men surrounding him for
a face to appeal to. It was already too dark to see expressions clearly.
Hopelessness turned his heart to lead as he saw Otto Wegner turn and
walk away from the crowd. Even though Wegner had always been Raoul's man
and never a friend of his, he felt betrayed.

"All right," said Raoul, staring into White Bear's eyes. "I'll shoot the
mongrel. Eli, you shoot the short one with the flat nose. Armand, you
take the other one."

"'Vec plaisir," said Armand, his teeth showing white in his brown beard
as he brought his rifle up to his shoulder.

White Bear felt the clench of nausea in his middle. Only pride kept him
from doubling up and vomiting in his terror.

"Don't do this, please," he cried. "We came to you to make peace."

"They mean to kill us," said Little Crow. "Talk no more to them, White
Bear. Do not plead. It is unbecoming a Sauk." White Bear felt a rush of
admiration for the strength and calm in Little Crow's voice. Here,
truly, was a brave.

Little Crow raised his voice in song.

    "In your brown blanket, O Earthmaker,
    Wrap your son and carry him away.
    Fold him again in your body.
    Let his bones turn to rocks,
    Let his flesh turn to grass.
    Give his eyes to the birds,
    Give his ears to the deer.
    Grow flowers from his heart."

White Bear and Three Horses joined in. There was nothing else to do.
White Bear wanted to die singing, not weeping.

What a miserable death this was, even so! And still, he found that the
song made his heart feel strong and his terror give way to a stern
anger. Murdered because of the simple, stupid bad luck that Raoul's band
of militiamen happened to be the advance guard of the long knives.
Surrounded by drunken savages--yes, they were the savages, not himself
and Three Horses and Little Crow.

Infuriating to think of the love and education his father had lavished
on him, all wasted now. All the years of following the shaman's path,
ended by a lead ball. Before he had accomplished anything.

And Redbird and Eagle Feather and the baby to come-- If not for them he
might accept the inevitable. Step onto the Trail of Souls with grace and
dignity. But, even more for their sake than for his own, he did not want
to die.

Frantic with fear and anger, he looked for a way of escape. The camp was
in the midst of prairie grass almost as high as a man's head. The sun
had gone down, and twilight was deepening. But Raoul was walking toward
him, holding his pistol high. And beyond him, between White Bear and the
grass, was a ring of men with rifles.

All that was left for him was to die with honor.

He raised his voice to sing louder.

_I must put all my strength into this. It is the last song I will sing
on earth._

"Stop that goddamned caterwauling!" Raoul shouted.

White Bear watched numbly as Armand Perrault brought his rifle to his
shoulder, stepped up to Little Crow, put the muzzle of the rifle to the
brave's head and pulled the trigger. The flint clicked down and
sparked, and powder sizzled in the pan. The rifle went off with a roar,
enveloping the brave's head in a pink cloud of smoke, blood, bits of
flesh and bone.

White Bear staggered backward, dizzy with shock and terror.

Three Horses shouted, "I will not die so!" He jerked free from the men
who were holding him and plunged into the grass, hands still bound
behind him. He ran toward the Rock River.

Rifles boomed.

In his panic, White Bear felt as if all the breath had been knocked out
of him. Three Horses might have a chance. He was a short man, and the
grass was tall. And light was fading moment by moment.

If White Bear stood where he was an instant longer he would be dead.
This was his only chance. No one was holding him. No one was even
pointing a gun at him. All of them, even Raoul, were staring after Three
Horses. Many of the men had fired and would need time to reload.

Every muscle in his body quivered. He jerked his hands. The rope was
still tight around his wrists. Running would be awkward. But Three
Horses had shown that it could be done.

_Run!_

White Bear heard the voice in his mind. His own voice or the Bear
spirit's? It did not matter.

He ran.

He threw all the strength in his legs into a sudden spring, away from
the distracted long knives. He dove into the grass, running away from
the river; opposite the way Three Horses had gone. With his arms behind
him, he ran with his head and shoulders thrust forward. The grasses and
tall plants slapped his face. His feet pounded the earth. His legs
pumped furiously. His breath roared in his chest. His heart thundered.

"Hey, the other Injun's gettin' away!"

"Goddamn it, _get_ him!" Raoul's voice, shrill with wild rage.

White Bear's moccasined feet seemed to be flying over the ground. He
felt the Bear spirit giving him strength. A curtain of prairie grass
fell away ahead of him and swished shut behind him. Even the grass was
helping. It was almost high enough to hide him as he ran in a crouch, as
his bound wrists forced him to do.

He was already deep into the prairie when he heard the calm voice of Eli
Greenglove cutting through the cool, clear air.

"Hold your fire, everybody. He's mine. Got a bead on him."

A moment later lightning struck the side of White Bear's head, sudden
and stunning. He heard the rifle's roar just an instant after the bullet
hit him. It struck so hard, it left him no strength to scream. His right
ear felt as if it had been torn away from his skull. A blaze of agony
blinded him. He staggered.

But he was alive.

_Play dead!_

It was the same voice in his mind that had told him to run. Now he was
sure it was the Bear spirit.

He shut his eyes, threw himself at once to the ground. The earth came up
and hit him in the face as hard as a fist in the jaw. Stunned for a
moment, he sucked air into his chest and let it out slowly. He lay
perfectly still. His ear felt as if someone had laid a burning torch on
it.

"Got the sonofabitch," came Eli Greenglove's flat voice from only a
short distance away.

But he was still alive. And no one was shooting at him. His body went
limp with relief.

He could not believe that he was still alive and conscious.

_Maybe I am dead. Maybe my spirit will stand up in a moment and start
walking west._

Greenglove was supposed to be the best shot in Smith County. Could he
really mistakenly think he hit White Bear square in the head? His eyes
were better than that.

White Bear heard distant shots.

_Earthmaker, let Three Horses live!_

If Three Horses had not run when he did, White Bear would not be alive
now. But White Bear remembered with anguish that he had seen Little Crow
die.

_Oh, my brother!_ Even though half dead with pain and terror himself, he
mourned the brave who had died before his eyes.

Blood pounded in White Bear's head. Night was growing steadily deeper.
By not moving and by taking only the tiniest breaths he might appear to
be dead. He lay with his mutilated right ear uppermost. He felt streams
of blood running like lines of ants over his scalp and his cheek. They
tickled his neck. To lie perfectly still was agony.

White Bear heard Raoul's voice say, "Make sure of him, Eli."

"Damn hellfire nation!" Eli came back. "Don't I know when I've put a man
under?"

"It's dark and you've had a lot of whiskey. Make sure of him."

"Pure waste of time," said Greenglove.

White Bear heard footsteps rustling through the grass toward him. The
effort of keeping himself from moving threatened to tear his muscles
from his bones. His heart beat harder as the steps came closer. Surely
Greenglove could hear its thudding. But he froze himself and held his
breath as the feet stopped beside him. In stillness was his only hope.
The pain throbbed in his ear.

_He'll see that he just hit my ear, and that will be the end._

Should he jump up and run for it? No, Greenglove would not miss a second
time. Let the Bear spirit dim Greenglove's sharp eyes. Let him be
deceived into thinking White Bear dead. There was no other way he could
escape.

He waited for the shot that would smash into his brain.

"Right through the skull," Greenglove called out. "Ain't even enough
left to scalp him."

Amazement flooded through White Bear. That couldn't be what Greenglove
saw. Unless he was blind drunk. Or blinded by the Bear.

_Or he doesn't want to kill me._

Hadn't he tried to talk Raoul out of shooting the three of them?

White Bear remembered Greenglove swinging the rifle at him the day of
his father's funeral. If Greenglove hadn't knocked him out, Raoul would
have shot him.

He was too frightened to try to understand it. He was alive, that was
all he could be sure of. Alive for a little while longer.

"He's in the happy hunting ground." Greenglove's voice faded a little as
he walked away. "Want us to dig a hole for him?"

"We don't bury dead Indians," said Raoul. "Let them rot. Let the
buzzards get fat on them." He raised his voice. "Every man mount up and
chase the ones there in the woods across the creek. This may be our
chance to finish Black Hawk."

"What happened to that other Injun that ran away?" Greenglove asked.

"We got him," a militiaman said. "He made it almost to the river. But
he's got enough lead in him now to start his own mine."

Grief filled White Bear's motionless body. Little Crow and Three Horses,
both killed. Three Horses' death had given him back his life. Three
Horses, the first Sauk to greet him on his return to the tribe. His two
comrades surely deserved to escape death as much as he did. Why had he
alone been spared? He wanted to cry out, as sorrow for his fallen
comrades tore into him, but he drew in his lower lip. He bit down on it
hard, clenching his teeth in his flesh until he felt no pain anywhere
else, in mind or body.

_Good-bye, Three Horses. Good-bye, Little Crow. I will burn tobacco to
the spirits for you._

Boots clumped through the prairie grass all around him. Hoof-beats
pounded past him. He feared he would be trampled, and it took
back-breaking effort to hold still. But the horses avoided his body.

Gradually the thundering passage of Raoul's men died away to the north.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time White Bear heard nothing but the creek rippling over its
bed of stones, the wind in the trees, crickets buzzing on the prairie.
Tiny creatures tickled his flesh as they hurried over his face and body.
To them he had already become part of the earth.

The burning in his ear settled down to a numb ache.

He heard the crack of rifle shots a long way off. Raoul's men, pursuing
Black Hawk's scouts. Must more of his brothers die tonight?

He opened his eyes. It was now very dark; full night had fallen. He was
lying on his left side in tall grass. He took a chance and raised his
head a little way. Raoul had said he wanted no men to stay behind, but
there might be someone about.

He dropped his head and tensed his hands and arms. The rope around his
wrists had loosened. He could twist his wrists till the fingers of his
right hand reached the knot. Pale eyes knew little about tying secure
knots. After working patiently for a long time he freed his hands.

He still felt sick with grief, and did not have the strength to move
away from this place where his comrades had died. Why not just lie here
and wait for the long knives to come back and kill him?

But he thought of Redbird and Eagle Feather. And the fullness that had
appeared in Redbird's belly before they crossed the Great River from
Ioway to Illinois. Using his knees and elbows to push himself through
the grass, he began to crawl.

Slithering like a snake, his body and limbs flat to the ground, he
wriggled along the edge of the creek till he felt sure any men that
might be nearby could not see him; then he slid down the embankment. The
side of his head throbbed with every movement.

He crossed the creek on all fours, the rocks biting into his palms and
knees. Where the swift, cold water was deepest he lowered his head into
the water to wash it. Agony exploded in his brain and he came close to
fainting. But he forced the muscles of his neck to raise his head, and
his arms and legs to push him along, out of the creek.

Soon he was in the shelter of the woods. He stood up and staggered
through the shrubbery. Now that he was safer, the pain in his torn right
ear pounded harder than ever.

He remembered that Raoul and his hundreds of mounted long knives had
ridden toward the place where Black Hawk, with only forty braves, was
waiting to learn how his peace emissaries fared.

He had stayed alive so far by luck, but he had no real hope of escaping
to his people. Probably some of the long knives who had ridden out with
Raoul would come across him, and that would be the end. As he neared the
farther edge of the woods, a newly risen half-moon, like a white wickiup
in a black field, shone at him through the trees ahead.

He was about to step out on the prairie when he heard the rumble of
hooves coming toward him. He stopped in the shelter of the trees. He
heard shots, screams of pain and terror.

Against the lighter prairie grass, men on horseback were dark shapes
rushing at him from the horizon.

Their voices were high-pitched, fearful. They were crying out in
English.

"Make a stand in the woods!"

"No! There's too many of them!"

"Just keep a-running. Follow the river."

White Bear looked about for a hiding place. The moon showed him that he
was standing beside a big old oak, with branches low enough for him to
jump to.

_Grandfather Oak, will you shelter me?_

Just before he jumped for a branch he noticed that a hollow had rotted
out in the base of the tree. It was big enough for him to hide in, but
then he would be on the same level as the militiamen. Safer up high.

He forced his tired legs to spring, managed to grip the lowest limb, one
hand on each side of it, bark scratching his palms. He pressed the soles
of his moccasins flat against the trunk and walked his body up, panting,
until he was able to pull himself up over the limb and reach for the
next one. The branches were stout and close together, and soon he was
high above the floor of the wood.

_You made a ladder for me. Thank you, Grandfather Oak._

Dozens of mounted militiamen were streaming past his tree, galloping
right under him. The hoofbeats of the horses and the shouts of the men
to one another, pitched high with terror, shattered the night air.

He saw the black shapes of more horses and riders swimming through the
prairie grass. Their elated cries were Sauk war whoops.

The braves of his tribe, racing toward him as if to rescue him. A sun
rose in his breast.

Rifles boomed and arrows whistled through the air after the fleeing
militiamen, and he was thankful that he was up this high. He heard
screams. Somewhere nearby a body crashed into shrubbery.

Some long knives, he saw, were trying to go around the woods, but the
greater distance they had to travel gave the Sauk riders time to catch
up with them. Rifle shots flashed like lightning in the darkness.

Two shadowy figures on foot, so close together they seemed one, stumbled
out of the tall grass and pushed their way into the woods, careless of
the noise they were making. White Bear held his breath, hoping they
would not discover him above them.

A voice below him said, "You got to keep going. They'll catch you and
tomahawk you sure."

Now the two men were standing by the tree in which he had taken shelter.
He strained his ears to listen.

"Save yourself," said another voice, rasping with pain. "I cannot run.
The arrow is under my kneecap. I will stay here and try to hold them
off."

_I know that voice, that accent. It is the Prussian, Otto Wegner._

White Bear remembered how Wegner had disappointed him back at Raoul's
camp. Now his life was in danger; he deserved that.

"Hold them off? There's hunnerds of them." He'd heard the other man's
voice before, but he sounded like so many long knives, White Bear could
not be sure that he knew him.

"Well, maybe if I shoot a few of them, you can get away."

At that White Bear felt anger heating up in his chest. So Wegner would
like to shoot a few Indians, would he? Being willing to stay and fight
while his comrade got away, though--that was worthy of respect.

"Damn! I don't like leaving you, Otto."

"You have a wife and children."

"So do you."

"But you have a chance to get away. I don't. What good is it, two of us
dead? Go!"

White Bear heard a sigh. "All right. Here's all my powder and shot. I
ain't planning to stop to use them. Remember, keep your head low so you
can see them above the horizon. If they ain't wearing hats, you can
figger they're Injuns."

"Please, Levi, my wife and my children, tell how I died."

That was who the other man was--Levi Pope, another of Raoul's men.

"I'll tell them you was brave. Make sure they don't catch you alive,
Otto. You know what Injuns do to white people. Use your last bullet on
yourself."

White Bear felt his cheeks burn with shame. For himself, the idea of
torturing a prisoner was unthinkable, and he did not believe Black Hawk
would allow it. But he could not be sure. Many men and women of the
British Band, he supposed, would enjoy making one of the dreaded long
knives suffer.

White Bear heard Pope scurry off through the brush while Wegner, gasping
with pain, settled himself in position at the base of the tree.

The boom of Wegner's rifle below him so startled White Bear that he
almost fell from his perch. He heard an agonized cry from out on the
prairie, saw a brave fall from a horse.

_He killed one of my brothers. I can't let this happen._

He heard quick, metallic sounds of clicking and scraping below him, the
sounds of a man loading his rifle.

_In a moment another Sauk warrior will fall._

The racking grief White Bear had felt since the deaths of Little Crow
and Three Horses changed all at once into a whirlwind of rage. He
remembered Little Crow, bound and helpless, his head blown apart. He
pictured Three Horses' body, torn by bullets. In his whole life up to
now he had never killed a man, but surely now, after what he had
suffered and seen, he had to kill.

_Kill him how? He is armed and I am not._

But Wegner was in dire pain. White Bear could jump out of the tree on
the Prussian's back and bring his foot down hard on the knee with the
arrow in it. That should hurt Wegner enough to loosen his grip on his
rifle, so that White Bear could get it away from him and shoot him with
it or smash his skull.

More Sauk braves were riding closer, and Wegner must be taking aim in
the darkness down there. White Bear scrambled down the ladder of tree
limbs he had climbed.

As he reached the lowest limb, moonlight showed Wegner rolling over, his
eyes gleaming. The rifle barrel swung toward him.

_He heard me._

White Bear leaped.

The flash blinded him for an instant. In a suffocating cloud of powder
smoke he hit Wegner's chest with knees and hands, an impact that knocked
the breath from him. Wegner screamed in pain, a high, womanish sound
that made White Bear's ears ring more than the shot had.

The Prussian, under him, battered him with the rifle, trying to turn it
so that he could hit him with the butt. White Bear had both hands on the
stock, and tried to kick Wegner's knee as their bodies bucked and
thrashed at the base of the oak.

White Bear remembered that militiamen often carried hunting knives in
shirt pockets. Gripping Wegner's rifle with one hand, he reached down
the front of the Prussian's leather jacket. Wegner's eyes widened in
fear, and he thrust frantically with his rifle. White Bear felt the
handle of a knife and pulled it free. The broad steel blade twinkled,
reflecting moon and stars.

Now. One thrust into his enemy's throat.

White Bear slid the point under the bandanna around Wegner's neck and
pressed it into the soft place just above the collarbone. The man's eyes
seemed about to pop out of his head. His thick, dark mustache was drawn
back from his clenched teeth.

Trying to make himself kill the man, White Bear felt as sick in his
stomach as he had when he was waiting for Raoul's bullet.

And he remembered again, the night after Raoul had driven him out of
Victoire and offered fifty pieces of eight for his death, what he had
heard Otto Wegner say.

He did not push the knife any farther. But he realized that Wegner would
still kill him, given any chance. He held himself ready to strike.

"Drop your rifle," he whispered. "Slide it away from you. Make a sudden
move and I'll cut your throat."

Wegner did as White Bear told him.

He said, "You are keeping me alive to torture me."

If he brought Wegner back to the Sauk, White Bear thought, the warriors
would want to kill him slowly. Again he felt that hot shame.

"Do you know who I am?" he asked.

"You are Raoul de Marion's nephew, Auguste. How can you be still alive?
I saw Greenglove shoot you."

White Bear ignored the question. "Three of us came to you under a white
flag to talk peace, and you shot us."

"It was wrong."

"You say that now, when I hold a knife on you. Why didn't you speak up
then?"

"Colonel de Marion is my commanding officer. Kill me, damn you. Is it
not your duty?"

"A warrior does as he pleases with his captives."

White Bear heard all around him, on the prairie and in the woods, the
war cries and whistle signals of the Sauk braves. It would not be long
before someone discovered White Bear crouched on top of this man,
holding a knife point to his throat.

Wegner said, "If I could, I would kill you."

"Yet if you had caught me the night my uncle offered fifty Spanish
dollars for my death, you would have let me go."

"How do you know that?"

It amused him to answer Wegner's question by saying, "I am a shaman--a
medicine man. We know things."

"Dummes Zeug," Wegner muttered. "Rubbish," he said louder, but his eyes
wavered.

White Bear said, "I am a healer. That is my work. I will not kill you
unless I have to. Give me your word you will not attack me, and I will
take the knife from your throat."

Wegner closed his eyes and sighed. "You are civilized. Maybe I can trust
you."

White Bear could not help laughing. "You saw today what civilized men do
to their prisoners. You can trust me because I am a Sauk."

"And why do you trust me?"

"Because I think you are a man of honor."

"All right. You have my word."

White Bear slowly drew back and stood over Wegner. The Prussian sat up,
then groaned. In the moonlight White Bear saw tears streaming
uncontrollably from his eyes. White Bear had him sit with his back to
the hollow tree. He brought his face close to the knee. With his eyes
adjusted to the darkness, the half-moon's rays were enough to show him
that Wegner had broken off the end of the arrow, and the rest of it
protruded from his kneecap. The arrow had gone into the joint. It hurt
White Bear just to look at it.

"I can try to pull this out," White Bear said.

"Go ahead."

"Give me that cloth around your neck."

With Wegner's bandanna White Bear wiped the blood off the arrow to make
it less slippery. It would have been easier if Wegner had not broken the
arrow. The protruding end was only long enough to let White Bear grip it
with one hand. He wrapped his left hand around his right to give him a
tighter grip, and pulled with all his strength.

Wegner fell over on his side in a faint.

_Thank Earthmaker he didn't scream._

The arrow had not moved at all.

When Wegner came around, White Bear said, "There is nothing I can do for
you. You need to get back to your own people."

Wegner's eyes widened. "You would let me go?"

"I have to. Or else kill you. If our warriors got you I couldn't stop
them from killing you. Climb into this hollow in the tree and stay there
till morning. By then, I think, our braves will be far from here."

He helped Wegner to stand and boosted him up into his hiding place.
Wegner let out a groan as he drew his wounded leg inside the opening.

_Take care of this pale eyes, Grandfather Oak._

"I will never forget this," said Wegner.

"Then remember my people."

He took Wegner's knife and rifle. He might have left the Prussian a
weapon to defend himself, but he thought that would be going beyond
kindness into foolishness.

He heard Sauk victory shouts coming from the other side of Old Man's
Creek, where Raoul's camp had been. Little though he wanted to go back
there, it seemed the surest way to safety. Carrying the rifle with one
hand, the knife in his belt, he made his way through the woods to the
creek.

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon he was back in the center of what had been the long knives' camp,
at the place where he had nearly been killed. A small fire burned here.
Near it lay two bodies stretched out. The head of one was covered with a
cloth. That, White Bear thought, must be Little Crow. Beside him lay
Three Horses, a blanket draped over his short body, his face with its
flattened nose uncovered. Standing around the bodies were half a dozen
warriors.

By all rights he ought to be lying there too. He put a hand up to his
ear, forgotten in the excitement of the encounter with Otto Wegner. The
pain had settled to a dull pulsing. Gingerly, he felt the wound. The
middle part of the ear was gone. The intact upper and lower parts were
covered with crusted blood. He had washed the wound once in the creek.
He must wash it again and bandage it.

_Greenglove did that so blood would flow and it would seem to anyone who
looked at me in the twilight that I'd been shot in the head. He was
trying to save my life. Why?_

One day, White Bear hoped, he would meet Greenglove and find out why he
had spared him.

_And that other time--when he hit me with his rifle just as Raoul was
about to shoot me--did he do that, too, to save my life?_

A solitary warrior sat before the fire, a long scalplock adorned with
feathers hanging down the side of his head. The firelight gleamed on his
shaven head and glittered on the beads around the rims of his ears. The
bowl of the pipe he smoked was part of a steel tomahawk blade; the stem
of the pipe was the tomahawk handle. He looked up, and his eyes widened
when White Bear stepped into the firelight.

"White Bear!" came Black Hawk's gravelly voice. "Are you truly alive or
do you come back from the Trail of Souls?"

White Bear felt an immense warmth as the firelight showed him Black
Hawk's teeth flashing in one of his rare smiles.

"I am alive," said White Bear.

"I am happy! I am surprised!" Black Hawk cried, waving his pipe. "I
thought all three of you were dead."

Sudden elation dizzied White Bear, and the flesh of his back prickled as
he realized what it meant to see Black Hawk sitting quietly smoking his
pipe in the center of Raoul's camp. Victory! The long knives routed. How
had it happened? Black Hawk might have made a terrible mistake leading
the Sauk across the Great River, but at that moment White Bear loved
him.

Owl Carver stepped out of the shadows carrying a bundle of goods he had
been gathering from the tents of the long knives. He dropped his bundle
to throw his arms around White Bear.

"My son is restored to me."

White Bear sat down at the fire.

"How did you escape?" Black Hawk asked.

White Bear explained how he had played dead when Eli Greenglove claimed
to have hit him. He said nothing about meeting Otto Wegner. He felt good
about having spared Wegner's life, but he was not sure Black Hawk would
understand. In fact, White Bear was not sure he himself understood.

Owl Carver made White Bear hold his head close to the firelight while he
examined the wound, muttering.

"Truly, the things the long knives do pass all understanding," he said.
"It was dark. You were in grass. Maybe he missed."

"He missed on purpose. He has great fame as a marksman; he sees very
well. He came and stood over me, and must have known I was alive."

Owl Carver searched through his bundle of loot and found a Frenchman's
kerchief and tied it around White Bear's head to protect the wounded
ear.

Chills of exultation rippled up White Bear's spine as he looked around
and saw Black Hawk's braves plundering the very camp where Raoul's men
had swarmed and had killed his two companions at sunset.

"Earthmaker has given us a mighty victory," he said.

"We never expected it," said Owl Carver. "We were camped on the Rock
River north of here when Iron Knife rode in after sunset to say that you
three had been killed, and also two of the braves who had gone with him.
He told us that a whole army of long knives was riding toward us."

Black Hawk said, "I was angry. They had killed my messengers of peace. I
did not care that there were hundreds of them and only forty of us. I
wanted vengeance for the blood they had shed."

White Bear laughed. "I heard them crying out as they fled your attack.
They thought there were hundreds of _you_."

"The Hawk spirit flew with us, blinding them and striking fear into
their hearts," said Black Hawk.

Owl Carver said, "And the spirits in their whiskey befuddled them too."

Black Hawk said, "I was surprised to see them turn tail and run. I
thought Americans were better shooters and fiercer fighters than that.
They outnumbered us many times over, but they showed no fight at all."

The Winnebago Prophet lumbered out of the darkness and sat down at the
fireside opposite Black Hawk. The silver nose-ring lying against his
mustache glittered red.

"It is well that you are here, Flying Cloud," said Black Hawk. "We must
look along the trails that lie ahead of us."

White Bear turned away in disgust. After the Winnebago Prophet had
misled Black Hawk so badly, how could he still rely on him?

A gruff voice said, "See, Father, I have lifted more hair from our
enemies." White Bear looked up. Wolf Paw was standing over them, holding
up two hanks of hair, each with a bloody, circular patch of flesh
attached to it. White Bear hoped that one of those scalps did not belong
to Otto Wegner.

Black Hawk stood up and seized Wolf Paw's shoulders. "My heart is big
when I see my son is so mighty a warrior."

Sitting down beside his father, Wolf Paw stared at White Bear, and White
Bear had to explain all over again how he came to be still alive.

After a moment of silence Black Hawk spoke. "Until tonight, there was no
blood spilled between the long knives and us. But when we tried to
surrender, they shot our messengers." He gestured to the bodies near the
fire and to White Bear. "And now we have killed many of them."

White Bear felt himself trembling with rage. He remembered Raoul coming
toward him, grinning, pistol raised--right on this spot--and he prayed
that now his uncle might be lying dead somewhere on the prairie. An
arrow in his back, killing him as he fled Black Hawk's warriors. A hole
in his scalp, and his hair dangling from some brave's belt.

_O Bear spirit, O Turtle, O Earthmaker, let it be so!_

Then his fury faded away and became fear as he realized that he had just
done, in his mind, a thing more terrible than murder. A man might call
on the spirits for the strength and skill to fight an enemy--but to
direct the power of the spirits against another man, no matter how
wicked, was forbidden. He prayed no harm would come to him because of
it.

Black Hawk said, "We have no choice now. The long knives have forced war
upon me."

White Bear spoke up quickly, before Wolf Paw or Flying Cloud could call
for war, as they were certain to do.

"It was my uncle, the brother of Star Arrow, who ordered us three to be
killed. He has hated our people all of his life. He especially hates me.
A different long-knife war chief might have opened his arms to us. Now
that Black Hawk has shown the long knives that they will be hurt if they
come against us, let us offer peace again. I am ready to go again with a
white flag to talk of surrender with other long-knife war chiefs."

Black Hawk made a flat, rejecting hand gesture. "You have seen what
happened. Pale eyes warriors would not let you get close enough to talk
to their chiefs."

A warrior came over to the fire, holding a tin cup. He offered it to
Black Hawk.

"The long knives left five barrels of whiskey, but they are almost
empty."

Black Hawk turned the cup over, letting the whiskey soak into the dirt.

"Pour that poison on the ground," he said. "Whiskey made the long knives
so foolish that when they looked at one of our braves they saw ten."

Wolf Paw said, "They abandoned wagonloads of food and ammunition. Even
some rifles."

"We will need them," said Black Hawk. "Without more provisions we cannot
go on."

After the warrior went away, Black Hawk gave his pipe tomahawk to Wolf
Paw to smoke. Owl Carver and the Winnebago Prophet brought out pipes of
their own. Owl Carver offered his to White Bear, who declined it. Given
what he had been through this day, and troubled by the fear that Black
Hawk was determined to plunge his people into worse calamities, White
Bear felt his stomach could not stand tobacco smoke.

Flying Cloud broke the thoughtful silence. "If forty Sauk warriors could
chase away two hundred long knives, then all the Sauk warriors can chase
away the long knives' whole army. I say call out the six hundred
warriors who wait at our main camp. We will drive the long knives all
the way back to the Great River."

White Bear wanted to answer the Winnebago Prophet with angry words, but
he felt light-headed and nauseated. He decided to wait and see what the
others would say.

"The Prophet of the Winnebago speaks well," said Wolf Paw. "My blade is
hungry for more long knives' scalps."

_Of course_, thought White Bear.

Owl Carver said drily, "We routed some drunk pale eyes who hardly
deserve to be called long knives. Let us not waste any more of our young
men's lives. Let us follow the northward curve of the Rock River to its
very headwaters, far beyond any pale eyes' settlements, then travel
westward toward the Great River. If we can cross the Great River safely,
I do not think the long knives will chase us farther."

The five men sat in silence. A sudden thought struck White Bear. _This_
was why Earthmaker had ordained that he be educated among the pale
eyes--so that he could help his band understand how pale eyes thought.
If they kept going north along the Rock River they would soon cross the
northern border of the state of Illinois. That might seem to them to
mean very little, but it could mean much to their pursuers. The country
where they were headed did not belong to any state; it was part of a
large land of many waters that was called the Michigan Territory.

Eagerly he said, "We may be able to escape the long knives by going
