all was for him alone. But now...."

The third would go to this sub-leader, Potan! The implication was
obvious.

I said, "Before we go any further--I can trust you for my share?"

"Of course."

       *       *       *       *       *

I figured that my very boldness in bargaining so prematurely would
convince him. I insisted, "And Miss Prince? She will have her
brother's share?"

Clever Anita! She put in swiftly, "I give no information until you
promise! We know the location of the Grantline camp, its weapons, its
defense, the amount and location of the ore. I warn you, if you do not
play us fair...."

He laughed heartily. He seemed to like us. He spread his huge legs as
he lounged in his settle, and drank of the bowl which one of his men
set before him.

"Little tigress! Fear me not--I play fair!" He pushed two of the bowls
across the table. "Drink, Haljan. All is well with us, and I am glad
to hear it. Miss Prince, drink my health as your leader."

I waved it away from Anita. "We need all our wits; your strong Martian
drinks are dangerous. Look here, I'll tell you just how the situation
stands--"

I plunged into a glib account of our supposed wanderings to find the
Grantline camp; its location off in the Mare Imbrium--hidden in a
cavern there. Potan, with the drink, and under the gaze of Anita's
eyes, was in a high good humor. He laughed when I told him that we had
dared to invade the Grantline camp, had smashed its exit portes, had
even gotten up to have a look at where the ore was piled.

"Well done, Haljan! You're a fellow to my liking!" But his gaze was on
Anita. "You dress like a man, or a charming boy."

She still wore the dark clothes of her brother. She said, "I am used
to action--man's garb pleases me. You shall treat me like a man, give
me my share of the gold-leaf."

       *       *       *       *       *

He had already demanded of us the meaning of that signal from the Mare
Imbrium. Miko's signal! It had not come again, though any moment I
feared it. I told him that Grantline had doubtless repaired his
damaged portes and sallied out to assail me in reprisal. And seeing
the brigand ship landing on Archimedes, had tried to lure it.

I wondered if my explanation were very convincing. It did not sound
so. But he was flushed now with the drink. And Anita added:

"Grantline knows the territory near his camp very well. He is equipped
only for short-range fighting."

I took it up. "It's like this, Potan: if he could get you to land
unsuspectingly near the mouth of his cavern...."

I pictured how Grantline might have figured on a sudden surprise
attack upon the ship. It was his only chance to catch it unprepared.

We were all three in friendly, intimate mood now. Potan said, "We'll
land down there right enough! But I need a few hours for my
assembling."

"He will not dare advance," I said. "For one thing, he can't leave the
treasure."

"He knows we have unmasked his lure," Anita put in smilingly. "Haljan
and I joining you--that silenced him. His light went out very
promptly, didn't it?"

She flashed me a side-gaze. Were we acting convincingly? But if Miko
started up his signals again, they might so quickly betray us! Anita's
thoughts were upon that, for she added:

"Grantline will not dare show his light! If he does, Set Potan, we can
blast him with a ray from here! Can't we?"

"Yes," Potan agreed. "If he comes within ten miles, I have one
powerful enough. We are assembling it now."

"And we have thirty men?" Anita persisted. "When we sail down to
attack him it should not be very difficult to kill all the Grantline
party. Thirty of us--that's enough to share in this treasure. I'm glad
Miko is dead."

"By Heaven, Haljan, this girl of yours is small, but very
blood-thirsty!"

"That accursed Miko murdered her brother," I explained.

       *       *       *       *       *

Acting! And never once did we dare relax! If only Miko's signals would
hold off and give us time!

We may have talked for half an hour. We were in a small, steel-lined
cubby, located in the forward deck-space of the ship. The dome was
over it. I could see from where I sat at the table that there was a
forward observatory tower under the dome quite near here. The ship was
laid out in rather similar fashion to the _Planetara_, though
considerably smaller.

Potan had dismissed his men from his cubby so as to be alone with us.
Out on the deck I could see them dragging apparatus about--bringing
the mechanisms of giant projectors up from below, beginning to
assemble them. Occasionally some of the men would come to our cubby
windows to peer in at us curiously.

My mind was roaming as I talked. For all my manner of casualness, I
knew that haste was necessary. Whatever Anita and I were to do must be
quickly done. But to win this fellow's utter confidence first was
necessary, so that we might have the freedom of the ship, might move
about unnoticed, unwatched.

I was horribly tense inside. Through the dome windows across the deck
from the cubby the rocks of the Lunar landscape were visible. I could
see the brink of this ledge upon which the ship lay, the descending
crags down the precipitous wall of Archimedes to the Earthlit plains
far below. Miko, Moa, and a few of the _Planetara's_ crew were down
there somewhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anita and I had a fairly definite plan. We were now in Potan's
confidence. With this interview at an end, I felt that our status
among the brigands would be established. We would be free to move
about the ship, join in its activities. It ought to be possible to
locate the signal-room, get friendly with the operator there.

Perhaps we would find a secret opportunity to flash a signal to Earth.
This ship, I was confident, would have the power for a long-range
signal, if not of too sustained a length. It was a desperate thing to
attempt but our whole procedure was desperate! And I felt--if Anita
perhaps could cajole the guard or the duty-man from the signal-room--I
might send a single flash or two that would reach the Earth. Just a
distress call, signed "Grantline." If I could do that and not get
caught.

Anita was engaging Potan in talking of his plans. The brigand leader
was boasting of his well-equipped ship, the daring of his men, and
questioning her about the size of the treasure. My thoughts were free
to roam.

A signal to Earth. And while we were making friends with these
brigands, the longest range electronic projector was being assembled.
Miko then could flash his signal and be damned to him! I would be on
the deck with that projector. Its operator, and I would turn it upon
Miko--one flash of it and he and his little band would be wiped out.

But there was our escape to be thought of. We could not remain very
long with these brigands. We could tell them that the Grantline camp
was on the Mare Imbrium. It would delay them for a time, but our lie
would soon be discovered. We must escape from them, get away and back
to Grantline. With Miko dead--a distress signal to Earth--and Potan in
ignorance of Grantline's location, the treasure would be safe until
help arrived from Earth.

It all fitted together so nicely! It seemed possible of success.

Our futile plans! Star-crossed always, doomed, fated always to be
upset by such unforeseen evil chances!

"By the infernal, little Anita, you look like a dove, but you're a
tigress! A comrade after my own heart--blood-thirsty as a
fire-worshipper!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Her laugh rang out to mingle with his. "Oh no, Set Potan! I am
treasure-thirsty."

"We'll get the treasure, never fear, little Anita."

"With you to lead us, Potan, I'm sure we will."

A man entered the cubby. Potan looked frowningly around. "What is it,
Argle?"

The fellow answered in Martian, leered at Anita and withdrew.

Potan stood up. I noticed that he was unsteady with the drink.

"They want me with the work at the projectors."

"Go ahead," I said.

He nodded. We were comrades now.

"Amuse yourself, Haljan. Or come out on deck if you wish. I will tell
my men you are one of us."

"And tell them to keep their hands off Miss Prince."

He stared at me. "I had not thought of that--a woman among so many
men."

His own gaze at Anita was as leeringly offensive as any of his men
could have given. He said, "Have no fear, little tigress."

Anita laughed. "I am afraid of nothing."

But when he had lurched from the cabin she touched me. Smiled with her
mannish swagger, for fear we were still observed, and murmured:

"Oh, Gregg, I am afraid!"

We stayed in the cubby a few moments, whispering--trying to plan.

"You think the signal room is in the tower, Gregg? This tower outside
our window here?"

"Yes, I think so."

"Shall we go out and see?"

"Yes. Keep near me always."

"Oh, Gregg. I will!"

We deposited our Erentz suits carefully in a corner of the cubby. We
might need them so suddenly! Then we swaggered out to join the
brigands working on the deck.


CHAPTER XXX

_Desperate Plans_

The deck glowed lurid in the queer blue-greenish glare of Martian
electro-fuse lights. It was in a bustle of ordered activity. Some
twenty of the crew were scattered about, working in little groups.
Apparatus was being brought up from below to be assembled. There was a
pile of Erentz suits and helmets, of Martian pattern, but still very
similar to those with which Grantline's expedition was equipped. There
were giant projectors of several kinds, some familiar to me, others
of a fashion I had never seen before. It seemed there were six or
eight of them, still dismantled, with a litter of their attendant
batteries and coils and tube-amplifiers. They were to be mounted here
on the deck, I surmised; I saw in the dome-side one or two of them
already rolled into position at the necessary pressure portes.

Anita and I stood outside Potan's cubby, gazing around us curiously.
The men looked at us, but none of them spoke.

"Let's watch from here a moment," I whispered. She nodded, standing
with her hand on my arm. I felt that we were very small, here in the
midst of these seven-foot Martian men. I was all in white, the costume
used in the warm interior of the Grantline camp. Bareheaded, white
silk _Planetara_ uniform jacket, broad belt and tight-laced trousers.
Anita was a slim black figure beside me, somber as Hamlet, with her
pale boyish face and wavy black hair.

The gravity being maintained here on the ship we had found to be
stronger than that of the Moon--rather more like Mars.

"There are the heat-rays, Gregg."

       *       *       *       *       *

A pile of them was visible down the deck-length. And I saw caskets of
fragile glass globes, bombs of different styles; hand-projectors of
the paralyzing ray; search-beams of several varieties; the Benson
curve-light, and a few side-arms of ancient Earth-design--swords and
dirks, and small bullet projectors.

There seemed to be some mining equipment also. Far along the deck,
beyond the central cabin in the open space of the stern, steel rails
were stacked; half a dozen small-wheeled ore-carts; a tiny motor
engine for hauling them--and what looked as though it might be the
dismembered sections of an ore-shute.

The whole deck was presently strewn with this mass of equipment.

Potan moved about, directing the different groups of workers. The
news had spread that we knew the location of the treasure. The
brigands were jubilant. In a few hours the ship's armament would be
ready, and it would advance to attack Grantline.

I saw many glances being cast out the dome side-windows toward the
distant, far-down plains of the Mare Imbrium. The brigands believed
that the Grantline camp lay in that direction.

Anita whispered, "Which is their giant electronic projector, Gregg?"

I could see it amidships of the deck. It was already in place. Potan
was there now, superintending the men who were connecting it. The most
powerful weapon on the ship, it had, Potan said, an effective range of
some ten miles. I wondered what it would do to a Grantline building!
The Erentz double walls would withstand it for a time, I was sure. But
it would blast an Erentz fabric-suit, no doubt of that. Like a
lightning bolt, it would kill--its flashing free-stream of electrons
shocking the heart, bringing instant death.

I whispered, "We must smash that before we leave! But first turn it on
Miko, if he signals now."

       *       *       *       *       *

I was tensely watchful for that signal. The electronic projector
obviously was not yet ready. But when it was connected, I must be near
it, to persuade its duty-man to fire it on Miko. With this done we
would have more time to plan our other tasks. I did not think Potan
would be ready for his attack before another time of sleep here in the
ship's routine. Things would be quieter then--I would watch my chance
to send a signal to Earth, and then we would escape.

With my thoughts roving, we had been standing quietly at the cubby
door-oval for perhaps fifteen minutes. My hand in my side pouch
clutched the little bullet projector. The brigands had taken it from
me and given it to Potan. He had placed it on the settle with my
Erentz suit; and when we gained his confidence he had forgotten it
and left it there. I had it now, and the feel of its cool sleek handle
gave me a measure of comfort. Things could go wrong so easily--but if
they did, I was determined to sell my life as dearly as possible. And
a vague thought was in my mind: I must not use the last bullet. That
would be for Anita.

I shook myself free from such sinister fancy.

"That electronic projector is remote-controlled. Look, Anita--that's
the signal room over us. The giant projector will be aimed and fired
from up there."

It seemed so. A thirty-foot skeleton tower stood on the deck near us,
with a spiral ladder leading up to a small square steel cubby at the
top. Through the cubby window-ovals I could see instrument panels. A
single Martian was up there; he had called down to Potan concerning
the electronic projector.

       *       *       *       *       *

The roof of this little tower room was close under the dome--a space
of no more than four feet. A pressure lock-exit in the dome was up
there, with a few steps leading up to it from the roof of the tower
signal-room. We could escape that way, perhaps. In the event of dire
necessity it might be possible. But only as a desperate resort, for it
would put us on the top of the glassite dome, with a sheer hundred
feet or more down its sleek bulging exterior side, and down the
outside bulge of the ship's hull, to the rocks below. There might be a
spider ladder outside leading downward, but I saw no evidence of it.
If Anita and I were forced to escape that way, I wondered how we could
manage a hundred foot jump to the rocks and land safely. Even with the
slight gravity of the Moon it would be a dangerous fall.

"You are Gregg Haljan?"

I started as one of the brigands, coming up behind us, addressed me.

"Yes."

"Commander Potan tells me you were chief navigator of the
_Planetara_?"

"Yes."

"You shall pilot us when we advance upon the Grantline camp. I am
control-commander here--Brotow, my name."
