civilized human being shudder merely to look at it, but they had
considered it almost paradise. It was many miles long, and a fair number
wide, and a stream ran down its middle. At the lower end of the valley
there was a vast swamp, from which at nightfall the thunderously
deep-bass croaking of giant frogs could be heard. But that swamp had
kept out the more terrifying creatures of that world. The thirty-foot
centipedes could not cross it or did not choose to. The mastodon-sized
tarantulas which ravaged so much of the planet would not cross it save
in pursuit of prey. So the valley was nearly a haven of safety.

True, there was one clotho spider in its ogre's castle nearby, and there
was a labyrinth spider in a minor valley which nobody had ever ventured
into, and there were some--not many--praying-mantises as tall as
giraffes. They wandered terribly here and there. But most members of
insect life here were absorbed in their own affairs and ignored the
humans. There was an ant-city, whose foot-long warriors competed with
the humans as scavengers. There were the bees, trying to eke out a
livelihood from the great, cruciform flowers of the giant cabbage-plants
and the milkweeds when water-lilies in the swamps did not bear their
four-foot blooms. Wasps sought their own prey. Flies were consumers of
corruption, but even the flies two feet in length would shy away from a
man who waved his arms at it. So this valley had seemed to these people
to be a truly admirable place.

But a fiend had entered it. As the gray light grew stronger the
shivering folk looked terrifiedly about them. There were only twenty of
the people now. Two weeks before there had been thirty. In a matter of
days or less, there would be none. Because the valley had been invaded
by a great gray furry spider!

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a stirring, not far from where the man-folk trembled. Small,
inquisitive antennae popped into view among a mass of large-sized
pebbles. There was a violent stirring, and gravel disappeared. Small
black things thrust upward into view and scurried anxiously about. They
returned to the spot from which they had emerged. They were ants,
opening the shaft of their city after scouting for danger outside. They
scratched and pulled and tugged at the plug of stones. They opened the
ant-city's artery of commerce. Strings of small black things came
pouring out. They averaged a foot in length, and they marched off in
groups upon their divers errands. Presently a group of huge-jawed
soldier-ants appeared, picking their way stolidly out of the opening.
They waited stupidly for the workers they were to guard. The workers
came, each carrying a faintly greenish blob of living matter. The
caravan moved off. The humans knew exactly what it was. The green blobs
were aphids--plant lice: ant-cows--small creatures sheltered and guarded
by the ants and daily carried to nearby vegetation to feed upon its sap
and yield inestimable honeydew.

Something reared up two hundred yards away, where the thin mist that lay
everywhere just barely began to fade all colorings before it dimmed all
outlines. The object was slender. It had a curiously humanlike head. It
held out horrible sawtoothed arms in a gesture as of benediction--which
was purest mockery. Something smaller was drawing near to it. The
colossal praying mantis held its pose, immovable. Presently it struck
downward with lightning speed. There was a cry. The mantis rose erect
again, its great arms holding something that stirred and struggled
helplessly, and repented its unconsonanted outcry. The mantis ate it
daintily as it struggled and screamed.

The humans did not watch this tragedy. The mantis would eat a man, of
course. It had. The only creatures immune to its menace were ants, which
for some reason it would not touch. But it was a mantis' custom after
spotting its prey to wait immobile for the unlucky creature to come
within its reach. It preferred to make its captures that way. Only if a
thing fled did the mantis pursue with deadly ferocity. Even then it
dined with monstrous deliberation as this one dined now. Still, mantises
could be seen from a distance and hidden from. They were not the terror
which had driven the humans even from their hiding-places.

It had been two weeks since the giant hunting-spider had come through a
mountain pass into this valley to prey upon the life within it. It was
gigantic even of its kind. It was deadliness beyond compare. The first
human to see it froze in terror. It was disaster itself. Its legs
spanned yards. Its fangs were needle-sharp and feet in length--and
poisoned. Its eyes glittered with insatiable, insane blood-lust. Its
coming was ten times more deadly to the unarmed folk than a Bengal tiger
loose in the valley would have been.

It killed a man the very first day it was in the valley, leaving his
sucked-dry carcass, and going on to destroy a rhinoceros-beetle and a
cricket--whose deep-bass cries were horrible--and proceeded down the
valley, leaving only death behind it. It had killed other men and women
since. It had caught four children. But even that was not the worst. It
carried worse, more deadly, more inevitable disaster with it.

Because, bumping and bouncing behind its abdomen as it moved, fastened
to its body with cables of coarse and discolored silk, the
hunting-spider dragged a burden which was its own ferocity many times
multiplied. It dragged an egg-bag. The bag was larger than its body,
four feet in diameter. The female spider would carry this
burden--cherishing it--until the eggs hatched. Then there would be four
to five hundred small monsters at large in the valley. And from the
instant of their hatching they would be just such demoniac creatures as
their parents. They would be small, to be sure. Their legs would span no
more than a foot. Their bodies would be the size of a man's fist. But
they could leap two yards, instantly they reached the open air, and
their inch-long fangs would be no less envenomed, and their ferocity
would be in madness, in insanity and in stark maniacal horror equal the
great gray fiend which had begot them.

The eggs had hatched. Today--now--this morning--they were abroad. The
little group of humans no longer hid in the mushroom-forests because the
small hunting-spiders sought frenziedly there for things to kill.
Hundreds of small lunatic demons roamed the valley. They swarmed among
the huge toadstools, killing and devouring all living things large and
small. When they encountered each other they fought in slavering,
panting fury, and the survivors of such duels dined upon their brothers.
Small truffle-beetles died, clicking futilely. Infinitesimal grubs,
newly hatched from butterfly eggs and barely six inches long, furnished
them with tidbits. But they would kill anything and feast upon it.

A woman had died yesterday, and two small gray devils battled
murderously above her corpse.

Just before darkness a huge yellow butterfly had flung itself agonizedly
aloft, with these small dark horrors clinging to its body, feasting upon
the juices of the body their poison had not yet done to death.

And now, at daybreak, the humans looked about despairingly for their own
deaths to come to them. They had spent the night in the open lest they
be trapped in the very forests that had been their protection. Now they
remained in clear view of the large gray murderer should it pass that
way. They did not dare to hide because of that ogreish creature's young,
who panted in their blood-lust as they scurried here and there and
everywhere.

As the day became established, the clouds were gray--gray only. The
night-mist thinned. One of the younger women of the tribe--a girl called
Saya--saw the huge thing far away. She cried out, choking. The others
saw the monster as it leaped upon and murdered a vividly colored
caterpillar on a milkweed near the limit of vision. The milkweed was the
size of a tree. The caterpillar was four yards long. While the enormous
victim writhed as it died, not one of the humans looked away. Presently
all was still. The hunting-spider crouched over its victim in obscene
absorption. Having been madness incarnate, it now was the very exemplar
of a horrid gluttony.

Again the humans shivered. They were without shelter. They were without
even the concept of arms. But it was morning, and they were alive, and
therefore they were hungry. Their desperation was absolute, but
desperation to some degree was part of their lives. Yet they shivered
and suffered. There were edible mushrooms nearby, but with the deadly
small replicas of the hunting-spider giant roaming everywhere, any
movement was as likely to be deadly as standing still to be found and
killed. The humans murmured to one another, fearfully.

But there was the young man called Burl, who had been lost from his
tribe and had found it again. The experience had changed him. He had
felt stirrings of atavistic impulses in recent weeks--the more
especially when the young girl Saya looked at him. It was not normal, in
humans conditioned to survive by flight, that Burl should feel
previously unimagined hunger for fury--a longing to hate and do battle.
Of course men sometimes fought for a particular woman's favor, but not
when there were deadly insects about. The carnivorous insects were not
only peril, but horror unfaceable. So Burl's sensations were very
strange. On this planet a courtship did not usually involve displays of
valor. A man who was a more skillful forager than the foot-long ants was
an acceptable husband. Warriors did not exist.

Burl did not even know what a warrior was. Yet today the sullen,
unreasonable impulses to conduct what he could not quite imagine were
very strong. He knew all the despairing terror the others felt. But he
also was hungry. The sheer doom that was upon his group did not change
the fact that he wanted to eat, nor did it change the fact that he felt
queer when the girl Saya looked at him. Because she was terrified, the
same sort of atavistic process was at work in her. She looked to Burl.
Men no longer served as protectors against enemies so irresistible as
giant spiders. It was not possible. But when Burl realized her regard
his chest swelled. He felt a half-formed impulse to beat upon it. His
new-found reasoning processes told him that this particular fear was
different in some fashion from the terrors men normally experienced. It
was. This was a different sort of emergency. Most dangers were sudden
and either immediately fatal or somehow avoidable. This was different.
There was time to savor its meaning and its hopelessness. It seemed as
if it should be possible to do something about it. But Burl was not
able, as yet, to think what to do. The bare idea of doing anything was
unusual, now. Because of it, though, Burl was able to disregard his
terror when Saya regarded him yearningly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The other men muttered to each other of the sudden death in the mushroom
thickets. No less certain death now feasted on the dead yellow
caterpillar. But Burl abruptly pushed his way clear of the small crowd
and scowled for Saya to see. He moved toward the nearest fungus-thicket.
An edible mushroom grew at its very edge. He marched toward it,
swaggering. Men did not often swagger on this planet.

But then he ceased to swagger. His approach to the mingled mass of
toadstools and lesser monstrosities grew slower. His feet dragged. He
came to a halt. His impulse to combat conflicted with the facts of here
and now. His flesh crawled at the thought of the grisly small beasts
which now might be within yards. These thickets had been men's safest
hiding-places. Now they were places of surest disaster.

He stopped, with a coldness at the pit of his stomach. But as it was a
new experience to be able to have danger come in a form which could be
foreseen, so Burl now had a new experience in that he was ashamed to be
afraid. Somehow, having tacitly undertaken to get food for his
companions, he could not bring himself to draw back while they watched.
But he did want desperately to get the food in a hurry and get away from
there.

He saw a gruesome fragment of a tragedy of days before. It was the
emptied, scraped, hollow leg-shell of a beetle. It was horrendously
barbed. Great, knife-edged spines lined its edge. They were six inches
in length. And men did not have weapons any more, but they sometimes
used just such objects as this to dismember defenseless giant slugs they
came upon.

Burl picked up the hollow shell of the leg-joint. He shook it free of
