station in the right direction. This stroll has been long enough. Come
out of it and let's get this job finished."

Suiting the action to the words Handlon started off at a brisk pace down
the hill, followed at a more moderate rate by Perry. At length they came
within full sight of the grounds. Extending for a considerable distance
before them and enclosing a large tract of land now well covered with
lush grass, was a formidable looking wall. In former days a glorious
mantle of ivy had covered the rough stones; but now there was little
left, and what there was looked pitifully decrepit. They continued their
progress along this barrier, finally coming upon a huge iron gate now
much the worse for rust. It stood wide open.

       *       *       *       *       *

The road up to the house had long since become overgrown with rank grass
and weeds. Faintly traceable through the mass of green could be seen a
rough footpath which the two followed carefully. They met no one. As
they approached the night of black pines the mass of the old mansion
began to loom up before them, grim and forbidding.

Instinctively both shivered. The silence of the place was complete and
of an uncannily tangible quality. Nervously they looked about them.

"How do you like it, Skip?" The words from Perry's previously silent
lips broke upon the stillness like a thunderclap. The other started.

"I should hate to die in it," Handlon answered solemnly. "I'll bet the
old joint is haunted. Nobody but a lunatic would ever live in it."

"I get a good deal the same impression myself," said Perry. "I don't
wonder that Bland sent two of us to cover the job."

As he spoke he mounted a flight of steps to a tumbledown veranda. There
was no sign of a door bell on the weather-beaten portal, but an ancient
knocker of bronze hanging forlornly before him seemed to suggest a means
of attracting attention. He raised it and rapped smartly.

       *       *       *       *       *

No answer.

Possessing all the attributes of the conventional reporter and a few
additional ones, Perry did not allow himself to become disheartened, but
merely repeated his summons, this time with more vim.

"Well, Horace," grinned Handlon, "it does look as if we were not so very
welcome here. However, seems to me if you were to pick up that piece of
dead limb and do some real knocking with it.... The dear Professor may
be deaf, you know, or maybe he's--"

"Skip, my boy, I don't know as we ought to go in right now after all. Do
you realize it will soon be dark?"

"To tell you the truth, Horace, I'm not stuck on this assignment either.
And I feel that after dark I should like it even less, somehow. But,
gee, the Old Man...."

"Oh, I'm not thinking of quitting on the job. We don't do that on the
Journal." Perry smiled paternally at the photographer. Could it be he
had purposely raised the other's hopes in order to chaff him some more?
"But I was thinking that it might be a good idea to look about the
outbuildings a bit while we have a little daylight. Eh?"

Handlon looked disappointed, but nodded gamely. He delayed only long
enough to deposit his camera and traps behind a grossly overgrown
hydrangea by the steps, then, with a resigned air, declared himself
ready to follow wherever the other might lead.

Perry elected to explore the barn first. This was a depressing old pile,
unpainted in years, with what had once been stout doors now swinging and
bumping in the light breeze. As the two men drew nearer, this
breeze--which seemed to sigh through the place at will--brought foul
odors that told them the place was at least not tenantless. In some
trepidation they stepped inside and stood blinking in the half
darkness.

"Pretty Polly!"

"Good God! What was that?" Handlon whispered. He knew it was no parrot's
voice. This was a far deeper sound than that, a sound louder than
anything a parrot's throat could produce. It came from the direction of
a ruinous stall over near a cobwebbed window. As Perry started fearfully
toward this, there issued from it a curious scraping sound, followed by
a fall that shook the floor, and a threshing as of hoofs. Now the great
voice could be heard again, this time uttering what sounded strangely
like oaths roared out in a foreign tongue. Yet when the newspaper men
reached the stall they found it occupied only by a large mule.

       *       *       *       *       *

The animal was lying on its side, its feet scraping feebly against the
side of the stall. The heaving, foam-flecked body was a mass of hideous
bruises, some of which were bleeding profusely. The creature seemed to
be in the last stage of exhaustion, lying with lips drawn back and eyes
closed. Beneath it and scattered all over the stall floor was a thick
layer of some whitish seeds.

"That's--why that's sunflower seed, Horace!" Handlon almost whimpered.
"And look! Look in that crib! It's full of the same stuff! Where's the
hay, Horace? Does this thing--"

He was interrupted by a mighty movement of the beast--a threshing that
nearly blinded the men in the cloud of bloodstained seeds it raised.
With something between a curse and a sob, the mule lunged at its crib as
if attempting to get bodily into it. But no: it was only trying to perch
on its edge! Now it had succeeded. The ungainly beast hung there a
second, two, three. From its uplifted throat issued that usually
innocuous phrase, a phrase now a thing of delirious horror:

"Pretty Polly!"

With a crash the tortured creature fell to the floor, to lie there
gasping and moaning.

Skip Handlon left that barn. Perry retained just enough wit to do what
he should have done the instant he first saw the animal. He whipped out
his automatic and fired one merciful shot. Then he too started for the
outside. He arrived in the yard perhaps ten seconds behind Handlon.

"Good Heavens, Perry," gibbered Handlon. "I'm not going to stay around
this place another minute. Just let me find where I left that suffering
camera, that's all I ask."

"Easy now." Perry laid a hand on his companion's shoulder. "I guess
we're up against something pretty fierce here, but we're going to see it
through, and you know it. So let's cut out the flight talk and go raise
the Professor."

Handlon tried earnestly to don a look of determination. If Perry was set
on staying here the least he could do was stay with him. However, could
Perry have foreseen the events which were to entangle them, he probably
would have led the race to the gate. As it was, he grasped a stick and
marched bravely up toward the front door.

       *       *       *       *       *

A sudden commotion behind him caused him to wheel sharply around.
Simultaneously a yell burst from Handlon.

"Look out, Horace!"

What he saw almost froze the blood in his veins. From a tumbledown coach
house had issued an enormous wolf-hound which was now almost upon then,
eyes flaming, fangs gleaming horribly.

So unexpected was the attack that both men stood rooted in their tracks.
The next moment the charging brute was upon them, and had bowled
Handlon off his equilibrium as if he were a child. The unfortunate
photographer made a desperate attempt to prevent injury to his precious
camera, which he had but a moment earlier succeeded in retrieving, and
in doing so fell rather violently to the ground. Every moment he
expected to feel the powerful jaws crunch his throat, and he made no
effort to rise. For several seconds he remained thus, until he could
endure the suspense no longer. He glanced around only to see Perry,
staring open-mouthed at the animal which had so frightened them.
Apparently it had forgotten the presence of the two men.

Handlon regained his feet rather awkwardly, the while keeping a watchful
eye on the beast, of whose uncertain temper he was by now fully aware.
In an undertone he addressed his companion.

"What do you make of it?" he wanted to know. "Did the critter bite
you?"

"No. That's the queer part of it. Neither did he bite you, if you were
to think it over a minute. Just put his nose down and _rammed_ you, head
on."

The photographer was flabbergasted. Involuntarily his gaze stole again
in the direction of the offending brute.

"What on earth--" he began. "Is he sharpening his teeth on a rock
preparatory to another attack upon us? Or--What the deuce _is_ he
doing?"

"If you ask me," came astonishingly from the watchful Perry, "he's
eating grass, which is my idea of something damn foolish for a perfectly
normal hound, genus lupo, to be--Look out!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The animal, as if suddenly remembering the presence of the men, suddenly
charged at them again, head down, eyes blazing. As before, it made no
effort to bite. Though both men were somewhat disconcerted by the great
brute they held their ground, and when it presented the opportunity the
older reporter planted a terrific kick to the flank which sent the
animal whimpering back to its shed behind.

"Score one," breathed Handlon. "If we--" At a sudden grating sound
overhead, he stopped.

Both turned to face the threatening muzzle of an ancient blunderbuss.
Behind it was an irate countenance, nearly covered by an unclipped beard
of a dirty gray color. In the eyes now glaring at them malevolently
through heavily concaved spectacles they read hate unutterable. The
barrel of the blunderbuss swung slightly as it covered alternately one
and the other. Both sensed that the finger even now tightening on the
trigger would not hesitate unduly. Being more or less hardened to
rebuffs of all kinds in the pursuance of their calling, the reporters
did not hesitate in stating their purpose.

"What?" yelled the old man. "You dare to invade my grounds and disturb
me at my labors for such a reason? Reporters! My scientific research
work is not for publicity, sirs; and futhermore I want it understood
that I am not to be dragged from my laboratory again for the purpose of
entertaining you or any others of your ilk. Get away!"

Without further ado the window was slammed down, a shutter closed on the
inside, and once more the silence of the dead descended upon the spot.
The two men grinned ruefully at each other, Handlon finally breaking the
stillness.

"My idea of the world's original one-sided conversation. We simply
didn't talk--and yet we're supposed to be reporters. You've got to hand
it to the Proff, Horace, for the beautiful rock-crusher he just handed
us."

"You didn't think we had anything easy, did you?" said Perry irritably.
"He'll change his tune presently, when--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Handlon's jaw dropped. "You don't mean you're going to take any more
chances! Would you rouse him again after the way he treated us with
that gun? Besides, the train...."

Perry bent a scathing glance at his companion. "What on earth has the
train to do with our getting the Professor's confession of crime or
whatever he has to offer? You evidently don't know Bland--much. I deduce
that a lot of my sweetness has been wasted on the desert air. Once more,
let me assure you that if you propose to go back without the Proff's mug
on one of those plates you might as well mail your resignation from
_here_. Get me?"

The other wilted.

"I wonder," Perry ruminated as he stared in the direction of the shed
wherein the canine monstrosity had disappeared. "Do you suppose that you
can get a snap of the old boy's mug if I can get him to the window
again? If you can do that, just leave the rest to me. I've handled these
crusty birds before. What say?"

"Go as far as you like." The photographer was once more grinning as he
unslung his camera and carefully adjusted a plate in place. Everything
at last to his satisfaction he gripped flash pan and bulb.

"I'm going to make some racket now," announced Perry grimly. "If Kell
shows up, work fast. He may shoot at you, but don't get excited. It's
almost dark, so his aim _might_ be poor."

At this suggestion his companion showed signs of panic, but the other
affected not to notice this. There came a deafening hullaballoo as Perry
beat a terrific tattoo on the ancient door. Followed a deep silence,
while Perry leaped back to stand in front of Skip and his camera. After
perhaps a full minute's wait he once more opened up his bombardment, to
jump quickly back to the camera as before. This time he had better
success. The window was again opened and the muzzle of the blunderbuss
put in its appearance. Handlon stood close behind Perry as he silently
swung the camera into a more favorable position for action. The face at
the window was purple with wrath.

"You damned pests! Leave my grounds at once or I shall call my hound and
set him upon you. And when--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Crack! Flash! Click! Perry had made a sudden sidewise movement as
Handlon went into action.

"Much obliged, Professor," said Perry politely. "Your pose with that old
cannon is going to be very effective from the front page. The write-up
will doubtless be interesting too. Probably the story won't be quite so
accurate as it would be had you told it to us yourself; but we shall get
as many of the details from the natives hereabouts as we can. Good-day
to you, sir!"

Motioning to the other he turned on his heel and started down the
driveway. It was an old trick, and for a long moment of suspense he
almost feared that it would fail. Another moment--

"Wait!" The quavering voice of the irascible old villain had lost some
of its malice. "Come back here a minute."

With simulated reluctance the two slowly retraced their steps. "Is there
something else, sir?"

"Perhaps...." The old man hesitated, as if pondering upon his words.
"Perhaps if you care to step in I can be of assistance to you after all.
It occurs to me that possibly I have been too abrupt with you."

"I am very glad that you have decided to cooperate with us, Professor
Kell," answered the reporter heartily, as they ascended the steps. The
old man's head disappeared from the window and shortly the sound of
footsteps inside told of his approach. Finally the oaken door swung
open, and they were silently ushered into the musty smelling hallway.
Though outwardly accepting the Professor's suddenly pacific attitude,
Perry made up his mind to be on his guard.

       *       *       *       *       *

As they entered what had evidently been the parlor in bygone days, an
oppressive, heavy odor smote their nostrils, telling of age-old carpets
and of draperies allowed to decay unnoticed. On the walls hung several
antique prints, a poorly executed crayon portrait of a person doubtless
an ancestor of the present Kell, and one or two paintings done in oil,
now badly cracked and stained. Everything gave the impression of an era
long since departed, and the two men felt vaguely out of place. Their
host led them to a pair of dilapidated chairs, which they accepted
gratefully. The ride to Keegan after a hard day's work had not tended to
improve their spirits.

"Now to business." Perry went straight to the point, desiring to get the
interview over as soon as possible. "We have heard indirectly of various
happenings in this vicinity which many think have some connection with
your scientific experiments. Any statement you may care to make to us in
regard to these happenings will be greatly appreciated by my paper.
Inasmuch as what little has already been printed is probably of an
erroneous nature, we believe it will be in your own best interest to
give us as complete data as possible." Here he became slightly
histrionic. "Of course we do not allow ourselves to take the stories
told by the local inhabitants too literally, as such persons are too
liable to exaggerate, but we must assume that some of these stories have
partial basis in fact. Any information relative to your scientific work,
incidentally, will make good copy for us also."

Perry gazed steadily at the patriarch as he spoke. For a moment, a
crafty expression passed over the old man's face, but as suddenly it
disappeared. Evidently he had arrived at a decision.

"Come with me," he wheezed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two newspaper men exchanged swift glances, the same thought in the
mind of each. Were they about to be led into a trap? If the old man's
shady reputation was at all deserved they would do well to be wary.
Perry thought swiftly of the clippings he had read and of what gossip he
had heard, then glanced once more in the direction of Handlon. That
