SCHWABE. The probable importance of such a period in its relation to
terrestrial meteorology was not only clearly pointed out by HERSCHEL,
but he even attempted to demonstrate, from such data as were obtainable,
the character of this influence.

Perhaps no one thing which this great philosopher has done better
exhibits the catholic character of his mind than this research. When the
possible connection of solar and terrestrial phenomena occurred to him
as a question to be tested, there were no available meteorological
records, and he could find but four or five short series of
observations, widely separated in time. To an ordinary thinker the task
would have seemed hopeless until more data had been collected. But
HERSCHEL'S fertile mind, though it could not recall lost opportunities
for solar observations, did find a substitute for meteorological records
in the statistics of the prices of grain during the various epochs.
It is clear that the price of wheat must have depended upon the supply,
and the supply, in turn, largely upon the character of the season.
The method, as ingenious as it is, failed in HERSCHEL'S hands on account
of the paucity of solar statistics; but it has since proved of value,
and has taken its place as a recognized method of research.


                    _Researches on Nebulae and Clusters._

When HERSCHEL first began to observe the nebulae in 1774, there were
very few of these objects known. The nebulae of _Orion_ and _Andromeda_
had been known in Europe only a little over a hundred years.

In 1784 MESSIER published a list of sixty-eight such objects which he
had found in his searches for comets, and twenty-eight nebulae had been
found by LACAILLE in his observations at the Cape of Good Hope. In the
mere discovery of these objects HERSCHEL quickly surpassed all others.
In 1786 he published a catalogue of one thousand new nebulae, in 1789 a
catalogue of a second thousand, and in 1802 one of five hundred. In all
he discovered and described two thousand five hundred and eight new
nebulae and clusters. This branch of astronomy may almost be said to be
proper to the HERSCHELS, father and son. Sir JOHN HERSCHEL re-observed
all his father's nebulae in the northern hemisphere, and added many new
ones, and in his astronomical expedition to the Cape of Good Hope he
recorded almost an equal number in the southern sky.

Of the six thousand two hundred nebulae now known the HERSCHELS
discovered at least eight-tenths. The mere discovery of twenty-five
hundred nebulae would have been a brilliant addition to our knowledge of
celestial statistics.

HERSCHEL did more than merely point out the existence and position of
these new bodies. Each observation was accompanied by a careful and
minute description of the object viewed, and with sketches and diagrams
which gave the position of the small stars in it and near it.[36]

As the nebulae and clusters were discovered they were placed in classes,
each class covering those nebulae which resembled each other in their
general features. Even at the telescope HERSCHEL'S object was not
discovery merely, but to know the inner constitution of the heavens.
His classes were arranged with this end, and they are to-day adopted.
They were:

  CLASS I. "Bright nebulae (288 in all).
       II. "Faint nebulae (909 in all).
      III. "Very faint nebulae (984 in all).
       IV. "Planetary nebulae, stars with burs, with milky chevelure,
              with short rays, remarkable shapes, etc. (79 in all).
        V. "Very large nebulae (52 in all).
       VI. "Very compressed and rich clusters of stars (42 in all).
      VII. "Pretty much compressed clusters (67 in all).
     VIII. "Coarsely scattered clusters of stars" (88 in all).

The lists of these classes were the storehouses of rich material from
which HERSCHEL drew the examples by which his later opinions on the
physical conditions of nebulous matter were enforced.

As the nebulae were discovered and classified they were placed upon a
star-map in their proper positions (1786), and, as the discoveries went
on, the real laws of the distribution of the nebulae and of the clusters
over the surface of the sky showed themselves more and more plainly. It
was by this means that HERSCHEL was led to the announcement of the law
that the spaces richest in nebulae are distant from the Milky Way, etc.
By no other means could he have detected this, and I believe this to
have been the first example of the use of the graphical method, now
become common in treating large masses of statistics.

It is still in his capacity of an observer--an acute and wise one--that
HERSCHEL is considered. But this was the least of his gifts. This vast
mass of material was not left in this state: it served him for a
stepping-stone to larger views of the nature and extent of the nebulous
matter itself.

His views on the nature of nebulae underwent successive changes. At first
he supposed all nebulae to be but aggregations of stars. The logic was
simple. To the naked eye there are many groups of stars which appear
nebulous. _Praesepe_ is, perhaps, the best example. The slightest
telescopic power applied to such groups alters the nebulous appearance,
and shows that it comes from the combined and confused light of discrete
stars. Other groups which remain nebulous in a seven-foot telescope,
become stellar in a ten-foot. The nebulosity of the ten-foot can be
resolved into stars by the twenty-foot, and so on. The nebulae which
remained still unresolved, it was reasonable to conclude, would yield to
higher power, and generally a nebula was but a group of stars removed to
a great distance. An increase of telescopic power was alone necessary to
demonstrate this.[37]

    "Nebulae can be selected so that an insensible gradation shall take
    place from a coarse cluster like the _Pleiades_ down to a milky
    nebulosity like that in _Orion_, every intermediate step being
    represented. This tends to confirm the hypothesis that all are
    composed of stars more or less remote."

So, at first, HERSCHEL believed that his twenty-foot telescope was of
power sufficient to fathom the Milky Way, that is, to see through it and
beyond it, and to reduce all its nebulosities to true groups of stars.

In 1791 he published a memoir on _Nebulous Stars_, in which his views
were completely changed. He had found a nebulous star, the sixty-ninth
of his Class IV., to which his reasons would not apply. In the centre of
it was a bright star; around the star was a halo gradually diminishing
in brightness from the star outward, and perfectly circular. It was
clear the two parts, star and nebula, were connected, and thus at the
same distance from us.

There were two possible solutions only. Either the whole mass was,
_first_, composed of stars, in which case the nucleus would be
enormously larger than the other stars of its stellar magnitude
elsewhere in the sky, or the stars which made up the halo indefinitely
small; or, _second_, the central nucleus was indeed a star, but a star
surrounded with "a shining fluid, of a nature totally unknown to us."

The long strata of nebulae, which he had before described under the name
of "telescopic Milky Ways," might well be accounted for by masses of
this fluid lying beyond the regions of the seventh-magnitude stars. This
fluid might exist independently of stars. If it is self-luminous, it
seems more fit to produce a star by its condensation, than to depend
upon the star for its own existence. Such were a few of the theorems to
which his discovery of this nebula led him. The hypothesis of an elastic
_shining fluid_ existing in space, sometimes in connection with stars,
sometimes distinct from them, was adopted and never abandoned. How well
the spectroscope has confirmed this idea it is not necessary to say.
We know the shining fluid does exist, and in late years we have seen the
reverse of the process imagined by HERSCHEL. A star has actually, under
our eyes, become a planetary nebula, and the cycle of which he gave the
first terms is complete.

In five separate memoirs (1802, 1811, 1814, 1817, and 1818) HERSCHEL
elaborated his views of the sidereal system. The whole extent of his
views must be gained from the extended memoirs themselves. Here only the
merest outline can be given.

In 1802 there is a marshaling of the various objects beyond our solar
system. The stars themselves may be _insulated_, or may belong to
_binary_ or _multiple_ systems, to _clusters_ and groups, or to grand
groups like the Milky Way. Nebulae may have any of the forms which have
been described; and, in 1811, he gives examples of immense spaces in the
sky covered with diffused and very faint nebulosity. "Its abundance
exceeds all imagination."[38] These masses of nebular matter are the
seats of attracting forces, and these forces must produce condensation.
When a nebula has more than one preponderating seat of attracting
matter, it may in time be divided, and the double nebulae have had such
an origin. When nebulae appear to us as round masses, they are in reality
globular in form, and this form is at once the effect and the proof of a
gravitating cause.

The central brightness of nebulae points out the seat of the attraction;
and the completeness of the approximation to a spherical form points out
the length of time that the gravitating forces have been at work. Those
nebulae (and clusters) which are most perfect in the globular form, have
been longest exposed to central forces. The planetary nebulae are the
oldest in our system. They must have a rotatory motion on their axes.

By progressive condensation planetary nebulae may be successively
converted into bright stellar nebulae, or into nebulous stars, and these
again, by the effects of the same cause, into insulated or double stars.
This chain of theorems, laid down in the memoir of 1811, is enforced in
1814 with examples which show how the nebulous appearance may grow into
the sidereal. HERSCHEL selects from the hundreds of instances in his
note-books, nebulae in every stage of progress, and traces the effect of
condensation and of clustering power through all its course, even to the
final breaking up of the Milky Way itself.

The memoirs of 1817 and 1818 add little to the general view of the
physical constitution of the heavens. They are attempts to gain a scale
of celestial measures by which we may judge of the distances of the
stars and clusters in which these changes are going on.

There is little to change in HERSCHEL'S statement of the general
construction of the heavens. It is the groundwork upon which we have
still to build. Every astronomical discovery and every physical fact
well observed is material for the elaboration of its details or for the
correction of some of its minor points. As a scientific conception it is
perhaps the grandest that has ever entered into the human mind. As a
study of the height to which the efforts of one man may go, it is almost
without a parallel. The philosopher who will add to it to-day, will have
his facts and his methods ready to his hands. HERSCHEL presents the
almost unique example of an eager observer marshaling the multitude of
single instances, which he himself has laboriously gathered, into a
compact and philosophic whole. In spite of minor errors and defects, his
ideas of the nature of the sidereal universe have prevailed, and are
to-day the unacknowledged basis of our every thought upon it. Some of
its most secret processes have been worked out by him, and the paths
which he pointed out are those along which our advances must be made.

In concluding this condensed account of HERSCHEL'S scientific labors,
it behoves us to remember that there was nothing due to accident in his
long life. He was born with the faculties which fitted him for the
gigantic labors which he undertook, and he had the firm basis of energy
and principle which kept him steadily to his work.

As a practical astronomer he remains without an equal. In profound
philosophy he has few superiors. By a kindly chance he can be claimed as
the citizen of no one country. In very truth his is one of the few names
which belong to the whole world.

FOOTNOTES:

[31] JAMES SHORT, F.R.S. (1710-1768), and JOHN DOLLOND, F.R.S.
(1706-1761), were the most celebrated makers of telescopes of their day.
The six-foot Newtonian reflectors of SHORT (aperture 9.4 inches), and
the forty-six-inch achromatics of DOLLOND (aperture 3.6 inches), were
highly esteemed. The Royal Observatory of Greenwich possessed, in 1765,
one of each class. In a comparative trial of SHORT'S telescope, at
Greenwich, and one of HERSCHEL'S first telescopes, the latter was
adjudged greatly superior.

[32] At least _one_ of these telescopes had the principal
mirror made of glass instead of metal.--_Philosophical Transactions_,
1803.

[33] The following extract from FOURIER'S _Eloge_ of HERSCHEL
is of interest in this connection. The sum first appropriated by the
king was L2,000. This was afterwards raised to L4,000, and a sum of L200
yearly was given for maintenance.

"L'histoire doit conserver a jamais la reponse de ce prince a un
etranger celebre [LALANDE?] qui le remerciait des sommes considerables
accordees pour les progres de l'astronomie. 'Je fais les depenses de la
guerre,' dit le roi, 'parcequ'elles sont necessaires; quant a celles des
sciences, il m'est agreable des les ordonner; leur objet ne coute point
des larmes, et honore l'humanite.'"

LALANDE'S own account is a little different. He says the king exclaimed:
"Ne vaut-il pas mieux employer son argent a cela qu'a faire tuer des
hommes?"

[34] The memoirs on the parallaxes of stars, written by various
astronomers from 1750 to 1800, were mainly directed to the improvement
of the methods, or to the discovery of the parallax of some particular
star. For example, LACAILLE'S observations of _Sirius_, at the Cape of
Good Hope, had resulted in a parallax of 9" for that star--a
quantity over forty times too large.

[35] HERSCHEL accepted, as did all his cotemporaries, the
Newtonian or corpuscular theory of light.

[36] Thus the position of small stars critically situated in
the centre, or on the edges of the nebulae was always noted. Many of the
descriptions are given in the published papers, but the publication of
the diagrams would be an immense help to this branch of astronomy.
D'ARREST in his reduction of HERSCHEL'S nebula observations (1856)
writes: "Gewiss waere es vom hoechsten Interesse fuer die Entwickelung,
welche hoffentlich auch dieser Zweig der beobachtenden Astronomie
zukuenftig erhalten wird, wenn die HERSCHEL'Schen Beobachtungen in der
Ausfuehrlichkeit in welcher sie, verschiedenen Andeutungen zufolge,
_handschriftlich_ vorhanden sind, veroeffentlicht wuerden. Es schliesst
sich dieser Wunsch in Betreff der Nebelflecken lebhaft an den an,
welcher, schon vor einem Jahrzehnt nach Veroeffentlichung der 400 noch
unedirten _star-gauges_ von gewichtigerer Seite her geaeussert wurde."
In this all must agree who have a knowledge of the direction in which we
must look for advances in the difficult and important questions of the
distance, the motions, and the changes of the nebulae. Almost the only
aid to be looked for from the older observations must come from such
diagrams, and we may safely say that the publication of this priceless
material, just as it stands, would carry our exact data back from 1833
to 1786, or no less than forty-seven years.

[37] Long after HERSCHEL had abandoned this idea, it continued
current among astronomers. The successes of Lord ROSSE'S telescope
perpetuated to the middle of the nineteenth century an erroneous view
which HERSCHEL had given up in 1791.

[38] These have never been re-observed. They should be sought
for with a powerful refractor, taking special precautions against the
illumination of the field of view from neighboring bright stars.
HERSCHEL'S reflectors were specially open to illusions produced in this
way. His observations probably will remain untested until some large
telescope is used in the way he adopted, _i. e._, in sweeping.




                             BIBLIOGRAPHY.


I.--LIST OF THE PUBLISHED WRITINGS OF WILLIAM HERSCHEL ON ASTRONOMICAL
    SUBJECTS.

                       [In chronological order.]

_N.B.--In general, translations and abstracts of those which appeared
in periodicals are not noticed here. I have made exceptions in the
more important cases._

[Solution of a prize question. _See_ this book, page 46.]
                              _Ladies' Diary_, 1779.


Astronomical observations on the periodical star in _Collo Ceti_.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1780, p. 338.


Astronomical observations relating to the mountains of the moon.
                              _Phil. Trans._, 1780, p. 507.


Astronomical observations on the rotation of the planets round their
axes, made with a view to determine whether the earth's diurnal motion
is perfectly equable.
