"What's that, Larry? Listen!" I said to my companion.

We stopped in the street. We had heard a girl's scream: then her
frantic, muffled words to attract our attention. Then we saw her white
face at the basement window. It was on the night of June 8-9, 1950,
when I was walking with my friend Larry Gregory through Patton Place
in New York City. My name is George Rankin. In a small, deserted house
we found the strange girl; brought her out; took her away in a taxi to
an alienist for examination.

We thought she might be demented--this strangely beautiful girl, in a
long white satin dress with a powdered white wig, and a black beauty
patch on her cheek--for she told us that the deserted house had just a
few minutes before been her house; and though we assured her this was
the summer of 1935, she told us her name was Mistress Mary Atwood,
that her father was Major Atwood of General Washington's staff, and
that she had just now come from the year 1777!

We took her to my friend Dr. Alten and she told her strange story. A
cage, like a room of shining metal bars, had materialized in her
garden. A great mechanical monster--a thing of metal, ten feet tall
and fashioned in the guise of a man--had captured her. She was whirled
away into the future, in the cage; then she was released, the cage had
vanished, and Larry and I had passed by the house and rescued her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captured by a Robot in a Time-traveling cage! We tried to fathom it.
And why had she been captured? Had she some enemy? She could only
think of a fellow called Tugh. He was a hideously repulsive cripple
who had dared make love to her and had threatened vengeance against
her and her father.

"Tugh!" exclaimed Alten. "A cripple? Why, he lived in New York City
three years ago, in 1932!"

A coincidence? The Tugh whom Mary knew in 1777 seemed the same person
who, in 1932, had gotten into trouble with the New York police and had
vowed some weird vengeance against them and all the city. And, equally
strange, this house on Patton Place where we had found the girl was
owned by the same Tugh who now was wanted for the murder of a girl and
could not be found!

With Dr. Alten, and Mary Atwood, Larry and I returned that same night
to the house on Patton Place. Near dawn, in the back yard of the
house, the Time-traveling cage appeared again! The Robot came from it.
Alten, Larry and I attacked the monster, and were defeated. When the
fight was over, Larry and Alten lay senseless. The mechanical thing
seized Mary and me, shoved us in the cage and whirled us away into
Time.

Larry presently recovered. He rushed into Patton Place, and in his
path another, much smaller cage appeared. A man and a girl leaped from
it; and, when Larry fought with them, they carried him off in their
vehicle.

       *       *       *       *       *

He learned they were chasing the larger cage. They were not hostile to
Larry and presently made friends with him. They were Princess Tina and
a young scientist named Harl, both of the world of 2930. The two cages
had come from 2930. The larger one had been stolen by an
insubordinate Robot named Migul--a pseudo-human mechanism running
amuck.

Again Tugh, the cripple, was mentioned. In 2930 he was a prominent
scientist! But Harl and Tina mistrusted him. Tugh and Harl had
invented the Time-traveling cages. It was a strange Time-world, that
2930, which now was described to Larry. It was an era in which all
work was done by mechanisms--fantastic Robots, all but human! And they
were now upon the verge of revolt against their human masters! Migul
was one of them. It had stolen one of the cages, gone to 1777 and
abducted Mary Atwood; and now, with her and me in its power, was
headed back for 1777 upon some strange mission. Was it acting for the
cripple Tugh? It seemed so. Tina and Harl, with Larry, chased our cage
and stopped in a night of the summer of 1777.

Simultaneously, from the house on Patton Place, in June of 1935,
Robots began appearing. A hundred of them, or a thousand, no one knew.
With swords and flashing red and violet light-beams they spread over
the city in the never-to-be-forgotten Massacre of New York! It was the
beginning of the vengeance Tugh had threatened! Nothing could stop the
monstrous mechanical men. For three days and nights New York City was
in chaos. The red beams were frigid. They brought a mid-summer
snowstorm! Then the violet beams turned the weather suddenly hot. A
crazy wild storm swept the wrecked city. Torrential hot rain poured
down. Then, one dawn, the beams vanished; the Robots retreated into
the house on Patton Place and disappeared; and New York was left a
horror of death and desolation.

The vengeance of Tugh against the New York City of 1935 was complete.


CHAPTER VIII

_The Murder of Major Atwood_

"We are late," Tina whispered. It was that night in 1777 when she,
Larry and Harl stepped from their Time-traveling cage; and again I am
picturing the events as Larry afterward described them to me. "Migul,
in the other cage, was here," Tina added. "But it's gone now. Exactly
where was it, I wonder?"

"Mary Atwood said it appeared in the garden."

They crept down the length of the field, just inside the picket fence.
In a moment the trees and an intervening hillock of ground hid the
dimly shining outline of their own cage from their sight. The dirt
road leading to Major Atwood's home was on the other side of the
fence.

"Wait," murmured Tina. "There is a light in the house. Someone is
awake."

"When was Migul here, do you think?" Larry whispered.

"Last night, perhaps. Or to-night. It may be only an hour--or a few
minutes ago."

The faint thud of horses' hoofs on the roadway made Tina and Larry
drop to the ground. They crouched in the shadows of a tree. Galloping
horses were approaching along the road. The moon went under a cloud.

From around a bend in the road a group of horsemen came. They were
galloping; then they slowed to a trot; a walk. They reined up in the
road not more than twenty feet from Larry and Tina. In the starlight
they showed clearly--men in the red and white uniform of the army of
the King. Some of them wore short, dark cloaks. They dismounted with a
clanking of swords and spurs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Their voices were audible. "Leave the steeds with Jake. Egad, we've
made enough noise already."

"Here, Jake, you scoundrel. Stay safely here with the mounts."

"Come on, Tony. You and I will circle. We have him, this time. By the
King's garter, what a fool he is to come into New York at such a
time!"

"He wants to see his daughter, I venture."

"Right, Tony. And have you seen her? As saucy a little minx as there
it in the Colonies. I was quartered here last month. I do not blame
the major for wanting to come."

"Here, take my bridle, Jake. Tie them to the fence."

There was a swift confusion of voices; laughter. "If you should hear a
pistol shot, Jake, ride quickly back and tell My Lord there was a
fracas and you did not dare remain."

"I only hope he is garbed in the rebel white and blue--eh, Tony? Then
he will yield like an officer and a gentleman; which he is, rebel or
no."

They were moving away to surround the house. Two were left.

"Come on, Tony. We will pound the front knocker in the name of the
King. A feather in our cap when we ride him down to the Bowling Green
and present him to My Lord...."

The voices faded.

Larry gripped the girl beside him. "They are British soldiers going to
capture Major Atwood! What can we--"

       *       *       *       *       *

He never finished. A scream echoed over the somnolent night--a voice
from the rear of the house. A man's voice.

The red-coated soldiers ran forward. In the field, close against the
fence, Tina and Larry were running.

From the garden of the house a man was screaming. Then there were
other voices; servants were awakening in the upper rooms. The
screaming, shouting man rushed through the house. He appeared at the
front door, standing between the high white colonial pillars which
supported the overhead porch. A yellow light fell upon him through the
opened doorway. An old, white-headed negro appeared. Larry and Tina,
in the nearby field, stood stricken by the scene.

"The marster--the marster--" He shouted this wildly.

The British officers ran at him.

"You, Thomas, tell us where the major is. We've come for him; we know
he's here! Don't lie!"

"But the marster--" He choked over it.

"A trick, Tony! Egad, if he is trying to trick us--"

They leaped to the porch and seized the old negro.

"Speak, you devil!" They shook him. "The house is surrounded. He
cannot escape!"

"But the marster is--is dead! My girl Tollie saw it and then she
swooned." He steadied himself. "He--the major's in the garden, Marster
Tony. Lying there dead! Murdered! By a ghost, Tollie says. A great,
white, shining ghost that came to the garden and murdered him!"

       *       *       *       *       *

If you were to delve very closely into certain old records of
Revolutionary New York City during the year 1777, you doubtless would
find mention of the strange murder of Major Atwood, who, coming from
New Jersey, is thought to have crossed the river well to the north of
the city, mounted his horse--which, by pre-arrangement, one of his
retainers had left for him somewhere to the south of Dykeman's
farm--and ridden to his home. He came, not as a spy, but in full
uniform. And no sooner had he reached his home when he was strangely
murdered. There was only a negro tale of an apparition which had
appeared in the garden and murdered the master.

Larry and I have found cursory mention of that. But I doubt if the
group of My Lord Howe's gay young blades who were sent north to
capture Major Atwood ever reported exactly what happened to them. The
old Dutch ferryman divulged that he had been hired to ferry the
homecoming major; this, too, is recorded. But Tony Green and his
fellow officers, sent to apprehend the colonial major, found him
inexplicably murdered; and by dawn they were back at the Bowling
Green, white-faced and shaken.

They told some of what had happened to them, but not all. They could
not expect to be believed, for instance, if they said that though they
were unafraid of a negro's tale of a ghost, they had themselves
encountered two ghosts, and had fled the premises!

Those two ghosts were only Larry and Tina!

The negro babbled of a shining cage appearing in the garden. That, of
course, was undoubtedly set down as nonsense. Tony Green and his
friends went to the garden and examined the body of Major Atwood. What
had killed him no one could say. No bullet had struck him. There were
no wounds, no knife thrust, no sword slash. Tony held the lantern with
its swaying yellow glow close to the murdered man's body. The August
night was warm; the garden, banked by trees and shrubbery, was
breathless and oppressively hot; yet the body of Atwood seemed frozen!
He had been dead but a short while, and already the body was stiff.
More than that, it was ice cold. The face, the brows were wet as
though frost had been there and now was melted!

Tony Green's hand shook as he held the lantern. He tried to tell his
comrades that Atwood had died from failure of the heart. Undoubtedly
it was that. He had seen what he supposed was an apparition;
something had frightened him; and a weak heart had brought his death.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, in another part of the garden, one of the searching officers
found a sheet of parchment scroll with writing on it. Yet it was not
parchment, either. Some strange, white, smooth fabric which crumpled
and tore very easily, the like of which this young British officer of
Howe's staff had never seen before. It was found lying in a flower bed
forty or fifty feet from Atwood's body. They gathered in a group to
examine it by the light of the lantern. Writing! The delicate script
of Mary Atwood! A missive addressed to her father. It was strangely
written, evidently not with a quill.

Tony read it with an awed, frightened voice:

     "Father, beware of Tugh! Beware of Tugh! And, my dear
     Father, good-by. I am departing, I think, to the year of our
     Lord, 2930. Cannot explain--a captive--good-by--nothing you
     can do--

                                                 Mary."

Strange! I can imagine how strange they thought it was. Tugh--why he
was the cripple who had lived down by the Bowling Green, and had
lately vanished!

They were reading this singularly unexplainable missive, when as
though to climax their own fears of the supernatural they saw
themselves a ghost! And not only one ghost, but two!

Plain as a pikestaff, peering from a nearby tree, in a shaft of
moonlight, a ghost was standing. It was the figure of a young girl,
with jacket and breeches of black and gleaming white. An apparition
fantastic! And a young man was with her, in a long dark jacket and
dark tubular pipes, for legs.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two ghosts with dead white faces stood peering. Then the man moved
forward. His dead, strange voice called:

"Drop that paper!"

My Lord Howe's red-coated officers dropped the parchment and fled.

And later, when Atwood's body was taken away to be given burial as
befitted an enemy officer and a gentleman, that missive from Mary
Atwood had disappeared. It was never found.

Tony Green and his fellows said nothing of this latter incident. One
cannot with grace explain being routed by a ghost. Not an officer of
His Majesty's army!

Unrecorded history! A supernatural incident of the year 1777!

Undoubtedly in the past ages there have been many such affairs: some
never recorded, others interwoven in written history and called
supernatural.

Yet why must they be that? There was nothing supernatural in the
events of that night in Major Atwood's garden.

Is this perchance an explanation of why the pages of history are so
thronged with tales of ghosts? There must, indeed, be many future ages
down the corridors of Time where the genius of man will invent devices
to fling him back into his past. And the impressions upon the past
which he makes are called supernatural.

Whether this be so or not, it was so in the case of these two
Time-traveling vehicles from 2930. Larry and I think that the world of
1935 is just now shaking off the shackles of superstition, and coming
to realize that what is called the supernatural is only the Unknown.
Who can say, up to 1935, how many Time-traveling humans have come
briefly back? Is this, perchance, what we call the phenomena of the
supernatural?

       *       *       *       *       *

Larry and Tina--anything but ghosts, very much alive and very much
perturbed--were standing back of that tree. They saw the British
officers reading the scrap of paper. They could hear only the words,
"Mary," and "from Mistress Atwood."

"A message!" Larry whispered. "She and George must have found a chance
to write it, and dropped it here while the Robot murdered Major
Atwood!"

Larry and Tina vehemently wanted to read the note. Tina whispered:

"If we show ourselves, they will be frightened and run. It is nearly
always so where Harl and I have become visible in earlier Times."

"Yes. I'll try it."

Larry stepped from the tree, and shouted, "Drop that paper!"

And a moment later, with Mary's torn little note scribbled on a scrap
of paper thrust in his pocket, Larry ran with Tina from the Atwood
garden. Unseen they scurried back through the field. Under a distant
tree they stopped and read the note.

"2930!" Larry exclaimed. "The Robot is taking them back to your world,
Tina!"

"Then we will go there. Let us get back to Harl, now."

