Malone shrugged. "Who knows?" he said. "But I'm not surprised you like
Burris' theory. Psionics never did make you very happy, did it?"

"Not very," Boyd admitted. "This way, anyhow, I've got something I can
cope with. And it makes nice, simple sense. No reason to go and
complicate it, Ken. None at all."

       *       *       *       *       *

Glumly, Malone made his farewells and then teleported himself from the
Justice Department Building back to his own apartment. There, slowly
and sadly, he began to pack. He hadn't yet decided just where he _was_
going, but that was a minor detail. The important thing was that he
was going. If the Director of the FBI tells you that you need a rest
cure, Malone thought, you do not argue with him. Argument may result
in your vacation being extended indefinitely. And that is not a good
thing.

Of course, such a "vacation" wouldn't be the end of the world. Not
quite. He could even beat Burris to the gun, hand in his resignation
and go into private practice as a lawyer. The name of Malone, he told
himself proudly, had not been entirely forgotten in Chicago, by any
means. But he didn't feel happy about the idea. He knew, perfectly
well, that he didn't want to live by trading on his father's
reputation. And besides, he _liked_ being an FBI agent. It had
glamour. It had standing.

It had everything. It even had trouble.

Malone caught his whirling mind and forced it back to a landing.
Where, he asked himself, was he going?

He thought about that for a second. Perhaps, as Burris had apparently
suspected, he was going nuts. When he considered it, it even sounded
like a good possibility.

After all, what evidence _did_ he have for his psionic theory? Her
Majesty had told him about those peculiar bursts of metal energy,
true. But there wasn't anything else. And, come to think of it, wasn't
it possible that Her Majesty had slipped just a little off the trolley
of her one-track psychosis?

At that thought a quick wave of guilt swept through him. Her Majesty,
after all, might be reading his mind from Yucca Flats, where she had
returned the previous night, right at that moment. He felt as if he
had committed high, middle and low treason all in one great big
package, not to mention Jack and the Game, he added disconsolately.

"Nevertheless," he muttered, and stopped. He blinked and started over
again. In spite of all that, he told himself, the Burris Theory
certainly looked a lot sounder when you considered it objectively.

The big question was whether or not he _wanted_ to consider it
objectively. But he put this aside for the future, and continued
packing slowly and carefully. When at last he snapped shut the last
suitcase, he still hadn't made up his mind as to the best spot for a
vacation. Images tumbled through his brain: mountains, seacoasts,
beaches, beautiful native girls and even a few insane asylums. But
nothing definite appeared. He sat down in his favorite easychair,
found a cigar and lit it, and luxuriated in the soothing fumes while
his mind began to wander.

Her Majesty, he was quite certain, wouldn't lie purposely. Granted,
she had misled him now and again, but even when she felt misleading
necessary she hadn't lied; she had merely juggled the truth a little.
And Malone was sure she would continue to tell him the truth as she
knew it.

Of course, that was the stopper: _as she knew it_. And she might have
developed another delusion. In which case, he thought sadly, Burris
was very probably right.

But she might also be telling the actual truth. And that meant, Malone
thought, that little pops of energy were occasionally bursting in
various minds. These little pops had an effect, or an apparent effect:
they made people change their minds about doing one thing or another.

And that meant--Malone stopped, his cigar halfway to his mouth.

_Wasn't it possible that just such a burst of energy had made Burris
call him off the case?_

It seemed like a long time before the cigar reached his mouth. Malone
felt slightly appalled. The flashes that had been going on in his own
mind had already been bothering him, and he'd decided that he'd have
to check every decision he made to be sure that it was not capricious;
now he made a resolve that he'd kept his mental faculties on a
perpetual watch for that sort of interference. Of course, it was more
than barely possible that he wouldn't notice it if anything happened.
But it would be pretty stupid to succumb to that sort of defeatism
now, he told himself grimly.

Now that everything was narrowing down so nicely, anyhow, he thought.
There were only two real possibilities. Malone numbered them in his
mind:

1. Her Majesty has developed a new delusion. In this case, he thought,
Burris was perfectly right. I can enjoy a month of free vacation.

2. Her Majesty is no nuttier than before. If this is the case, he
thought, then there's more to the case than has appeared, and Kenneth
J. Malone, with or without the FBI, is going to get to the bottom of
it.

Therefore, he summed up, everything now hinged on whether or not Her
Majesty was unhinged.

That was confusing, but he managed to straighten it out after a
second. He put his half-smoked cigar carefully in an ashtray and stood
up. He went over to the phone and dialed the special unlisted number
of the FBI.

The face that appeared was faintly sallow and looked sad. "Pelham
here," it said in the tones of a discouraged horse.

"Hello, Pelham," Malone said. "Kenneth Malone here."

"Trouble?" Pelham said. It was obvious that he expected trouble, and
always had, and probably always would.

"Nope," Malone said. Pelham looked even sadder. "Just checking out for
vacation. You can tell the Chief I'm going to take off for Las Vegas.
I'm taking his advice, tell him; I'm going to carouse and throw my
money away and look at dancing girls and smoke and drink and stay out
late. I'll let the local office know where I'm staying when I get
there, just in case something comes up."

"O.K.," Pelham said unhappily. "I'll check you out." He tried a smile,
but it looked more like the blank expression on the face of a local
corpse. "Have fun," he said.

"Thanks," Malone said. "I'll try."

But his precognitive sense suddenly rose up on its hind legs as he
broke the connection. The attempt to have fun, it told him in no
uncertain terms, was going to be a morbid failure.

"Nevertheless," Malone muttered, heaved a great sigh, and started for
the suitcase and the door.


VIII

The Great Universal was not the tops in every field. Not by a long
shot. As Las Vegas resorts went, as a matter of fact, almost any of
them could outdo the Great Universal in one respect or another. The
Golden Palace, for instance, had much gaudier gaming rooms. The
Moonbeam had a louder orchestra. The Barbary Coast and the Ringing
Welkin both had more slot machines, and it was undeniable that the
Flower of the West had fatter and pinker dancing girls. The Red Hot,
the Last Fling and the Double Star all boasted more waiters and more
famous guests per square foot of breathable air.

But the Great Universal, in sheer size, volume of business and
elegance of surroundings, outdid any three of the others combined. It
stood grandly alone at the edge of the Strip, the grandiloquent Las
Vegas version of Broadway or Hollywood Boulevard. It had a central
Tower that climbed thirty stories into the clean desert air, and the
Tower was surrounded by a quarter of a square mile of single-level
structures. At the base, the building spread out for five hundred feet
in every direction, and beyond that were the clusters of individual
cabins interlaced by walks, small parks, an occasional pool, and a few
little groves of trees "for privacy and the feeling of oneness with
Nature," the brochure said. But the brochure didn't even do justice to
the place. Nothing could have except the popping eyes of the thousand
of tourists who saw the Great Universal every month. And they were
usually in no condition to sit down and talk calmly about it.

Around the entire collection of buildings rose a wall that fitted the
architectural style of the place perfectly. A Hollywood writer out for
a three-day bender had called it "Futuristic Mediaeval," since it
seemed to be a set-designer's notion of Camelot combined with a
Twenty-fifth Century city as imagined by Frank R. Paul. It had
Egyptian designs on it, but no one knew exactly why. On the other
hand, of course, there was no real reason why not.

That was not the only decoration. Emblazoned on the Tower, in huge
letters of evershifting color, was a glowing sign larger than the eye
could believe. The sign proclaimed through daylight and the darkest
night: Great Universal Hotel. Malone had no doubts about it.

There was a running argument as to whether or not the Great Universal
was actually on the Strip. Certainly the original extent of the Strip
didn't include it. But the Strip itself had been spreading Westward at
a slow but steady pace for two decades, and the only imaginable
stopping-point was the California border.

Malone had taken a taxi from the airfield, and had supplied himself
with silver dollars there. He gave the cabbie one of them and added
another when the man's expression showed real pain. Still unhappy but
looking a little less like a figure out of the Great Depression, the
cabbie gunned his machine away, leaving Malone standing in the carport
surrounded by suitcases and bags of all sizes and weights.

A robot redcap came gliding along. Inevitably, it was gilded, and
looked absolutely brand new. Behind it, a chunky little man with
bright eyes waved at Malone. "Reserved here?" he said.

"That's right," Malone said. "The name is Malone."

The redcap's escort shrugged. "I don't care if the name is Jack the
Ripper," he said. "Just reservations, that's all I care."

Malone watched the luggage being stowed away, and followed after the
redcap and its escort with mixed feelings. Las Vegas glittered like
mad, but the two inhabitants he had met so far seemed a little dim.
However, he told himself, better things might turn up.

Better things did, almost immediately. In the great lobby of the
Tower, guests were lounging about in little groups. Many of the guests
were dressed in tuxedos, others in sport shirts and slacks. Quite a
number were wearing dresses, skirt-and-blouse combinations or evening
gowns, and Malone paid most of his attention to these.

New York, Washington and even Chicago had nothing to match them, he
thought dazedly. They were magnificent, and almost frightening in
their absolute beauty. Malone however, was not easily daunted. He
followed a snappily-dressed bellman to the registration desk while his
robot purred gently after him. First things first, he thought--but
making friends with the other guests definitely came up number two. Or
three, anyhow, he amended sadly.

He signed his own name to the register, but didn't add: "Federal
Bureau of Investigation" after it. After all, he thought, he was there
unofficially. And even though gambling was perfectly legal in Nevada,
the thought of the FBI still made many of the club owners just the
least little bit nervous. Instead, Malone gave a Chicago firm as his
business address--one which the FBI used as a cover for just such
purposes.

The clerk looked at him politely and blankly. "A room in the Tower,
sir?" he said.

Malone shook his head. "Ground floor," he said. "But not too far from
the Tower. I get airsick easily."

The clerk gave Malone a large laugh, which made him uncomfortable and
a little angry. The joke hadn't been all that good, he thought. If
he'd ordered a top-price room he could understand the hospitality, but
the most expensive rooms were in the Tower, with the outside cabins
running a close second. The other rooms dropped in price as they
approached the periphery of the main building.

"A humorist, sir?" the clerk said.

"Not at all," Malone said pleasantly, wishing he'd signed with his
full occupation and address. "I'm a gravedigger. Business has been
very good this year."

The clerk, apparently undecided as to whether or not to offer
congratulations, settled for consulting his registry and then stabbing
at a button on a huge and complex board at his right. A key slid out
of a slot and the clerk handed it to Malone with a rather strained
smile. "10-Q," he said.

"You're very welcome," Malone said in his most unctuous tones. He took
the key.

The clerk blinked. "The bellman will take you to your rooms, sir," he
said in a good imitation of his original voice. "There are maps of the
building at intervals along the halls, and if you find that you have
become lost you have only to ask one of the hall guides to show you
the proper directions."

"My, my," Malone said.

The clerk cleared his throat. "If you wish to use one of the cars," he
went on in a slightly more unsteady voice, "simply insert your key in
the slot beneath one of the wall maps, and a car will be at your
service."

Malone shook his head and gave a deep sigh. "What," he said, "will
they think of next?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Satisfied with that for an exit line, he turned and found that the
bellman had already taken his luggage from the robot redcap and put it
aboard a small electric car. Malone got in beside him and the bellman
started the vehicle down the hallway. It rolled along on soft, silent
tires. It, too, was gilded. It didn't move very fast, Malone thought,
but it certainly beat walking.

Each hallway which radiated out from the central section beneath the
Tower was built like a small-edition city street. The little cars
scooted up and down the two center lanes while pedestrians, poor
benighted souls, kept to the side walkways. Every so often Malone saw
one, walking along the raised walkway and holding the rail along the
outside that was meant to keep guests of every stage of drunkenness
from falling into the road. At the intersections, small,
Japanese-style bridges crossed over the roadway. On these, Malone saw
uniformed men standing motionless, one to a bridge. They all looked
identical, and each one had a small gold stripe sewn to the chest of
the red uniform. Malone read the letters on the stripe as they passed
the third man. It said: _Guide_.

"Now, you live in Q-wing, sir," the bellman was saying in a nasal, but
rather pleasant voice as Malone looked away. "You're not far from the
Tower Lobby, so you won't have a lot to remember. It's not like living
along, say, the D-E Passageway out near 20 or 23."

"I'm sure it isn't," Malone said politely.

"No," the bellman said, "you got it simple. This here is Q-Yellow--see
the yellow stripe on the wall?"

Malone looked. There was a yellow stripe on the wall. "I see it," he
said.

"So all you got to do," the bellman said, "is follow Q-Yellow to the
Tower Lobby." He acted as if he had demonstrated a Euclidean
proposition flawlessly. "Got it?" he asked.

"Very simple," Malone said.

"O.K.," the bellman said. "Now, the gaming rooms--"

Malone listened with about a fifth of an ear while the bellman went on
spinning out incredibly complex directions for getting around in the
quasi-city that was the Great Universal. At one point he thought he
caught the man saying that an elephant ramp took guests past the
resplendent glass rest rooms to the roots of the roulette wheel, but
that didn't sound even remotely plausible when he considered it. At
last the bellman announced:

