yet the girl did not fall to the jagged stones that lay beneath her.
She was rigid, straining. Then suddenly her arm waved wildly and she
screamed, a wild gasping cry that died in her throat on a note of
despairing terror. It seemed that she struggled furiously with an
unseen power for one horrible instant. Then the tortured body lurched
violently and collapsed in a pitiful quivering heap among the stones.

Eddie Vail was running now, miraculously picking his way over the
treacherous footing. The girl had fainted, no doubt of that, and
something was seriously wrong with her.

A mysterious mechanical something whizzed past; something that buzzed
like a thousand hornets and slithered over the rocks in a series of
metallic clanks. Then it was gone--or so it seemed in the confusion of
Eddie's mind; but he had seen nothing. Probably a fantasy of his
overworked brain, or only the surf breaking against the sea wall. He
turned his attention to the girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was moaning and tossing her head, returning painfully to
consciousness. He straightened her limbs and placed his folded coat
under the restless head, noting with alarm that vicious red welts
marred the whiteness of her arms and shoulders. It was as if she had
been beaten cruelly; those marks could never have resulted from her
fall. Poor kid. Subject to fits of some sort, he presumed. She was a
good looker, too, and no mistake. He smoothed back the rumpled mass of
golden hair and studied her features. They were vaguely familiar.

Then she opened her eyes. Stark terror looked out from their
ultra-marine depths, and her lips quivered as if she were about to
cry. He raised her to a more comfortable position and supported her
with an encircling arm. She did cry a little, like a frightened child.
Then, with startling abruptness, she sprang to her feet.

"Where is it?" she demanded.

"Where's what?" Eddie was on his feet, peering in all directions. He
remembered the queer sounds he had heard or imagined.

"I--I don't know." The girl passed a trembling hand before her eyes as
if to wipe away some horrifying vision. "Perhaps it's my imagination,
but I felt--it was just as real--one of father's iron monsters.
Beating me; bending me. I'd have snapped in a moment. But nothing was
there. I--I'm afraid...."

Eddie caught her as she swayed on her feet. "There now," he said
soothingly, "you're all right, Miss Shelton. It's gone now, whatever
it was." Iron monsters! In a flash it had come to him that this girl
he held in his arms was Lina Shelton, daughter of the robot wizard. No
wonder she was afflicted with hallucinations! But those bruises were
real, as was the forcible twisting of her lithe young body. And he
_had_ heard something.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You know me?" The girl was calmer now and faced him with a surprised
look.

"Yes, Miss Shelton. At least I recognize you from the pictures.
Society page, you know. And I'm Edward Vail--Eddie for short--on
vacation and at your service."

The girl smiled wanly. "You know of father's break with Universal
Electric? Of his private experiments?"

"I heard of the scrap and of how he walked out on the outfit, but
nothing further." Eddie thought grimly of how nearly he had come to
losing his own job when David Shelton broke relations with his
employers. He had been too enthusiastic in support of some of the
older man's claims.

"It's been terrible," the girl whispered. She clung nervously to his
arm as he picked the way back to the road. "The loneliness, and all.
No servants will stay out here now, and father spends all of his time
in the laboratory. Then--this fear of the mechanical men--they haunt
me. I--I guess they've got me a little goofy."

Eddie laughed reassuringly. "Perhaps," he suggested, "you will let me
help you. Your father, I believe, will remember me, and I'll be very
glad to--"

"No, no!" The girl seemed frightened at the thought. "I'm sure he
wouldn't welcome you. He's changed greatly of late and is suspicious
of everyone, even keeping things from me. But it's awfully nice of you
to offer your assistance, and you've been a perfect peach to take care
of me this way. I--I'd better go now."

They had reached the road and Eddie looked uncertainly at his
roadster. He hated to think of leaving the girl in this lonely spot.
She was obviously in a state of extreme nervous tension and, to him,
seemed pathetically helpless, and afraid.

"That the house?" he asked, pointing in the direction of the gloomy
old mansion whose dilapidated gables were barely visible over the tree
tops.

"Yes." The girl shivered and drew closer to him.

The ensuing silence was broken by the slam of a door. His car! Eddie
looked toward it in amazement; he was hearing things again. The
springs sagged on the driver's side as under the weight of a very
heavy occupant, but the seat was empty. Then came the whine of the
starter and the motor purred into life. The gears clashed sickeningly
and the car was jerked into the road with a violence that should have
stripped the differential. He pulled the girl aside just as it roared
past and disappeared around the bend in a cloud of dust. The sound of
the exhaust died away rapidly and left them staring into each other's
eyes in awed silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

David Shelton was prowling around in the shrubbery when they
approached the house--a furtive, unkempt creature whom Eddie would
hardly have recognized. He straightened up and peered at his
daughter's companion with obvious disapproval.

"Lina," he said severely, "I've told you we want no visitors."

"Yes, Dad, I know, but Mr. Vail's car was stolen out in front and
there is no way for him to go on. We must look after him."

"His car--stolen? Who stole it?" David Shelton drew close and glared
suspiciously at his unwelcome visitor.

"One of your monsters, I think," she replied shakily, "though we could
see nothing. And the same thing attacked me and beat me. Look at my
bruises!"

Shelton was examining the marks, and his fingers trembled as he
touched his daughter's shoulder. He looked piteously into her eyes.
"Are you sure, Lina? Sure? Did you see it?"

"No, no. But I felt and heard--the iron arms and the clamps and the
buzzing. Oh, it was horrible!" The girl's voice rose hysterically.

"Oh, Lord! What have I done?" groaned Shelton. "It's true, then. Lina,
listen: I've succeeded in making them invisible, and one got away this
morning. But I thought--I thought--" He looked at Eddie, remembering
his presence suddenly. "But I'm talking too much. It seems to me I
remember having seen you before, young man."

"You have, sir," Eddie stated. "In the research laboratory of
Universal Electric. I work with Borden."

"They've sent you to find me?" Shelton stiffened perceptibly.

"Indeed, not, sir. I'm on vacation and was merely passing by when I
saw your daughter in danger, a danger I still do not understand."

"Yes, and he helped me to the road," Lina interposed, "and then lost
his car at the hands of--"

"Silence!" the father thundered. But his eyes fell before the fire
that instantly flashed in those of the girl.

"Now, you listen to me!" she returned angrily, "I've stayed on here
with you until I'm nearly crazy with your everlasting puttering and
experimenting--hearing your uncanny machines walking around in the
middle of the night--seeing impossible sights--then, this thing I
couldn't see but could feel. And you've gotten into such a state that
you'll go crazy yourself, if you continue. Something's got to be done,
I tell you. I can't stand it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Her voice broke on a choked sob.

"But Lina--"

"Don't but me, Father. I mean it. Mr. Vail discovered your hideout
quite by accident and he's been very nice to me. I tell you he means
no harm and I want him to stay. If you're not decent to him, if you
send him away, I swear I'll go too. I will--I will!"

Shelton's eyes misted and something of the hardness left his
expression. A look of haunting fear took its place and he stared
pleadingly at Eddie.

"Br-r! I'm cold!" Lina exclaimed irrelevantly. "And--and I believe I'm
going to cry." She turned away and raced for the shelter of the gloomy
old house without another word.

Eddie turned inquiring eyes on his unwilling host.

"Just like her mother before her," Shelton muttered softly. Then he
faced the younger man squarely and his shoulders straightened. "Mr.
Vail," he said sheepishly, "I've been a fool and I ask your pardon.
But Lina doesn't know. There's something tremendous behind all this,
something that's gotten beyond me. I'll send her away for her own
safety, but I must stay on. If--if only there was someone I could
trust--"

"You can trust me, sir," Eddie stated simply.

The older man paced the ground nervously, and Eddie could see that he
was under a most severe mental strain. Several times he halted in his
tracks and peered anxiously at his guest. Then he seemed to make a
sudden decision.

"Vail," he said sharply, "I need help badly. I want you to stay, if
you will. You swear you'll not reveal what I am about to show you?"

"I swear it, sir."

"You'll not report to Universal?"

"Never."

       *       *       *       *       *

They surveyed each other appraisingly. Eddie was mystified by the
happenings of the day and was curious to learn more concerning these
mythical invisible creations. It was inconceivable that the scientist
had spoken truly of his accomplishment. Yet, he had done some
marvelous things with Universal and, maybe--well, anyway, there was
the girl.

"Come with me," Shelton was saying: "I believe you're a square
shooter, Vail." He was leading the way along the gravel path at the
side of the house. Before them loomed the squat brick building that
was the laboratory.

The door crashed open before Shelton's hand had reached the knob, and
one of those buzzing, unseen, monstrosities rushed clanking by,
knocking the scientist from his feet in its passage. Ponderous,
speeding footsteps crunched the gravel of the path, and then, with a
wild thrashing of the underbrush alongside, the thing was gone.

Eddie bent over the prostrate man and saw that he was unconscious. A
thin trickle of blood ran from a cut in the side of his head.

"Lina! Lina!" called Eddie frantically. For the first time in his life
he was genuinely frightened.

       *       *       *       *       *

He half carried, half dragged the limp body through the door of the
laboratory and propped it in a chair. It required but a moment for him
to see that Shelton's injury was inconsequential. He had only been
stunned and already showed signs of recovering.

"What is it, Mr. Vail? What's happened?" came the voice of Lina
Shelton breathlessly. She was framed in the doorway, dressed now and
panting from her exertions in responding to his call. "Oh, it's
father," she wailed, dropping to her knees at his side. "He's been
hurt. Badly, too."

"No, not badly, Miss Shelton. He'll be around in a minute. I'm sorry
to have excited you, but when I called I feared it was worse than it
is." He was washing the blood from her father's small wound as he
spoke.

She took the basin from his hand, spilling some of the water in her
eagerness. "Here, let me have that cloth," she demanded.

Eddie admired her as her deft fingers took up the task. She was as
exquisite in a simple sport outfit as she had been in her bathing
suit.

The scientist opened his eyes after a moment. Remembrance came at once
and he sat erect in the chair, staring.

"Lina!" he exclaimed, grasping her hand conclusively. "You're here,
thank God! I dreamed--oh, it was horrible--I dreamed they had you." He
clung to her closely.

"They?" she murmured inquiringly.

"Yes. Two of them are loose now. It's danger for you, my dear. You
must leave at once. No, no--I can't let you out of my sight until they
are captured or destroyed." He rose to his feet in his agitation and
shook his head to clear it. He looked pleadingly at Eddie as if
expecting him to offer a solution of the difficulty.

"Vail!" he exploded, then, pointing a shaking forefinger at an
elaborate short-wave radio transmitter which occupied a corner of the
large room. "I ask you to bear witness. That is the source of energy
for these creations of mine and it's shut down. How on earth can they
keep going? I ask you."

"Perhaps someone else, sir," Eddie suggested doubtfully. "Have you any
enemies who might be able to duplicate the impulses of that
apparatus?"

"Bah! Enemies, yes--with Universal--but none who could duplicate the
complicated frequencies I use. My secrets are my own. I've never even
put them on paper."

       *       *       *       *       *

Eddie was examining the intricate apparatus. "You knew of the first
one's escape, didn't you?" he asked. "How did it happen?"

Shelton again became the enthusiastic scientist. "Here," he said,
"I'll show you and you can judge for yourself." He strode to the
gleaming figure of a seven-foot robot of startlingly human-like
appearance.

Lina let forth an exclamation of repugnance and fear.

"No, Mr. Shelton," Eddie objected. "The same thing will occur again.
Then there will be three."

"We'll fix that, my boy." The scientist was removing cover plates from
the hip joints of the mechanical man. "I'll disconnect the cables that
feed the locomotors. He _can't_ walk then."

Eddie was still doubtful but dared offer no further objection,
especially since Lina Shelton was watching in wide-eyed silence. He
examined the monster and saw that it was quite similar in outside
appearance to those supplied by Universal for heavy manual labor,
excepting that this one was armed as were those used for prison
guards. There were the same articulated limbs and the various clamps
and hooks for lifting and heavy hauling; the tentacles for grasping;
machine guns front and back. Under the helical headpiece that was the
antenna this robot seemed to have two eyes--a new feature--but closer
examination showed these to be the twin lenses of a stereoscopic
motion picture camera. This robot, then, could see. Or at least it
could record what the lenses saw for its masters.

"There," Shelton grunted when he had finished his tinkering, "he's
paralyzed from the waist down. Let this one try and get away from us."

"Guns aren't loaded, are they?" Eddie asked.

"Lord, no! Never have any of them loaded. That _would_ be a fool
stunt." Shelton had pulled the starting handle of a motor-generator
and its rising whine accompanied his words.

       *       *       *       *       *

The vacuum tubes of the transmitter glowed into life and the scientist
manipulated the controls rapidly. Lina was watching the robot with
fascinated awe. Its arms moved in obedience to the controls, tentacles
waved and coiled; the humming of its internal mechanisms filled the
room. The locomotion controls had no effect, as the scientist had
predicted. Eddie drew a sigh of relief.

"Now, Vail, watch," Shelton exulted. "I'll show you what I was doing
with the first one." He closed a switch that lighted another bank of
vacuum tubes behind the control panel.

"You can make this one invisible?" Eddie asked incredulously.

"Certainly--from the waist up. This ought to be good."

"Mind telling me the principle?"

"Not at all--now. I've your promise of secrecy. It's a simple matter,
Vail, really. Just a problem of wave motions--light. Invisible light;
the ultra-violet, you know. My robots are built of specially alloyed
metals which permit great freedom of molecular vibration. The
insulating materials and even the glass of the camera lenses are
possessed of the same property. Get it? I merely set up a wave motion
in the atoms of the material that is in synchronism with the frequency
of ultra-violet light, which is invisible to the human eye. All
visible colors are absorbed, or more accurately, none are reflected
excepting the ultra-violet. Perfect transparency is obtained since
there is neither refraction nor diffraction of the visible colors. And
there you are!"

Eddie stared at the upper half of the robot and saw that it was
