of guards with submachine guns were standing there and Lee noted the
deadly pallor of their faces.

Scriven motioned them to open the gate, then, turning to Lee, he put a
hand on his shoulder. "Brace yourself; this is going to be bad."

They entered; nobody followed and behind them the steel door closed
immediately. Inside there was neither sound nor motion; everything was
at a standstill with the power cut off; nothing but silence and bluish
neon-lights flooded down upon the rows of punch presses, multiple
drills, circular saws, and turret lathes along the assembly line,
lifting their every detail into sharp relief.

At their posts by the machines the Gogs and Magogs were standing, frozen
in motion like their fellow-machines. Some had their hands at the
controls, others were holding wrenches, gauges and strange, nameless
things. As they leaned forward from the shadows into the cone of strong
lights the pale selen-cells of their eyes stood out like bits from a
full moon; their bulging shoulders which housed the powerful motors of
their simian arms glittered moist as if they were sweating at their
work.

And then Lee _saw_ their work; the man who had gone through the green
hells of the Pacific gave a low moan of horror. The other man who had
seen everything of mangled human form which goes onto an operating
table, the great Scriven he, too, had turned an ashen grey. They had
expected blood; they had expected some thing of a nasty nature, but not
this ... thing:

There was no Gus Krinsley, there was not even any part of him resembling
that of a human being; and yet the parts were there. "They must have
clamped him into some mock-up," Scriven murmured. "And then moved his
body all along the line. Hope he was dead when they started giving him
the works."

Lee's gaunt body shook. "I'm certain that Gus was _not_ dead when these
monsters worked on him!" he said.

Stiff-legged, like automata themselves, the two men stepped to the top
of the line. The circular saws, designed for the cutting of steel bars;
now they gleamed red with the blood of severed human limbs. There were
these purplish streaks and spatterings all the way down the line inside
the casings of the multiple drills, in the curved hollows of the sheet
metal presses, on the hands of the Robots, in their dumb faces--splashed
over and turning blackish on their stainless steel chests. And at its
end the line had spilled some shapeless, greyish things; there was
nothing human in them, as little as there is anything human in the rusty
bowels of a junked automobile. And these things they had been.... Lee
confronted Scriven with fury blazing in his eyes:

"Dr. Scriven, I suppose you know as well as I do what's been going on in
here and outside The Brain as well. Mass murder, chaos, reign of
terror.... Now that my friend has come to this monstrous end I demand to
know when are you going to stop The Brain?"

Like a tiger challenged to battle the surgeon raised his mighty head:
"Calm yourself Lee. We cannot afford emotional outbursts. Not here, not
now. The situation is far too serious for that. I know he was your
friend; he must have made a false move, given the wrong command; a
tragic mistake...."

"That's a rotten lie, Scriven, and you know it!" Lee snapped. "Accident,
hell! The disappearance of the President, the deaths of the
representatives, the train wrecks, the plane wrecks all of them Brain
controlled--were those too accidents? You're the head of the Braintrust,
You stand responsible; your duty is plain. Cut off the power and kill
this thing."

The muscles over Scriven's cheekbones quivered in his struggle to keep
control over himself: "For your own sake, Lee, and for the sake of
America, _stop that kind of talk_. You have been putting two and two
together; I rather expected that from a man of your intelligence. All
right then, something went wrong with The Brain; that is correct. We
have not been able to locate the disturbance yet, but the trail is
getting hot; it must be connected with those centers of 'higher psychic
activities,' the one's we know least about. But we cannot cut those out
because something of psychic activity goes into every kind of The
Brain's cognitions, even the purely mathematical ones. And it would be
utterly impossible to stop The Brain's operations altogether. I wanted
to, but the General Staff won't permit it. There's an international
crisis of the first magnitude. There may be war within a few days or
even hours. Our country has got to prepare counter measures; get ready
for the worst. A state of National Emergency already is declared. The
Brain is the heart of our National Defense: You know that. It is vital
and as indispensible at this hour as it never was before; it continues
to function perfectly with the exception of these isolated disturbances
in the civilian sector which we will have under control in no time.

"At present I am no more than a figurehead. If I were to give orders to
cut off The Brain's power, I would be court-martialed; if I would try
and force my way into the Atomic Powerplant, the guards would shoot me
on the spot. That's orders Lee. And they apply to you as well. Be
reasonable, man!"

Lee's fingers tore through his greying mane of hair.

"Scriven, this is maddening. I thought you knew what I know; I thought
you knew everything. Then let me tell you that you're absolutely wrong.
There is no technological, mechanical defect; it's worse, it's
infinitely worse: you've created a Frankenstein in The Brain. The
thing's alive; it's possessed with a destructive will, it demands the
unconditional surrender of Man; it has made itself the God of the
Machines. Behind all this there is a deep and evil plan by which The
Brain aspires to dictatorship over the world."

For a second Scriven jerked his head sideways, away from Lee in that
mannerism typical for him. His lips inaudibly formed words:
"dementia-praecox." As he turned back to Lee his face was changed and so
was his voice. There was calm and authority in it, the whole immense
superiority and power which the surgeon holds over the patient on the
operation table:

"Very interesting, Lee. You must tell me about it some day; as soon as
we are over this emergency. This tragic thing, Gus Krinsley's end. It
has had a deeply upsetting effect. I too, considered him my friend you
know. Let's get out of here, Lee, there's nothing we can do for the poor
fellow. The remains will be taken care of. Meanwhile, there are so many
other things to do and we've got to pull ourselves together and keep our
minds on the job ahead of us. Come on, at the communications center we
can get a drink. I feel the need of one, don't you? And apropos of
nothing, the routine checkups on the aptitude tests for all
Brain-employees are on again. I take it you are scheduled for Mellish's
and Bondy's office one of these days. This afternoon I think...."

Lee gave a long glance to the man who was now leading him towards the
door with a brisk step and a kind firm hand on his arm. The man didn't
look at him; he kept his eyes averted from both Lee and the
blood-spattered assembly line.

Gus Krinsley had said: "I'm a lost soul down there, Aussie." Lee
thought. Gus Krinsley was my friend. I should have warned him, I should
have told him everything; it might have saved his life. Gus was a common
man, a good man; he wouldn't have stood for Brain-dictatorship. In that
he was like other common men who do not know their danger. It is not
vengeance which I seek but the defense of those for whom Gus was a
living symbol. For this defense I've got to preserve myself.

And aloud he: "The routine checkups on the aptitude tests--of course. I
thought they were about due. Tomorrow afternoon at Mellish and Bondy's
office; that would suit me fine. As you said it yourself, Scriven, a
moment ago, this is an awful shock. Gus' tragic end and these tests
ought to be based on a man's normal state of mind. So if you don't mind
I think I'll go now and break the sad news gently to Gus' wife. You'll
give me time for that; that's what you had in mind in the first place,
wasn't it?"

"Of course, my dear fellow, of course, that's what I had in mind. Then,
till tomorrow afternoon. They'll be waiting for you at the health
center...."




CHAPTER VIII


As the elevator shot up through the concrete of The Brain's "dura mater"
toward Apperception 36, Lee was feeling grand. Now he was a man with a
mission. Now he knew exactly what he had to do. Whether it would help,
whether it would stop The Brain; that was a different question, but at
least he had his plan.

He marvelled at the ease and at the lightning speed with which the great
decision had come. It had been at the sight of the senseless
robot-monsters, at the blood-spattered assembly line that the sense of
sacred mission had come over him. It had been at the moment when, in
Scriven's grip upon his arm, he had read his condemnation that he had
hit upon the plan.

He must take an awful chance and a terrific responsibility. For this he
had to be morally certain that The Brain was a liar, that Scriven was a
liar and that war was being provoked by The Brain despite all its
assertions to the contrary because The Brain could assume power only
over the dead bodies of millions of men like Gus; Gus whom The Brain had
butchered like a guinea pig because he had refused to obey the Gogs and
Magogs of the Machine God.

Now that he had this moral certainty Lee felt that strange and mystical
elation which comes to the soldier at the zero hour in war. The worst
was really over; the terrible waiting, the uncertainty, the struggle of
morale in "sweating it out." Now his nerves were steady, exhaustion and
fatigue had vanished; in its place was that wonderful feeling of full
mastery over all faculties which comes to fighting men as the battle is
joined. There was that upsurge of the blood from fighting ancestors
which obliterates the cowardice of the intellect, that inspired
intoxication which sharpens the intellect into a battle axe. By his
quick-witted postponement of the fateful appointment with the
psychiatrists he had gained thirty hours. Whether this would be enough
he didn't know, but he felt in himself the strength to fight on
endlessly.

The elevator stopped at Apperception 36 and Lee stood for a moment at
the door of his lab for a last breath, a briefing addressed to himself:

"This is like walking into a mine field," he thought; "one false step
and things go Boom. All the sensory organs of The Brain are in action
behind this door and some of them are pretty near extrasensory in their
mind-reading capacities. I've got to walk back and forth amongst those
observation screens; there may be other radiations too, following me,
penetrating into the recesses of my mind without my knowing it. That
means I must make my mind a blank. It's like being quizzed by a
lie-detector, only more so. I must not only seem normal and at ease, I
actually must be so and harbor only friendly, innocuous thoughts toward
The Brain. My actions will seem innocent enough; it is my thoughts
wherein my danger lies. Whatever I do; I've got to direct that from the
subconscious: act as by instinct and keep the mind a blank."

He opened the door and looked around--as usual--in this vault as silent
as the grave of a Pharaoh. There was a little dust on the glass cubicles
of "_Ant-termes-pacificus_" and there were a few lines scribbled on the
yellow memo-pad on his desk:

"Thanks for the weekend, boss. Everything normal and under control. Next
feeding time at 8 p.m. the 27th. So long, Harris." Of course; he had
given Harris, his assistant, the weekend off. That had escaped his mind
in the excitement when The Brain's mutiny began.... And now it was the
29th.

"They must be ravenously hungry by this time," he thought, and that
thought was in order because it was a normal thought.

He walked through the rows of the cubicles, halting his step every now
and then. The fluorescent screens on which The Brain drew the curves of
its observation-rays showed two sharp rises of the lines marked
"activity" and "emotionality". The lower levels of the glass cages
already were opaque; the glass corroded by the viscous acids which the
soldiers had squirted from their cephalic glands in their attempts to
break out and to reach food.

"Poor beasts," Lee thought, and he thought it without restraint because
it was normal, a perfectly harmless thought. But then; below the layers
of his consciousness his instincts told a different story.

"This is marvelous," they triumphed. "Fate takes a hand; they are
desperate; they're ready for the warpath and even the tiger and the
elephant would run for cover when their columns march."

As if it were the most natural thing in the world for him to do Lee
walked over to the south wall, the one which separated the lab from the
interior of The Brain. He removed a sliding panel marked
"L-Filler-Spout" and there it was before his eyes, looking almost like a
fireplug. There was one in every apperception center and there were
hundreds more throughout The Brain, and their purpose was to replenish
the liquid insulation which shielded the sensitive electric nervepaths
of The Brain. Without looking at the thing, concentrating his every
thought upon the hunger of "_Ant-termes-pacificus_", Lee unscrewed the
cap and put a finger into the opening. The finger came back covered with
the thick, the syrupy lignin, this amber-colored sluggish stream of
woodpulp liquefied, this soft bed of The Brain's vibrant nerves.
Unthinking, absent-minded, Lee wiped the finger with his handkerchief.

"Now, I'm going to try a slightly different arrangement of the tests,"
he thought. "It's normal; I'm doing that almost every day."

The feeling he experienced as he swung into action was strange. As he
walked back and forth it felt like somnambulic walk; something his limbs
did without an act of will. As his hands did things expertly and
skillfully the feeling was that they were instruments automatically
moved not by his own volition but by some power outside himself.

His movements were those of a child serenely at play, a child
incongruously tall and gaunt and grey-haired constructing little
causeways and bridges on the ground with the logs of the fireplace; a
happy child engrossed in an innocent game....

       *       *       *       *       *

It took about an hour and then causeways of fresh pulpwood were laid
from every termite hill to every feeding gate, from every glass cubicle
to the south wall and along the south wall to the "Lignin-Filler-Spout";
and from the ground up to the spout a little tepee of sticks had been
built.

Admiringly the grey-haired child looked at its handiwork through
thick-lensed glasses. "It's been an interesting game," Lee thought, "it
might turn out to be a valuable new experiment. I'll sit down now and
observe what happens...."

He went over to the desk again and settled down. He opened his files and
laid out his charts on the desk and there were colored pencils to be
sharpened for the entries. He was glad of that; his conscious mind
rejoiced now over every little pursuit of routine, of normalcy, of the
established scientific order of things; it concentrated on these. Pencil
in hand, reclined in comfort, his heartbeat even, he kept expectant eyes
upon the staggered rows of fluorescent screens, ready to note any
significant developments.

He didn't have to wait long; their strange sixth sense, the telepathy of
their collective brains, the spirit of the hive with the immortality of
their race for its supreme law, had already told them of a promised land
and of new worlds to conquer.

On the fluorescent screens Lee watched their preparations for the big
drive: The nasicorn-soldiers clotting together at the exit tunnels like
assault troops at the bow of invasion barges when the bottom scrapes the
landing beach; the fierce, virginal workers struggling up from the deep
shelters of the nurseries, carrying in their mandibles the squirming
larvae, the living future of the race. The walls of the queen's prison
broken down in the innermost redoubt and the guards closing in on the
idol of the race, moving the big white body like a juggernaut.

In a matter of minutes the "activity" and "emotionality" curves on the
fluorescent screens surged to heights which Lee had never seen.

It started with the crossbreeds of "_termes-bellicosus_," with army-ants
and devil-ants, and spread quickly all along the line of non-belligerent
varieties. Famine had given them the impetus to change their mode of
life; famine, the inexorable tyrant, whipped them onward into their
exodus.

On the foremost fluorescent screens Lee saw it start: Small groups of
warriors reconnoitering into no-man's-land and quickly darting back
again.... And then the dark columns of the first assault wave descending
from their city-gates, lock-stepped like Prussian guards of old,
marching as if to the beat of drums. On the visi-screens which magnified
them a hundred times they looked an awesome sight with the rostrums of
their horns, bigger than all the rest of their bodies, swinging like
turrets of battleships being trained upon the enemy. From the
loudspeakers which magnified all noise a hundred times, the excited
tremors of their bodies, the locked steps of a million feet swelled into
a vast roar sounding almost like thunder.

Jotting down observations in rapid pencil strokes, Lee thought:
"Starvation is producing very interesting results; it's a worthwhile
experiment." With all his mental energy he suppressed the silent prayer
which struggled to arise from the deep of his unconscious: "Good Lord
let The Brain not realize _what_ is going on."

The visi-screens now showed the second wave of the assault: endless
columns of workers, their mandibles twitching with eagerness to devour,
bustling along the logs, kept in line by two rows of warriors to their
right and left. The noises they produced in the loudspeakers were as of
some big cattle-drive.

