She was indeed but a little girl chained by the inexorable bonds of
caste to a false ideal. Birth and station spelled honor to her, and
honor, to the daughter of an English noble, was a mightier force even
than love.

That Norman of Torn was an outlaw she might have forgiven, but that he
was, according to report, a low fellow of no birth placed an impassable
barrier between them.

For hours the girl lay sobbing upon the bench, whilst within her raged
the mighty battle of the heart against the head.

Thus her mother found her, and kneeling beside her, and with her arms
about the girl's neck, tried to soothe her and to learn the cause of
her sorrow. Finally it came, poured from the flood gates of a sorrowing
heart; that wave of bitter misery and hopelessness which not even a
mother's love could check.

"Joan, my dear daughter," cried Lady de Tany, "I sorrow with thee that
thy love has been cast upon so bleak and impossible a shore. But it be
better that thou hast learnt the truth ere it were too late; for, take
my word upon it, Joan, the bitter humiliation such an alliance must
needs have brought upon thee and thy father's house would soon have
cooled thy love; nor could his have survived the sneers and affronts
even the menials would have put upon him."

"Oh, mother, but I love him so," moaned the girl. "I did not know how
much until he had gone, and the King's officer had come to search for
him, and then the thought that all the power of a great throne and the
mightiest houses of an entire kingdom were turned in hatred against him
raised the hot blood of anger within me and the knowledge of my love
surged through all my being. Mother, thou canst not know the honor, and
the bravery, and the chivalry of the man as I do. Not since Arthur of
Silures kept his round table hath ridden forth upon English soil so true
a knight as Norman of Torn.

"Couldst thou but have seen him fight, my mother, and witnessed the
honor of his treatment of thy daughter, and heard the tone of dignified
respect in which he spoke of women thou wouldst have loved him, too,
and felt that outlaw though he be, he is still more a gentleman than
nine-tenths the nobles of England."

"But his birth, my daughter!" argued the Lady de Tany. "Some even say
that the gall marks of his brass collar still showeth upon his neck, and
others that he knoweth not himself the name of his own father, nor had
he any mother."

Ah, but this was the mighty argument! Naught could the girl say to
justify so heinous a crime as low birth. What a man did in those rough
cruel days might be forgotten and forgiven but the sins of his mother
or his grandfather in not being of noble blood, no matter howsoever
wickedly attained, he might never overcome or live down.

Torn by conflicting emotions, the poor girl dragged herself to her own
apartment and there upon a restless, sleepless couch, beset by wild,
impossible hopes, and vain, torturing regrets, she fought out the long,
bitter night; until toward morning she solved the problem of her misery
in the only way that seemed possible to her poor, tired, bleeding,
little heart. When the rising sun shone through the narrow window, it
found Joan de Tany at peace with all about her; the carved golden hilt
of the toy that had hung at her girdle protruded from her breast, and a
thin line of crimson ran across the snowy skin to a little pool upon the
sheet beneath her.

And so the cruel hand of a mighty revenge had reached out to crush
another innocent victim.




CHAPTER XV

When word of the death of Joan de Tany reached Torn, no man could
tell from outward appearance the depth of the suffering which the sad
intelligence wrought on the master of Torn.

All that they who followed him knew was that certain unusual orders were
issued, and that that same night, the ten companies rode south toward
Essex without other halt than for necessary food and water for man and
beast.

When the body of Joan de Tany rode forth from her father's castle to
the church at Colchester, and again as it was brought back to its final
resting place in the castle's crypt, a thousand strange and silent
knights, black draped, upon horses trapped in black, rode slowly behind
the bier.

Silently they had come in the night preceding the funeral, and as
silently, they slipped away northward into the falling shadows of the
following night.

No word had passed between those of the castle and the great troop of
sable-clad warriors, but all within knew that the mighty Outlaw of Torn
had come to pay homage to the memory of the daughter of De Tany, and all
but the grieving mother wondered at the strangeness of the act.

As the horde of Torn approached their Derby stronghold, their young
leader turned the command over to Red Shandy and dismounted at the door
of Father Claude's cottage.

"I am tired, Father," said the outlaw as he threw himself upon his
accustomed bench. "Naught but sorrow and death follow in my footsteps. I
and all my acts be accurst, and upon those I love, the blight falleth."

"Alter thy ways, my son; follow my advice ere it be too late. Seek out
a new and better life in another country and carve thy future into the
semblance of glory and honor."

"Would that I might, my friend," answered Norman of Torn. "But hast
thou thought on the consequences which surely would follow should I thus
remove both heart and head from the thing that I have built?

"What suppose thou would result were Norman of Torn to turn his great
band of cut-throats, leaderless, upon England? Hast thought on't,
Father?

"Wouldst thou draw a single breath in security if thou knew Edwild the
Serf were ranging unchecked through Derby? Edwild, whose father was torn
limb from limb upon the rack because he would not confess to killing a
buck in the new forest, a buck which fell before the arrow of another
man; Edwild, whose mother was burned for witchcraft by Holy Church.

"And Horsan the Dane, Father. How thinkest thou the safety of the roads
would be for either rich or poor an I turned Horsan the Dane loose upon
ye?

"And Pensilo, the Spanish Don! A great captain, but a man absolutely
without bowels of compassion. When first he joined us and saw our mark
upon the foreheads of our dead, wishing to out-Herod Herod, he marked
the living which fell into his hands with a red hot iron, branding
a great P upon each cheek and burning out the right eye completely.
Wouldst like to feel, Father, that Don Piedro Castro y Pensilo ranged
free through forest and hill of England?

"And Red Shandy, and the two Florys, and Peter the Hermit, and One Eye
Kanty, and Gropello, and Campanee, and Cobarth, and Mandecote, and the
thousand others, each with a special hatred for some particular class or
individual, and all filled with the lust of blood and rapine and loot.

"No, Father, I may not go yet, for the England I have been taught to
hate, I have learned to love, and I have it not in my heart to turn
loose upon her fair breast the beasts of hell who know no law or order
or decency other than that which I enforce."

As Norman of Torn ceased speaking, the priest sat silent for many
minutes.

"Thou hast indeed a grave responsibility, my son," he said at last.
"Thou canst not well go unless thou takest thy horde with thee out of
England, but even that may be possible; who knows other than God?"

"For my part," laughed the outlaw, "I be willing to leave it in His
hands; which seems to be the way with Christians. When one would shirk
a responsibility, or explain an error, lo, one shoulders it upon the
Lord."

"I fear, my son," said the priest, "that what seed of reverence I have
attempted to plant within thy breast hath borne poor fruit."

"That dependeth upon the viewpoint, Father; as I take not the Lord into
partnership in my successes it seemeth to me to be but of a mean and
poor spirit to saddle my sorrows and perplexities upon Him. I may be
wrong, for I am ill-versed in religious matters, but my conception of
God and scapegoat be not that they are synonymous."

"Religion, my son, be a bootless subject for argument between friends,"
replied the priest, "and further, there be that nearer my heart just now
which I would ask thee. I may offend, but thou know I do not mean to.
The question I would ask, is, dost wholly trust the old man whom thou
call father?"

"I know of no treachery," replied the outlaw, "which he hath ever
conceived against me. Why?"

"I ask because I have written to Simon de Montfort asking him to meet
me and two others here upon an important matter. I have learned that he
expects to be at his Leicester castle, for a few days, within the week.
He is to notify me when he will come and I shall then send for thee
and the old man of Torn; but it were as well, my son, that thou do
not mention this matter to thy father, nor let him know when thou come
hither to the meeting that De Montfort is to be present."

"As you say, Father," replied Norman of Torn. "I do not make head nor
tail of thy wondrous intrigues, but that thou wish it done thus or so is
sufficient. I must be off to Torn now, so I bid thee farewell."

Until the following Spring, Norman of Torn continued to occupy himself
with occasional pillages against the royalists of the surrounding
counties, and his patrols so covered the public highways that it became
a matter of grievous import to the King's party, for no one was safe in
the district who even so much as sympathized with the King's cause, and
many were the dead foreheads that bore the grim mark of the Devil of
Torn.

Though he had never formally espoused the cause of the barons, it now
seemed a matter of little doubt but that, in any crisis, his grisly
banner would be found on their side.

The long winter evenings within the castle of Torn were often spent in
rough, wild carousals in the great hall where a thousand men might sit
at table singing, fighting and drinking until the gray dawn stole in
through the east windows, or Peter the Hermit, the fierce majordomo,
tired of the din and racket, came stalking into the chamber with drawn
sword and laid upon the revellers with the flat of it to enforce the
authority of his commands to disperse.

Norman of Torn and the old man seldom joined in these wild orgies, but
when minstrel, or troubadour, or storyteller wandered to his grim lair,
the Outlaw of Torn would sit enjoying the break in the winter's dull
monotony to as late an hour as another; nor could any man of his great
fierce horde outdrink their chief when he cared to indulge in the
pleasures of the wine cup. The only effect that liquor seemed to have
upon him was to increase his desire to fight, so that he was wont to
pick needless quarrels and to resort to his sword for the slightest,
or for no provocation at all. So, for this reason, he drank but seldom
since he always regretted the things he did under the promptings of that
other self which only could assert its ego when reason was threatened
with submersion.

Often on these evenings, the company was entertained by stories from the
wild, roving lives of its own members. Tales of adventure, love, war
and death in every known corner of the world; and the ten captains told,
each, his story of how he came to be of Torn; and thus, with fighting
enough by day to keep them good humored, the winter passed, and spring
came with the ever wondrous miracle of awakening life, with soft
zephyrs, warm rain, and sunny skies.

Through all the winter, Father Claude had been expecting to hear from
Simon de Montfort, but not until now did he receive a message which
told the good priest that his letter had missed the great baron and
had followed him around until he had but just received it. The message
closed with these words:

"Any clew, however vague, which might lead nearer to a true knowledge
of the fate of Prince Richard, we shall most gladly receive and give our
best attention. Therefore, if thou wilst find it convenient, we shall
visit thee, good father, on the fifth day from today."

Spizo, the Spaniard, had seen De Montfort's man leave the note with
Father Claude and he had seen the priest hide it under a great bowl on
his table, so that when the good father left his cottage, it was the
matter of but a moment's work for Spizo to transfer the message from its
hiding place to the breast of his tunic. The fellow could not read, but
he to whom he took the missive could, laboriously, decipher the Latin in
which it was penned.

The old man of Torn fairly trembled with suppressed rage as the full
purport of this letter flashed upon him. It had been years since he had
heard aught of the search for the little lost prince of England, and now
that the period of his silence was drawing to a close, now that more and
more often opportunities were opening up to him to wreak the last shred
of his terrible vengeance, the very thought of being thwarted at the
final moment staggered his comprehension.

"On the fifth day," he repeated. "That is the day on which we were to
ride south again. Well, we shall ride, and Simon de Montfort shall not
talk with thee, thou fool priest."

That same spring evening in the year 1264, a messenger drew rein before
the walls of Torn and, to the challenge of the watch, cried:

"A royal messenger from His Illustrious Majesty, Henry, by the grace of
God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitaine, to Norman of
Torn, Open, in the name of the King!"

Norman of Torn directed that the King's messenger be admitted, and the
knight was quickly ushered into the great hall of the castle.

The outlaw presently entered in full armor, with visor lowered.

The bearing of the King's officer was haughty and arrogant, as became a
man of birth when dealing with a low born knave.

"His Majesty has deigned to address you, sirrah," he said, withdrawing
a parchment from his breast. "And, as you doubtless cannot read, I will
read the King's commands to you."

"I can read," replied Norman of Torn, "whatever the King can write.
Unless it be," he added, "that the King writes no better than he rules."

The messenger scowled angrily, crying:

"It ill becomes such a low fellow to speak thus disrespectfully of our
gracious King. If he were less generous, he would have sent you a halter
rather than this message which I bear."

"A bridle for thy tongue, my friend," replied Norman of Torn, "were in
better taste than a halter for my neck. But come, let us see what the
King writes to his friend, the Outlaw of Torn."

Taking the parchment from the messenger, Norman of Torn read:

Henry, by Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Aquitaine; to Norman of Torn:

Since it has been called to our notice that you be harassing and
plundering the persons and property of our faithful lieges!!!!!

We therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in us by Almighty God,
do command that you cease these nefarious practices!!!!!

And further, through the gracious intercession of Her Majesty, Queen
Eleanor, we do offer you full pardon for all your past crimes!!!!!

Provided, you repair at once to the town of Lewes, with all the fighting
men, your followers, prepared to protect the security of our person, and
wage war upon those enemies of England, Simon de Montfort, Gilbert de
Clare and their accomplices, who even now are collected to threaten and
menace our person and kingdom!!!!!

Or, otherwise, shall you suffer death, by hanging, for your long
unpunished crimes. Witnessed myself, at Lewes, on May the third, in the
forty-eighth year of our reign.

HENRY, REX.

"The closing paragraph be unfortunately worded," said Norman of Torn,
"for because of it shall the King's messenger eat the King's message,
and thus take back in his belly the answer of Norman of Torn." And
crumpling the parchment in his hand, he advanced toward the royal
emissary.

The knight whipped out his sword, but the Devil of Torn was even
quicker, so that it seemed that the King's messenger had deliberately
hurled his weapon across the room, so quickly did the outlaw disarm him.

And then Norman of Torn took the man by the neck with one powerful hand
and, despite his struggles, and the beating of his mailed fists, bent
him back upon the table, and there, forcing his teeth apart with the
point of his sword, Norman of Torn rammed the King's message down the
knight's throat; wax, parchment and all.

It was a crestfallen gentleman who rode forth from the castle of Torn a
half hour later and spurred rapidly--in his head a more civil tongue.

When, two days later, he appeared before the King at Winchelsea and
reported the outcome of his mission, Henry raged and stormed, swearing
by all the saints in the calendar that Norman of Torn should hang for
his effrontery before the snow flew again.

News of the fighting between the barons and the King's forces at
Rochester, Battel and elsewhere reached the ears of Norman of Torn a few
days after the coming of the King's message, but at the same time came
other news which hastened his departure toward the south. This latter
word was that Bertrade de Montfort and her mother, accompanied by Prince
Philip, had landed at Dover, and that upon the same boat had come Peter
of Colfax back to England--the latter, doubtless reassured by the strong
conviction, which held in the minds of all royalists at that time, of
the certainty of victory for the royal arms in the impending conflict
with the rebel barons.

Norman of Torn had determined that he would see Bertrade de Montfort
once again, and clear his conscience by a frank avowal of his identity.
He knew what the result must be. His experience with Joan de Tany had
taught him that. But the fine sense of chivalry which ever dominated all
his acts where the happiness or honor of women were concerned urged him
to give himself over as a sacrifice upon the altar of a woman's pride,
that it might be she who spurned and rejected; for, as it must appear
now, it had been he whose love had grown cold. It was a bitter thing
to contemplate, for not alone would the mighty pride of the man be
lacerated, but a great love.

Two days before the start of the march, Spizo, the Spaniard, reported
to the old man of Torn that he had overheard Father Claude ask Norman of
Torn to come with his father to the priest's cottage the morning of the
march to meet Simon de Montfort upon an important matter, but what the
nature of the thing was the priest did not reveal to the outlaw.

This report seemed to please the little, grim, gray old man more than
aught he had heard in several days; for it made it apparent that the
priest had not as yet divulged the tenor of his conjecture to the Outlaw
of Torn.

On the evening of the day preceding that set for the march south,
a little, wiry figure, grim and gray, entered the cottage of Father
Claude. No man knows what words passed between the good priest and his
visitor nor the details of what befell within the four walls of the
little cottage that night; but some half hour only elapsed before the
little, grim, gray man emerged from the darkened interior and hastened
upward upon the rocky trail into the hills, a cold smile of satisfaction
on his lips.

The castle of Torn was filled with the rush and rattle of preparation
early the following morning, for by eight o'clock the column was to
march. The courtyard was filled with hurrying squires and lackeys. War
horses were being groomed and caparisoned; sumpter beasts, snubbed to
great posts, were being laden with the tents, bedding, and belongings of
