Lagerstroemia Indica.

This plant, a member of the Lythraceae, may perhaps be heterostyled, or may
formerly have been so. It is remarkable from the extreme variability of its
stamens. On a plant, growing in my hothouse, the flowers included from nineteen
to twenty-nine short stamens with yellow pollen, which correspond in position
with the shortest stamens of Lythrum; and from one to five (the latter number
being the commonest) very long stamens, with thick flesh-coloured filaments and
green pollen, corresponding in position with the longest stamens of Lythrum. In
one flower, two of the long stamens produced green, while a third produced
yellow pollen, although the filaments of all three were thick and flesh-
coloured. In an anther of another flower, one cell contained green and the other
yellow pollen. The green and yellow pollen-grains from the stamens of different
length are of the same size. The pistil is a little bowed upwards, with the
stigma seated between the anthers of the short and long stamens, so that this
plant was mid-styled. Eight flowers were fertilised with green pollen, and six
with yellow pollen, but not one set fruit. This latter fact by no means proves
that the plant is heterostyled, as it may belong to the class of self-sterile
species. Another plant growing in the Botanic Gardens at Calcutta, as Mr. J.
Scott informs me, was long-styled, and it was equally sterile with its own
pollen; whilst a long-styled plant of L. reginae, though growing by itself,
produced fruit. I examined dried flowers from two plants of L. parviflora, both
of which were long-styled, and they differed from L. Indica in having eight long
stamens with thick filaments, and a crowd of shorter stamens. Thus the evidence
whether L. Indica is heterostyled is curiously conflicting: the unequal number
of the short and long stamens, their extreme variability, and especially the
fact of their pollen-grains not differing in size, are strongly opposed to this
belief; on the other hand, the difference in length of the pistils in two of the
plants, their sterility with their own pollen, and the difference in length and
structure of the two sets of stamens in the same flower, and in the colour of
their pollen, favour the belief. We know that when plants of any kind revert to
a former condition, they are apt to be highly variable, and the two halves of
the same organ sometimes differ much, as in the case of the above-described
anther of the Lagerstroemia; we may therefore suspect that this species was once
heterostyled, and that it still retains traces of its former state, together
with a tendency to revert more completely to it. It deserves notice, as bearing
on the nature of Lagerstroemia, that in Lythrum hyssopifolia, which is a
homostyled species, some of the shorter stamens vary in being either present or
absent; and that these same stamens are altogether absent in L. thymifolia. In
another genus of the Lythraceae, namely Cuphea, three species raised by me from
seed certainly were homostyled; nevertheless their stamens consisted of two
sets, differing in length and in the colour and thickness of their filaments,
but not in the size or colour of their pollen-grains; so that they thus far
resembled the stamens of Lagerstroemia. I found that Cuphea purpurea was highly
fertile with its own pollen when artificially aided, but sterile when insects
were excluded. (4/11. Mr. Spence informs me that in several species of the genus
Mollia (Tiliaceae) which he collected in South America, the stamens of the five
outer cohorts have purplish filaments and green pollen, whilst the stamens of
the five inner cohorts have yellow pollen. He therefore suspected that these
species might prove to be heterostyled and trimorphic: but he did not notice the
length of the pistils. In the allied Luhea the outer purplish stamens are
destitute of anthers. I procured some specimens of Mollia lepidota and speciosa
from Kew, but could not make out that their pistils differed in length in
different plants; and in all those which I examined the stigma stood close
beneath the uppermost anthers. The numerous stamens are graduated in length, and
the pollen-grains from the longest and shortest ones did not present any marked
difference in diameter. Therefore these species do not appear to be
heterostyled.)]

Oxalis (Geraniaceae).

(Figure 4.11. Oxalis speciosa (with the petals removed).
Left: Long-styled.
Centre: Mid-styled.
Right: Short-styled.
S, S, S, stigmas. The dotted lines with arrows show which pollen must be carried
to the stigmas for legitimate fertilisation.)

In 1863 Mr. Roland Trimen wrote to me from the Cape of Good Hope that he had
there found species of Oxalis which presented three forms; and of these he
enclosed drawings and dried specimens. Of one species he collected 43 flowers
from distinct plants, and they consisted of 10 long-styled, 12 mid-styled, and
21 short-styled. Of another species he collected 13 flowers, consisting of 3
long-styled, 7 mid-styled, and 3 short-styled. In 1866 Professor Hildebrand
proved by an examination of the specimens in several herbaria that 20 species
are certainly heterostyled and trimorphic, and 51 others almost certainly so.
(4/12. 'Monatsber. der Akad. der Wiss. Berlin' 1866 pages 352, 372. He gives
drawings of the three forms at page 42 of his 'Geschlechter-Vertheilung' etc.
1867.) He also made some interesting observations on living plants belonging to
one form alone; for at that time he did not possess the three forms of any
living species. During the years 1864 to 1868 I occasionally experimented on
Oxalis speciosa, but until now have never found time to publish the results. In
1871 Hildebrand published an admirable paper in which he shows in the case of
two species of Oxalis, that the sexual relations of the three forms are nearly
the same as in Lythrum salicaria. (4/13. 'Botanische Zeitung' 1871 pages 416 and
432.) I will now give an abstract of his observations, and afterwards of my own
less complete ones. I may premise that in all the species seen by me, the
stigmas of the five straight pistils of the long-styled form stand on a level
with the anthers of the longest stamens in the two other forms. In the mid-
styled form, the stigmas pass out between the filaments of the longest stamens
(as in the short-styled form of Linum); and they stand rather nearer to the
upper anthers than to the lower ones. In the short-styled form, the stigmas also
pass out between the filaments nearly on a level with the tips of the sepals.
The anthers in this latter form and in the mid-styled rise to the same height as
the corresponding stigmas in the other two forms.

Oxalis Valdiviana.

This species, an inhabitant of the west coast of South America, bears yellow
flowers. Hildebrand states that the stigmas of the three forms do not differ in
any marked manner, but that the pistil of the short-styled form alone is
destitute of hairs. The diameters of the pollen-grains are as follows:--

Table 4.b. Oxalis Valdiviana. Diameters of pollen-grains in divisions of the
micrometer.

Column 1: Source of Pollen-grains.
Column 2: Minimum diameter.
Column 3: Maximum diameter.

From the:
Longest stamens of short-styled form : 8 to 9.
Mid-length stamens of short-styled form : 7 to 8.
Longest stamens of mid-styled form : 8.
Shortest stamens of mid-styled form : 8.
Mid-length stamens of long-styled form : 7.
Shortest stamens of long-styled form : 6.

Therefore the extreme difference in diameter is as 8.5 to 6, or as 100 to 71.
The results of Hildebrand's experiments are given in Table 4.27, drawn up in
accordance with my usual plan.

Table 4.27. Oxalis Valdiviana (from Hildebrand).

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of Capsules produced.
Column 4: Number of Seeds per Capsule.

Long-styled by pollen of longest stamens of short-styled. Legitimate union :
28 : 28 : 11.9.

Long-styled by pollen of longest stamens of mid-styled. Legitimate union :
21 : 21 : 12.0.

Long-styled by pollen of own and own-form mid-length stamens. Illegitimate union
:
40 : 2 : 5.5.

Long-styled by pollen of own and own-form shortest stamens. Illegitimate union :
26 : 0 : 0.

Long-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of short-styled. Illegitimate union :
16 : 1 : 1.

Long-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of mid-styled. Illegitimate union :
9 : 0 : 0.

Mid-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of long-styled. Legitimate union :
38 : 38 : 11.3.

Mid-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of short-styled. Legitimate union :
23 : 23 : 10.4.

Mid-styled by pollen of own and own-form longest stamens. Illegitimate union :
52 : 0 : 0.

Mid-styled by pollen of own and own-form shortest stamens. Illegitimate union :
30 : 1 : 6.

Mid-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of long-styled. Illegitimate union :
16 : 0 : 0.

Mid-styled by pollen of longest stamens of short-styled. Illegitimate union :
16 : 2 : 2.5.

Short-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of long-styled. Legitimate union:
18 : 18 : 11.0.

Short-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of mid-styled. Legitimate union:
10 : 10 : 11.3.

Short-styled by pollen of own and own-form longest stamens. Illegitimate union :
21 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of own and own-form mid-length stamens. Illegitimate
union :
22 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of longest stamens of mid-styled. Illegitimate union:
4 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of long-styled. Illegitimate union:
3 : 0 : 0.

We here have the remarkable result that every one of 138 legitimately fertilised
flowers on the three forms yielded capsules, containing on an average 11.33
seeds. Whilst of the 255 illegitimately fertilised flowers, only 6 yielded
capsules, which contained 3.83 seeds on an average. Therefore the fertility of
the six legitimate to that of the twelve illegitimate unions, as judged by the
proportion of flowers that yielded capsules, is as 100 to 2, and as judged by
the average number of seeds per capsule as 100 to 34. It may be added that some
plants which were protected by nets did not spontaneously produce any fruit; nor
did one which was left uncovered by itself and was visited by bees. On the other
hand, scarcely a single flower on some uncovered plants of the three forms
growing near together failed to produce fruit.

Oxalis Regnelli.

This species bears white flowers and inhabits Southern Brazil. Hildebrand says
that the stigma of the long-styled form is somewhat larger than that of the mid-
styled, and this than that of the short-styled. The pistil of the latter is
clothed with a few hairs, whilst it is very hairy in the other two forms. The
diameter of the pollen-grains from both sets of the longest stamens equals 9
divisions of the micrometer,--that from the mid-length stamens of the long-
styled form between 8 and 9, and of the short-styled 8,--and that from the
shortest stamens of both sets 7. So that the extreme difference in diameter is
as 9 to 7 or as 100 to 78. The experiments made by Hildebrand, which are not so
numerous as in the last case, are given in Table 4.28 in the same manner as
before.

TABLE 4.28. Oxalis Regnelli (from Hildebrand).

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of Capsules produced.
Column 4: Average Number of Seeds per Capsule.

Long-styled by pollen of longest stamens of short-styled. Legitimate union :
6 : 6 : 10.1.

Long-styled by pollen of longest stamens of mid-styled. Legitimate union :
5 : 5 : 10.6.

Long-styled by pollen of own mid-length stamens. Illegitimate union :
4 : 0 : 0.

Long-styled by pollen of own shortest stamens. Illegitimate union :
1 : 0 : 0.

Mid-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of short-styled. Legitimate union :
9 : 9 : 10.4.

Mid-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of long-styled. Legitimate union :
10 : 10 : 10.1.

Mid-styled by pollen of own longest stamens. Illegitimate union :
9 : 0 : 0.

Mid-styled by pollen of own shortest stamens. Illegitimate union :
2 : 0 : 0.

Mid-styled by pollen of longest stamens of short-styled. Illegitimate union :
1 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of mid-styled. Legitimate union:
9 : 9 : 10.6.

Short-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of long-styled. Legitimate union:
2 : 2 : 9.5.

Short-styled by pollen of own mid-length stamens. Illegitimate union :
12 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of own longest stamens. Illegitimate union :
9 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of long-styled. Illegitimate union:
1 : 0 : 0.

The results are nearly the same as in the last case, but more striking; for 41
flowers belonging to the three forms fertilised legitimately all yielded
capsules, containing on an average 10.31 seeds; whilst 39 flowers fertilised
illegitimately did not yield a single capsule or seed. Therefore the fertility
of the six legitimate to that of the several illegitimate unions, as judged both
by the proportion of flowers which yielded capsules and by the average number of
contained seeds, is as 100 to 0.

Oxalis speciosa.

This species, which bears pink flowers, was introduced from the Cape of Good
Hope. A sketch of the reproductive organs of the three forms (Figure 4.11) has
already been given. The stigma of the long-styled form (with the papillae on its
surface included) is twice as large as that of the short-styled, and that of the
mid-styled intermediate in size. The pollen-grains from the stamens in the three
forms are in their longer diameters as follows:--

Table 4.c. Oxalis speciosa. Diameters of pollen-grains in divisions of the
micrometer.

Column 1: Source of Pollen-grains.
Column 2: Minimum diameter.
Column 3: Maximum diameter.

From the:
Longest stamens of short-styled form : 15 to 16.
Mid-length stamens of short-styled form : 12 to 13.
Longest stamens of mid-styled form : 16.
Shortest stamens of mid-styled form : 11 to 12.
Mid-length stamens of long-styled form : 14.
Shortest stamens of long-styled form : 12.

Therefore the extreme difference in diameter is as 16 to 11, or as 100 to 69;
but as the measurements were taken at different times, they are probably only
approximately accurate. The results of my experiments in fertilising the three
forms are given in Table 4.29.

Table 4.29. Oxalis speciosa.

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of Capsules produced.
Column 4: Average Number of Seeds per Capsule.

Long-styled by pollen of longest stamens of short-styled. Legitimate union :
19 : 15 : 57.4.

Long-styled by pollen of longest stamens of mid-styled. Legitimate union :
4 : 3 : 59.0.

Long-styled by pollen of own-form mid-length stamens. Illegitimate union :
9 : 2 : 42.5.

Long-styled by pollen of own-form shortest stamens. Illegitimate union :
11 : 0 : 0.

Long-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of mid-styled. Illegitimate union :
4 : 0 : 0.

Long-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of short-styled. Illegitimate union
:
12 : 5 : 30.0.

Mid-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of long-styled. Legitimate union :
3 : 3 : 63.6.

Mid-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of short-styled. Legitimate union :
4 : 4 : 56.3.

Mid-styled by mixed pollen from both own-form longest and shortest stamens.
Illegitimate union :
9 : 2 : 19.

Mid-styled by pollen of longest stamens of short-styled. Illegitimate union :
12 : 1 : 8.

Short-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of mid-styled. Legitimate union:
3 : 2 : 67.

Short-styled by pollen of shortest stamens of long-styled. Legitimate union:
3 : 3 : 54.3.

Short-styled by pollen of own-form longest stamens. Illegitimate union:
5 : 1 : 8.

Short-styled by pollen of own-form mid-length stamens. Illegitimate union :
3 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by both pollens mixed together, of own-form longest and mid-length
stamens. Illegitimate union:
13 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of longest stamens of mid-styled. Illegitimate union :
7 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of mid-length stamens of long-styled. Illegitimate union:
10 : 1 : 54.

We here see that thirty-six flowers on the three forms legitimately fertilised
yielded 30 capsules, these containing on an average 58.36 seeds. Ninety-five
flowers illegitimately fertilised yielded 12 capsules, containing on an average
28.58 seeds. Therefore the fertility of the six legitimate to that of the twelve
illegitimate unions, as judged by the proportion of flowers which yielded
capsules, is as 100 to 15, and judged by the average number of seeds per capsule
as 100 to 49. This plant, in comparison with the two South American species
previously described, produces many more seeds, and the illegitimately
fertilised flowers are not quite so sterile.

Oxalis rosea.

Hildebrand possessed in a living state only the long-styled form of this
trimorphic Chilian species. (4/14. 'Monatsber. der Akad. der Wiss. Berlin' 1866
page 372.) The pollen-grains from the two sets of anthers differ in diameter as
9 to 7.5, or as 100 to 83. He has further shown that there is an analogous
difference between the grains from the two sets of anthers of the same flower in
five other species of Oxalis, besides those already described. The present
species differs remarkably from the long-styled form of the three species
previously experimented on, in a much larger proportion of the flowers setting
capsules when fertilised with their own-form pollen. Hildebrand fertilised 60
flowers with pollen from the mid-length stamens (of either the same or another
flower), and they yielded no less than 55 capsules, or 92 per cent. These
capsules contained on an average 5.62 seeds; but we have no means of judging how
near an approach this average makes to that from flowers legitimately
