"No, no," Jon said. "I wouldn't ask you to. Besides, I heard your last
phone call. So it's already out. I want you to do two things for me. One
has to do with Dad. The other is to deliver a message. I overheard a
conference call between Prime Minister Chargill and some of the members
of the council. They're about to ask Dad for a huge sum of money to
finance the first aggressive drive in this war effort. Try and convince
him that it'll do more harm than good. Look, Clea, you've got a
mathematical mind. Show him how this whole thing works. He doesn't mean
to be, but he's almost as much responsible for this thing as any one
individual could be. See if he can keep production from flooding the
city. And for Toromon's sake, keep an eye, a close eye on his
supervisors. They're going to tilt the island into the sea with all
their cross-purposes intrigues. All I can do is start you on the right
track, Sis, and you'll have to take it from there.

"Now for the message. The one circuit I can't break in on is the Royal
Palace system. I can just overhear. Somehow I've got to get a message to
the Duchess of Petra. Tell her to get to Telphar in the next forty-eight
hours by way of the transit ribbon. Tell her there are two kids she owes
a favor to. And tell her the girl she owes four or five favors. She'll
be able to find out who they are."

Clea was scribbling. "Does the transit ribbon still work?" she asked.

"It was working when I escaped from prison," Jon said. "I don't see why
it should have stopped now."

"You used it?" Clea said. "That means you were in Toron!"

"That's right. And I was at your party too."

"Then it was ..." She stopped. Then laughed, "I'm so glad, Jon. I'm so
glad it was you after all."

"Come on, Sis, tell me about yourself," Jon said. "What's been happening
in the real world. I've been away from it a long time. Here in Telphar I
don't feel much closer. Right now I'm walking around in my birthday
suit. On our way here we got into a shadowy situation and I had to
abandon my clothes for fear of getting caught. I'll explain that later,
too. But what about you?"

"Oh, there's nothing to tell. But to you I guess there is. I graduated,
with honors. I've grown up. I'm engaged to Tomar. Did you know that? Dad
approves, and we're to be married as soon as the war's over. I'm working
on a great project, to find the inverse sub-trigonometric functions.
Those are about the most important things in my life right now. I'm
suppose to be working on the war effort, but except for this afternoon,
I haven't done much."

"Fine," Jon said. "That's about the right proportions."

"Now what about you? And the clothes?" She grinned into the visaphone,
and he grinned back.

"Well--no, you wouldn't believe it. At least not if I told it that way.
Arkor, the friend who's with me, is one of the forest people. He left
the forest to spend some time in Toron, which is where I met him.
Apparently he managed to accumulate an amazing store of information,
about all sorts of things--electronics, languages, even music. You'd
think he could read minds. Anyway, here we are, through the forest,
across the prison mines, and in Telphar."

"Jon, what were the mines like? It always made me wonder how Dad could
use tetron when he knew that you were being whipped to get it."

"You and I'll get drunk some evening and I'll tell you what it was
like," Jon said. "But not until. When you're trying to convince Dad,
bring that up about me and the mines."

"Don't worry," she said. "I will."

"Anyway," Jon went on, "we had to get through the forest without being
seen and with all those leaves it was pretty dark. Arkor could get
through because he was a forest man and nobody would stop him. But
because they'd have seen me, I had to go most of the way naked as a
jaybird."

Clea frowned. "I don't understand. Are you sure you're all right?"

Jon laughed. "Of course I'm all right. I can't really explain to you
just yet. I'm just so happy to see you again, to be able to talk to
you. Sis, I've wanted to be free for so long, to see you and Dad again,
and--there's nothing wrong with me except the sniffles."

It welled up in her like a wave and the tears flooded her lower lids,
and then one overflowed and ran down the left side of her nose. "You see
what you're doing," she said. And they laughed once more. "To see you
again, Jon is so ... _fine_."

"I love you, Sis," Jon said. "Thanks, and so long for a little while."

"I'll get your message out. So long." The phone blinked dark and she sat
there wondering if perhaps the tension wasn't too much. But it wasn't,
and she had messages to deliver.




CHAPTER X


During the next couple of hours, two people died, miles apart.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Don't be silly," Rara was saying in the inn at the Devil's Pot. "I'm a
perfectly good nurse. Do you want to see my license?"

The white-haired old man sat very straight in his chair by the window.
Blue seeped like liquid across the glass. "Why did I do it?" he said.
"It was wrong. I--I love my country."

Rara pulled the blanket from the back of the chair and tucked it around
the stiff, trembling shoulders. "What are you talking about?" she said,
but the birthmark over her face showed deep purple with worry.

He shook the blanket off and flung his hand across the table where the
news directive lay.

    CROWN PRINCE KIDNAPED!
      KING DECLARES WAR!

The trembling in Geryn's shoulders became violent shaking.

"Sit back," said Rara.

Geryn stood up.

"Sit down," Rara repeated. "Sit down. You're not well. Now sit down!"

Geryn lowered himself stiffly to the chair. He turned to Rara. "Did I
start a war? I tried to stop it. That was all I wanted. Would it have
happened if ..."

"Sit back," Rara said. "If you're going to talk to somebody, talk to me.
I can answer you. Geryn, you didn't start the war."

Geryn suddenly rose once more, staggered forward, slammed his hands on
the table and began to cough.

"For pity's sake," Rara cried, trying to move the old man back into his
chair, "will you sit down and relax! You're not well! You're not well at
all!" From above the house came the faint beat of helicopter blades.

Geryn went back to his chair. Suddenly he leaned his head back, his
sharp Adam's apple shooting high in his neck and quivering. Rara jumped
forward and tried to bring his head up. "Dear heavens," she breathed.
"Stop that. Now stop it, or you'll hurt yourself."

Geryn's head came up straight again. "A war," he said. "They made me
start the--"

"No one made you do anything," Rara said. "And you didn't start the
war."

"Are you sure?" he asked. "No. You can't be sure. No one can.
Nobody...."

"Will you please try to relax," Rara repeated, tucking at the blanket.

Geryn relaxed. It went all through his body, starting at his hands. The
stiff shoulders dropped a little, his head fell forward, the wall of
muscle quivering across his stomach loosened, the back bent; and that
frail fist of strength that had jarred life through his tautened body
for seventy years, shaking inside his chest, it too relaxed. Then it
stopped. Geryn crumpled onto the floor.

The shifting body pulled Rara down with him. Unaware that he was dead,
she was trying to get him back into the chair, when the helicopter
blades got very loud.

She looked up to see the window darken with a metal shadow. "Good lord,"
she breathed. Then the glass shattered.

She screamed, careened around the table, and fled through the door,
slamming it behind her.

Over the flexible metal ramp that hooked onto the window sill two men
entered the room. Fire-blades poised, they walked to the crumpled body,
lifted it between them, and carried it back to the window. Their arm
bands showed the royal insignia of the palace guards.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tel was running down the street because someone was following him. He
ducked into a side alley and skittered down a flight of stone steps.
Somewhere overhead he heard a helicopter.

His heart was pounding like explosions in his chest, like the sea, like
his ocean. Once he had looked through a six-inch crevice between glassy
water and the top of a normally submerged cave and seen wet, orange
starfish dripping from the ceiling and their reflections quivering with
his own breath. Now he was trapped in the cave of the city, the tide of
fear rising to lock him in. Footsteps passed above him.

Nearby was a ladder that led to a trap door which would put him in the
hall of a tenement. He climbed it, emerged, and then turned up the
regular steps to the roof. He walked across the tar-paper surface to the
edge, leaned over, and peered into the alley. Two men, who may have been
the people following him, approached from opposite ends of the alley.
The sky was deepening toward evening and it was cool. The two men met,
and then one pointed to the roof.

"Damn," Tel muttered, ducked backward, and bit his tongue with surprise.
He opened his mouth and breathed hard, holding the side of his jaw. The
helicopter was coming closer.

Then something very light fell over him. He forgot his bitten tongue and
struck out with his hands. It was strong, too. It jerked at his feet and
he fell forward. It was not until it lifted him from the roof that he
realized he was caught in a net. He was being drawn up toward the sound
of the whirling helicopter blades.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just about that time the order came through. He didn't even have time to
say good-bye to Clea. Two other mathematicians in the corps had shown
appropriate awe at Clea's discovery and proceeded to locate the
generator. The next-in-charge general, working on a strategy Tomar did
not quite understand, decided that now was the time for an active
strike. "Besides," he added, "if we don't give them some combat soon,
we'll lose--and I mean lose as in 'misplace'--the war."

The shadow of the control tower fell through the windshield and slipped
across Tomar's face. He pulled up his goggles and sighed. Active combat.
What the hell would they be combating? The disorder, the disorganization
was beginning to strike him as farcical. Though after the poisoned fish,
the farcical was no longer funny.

The buildings on the airfield sunk back and down. The transit ribbon
fell below him and the six other planes in the formation pulled up
behind him. A moment later the island was a comb of darkness on the
glittering foil of the evening sea.

Clouds banded the deep blue at the horizon. There were three stars out,
the same stars that he had looked at as a boy when his sunup to sundown
work day had ended. Between hunger and hunger there had been some times
when you could look at the stars and wonder, as there were now between
times of work and work.

The controls were set. There was nothing to do but wait for land to rise
up over the edge of the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the end of the metal ribbon was a transparent crystal sphere,
fifteen feet in diameter which hovered above the receiving stage. A
dozen small tetron units sat around the room. By one ornate window a
bank of forty-nine scarlet knobbed switches pointed to off. Two men
stood on the metal catwalk that ran above the receiving stage, one young
man with black hair, the other a dark giant with a triplex of scars down
the left side of his face.

In another room, the corpses of the elders of Telphar sat stiff and
decomposed on green velvet seats.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was evening in the solarium on top of the General Medical building.
The patients were about to be herded from their deck chairs and game
tables under the glass roof back to their wards, when a woman screamed.
Then there was the sound of breaking glass. More people screamed.

Alter heard the roar of helicopter blades. People were running around
her. Suddenly the crowd of bathrobed patients broke from in front of
her. She touched the cast that covered her left shoulder and arm. People
cried out. Then she saw.

The glass dome had been shattered at the edge, and the flexible metal
ramp ran a dark ribbon from the copter to the edge of the solarium. The
men that marched across had the insignia of the royal guards. She
clamped her jaws together and moved behind the nurse. The men marched
in, fire-blades high, among the overturned deck chairs. There were three
stars visible, she noted irrelevantly, through the bubble dome.

Good lord! They were coming toward her!

The moment the guards recognized her, she realized the only way to get
out was to cross the suddenly immense span of metal flooring to the
stairwell. She ducked her head, broke from the crowd of patients and
ran, wondering why she had been fool enough to wait this long. The guard
tackled her and she heard screams again.

She fell to the hard floor and felt pain explode along the inside of her
cast. The guard tried to lift her, and with her good arm she struck at
his face. Then she held her palm straight and brought the edge down on
the side of his neck.

She staggered and she felt herself slip to the floor. Then someone
grabbed a handful of her hair and her head was yanked back. At first she
closed her eyes. Then she had to open them. Night was moving above her
through the dome of the solarium. Then the cracked edge of the glass
passed over her, and it was colder, and the blur and roar of helicopter
blades was above.

       *       *       *       *       *

"On course?"

"Dead on course," said Tomar back into the microphone. Below, the rim of
land slipped back under them. The moon bleached the edges of the
vari-colored darknesses beneath them; then went down.

"What are you thinking about, Major?" came the voice from the speaker
again.

"Not thinking about anything," Tomar said. "Just thinking about waiting.
It's funny, that's most of what you do in this army: wait. You wait to
go out and fight. And once you go out, then you start waiting to turn
around and come back."

"Wonder what it'll be like."

"A few bombs over that generator, then we'll have had active combat, and
everyone will be happy."

A laugh, mechanical, through the speaker. "Suppose they 'active' back?"

"If they cripple our planes like they've done before, we'll make it to
the island again."

"I had to leave a hot cup of coffee back at the hangar, Major. I wish it
was light so we could see what we were doing."

