                         _Critique of Pure Reason, Preface to the
                         Second Edition [Mueller], (New York,
                         1900), p. 690._


=202.= [When followed in the proper spirit], there is no study in
the world which brings into more harmonious action all the
faculties of the mind than the one [mathematics] of which I
stand here as the humble representative and advocate. There is
none other which prepares so many agreeable surprises for its
followers, more wonderful than the transformation scene of a
pantomime, or, like this, seems to raise them, by successive
steps of initiation to higher and higher states of conscious
intellectual being.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _A Plea for the Mathematician, Nature,
                         Vol. 1, p. 261._


=203.= Thought-economy is most highly developed in mathematics,
that science which has reached the highest formal development,
and on which natural science so frequently calls for assistance.
Strange as it may seem, the strength of mathematics lies in the
avoidance of all unnecessary thoughts, in the utmost economy of
thought-operations. The symbols of order, which we call numbers,
form already a system of wonderful simplicity and economy. When
in the multiplication of a number with several digits we employ
the multiplication table and thus make use of previously
accomplished results rather than to repeat them each time, when
by the use of tables of logarithms we avoid new numerical
calculations by replacing them by others long since performed,
when we employ determinants instead of carrying through from the
beginning the solution of a system of equations, when we
decompose new integral expressions into others that are
familiar,--we see in all this but a faint reflection of the
intellectual activity of a _Lagrange_ or _Cauchy_, who with the
keen discernment of a military commander marshalls a whole troop
of completed operations in the execution of a new one.--MACH, E.

                         _Populaer-wissenschafliche Vorlesungen
                         (1908), pp. 224-225._


=204.= Pure mathematics proves itself a royal science both
through its content and form, which contains within itself the
cause of its being and its methods of proof. For in complete
independence mathematics creates for itself the object of which
it treats, its magnitudes and laws, its formulas and symbols.

                                                   --DILLMANN, E.

                         _Die Mathematik die Fackeltraegerin einer
                         neuen Zeit (Stuttgart, 1889), p. 94._


=205.= The essence of mathematics lies in its freedom.

                                                --CANTOR, GEORGE.

                         _Mathematische Annalen, Bd. 21, p. 564._


=206.= Mathematics pursues its own course unrestrained, not
indeed with an unbridled licence which submits to no laws, but
rather with the freedom which is determined by its own nature and
in conformity with its own being.--HANKEL, HERMANN.

                         _Die Entwickelung der Mathematik in den
                         letzten Jahrhunderten (Tuebingen, 1884),
                         p. 16._


=207.= Mathematics is perfectly free in its development and is
subject only to the obvious consideration, that its concepts must
be free from contradictions in themselves, as well as definitely
and orderly related by means of definitions to the previously
existing and established concepts.--CANTOR, GEORGE.

                         _Grundlagen einer allgemeinen
                         Manigfaltigkeitslehre (Leipzig, 1883),
                         Sect. 8._


=208.= Mathematicians assume the right to choose, within the
limits of logical contradiction, what path they please in
reaching their results.--ADAMS, HENRY.

                         _A Letter to American Teachers of
                         History (Washington, 1910),
                         Introduction, p. v._


=209.= Mathematics is the predominant science of our time; its
conquests grow daily, though without noise; he who does not
employ it for himself, will some day find it employed against
himself.--HERBART, J. F.

                         _Werke [Kehrbach] (Langensalza, 1890),
                         Bd. 5, p. 105._


=210.= Mathematics is not the discoverer of laws, for it is not
induction; neither is it the framer of theories, for it is not
hypothesis; but it is the judge over both, and it is the arbiter
to which each must refer its claims; and neither law can rule nor
theory explain without the sanction of mathematics.

                                              --PEIRCE, BENJAMIN.

                         _Linear Associative Algebra, American
                         Journal of Mathematics, Vol. 4 (1881),
                         p. 97._


=211.= Mathematics is a science continually expanding; and its
growth, unlike some political and industrial events, is attended
by universal acclamation.--WHITE, H. S.

                         _Congress of Arts and Sciences (Boston
                         and New York, 1905), Vol. 1, p. 455._


=212.= Mathematics accomplishes really nothing outside of the
realm of magnitude; marvellous, however, is the skill with which
it masters magnitude wherever it finds it. We recall at once the
network of lines which it has spun about heavens and earth; the
system of lines to which azimuth and altitude, declination and
right ascension, longitude and latitude are referred; those
abscissas and ordinates, tangents and normals, circles of
curvature and evolutes; those trigonometric and logarithmic
functions which have been prepared in advance and await
application. A look at this apparatus is sufficient to show that
mathematicians are not magicians, but that everything is
accomplished by natural means; one is rather impressed by the
multitude of skilful machines, numerous witnesses of a manifold
and intensely active industry, admirably fitted for the
acquisition of true and lasting treasures.--HERBART, J. F.

                         _Werke [Kehrbach] (Langensalza, 1890),
                         Bd. 5, p. 101._


=213.= They [mathematicians] only take those things into
consideration, of which they have clear and distinct ideas,
designating them by proper, adequate, and invariable names, and
premising only a few axioms which are most noted and certain to
investigate their affections and draw conclusions from them, and
agreeably laying down a very few hypotheses, such as are in the
highest degree consonant with reason and not to be denied by
anyone in his right mind. In like manner they assign generations
or causes easy to be understood and readily admitted by all, they
preserve a most accurate order, every proposition immediately
following from what is supposed and proved before, and reject all
things howsoever specious and probable which can not be inferred
and deduced after the same manner.--BARROW, ISAAC.

                         _Mathematical Lectures (London, 1734),
                         p. 66._


=214.= The dexterous management of terms and being able to _fend_
and _prove_ with them, I know has and does pass in the world for
a great part of learning; but it is learning distinct from
knowledge, for knowledge consists only in perceiving the
habitudes and relations of ideas one to another, which is done
without words; the intervention of sounds helps nothing to it.
And hence we see that there is least use of distinction where
there is most knowledge: I mean in mathematics, where men have
determined ideas with known names to them; and so, there being no
room for equivocations, there is no need of distinctions.

                                                   --LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _Conduct of the Understanding, Sect.
                         31._


=215.= In mathematics it [sophistry] had no place from the
beginning: Mathematicians having had the wisdom to define
accurately the terms they use, and to lay down, as axioms, the
first principles on which their reasoning is grounded. Accordingly
we find no parties among mathematicians, and hardly any disputes.

                                                   --REID, THOMAS.

                         _Essays on the Intellectual Powers of
                         Man, Essay 1, chap. 1._


=216.= In most sciences one generation tears down what another
has built and what one has established another undoes. In
Mathematics alone each generation builds a new story to the old
structure.--HANKEL, HERMANN.

                         _Die Entwickelung der Mathematik in den
                         letzten Jahrhunderten (Tuebingen, 1884),
                         p. 25._


=217.= Mathematics, the priestess of definiteness and
clearness.--HERBART, J. F.

                         _Werke [Kehrbach] (Langensalza, 1890),
                         Bd. 1, p. 171._


=218.= ... mathematical analysis is co-extensive with nature
itself, it defines all perceivable relations, measures times,
spaces, forces, temperatures; it is a difficult science which
forms but slowly, but preserves carefully every principle once
acquired; it increases and becomes stronger incessantly amidst
all the changes and errors of the human mind.

Its chief attribute is clearness; it has no means for expressing
confused ideas. It compares the most diverse phenomena and
discovers the secret analogies which unite them. If matter
escapes us, as that of air and light because of its extreme
tenuity, if bodies are placed far from us in the immensity of
space, if man wishes to know the aspect of the heavens at
successive periods separated by many centuries, if gravity and
heat act in the interior of the solid earth at depths which will
forever be inaccessible, mathematical analysis is still able to
trace the laws of these phenomena. It renders them present and
measurable, and appears to be the faculty of the human mind
destined to supplement the brevity of life and the imperfection
of the senses, and what is even more remarkable, it follows the
same course in the study of all phenomena; it explains them in
the same language, as if in witness to the unity and simplicity
of the plan of the universe, and to make more manifest the
unchangeable order which presides over all natural causes.

                                                    --FOURIER, J.

                         _Theorie Analytique de la Chaleur,
                         Discours Preliminaire._


=219.= Let us now declare the means whereby our understanding can
rise to knowledge without fear of error. There are two such
means: intuition and deduction. By intuition I mean not the
varying testimony of the senses, nor the deductive judgment of
imagination naturally extravagant, but the conception of an
attentive mind so distinct and so clear that no doubt remains to
it with regard to that which it comprehends; or, what amounts to
the same thing, the self-evidencing conception of a sound and
attentive mind, a conception which springs from the light of
reason alone, and is more certain, because more simple, than
deduction itself....

It may perhaps be asked why to intuition we add this other mode
of knowing, by deduction, that is to say, the process which, from
something of which we have certain knowledge, draws consequences
which necessarily follow therefrom. But we are obliged to admit
this second step; for there are a great many things which,
without being evident of themselves, nevertheless bear the
marks of certainty if only they are deduced from true and
incontestable principles by a continuous and uninterrupted
movement of thought, with distinct intuition of each thing; just
as we know that the last link of a long chain holds to the first,
although we can not take in with one glance of the eye the
intermediate links, provided that, after having run over them in
succession, we can recall them all, each as being joined to its
fellows, from the first up to the last. Thus we distinguish
intuition from deduction, inasmuch as in the latter case there is
conceived a certain progress or succession, while it is not so in
the former;... whence it follows that primary propositions,
derived immediately from principles, may be said to be known,
according to the way we view them, now by intuition, now by
deduction; although the principles themselves can be known only
by intuition, the remote consequences only by deduction.

                                                      --DESCARTES.

                         _Rules for the Direction of the Mind,
                         Philosophy of D. [Torrey] (New York,
                         1892), pp. 64, 65._


=220.= Analysis and natural philosophy owe their most important
discoveries to this fruitful means, which is called induction.
Newton was indebted to it for his theorem of the binomial and the
principle of universal gravity.--LAPLACE.

                         _A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities
                         [Truscott and Emory] (New York 1902), p.
                         176._


=221.= There is in every step of an arithmetical or algebraical
calculation a real induction, a real inference from facts to facts,
and what disguises the induction is simply its comprehensive
nature, and the consequent extreme generality of its language.

                                                     --MILL, J. S.

                         _System of Logic, Bk. 2, chap. 6, 2._


=222.= It would appear that Deductive and Demonstrative Sciences
are all, without exception, Inductive Sciences: that their
evidence is that of experience, but that they are also, in virtue
of the peculiar character of one indispensable portion of the
general formulae according to which their inductions are made,
Hypothetical Sciences. Their conclusions are true only upon
certain suppositions, which are, or ought to be, approximations
to the truth, but are seldom, if ever, exactly true; and to this
hypothetical character is to be ascribed the peculiar certainty,
which is supposed to be inherent in demonstration.--MILL, J. S.

                         _System of Logic, Bk. 2, chap. 6, 1._


=223.= The peculiar character of mathematical truth is, that it
is necessarily and inevitably true; and one of the most important
lessons which we learn from our mathematical studies is a
knowledge that there are such truths, and a familiarity with
their form and character.

This lesson is not only lost, but read backward, if the student
is taught that there is no such difference, and that mathematical
truths themselves are learned by experience.--WHEWELL, W.

                         _Thoughts on the Study of Mathematics.
                         Principles of English University
                         Education (London, 1838)._


=224.= These sciences, Geometry, Theoretical Arithmetic and Algebra,
have no principles besides definitions and axioms, and no process
of proof but _deduction_; this process, however, assuming a most
remarkable character; and exhibiting a combination of simplicity
and complexity, of rigour and generality, quite unparalleled in
other subjects.--WHEWELL, W.

                         _The Philosophy of the Inductive
                         Sciences, Part 1, Bk. 2, chap. 1, sect.
                         2 (London, 1858)._


=225.= The apodictic quality of mathematical thought, the certainty
and correctness of its conclusions, are due, not to a special mode
of ratiocination, but to the character of the concepts with which
it deals. What is that distinctive characteristic? I answer:
_precision_, _sharpness_, _completeness_,[1] of definition. But
how comes your mathematician by such completeness? There is no
mysterious trick involved; some ideas admit of such precision,
others do not; and the mathematician is one who deals with those
that do.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _The Universe and Beyond; Hibbert
                         Journal, Vol. 3 (1904-1905), p. 309._

    [1]  i.e., in terms of the absolutely clear and
         _in_definable.


=226.= The reasoning of mathematicians is founded on certain and
infallible principles. Every word they use conveys a determinate
idea, and by accurate definitions they excite the same ideas in
the mind of the reader that were in the mind of the writer. When
they have defined the terms they intend to make use of, they
premise a few axioms, or self-evident principles, that every one
must assent to as soon as proposed. They then take for granted
certain postulates, that no one can deny them, such as, that a
right line may be drawn from any given point to another, and from
these plain, simple principles they have raised most astonishing
speculations, and proved the extent of the human mind to be more
spacious and capacious than any other science.--ADAMS, JOHN.

                         _Diary, Works (Boston, 1850), Vol. 2, p.
                         21._


=227.= It may be observed of mathematicians that they only meddle
with such things as are certain, passing by those that are
doubtful and unknown. They profess not to know all things,
neither do they affect to speak of all things. What they know to
be true, and can make good by invincible arguments, that they
publish and insert among their theorems. Of other things they
are silent and pass no judgment at all, choosing rather to
acknowledge their ignorance, than affirm anything rashly. They
affirm nothing among their arguments or assertions which is not
most manifestly known and examined with utmost rigour, rejecting
all probable conjectures and little witticisms. They submit
nothing to authority, indulge no affection, detest subterfuges of
words, and declare their sentiments, as in a court of justice,
_without passion, without apology_; knowing that their reasons,
as Seneca testifies of them, are not brought to _persuade_, but
to compel.--BARROW, ISAAC.

                         _Mathematical Lectures (London, 1734),
                         p. 64._


=228.= What is exact about mathematics but exactness? And is not
this a consequence of the inner sense of truth?--GOETHE.

                         _Sprueche in Prosa, Natur, 6, 948._


=229.= ... the three positive characteristics that distinguish
mathematical knowledge from other knowledge ... may be briefly
expressed as follows: first, mathematical knowledge bears more
distinctly the imprint of truth on all its results than any other
kind of knowledge; secondly, it is always a sure preliminary step
to the attainment of other correct knowledge; thirdly, it has no
need of other knowledge.--SCHUBERT, H.

                         _Mathematical Essays and Recreations
                         (Chicago, 1898), p. 35._


=230.= It is now necessary to indicate more definitely the reason
why mathematics not only carries conviction in itself, but also
transmits conviction to the objects to which it is applied. The
reason is found, first of all, in the perfect precision with
which the elementary mathematical concepts are determined; in
this respect each science must look to its own salvation.... But
this is not all. As soon as human thought attempts long chains of
conclusions, or difficult matters generally, there arises not
only the danger of error but also the suspicion of error, because
since all details cannot be surveyed with clearness at the same
instant one must in the end be satisfied with a _belief_ that
nothing has been overlooked from the beginning. Every one knows
how much this is the case even in arithmetic, the most elementary
use of mathematics. No one would imagine that the higher parts of
mathematics fare better in this respect; on the contrary, in more
complicated conclusions the uncertainty and suspicion of hidden
errors increases in rapid progression. How does mathematics
manage to rid itself of this inconvenience which attaches to it
in the highest degree? By making proofs more rigorous? By giving
new rules according to which the old rules shall be applied? Not
in the least. A very great uncertainty continues to attach to the
result of each single computation. But there are checks. In the
realm of mathematics each point may be reached by a hundred
different ways; and if each of a hundred ways leads to the same
point, one may be sure that the right point has been reached. A
calculation without a check is as good as none. Just so it is
with every isolated proof in any speculative science whatever;
the proof may be ever so ingenious, and ever so perfectly true
and correct, it will still fail to convince permanently. He will
therefore be much deceived, who, in metaphysics, or in psychology
which depends on metaphysics, hopes to see his greatest care in
the precise determination of the concepts and in the logical
conclusions rewarded by conviction, much less by success in
transmitting conviction to others. Not only must the conclusions
support each other, without coercion or suspicion of subreption,
but in all matters originating in experience, or judging
concerning experience, the results of speculation must be
verified by experience, not only superficially, but in countless
special cases.--HERBART, J. F.

                         _Werke [Kehrbach] (Langensalza, 1890),
                         Bd. 5, p. 105._


=231.= [In mathematics] we behold the conscious logical activity
of the human mind in its purest and most perfect form. Here we
learn to realize the laborious nature of the process, the great
care with which it must proceed, the accuracy which is necessary
to determine the exact extent of the general propositions arrived
at, the difficulty of forming and comprehending abstract concepts;
but here we learn also to place confidence in the certainty, scope
and fruitfulness of such intellectual activity.--HELMHOLTZ, H.

                         _Ueber das Verhaeltniss der
                         Naturwissenschaften zur Gesammtheit der
                         Wissenschaft, Vortraege und Reden, Bd. 1
                         (1896), p. 176._


=232.= It is true that mathematics, owing to the fact that its
whole content is built up by means of purely logical deduction
from a small number of universally comprehended principles,
has not unfittingly been designated as the science of the
_self-evident_ [Selbstverstaendlichen]. Experience however, shows
that for the majority of the cultured, even of scientists,
mathematics remains the science of the _incomprehensible_
[Unverstaendlichen].--PRINGSHEIM, ALFRED.

                         _Ueber Wert und angeblichen Unwert der
                         Mathematik, Jahresbericht der Deutschen
                         Mathematiker Vereinigung (1904), p.
                         357._


=233.= Mathematical reasoning is deductive in the sense that it
is based upon definitions which, as far as the validity of the
reasoning is concerned (apart from any existential import), needs
only the test of self-consistency. Thus no external verification
of definitions is required in mathematics, as long as it is
considered merely as mathematics.--WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _Universal Algebra (Cambridge, 1898),
                         Preface, p. vi._


=234.= The mathematician pays not the least regard either to
testimony or conjecture, but deduces everything by demonstrative
reasoning, from his definitions and axioms. Indeed, whatever is
built upon conjecture, is improperly called science; for
conjecture may beget opinion, but cannot produce knowledge.

                                                  --REID, THOMAS.

                         _Essays on the Intellectual Powers of
                         Man, Essay 1, chap. 3._


=235.= ... for the saving the long progression of the thoughts to
remote and first principles in every case, the mind should
provide itself several stages; that is to say, intermediate
principles, which it might have recourse to in the examining
those positions that come in its way. These, though they are not
self-evident principles, yet, if they have been made out from
them by a wary and unquestionable deduction, may be depended on
as certain and infallible truths, and serve as unquestionable
truths to prove other points depending upon them, by a nearer and
shorter view than remote and general maxims.... And thus
mathematicians do, who do not in every new problem run it back to
the first axioms through all the whole train of intermediate
propositions. Certain theorems that they have settled to
themselves upon sure demonstration, serve to resolve to them
multitudes of propositions which depend on them, and are as
firmly made out from thence as if the mind went afresh over every
link of the whole chain that tie them to first self-evident
principles.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _The Conduct of the Understanding, Sect.
                         21._


=236.= Those intervening ideas, which serve to show the agreement
of any two others, are called _proofs_; and where the agreement or
disagreement is by this means plainly and clearly perceived, it is
called _demonstration_; it being _shown_ to the understanding, and
the mind made to see that it is so. A quickness in the mind to
find out these intermediate ideas, (that shall discover the
agreement or disagreement of any other) and to apply them right,
is, I suppose, that which is called _sagacity_.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _An Essay concerning Human
                         Understanding, Bk. 6, chaps. 2, 3._


=237.= ... the speculative propositions of mathematics do not
relate to _facts_; ... all that we are convinced of by any
demonstration in the science, is of a necessary connection
subsisting between certain suppositions and certain conclusions.
When we find these suppositions actually take place in a
particular instance, the demonstration forces us to apply the
conclusion. Thus, if I could form a triangle, the three sides of
which were accurately mathematical lines, I might affirm of this
individual figure, that its three angles are equal to two right
angles; but, as the imperfection of my senses puts it out of my
power to be, in any case, _certain_ of the exact correspondence
of the diagram which I delineate, with the definitions given in
the elements of geometry, I never can apply with confidence to a
particular figure, a mathematical theorem. On the other hand, it
appears from the daily testimony of our senses that the
speculative truths of geometry may be applied to material objects
with a degree of accuracy sufficient for the purposes of life;
and from such applications of them, advantages of the most
important kind have been gained to society.--STEWART, DUGALD.

                         _Elements of the Philosophy of the Human
                         Mind, Part 3, chap. 1, sect. 3._


=238.= No process of sound reasoning can establish a result not
contained in the premises.--MELLOR, J. W.

                         _Higher Mathematics for Students of
                         Chemistry and Physics (New York, 1902),
                         p. 2._


=239.= ... we cannot get more out of the mathematical mill than
we put into it, though we may get it in a form infinitely more
useful for our purpose.--HOPKINSON, JOHN.

                         _James Forrest Lecture, 1894._


=240.= The iron labor of conscious logical reasoning demands
great perseverance and great caution; it moves on but slowly, and
is rarely illuminated by brilliant flashes of genius. It knows
little of that facility with which the most varied instances come
thronging into the memory of the philologist or historian. Rather
is it an essential condition of the methodical progress of
mathematical reasoning that the mind should remain concentrated
on a single point, undisturbed alike by collateral ideas on the
one hand, and by wishes and hopes on the other, and moving on
steadily in the direction it has deliberately chosen.

                                                  --HELMHOLTZ, H.

                         _Ueber das Verhaeltniss der
                         Naturwissenschaften zur Gesammtheit der
                         Wissenschaft, Vortraege und Reden, Bd. 1
                         (1896), p. 178._


=241.= If it were always necessary to reduce everything to
intuitive knowledge, demonstration would often be insufferably
prolix. This is why mathematicians have had the cleverness to
divide the difficulties and to demonstrate separately the
intervening propositions. And there is art also in this; for as
the mediate truths (which are called _lemmas_, since they appear
to be a digression) may be assigned in many ways, it is well, in
order to aid the understanding and memory, to choose of them
those which greatly shorten the process, and appear memorable and
worthy in themselves of being demonstrated. But there is another
obstacle, viz.: that it is not easy to demonstrate all the
axioms, and to reduce demonstrations wholly to intuitive
knowledge. And if we had chosen to wait for that, perhaps we
should not yet have the science of geometry.--LEIBNITZ, G. W.

                         _New Essay on Human Understanding
                         [Langley], Bk. 4, chaps. 2, 8._


=242.= In Pure Mathematics, where all the various truths are
necessarily connected with each other, (being all necessarily
connected with those _hypotheses_ which are the principles of the
science), an arrangement is beautiful in proportion as the
principles are few; and what we admire perhaps chiefly in the
science, is the astonishing variety of consequences which may be
demonstrably deduced from so small a number of premises.

                                               --STEWART, DUGALD.

                         _The Elements of the Philosophy of the
                         Human Mind, Part 3, chap. 1, sect. 3._


=243.= Whenever ... a controversy arises in mathematics, the
issue is not whether a thing is true or not, but whether the
proof might not be conducted more simply in some other way, or
whether the proposition demonstrated is sufficiently important
for the advancement of the science as to deserve especial
enunciation and emphasis, or finally, whether the proposition is
not a special case of some other and more general truth which is
as easily discovered.--SCHUBERT, H.

                         _Mathematical Essays and Recreations
                         (Chicago, 1898), p. 28._


=244.= ... just as the astronomer, the physicist, the geologist,
or other student of objective science looks about in the world of
sense, so, not metaphorically speaking but literally, the mind of
the mathematician goes forth in the universe of logic in quest of
the things that are there; exploring the heights and depths for
facts--ideas, classes, relationships, implications, and the rest;
observing the minute and elusive with the powerful microscope of
his Infinitesimal Analysis; observing the elusive and vast with
the limitless telescope of his Calculus of the Infinite; making
guesses regarding the order and internal harmony of the data
observed and collocated; testing the hypotheses, not merely by
the complete induction peculiar to mathematics, but, like his
colleagues of the outer world, resorting also to experimental tests
and incomplete induction; frequently finding it necessary, in view
of unforeseen disclosures, to abandon one hopeful hypothesis or to
transform it by retrenchment or by enlargement:--thus, in his own
domain, matching, point for point, the processes, methods and
experience familiar to the devotee of natural science.

                                              --KEYSER, CASSIUS J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 26._


=245.= That mathematics "do not cultivate the power of
generalization," ... will be admitted by no person of competent
knowledge, except in a very qualified sense. The generalizations
of mathematics, are, no doubt, a different thing from the
generalizations of physical science; but in the difficulty of
seizing them, and the mental tension they require, they are no
contemptible preparation for the most arduous efforts of the
scientific mind. Even the fundamental notions of the higher
mathematics, from those of the differential calculus upwards are
products of a very high abstraction.... To perceive the
mathematical laws common to the results of many mathematical
operations, even in so simple a case as that of the binomial
theorem, involves a vigorous exercise of the same faculty which
gave us Kepler's laws, and rose through those laws to the theory
of universal gravitation. Every process of what has been called
Universal Geometry--the great creation of Descartes and his
successors, in which a single train of reasoning solves whole
classes of problems at once, and others common to large groups
of them--is a practical lesson in the management of wide
generalizations, and abstraction of the points of agreement from
those of difference among objects of great and confusing
diversity, to which the purely inductive sciences cannot furnish
many superior. Even so elementary an operation as that of
abstracting from the particular configuration of the triangles or
other figures, and the relative situation of the particular lines
or points, in the diagram which aids the apprehension of a common
geometrical demonstration, is a very useful, and far from being
always an easy, exercise of the faculty of generalization so
strangely imagined to have no place or part in the processes of
mathematics.--MILL, JOHN STUART.

                         _An Examination of Sir William
                         Hamilton's Philosophy (London, 1878),
                         pp. 612, 613._


=246.= When the greatest of American logicians, speaking of the
powers that constitute the born geometrician, had named
Conception, Imagination, and Generalization, he paused. Thereupon
from one of the audience there came the challenge, "What of
reason?" The instant response, not less just than brilliant, was:
"Ratiocination--that is but the smooth pavement on which the
