(a Guiana species) for 60 m., the temperature on the surrounding grass
being -2o C., and neither was in the least injured. But when C. laevigata
was exposed for 1 h., the temp. on the surrounding grass being between -3o
and -4o C., every leaf was killed.
[page 290]

another night for 1 h., when the temperature of the grass was -4o C.; and
now all the leaves on a large bush, whether pinned flat open or free, were
killed, blackened, and shrivelled, with the exception of those on one small
branch, low down, which was very slightly protected by the leaves on the
branches above. Another tall bush, with four of its large compound leaves
pinned out horizontally, was afterwards exposed (temp. of surrounding grass
exactly the same, viz., -4o C.), but only for 30 m. On the following
morning every single leaflet on these four leaves was dead, with both their
upper and lower surfaces completely blackened. Of the many free leaves on
the bush, only seven were blackened, and of these only a single one (which
was a younger and more tender leaf than any of the pinned ones) had both
surfaces of the leaflets blackened. The contrast in this latter respect was
well shown by a free leaf, which stood between two pinned-open ones; for
these latter had the lower surfaces of their leaflets as black as ink,
whilst the intermediate free leaf, though badly injured, still retained a
plain tinge of green on the lower surface of the leaflets. This bush
exhibited in a striking manner the evil effects of the leaves not being
allowed to assume at night their normal dependent position; for had they
all been prevented from doing so, assuredly every single leaf on the bush
would have been utterly killed by this exposure of only 30 m. The leaves
whilst sinking downwards in the evening twist round, so that the upper
surface is turned inwards, and is thus better protected than the outwardly
turned lower surface. Nevertheless, it was always the upper surface which
was more blackened than the lower, whenever any difference could be
perceived between them; but whether this was due to the cells near the
upper surface being more tender, or merely to their containing more
chlorophyll, we do not know.

Melilotus officinalis.--A large pot with many plants, which had been kept
during the winter in the greenhouse, was exposed during 5 h. at night to a
slight frost and clear sky. Four leaves had been pinned out, and these died
after a few days; but so did many of the free leaves. Therefore nothing
certain could be inferred from this trial, though it indicated that the
horizontally extended leaves suffered most. Another large pot with many
plants was next exposed for 1 h., the temperature on the surrounding grass
being lower, viz., -3o to -4o C. Ten leaves had been pinned out, and the
result was striking, for on the following morning all these were found much
injured or
[page 291]
killed, and none of the many free leaves on the several plants were at all
injured, with the doubtful exception of two or three very young ones.

Melilotus Italica.--Six leaves were pinned out horizontally, three with
their upper and three with their lower surfaces turned to the zenith. The
plants were exposed for 5 h. to a clear sky, the temperature on ground
being about -1o C. Next morning the six pinned-open leaves seemed more
injured even than the younger and more tender free ones on the same
branches. The exposure, however, had been too long, for after an interval
of some days many of the free leaves seemed in almost as bad a condition as
the pinned-out ones. It was not possible to decide whether the leaves with
their upper or those with their lower surfaces turned to the zenith had
suffered most.

Melilotus suaveolens.--Some plants with 8 leaves pinned out were exposed to
a clear sky during 2 h., the temperature on the surrounding grass being -2o
C. Next morning 6 out of these 8 leaves were in a flaccid condition. There
were about 150 free leaves on the plant, and none of these were injured,
except 2 or 3 very young ones. But after two days, the plants having been
brought back into the greenhouse, the 6 pinned-out leaves all recovered.

Melilotus Taurica.--Several plants were exposed for 5 h. during two nights
to a clear sky and slight frost, accompanied by some wind; and 5 leaves
which had been pinned out suffered more than those both above and below on
the same branches which had gone to sleep. Another pot, which had likewise
been kept in the greenhouse, was exposed for 35 - 40 m. to a clear sky, the
temperature of the surrounding grass being between -3o and -4o C. Nine
leaves had been pinned out, and all of these were killed. On the same
plants there were 210 free leaves, which had been allowed to go to sleep,
and of these about 80 were killed, i.e. only 38 per cent.

Melilotus Petitpierreana.--The plants were exposed to a clear sky for 35 -
40 m.: temperature on surrounding grass -3o to -4o C. Six leaves had been
pinned out so as to stand about ½ inch above the cork, and four had been
pinned close to it. These 10 leaves were all killed, but the closely pinned
ones suffered most, as 4 of the 6 which stood above the cork still retained
small patches of a green colour. A considerable number, but not nearly all,
of the free leaves, were killed or much injured, whereas all the pinned out
ones were killed.
[page 292]

Melilotus macrorrhiza.--The plants were exposed in the same manner as in
the last case. Six leaves had been pinned out horizontally, and five of
them were killed, that is, 83 percent. We estimated that there were 200
free leaves on the plants, and of these about 50 were killed and 20 badly
injured, so that about 35 per cent of the free leaves were killed or
injured.

Lotus aristata.--Six plants were exposed for nearly 5 h. to a clear sky;
temperature on surrounding grass -1.5o C. Four leaves had been pinned out
horizontally, and 2 of these suffered more than those above or below on the
same branches, which had been allowed to go to sleep. It is rather a
remarkable fact that some plants of Lotus Jacoboeus, an inhabitant of so
hot a country as the Cape Verde Islands, were exposed one night to a clear
sky, with the temperature of the surrounding grass -2o C., and on a second
night for 30 m. with the temperature of the grass between -3o and -4o C.,
and not a single leaf, either the pinned-out or free ones, was in the least
injured.

Marsilea quadrifoliata.--A large plant of this species--the only
Cryptogamic plant known to sleep--with some leaves pinned open, was exposed
for 1 h. 35 m. to a clear sky, the temperature on the surrounding ground
being -2o C., and not a single leaf was injured. After an interval of some
days the plant was again exposed for 1 h. to a clear sky, with the
temperature on the surrounding ground lower, viz., -4o C. Six leaves had
been pinned out horizontally, and all of them were utterly killed. The
plant had emitted long trailing stems, and these had been wrapped round
with a blanket, so as to protect them from the frozen ground and from
radiation; but a very large number of leaves were left freely exposed,
which had gone to sleep, and of these only 12 were killed. After another
interval, the plant, with 9 leaves pinned out, was again exposed for 1 h.,
the temperature on the ground being again -4o C. Six of the leaves were
killed, and one which did not at first appear injured afterwards became
streaked with brown. The trailing branches, which rested on the frozen
ground, had one-half or three-quarters of their leaves killed, but of the
many other leaves on the plant, which alone could be fairly compared with
the pinned-out ones, none appeared at first sight to have been killed, but
on careful search 12 were found in this state. After another interval, the
plant with 9 leaves pinned out, was exposed for 35 - 40 m. to a clear sky
and to nearly the same, or perhaps a rather lower, temperature (for the
thermometer by an accident had been left on a
[page 293]
sun-dial close by), and 8 of these leaves were killed. Of the free leaves
(those on the trailing branches not being considered), a good many were
killed, but their number, compared with the uninjured ones, was small.
Finally, taking the three trials together, 24 leaves, extended
horizontally, were exposed to the zenith and to unobstructed radiation, and
of these 20 were killed and 1 injured; whilst a relatively very small
proportion of the leaves, which had been allowed to go to sleep with their
leaflets vertically dependent, were killed or injured.

The cotyledons of several plants were prepared for trial, but the weather
was mild and we succeeded only in a single instance in having seedlings of
the proper age on nights which were clear and cold. The cotyledons of 6
seedlings of Mimosa pudica were fastened open on cork and were thus exposed
for 1 h. 45 m. to a clear sky, with the temperature on the surrounding
ground at 29o F.; of these, 3 were killed. Two other seedlings, after their
cotyledons had risen up and had closed together, were bent over and
fastened so that they stood horizontally, with the lower surface of one
cotyledon fully exposed to the zenith, and both were killed. Therefore of
the 8 seedlings thus tried 5, or more than half, were killed. Seven other
seedlings with their cotyledons in their normal nocturnal position, viz.,
vertical and closed, were exposed at the same time, and of these only 2
were killed.* Hence it appears, as far as these few trials tell anything,
that the vertical position at night of the cotyledons of Mimosa pudica
protects them to a certain degree from the evil effects of radiation and
cold.]

Concluding Remarks on the Radiation from Leaves at Night.--We exposed on
two occasions during the summer to a clear sky several pinned-open leaflets
of Trifolium pratense, which naturally rise at night, and of Oxalis
purpurea, which naturally sink at night (the plants growing out of doors),
and looked at

* We were surprised that young seedlings of so tropical a plant as Mimosa
pudica were able to resist, as well as they did, exposure for 1 hr. 45 m.
to a clear sky, the temperature on the surrounding ground being 29o F. It
may be added that seedlings of the Indian 'Cassia pubescens' were exposed
for 1 h. 30 m. to a clear sky, with the temp. on the surrounding ground at
-2o C., and they were not in the least injured.
[page 294]

them early on several successive mornings, after they had assumed their
diurnal positions. The difference in the amount of dew on the pinned-open
leaflets and on those which had gone to sleep was generally conspicuous;
the latter being sometimes absolutely dry, whilst the leaflets which had
been horizontal were coated with large beads of dew. This shows how much
cooler the leaflets fully exposed to the zenith must have become, than
those which stood almost vertically, either upwards or downwards, during
the night.

From the several cases above given, there can be no doubt that the position
of the leaves at night affects their temperature through radiation to such
a degree, that when exposed to a clear sky during a frost, it is a question
of life and death. We may therefore admit as highly probable, seeing that
their nocturnal position is so well adapted to lessen radiation, that the
object gained by their often complicated sleep movements, is to lessen the
degree to which they are chilled at night. It should be kept in mind that
it is especially the upper surface which is thus protected, as it is never
directed towards the zenith, and is often brought into close contact with
the upper surface of an opposite leaf or leaflet.

We failed to obtain sufficient evidence, whether the better protection of
the upper surface has been gained from its being more easily injured than
the lower surface, or from its injury being a greater evil to the plant.
That there is some difference in constitution between the two surfaces is
shown by the following cases. Cassia floribunda was exposed to a clear sky
on a sharp frosty night, and several leaflets which had assumed their
nocturnal dependent position with their lower surfaces turned outwards so
as to be
[page 295]
exposed obliquely to the zenith, nevertheless had these lower surfaces less
blackened than the upper surfaces which were turned inwards and were in
close contact with those of the opposite leaflets. Again, a pot full of
plants of Trifolium resupinatum, which had been kept in a warm room for
three days, was turned out of doors (Sept. 21st) on a clear and almost
frosty night. Next morning ten of the terminal leaflets were examined as
opaque objects under the microscope. These leaflets, in going to sleep,
either turn vertically upwards, or more commonly bend a little over the
lateral leaflets, so that their lower surfaces are more exposed to the
zenith than their upper surfaces. Nevertheless, six of these ten leaflets
were distinctly yellower on the upper than on the lower and more exposed
surface. In the remaining four, the result was not so plain, but certainly
whatever difference there was leaned to the side of the upper surface
having suffered most.

It has been stated that some of the leaflets experimented on were fastened
close to the cork, and others at a height of from ½ to 3/4 of an inch above
it; and that whenever, after exposure to a frost, any difference could be
detected in their states, the closely pinned ones had suffered most. We
attributed this difference to the air, not cooled by radiation, having been
prevented from circulating freely beneath the closely pinned leaflets. That
there was really a difference in the temperature of leaves treated in these
two different methods, was plainly shown on one occasion; for after the
exposure of a pot with plants of Melilotus dentata for 2 h. to a clear sky
(the temperature on the surrounding grass being -2o C.), it was manifest
that more dew had congealed into hoar-frost on the closely pinned leaflets,
than on those which stood horizontally
[page 296]
a little above the cork. Again, the tips of some few leaflets, which had
been pinned close to the cork, projected a little beyond the edge, so that
the air could circulate freely round them. This occurred with six leaflets
of Oxalis acetosella, and their tips certainly suffered rather less then
the rest of the same leaflets; for on the following morning they were still
slightly green. The same result followed, even still more clearly, in two
cases with leaflets of Melilotus officinalis which projected a little
beyond the cork; and in two other cases some leaflets which were pinned
close to the cork were injured, whilst other free leaflets on the same
leaves, which had not space to rotate and assume their proper vertical
position, were not at all injured.

Another analogous fact deserves notice: we observed on several occasions
that a greater number of free leaves were injured on the branches which had
been kept motionless by some of their leaves having been pinned to the
corks, than on the other branches. This was conspicuously the case with
those of Melilotus Petitpierreana, but the injured leaves in this instance
were not actually counted. With Arachis hypogaea, a young plant with 7
stems bore 22 free leaves, and of these 5 were injured by the frost, all of
which were on two stems, bearing four leaves pinned to the cork-supports.
With Oxalis carnosa, 7 free leaves were injured, and every one of them
belonged to a cluster of leaves, some of which had been pinned to the cork.
We could account for these cases only by supposing that the branches which
were quite free had been slightly waved about by the wind, and that their
leaves had thus been a little warmed by the surrounding warmer air. If we
hold our hands motionless before a hot fire, and then wave them about, we
[page 297]
immediately feel relief; and this is evidently an analogous, though
reversed, case. These several facts--in relation to leaves pinned close to
or a little above the cork-supports--to their tips projecting beyond it--
and to the leaves on branches kept motionless--seem to us curious, as
showing how a difference, apparently trifling, may determine the greater or
less injury of the leaves. We may even infer as probable that the less or
greater destruction during a frost of the leaves on a plant which does not
sleep, may often depend on the greater or less degree of flexibility of
their petioles and of the branches which bear them.

NYCTITROPIC OR SLEEP MOVEMENTS OF COTYLEDONS.

We now come to the descriptive part of our work, and will begin with
cotyledons, passing on to leaves in the next chapter. We have met with only
two brief notices of cotyledons sleeping. Hofmeister,* after stating that
the cotyledons of all the observed seedlings of the Caryophylleae (Alsineae
and Sileneae) bend upwards at night (but to what angle he does not state),
remarks that those of Stellaria media rise up so as to touch one another;
they may therefore safely be said to sleep. Secondly, according to Ramey**,
the cotyledons of Mimosa pudica and of Clianthus Dampieri rise up almost
vertically at night and approach each other closely. It has been shown in a
previous chapter that the cotyledons of a large number of plants bend a
little upwards at night, and we here have to meet the difficult question at
what inclination may they be said to sleep? According to the view which we
maintain, no movement deserves to be called

* 'Die Lehre von der Pflanzenzelle,' 1867, p. 327.

** 'Adansonia,' March 10th, 1869.

[page 298]
nyctitropic, unless it has been acquired for the sake of lessening
radiation; but this could be discovered only by a long series of
experiments, showing that the leaves of each species suffered from this
cause, if prevented from sleeping. We must therefore take an arbitrary
limit. If a cotyledon or leaf is inclined at 60o above or beneath the
horizon, it exposes to the zenith about one-half of its area; consequently
the intensity of its radiation will be lessened by about half, compared
with what it would have been if the cotyledon or leaf had remained
horizontal. This degree of diminution certainly would make a great
difference to a plant having a tender constitution. We will therefore speak
of a cotyledon and hereafter of a leaf as sleeping, only when it rises at
night to an angle of about 60o, or to a still higher angle, above the
horizon, or sinks beneath it to the same amount. Not but that a lesser
diminution of radiation may be advantageous to a plant, as in the case of
Datura stramonium, the cotyledons of which rose from 31o at noon to 55o at
night above the horizon. The Swedish turnip may profit by the area of its
leaves being reduced at night by about 30 per cent., as estimated by Mr. A.
S. Wilson; though in this case the angle through which the leaves rose was
not observed. On the other hand, when the angular rise of cotyledons or of
leaves is small, such as less than 30o, the diminution of radiation is so
slight that it probably is of no significance to the plant in relation to
radiation. For instance, the cotyledons of Geranium Ibericum rose at night
to 27o above the horizon, and this would lessen radiation by only 11 per
cent.: those of Linum Berendieri rose to 33o, and this would lessen
radiation by 16 per cent.

There are, however, some other sources of doubt with
[page 299]
respect to the sleep of cotyledons. In certain cases, the cotyledons whilst
young diverge during the day to only a very moderate extent, so that a
small rise at night, which we know occurs with the cotyledons of many
plants, would necessarily cause them to assume a vertical or nearly
vertical position at night; and in this case it would be rash to infer that
the movement was effected for any special purpose. On this account we
hesitated long whether we should introduce several Cucurbitaceous plants
into the following list; but from reasons, presently to be given, we
thought that they had better be at least temporarily included. This same
source of doubt applies in some few other cases; for at the commencement of
our observations we did not always attend sufficiently to whether the
cotyledons stood nearly horizontally in the middle of the day. With several
seedlings, the cotyledons assume a highly inclined position at night during
so short a period of their life, that a doubt naturally arises whether this
can be of any service to the plant. Nevertheless, in most of the cases
given in the following list, the cotyledons may be as certainly said to
sleep as may the leaves of any plant. In two cases, namely with the cabbage
and radish, the cotyledons of which rise almost vertically during the few
first nights of their life, it was ascertained by placing young seedlings
in the klinostat, that the upward movement was not due to apogeotropism.

The names of the plants, the cotyledons of which stand at night at an angle
of at least 60o with the horizon, are arranged in the appended list on the
same system as previously followed. The numbers of the Families, and with
the Leguminosae the numbers of the Tribes, have been added to show how
widely the plants in question are distributed throughout the
[page 300]
dicotyledonous series. A few remarks will have to be made about many of the
plants in the list. In doing so, it will be convenient not to follow
strictly any systematic order, but to treat of the Oxalidae and the
Leguminosae at the close; for in these two Families the cotyledons are
generally provided with a pulvinus, and their movements endure for a much
longer time than those of the other plants in the list.

List of Seedling Plants, the cotyledons of which rise or sink at night to
an angle of at least 60o above or beneath the horizon.

Brassica oleracea. Cruciferae (Fam. 14).
-- napus (as we are informed by Prof. Pfeffer). Raphanus sativus.
Cruciferae.
Githago segetum. Caryophylleae (Fam. 26).
Stellaria media (according to Hofmeister, as quoted). Caryophylleae.
Anoda Wrightii. Malvaceae (Fam. 36).
Gossypium (var. Nankin cotton). Malvaceae.
Oxalis rosea. Oxalidae (Fam. 41).
-- floribunda.
-- articulata.
-- Valdiviana.
-- sensitiva.
Geranium rotundifolium. Geraniaceae (Fam. 47).
Trifolium subterraneum. Leguminosae (Fam. 75, Tribe 3).
-- strictum.
-- leucanthemum.
Lotus ornithopopoides. Leguminosae (Tribe 4).
-- peregrinus.
-- Jacobaeus.
Clianthus Dampieri. Leguminosae (Tribe 5)--according to M. Ramey.
Smithia sensitiva. Leguminosae (Tribe 6).
Haematoxylon Campechianum. Leguminosae (Tribe 13)--according to Mr. R. I.
Lynch.
Cassia mimosoides. Leguminosae (Tribe 14).
-- glauca.
-- florida.
-- corymbosa.
-- pubescens.
-- tora.
-- neglecta.
-- 3 other Brazilian unnamed species.
Bauhinia (sp.?. Leguminosae (Tribe 15).
Neptunia oleracea. Leguminosae (Tribe 20).
Mimosa pudica. Leguminosae (Tribe 21).
-- albida.
Cucurbita ovifera. Cucurbitaceae (Fam. 106).
-- aurantia.
Lagenaria vulgaris. Cucurbitaceae.
Cucumis dudaim. Cucurbitaceae.
Apium petroselinum. Umbelliferae (Fam. 113).
-- graveolens.
Lactuca scariola. Compositae (Fam. 122).
Helianthus annuus (?). Compositae.
Ipomoea caerulea. Convolvulaceae (Fam. 151).
-- purpurea.
-- bona-nox.
-- coccinea.
[page 301]
List of Seedling Plants (continued).
Solanum lycopersicum. Solaneae (Fam. 157.)
Mimulus, (sp. ?) Scrophularineae (Fam. 159)--from information given us by
Prof. Pfeffer.
Mirabilis jalapa. Nyctagineae (Fam. 177).
Mirabilis longiflora.
Beta vulgaris. Polygoneae (Fam. 179).
Amaranthus caudatus. Amaranthaceae (Fam. 180).
Cannabis sativa (?). Cannabineae (Fam. 195).

Brassica oleracea (Cruciferae).--It was shown in the first chapter that the
cotyledons of the common cabbage rise in the evening and stand vertically
up at night with their petioles in contact. But as the two cotyledons are
of unequal height, they frequently interfere a little with each other's
movements, the shorter one often not standing quite vertically. They awake
early in the morning; thus at 6.45 A.M. on Nov. 27th, whilst if was still
dark, the cotyledons, which had been vertical and in contact on the
previous evening, were reflexed, and thus presented a very different
appearance. It should be borne in mind that seedlings in germinating at the
proper season, would not be subjected to darkness at this hour in the
morning. The above amount of movement of the cotyledons is only temporary,
lasting with plants kept in a warm greenhouse from four to six days; how
long it would last with seedlings growing out of doors we do not know.

Raphanus sativus.--In the middle of the day the blades of the cotyledons of
10 seedlings stood at right angles to their hypocotyls, with their petioles
a little divergent; at night the blades stood vertically, with their bases
in contact and with their petioles parallel. Next morning, at 6.45 A.M.,
whilst it was still dark, the blades were horizontal. On the following
night they were much raised, but hardly stood sufficiently vertical to be
said to be asleep, and so it was in a still less degree on the third night.
Therefore the cotyledons of this plant (kept in the greenhouse) go to sleep
for even a shorter time than those of the cabbage. Similar observations
were made, but only during a single day and night, on 13 other seedlings
likewise raised in the greenhouse, with the same result.

The petioles of the cotyledons of 11 young seedlings of Sinapis nigra were
slightly divergent at noon, and the blades stood at right angles to the
hypocotyls; at night the petioles were in close contact, and the blades
considerably raised, with their bases in contact, but only a few stood
sufficiently upright to be called asleep. On the following morning,
[page 302]
the petioles diverged before it was light. The hypocotyl is slightly
sensitive, so that if rubbed with a needle it bends towards the rubbed
side. In the case of Lepidium sativum, the petioles of the cotyledons of
young seedlings diverge during the day and converge so as to touch each
other during the night, by which means the bases of the tripartite blades
are brought into contact; but the blades are so little raised that they
cannot be said to sleep. The cotyledons of several other cruciferous plants
were observed, but they did not rise sufficiently during the night to be
said to sleep.

Githago segetum (Caryophylleae).--On the first day after the cotyledons had
burst through the seed-coats, they stood at noon at an angle of 75o above
the horizon; at night they moved upwards, each through an angle of 15o so
as to stand quite vertical and in contact with one another. On the second
day they stood at noon at 59o above the horizon, and again at night were
completely closed, each having risen 31o. On the fourth day the cotyledons
did not quite close at night. The first and succeeding pairs of young true
leaves behaved in exactly the same manner. We think that the movement in
this case may be called nyctitropic, though the angle passed through was
small. The cotyledons are very sensitive to light and will not expand if
exposed to an extremely dim one.

Anoda Wrightii (Malvaceae).--The cotyledons whilst moderately young, and
only from .2 to .3 inch in diameter, sink in the evening from their mid-day
horizontal position to about 35o beneath the horizon. But when the same
seedlings were older and had produced small true leaves, the almost
orbicular cotyledons, now .55 inch in diameter, moved vertically downwards
at night. This fact made us suspect that their sinking might be due merely
to their weight; but they were not in the least flaccid, and when lifted up
sprang back through elasticity into their former dependent position. A pot
with some old seedlings was turned upside down in the afternoon, before the
nocturnal fall had commenced, and at night they assumed in opposition to
their own weight (and to any geotropic action) an upwardly directed
vertical position. When pots were thus reversed, after the evening fall had
already commenced, the sinking movement appeared to be somewhat disturbed;
but all their movements were occasionally variable without any apparent
cause. This latter fact, as well as that of the young cotyledons not
sinking nearly so much as the older ones, deserves notice.
[page 303]
Although the movement of the cotyledons endured for a long time, no
pulvinus was exteriorly visible; but their growth continued for a long
time. The cotyledons appear to be only slightly heliotropic, though the
hypocotyl is strongly so.

Gossypium arboreum (?) (var. Nankin cotton) (Malvaceae).--The cotyledons
behave in nearly the same manner as those of the Anoda. On June 15th the
cotyledons of two seedlings were .65 inch in length (measured along the
midrib) and stood horizontally at noon; at 10 P.M. they occupied the same
position and had not fallen at all. On June 23rd, the cotyledons of one of
these seedlings were 1.1 inch in length, and by 10 P.M. they had fallen
from a horizontal position to 62o beneath the horizon. The cotyledons of
the other seedling were 1.3 inch in length, and a minute true leaf had been
formed; they had fallen at 10 P.M. to 70o beneath the horizon. On June
25th, the true leaf of this latter seedling was .9 inch in length, and the
cotyledons occupied nearly the same position at night. By July 9th the
cotyledons appeared very old and showed signs of withering; but they stood
at noon almost horizontally, and at 10 P.M. hung down vertically.

Gossypium herbaceum.--It is remarkable that the cotyledons of this species
behave differently from those of the last. They were observed during 6
weeks from their first development until they had grown to a very large
size (still appearing fresh and green), viz. 2 ½ inches in breadth. At this
age a true leaf had been formed, which with its petiole was 2 inches long.
During the whole of these 6 weeks the cotyledons did not sink at night; yet
when old their weight was considerable and they were borne by much
elongated petioles. Seedlings raised from some seed sent us from Naples,
behaved in the same manner; as did those of a kind cultivated in Alabama
and of the Sea-island cotton. To what species these three latter forms
belong we do not know. We could not make out in the case of the Naples
cotton, that the position of the cotyledons at night was influenced by the
soil being more or less dry; care being taken that they were not rendered
flaccid by being too dry. The weight of the large cotyledons of the Alabama
and Sea-island kinds caused them to hang somewhat downwards, when the pots
in which they grew were left for a time upside down. It should, however, be
observed that these three kinds were raised in the middle of the winter,
which sometimes greatly interferes with the proper nyctitropic movements of
leaves and cotyledons.
[page 304]

Cucurbitaceae.--The cotyledons of Cucurbita aurantia and ovifera, and of
Lagenaria vulgaris, stand from the 1st to the 3rd day of their life at
about 60o above the horizon, and at night rise up so as to become vertical
and in close contact with one another. With Cucumis dudaim they stood at
noon at 45o above the horizon, and closed at night. The tips of the
cotyledons of all these species are, however, reflexed, so that this part
is fully exposed to the zenith at night; and this fact is opposed to the
belief that the movement is of the same nature as that of sleeping plants.
After the first two or three days the cotyledons diverge more during the
day and cease to close at night. Those of Trichosanthes anguina are
somewhat thick and fleshy, and did not rise at night; and they could
perhaps hardly be expected to do so. On the other hand, those of
Acanthosicyos horrida* present nothing in their appearance opposed to their
moving at night in the same manner as the preceding species; yet they did
not rise up in any plain manner. This fact leads to the belief that the
nocturnal movements of the above-named species has been acquired for some
special purpose, which may be to protect the young plumule from radiation,
by the close contact of the whole basal portion of the two cotyledons.

Geranium rotundifolium (Geraniaceae).--A single seedling came up
accidentally in a pot, and its cotyledons were observed to bend
perpendicularly downwards during several successive nights, having been
horizontal at noon. It grew into a fine plant but died before flowering: it
was sent to Kew and pronounced to be certainly a Geranium, and in all
probability the above-named species. This case is remarkable because the
cotyledons of G. cinereum, Endressii, Ibericum, Richardsoni, and
subcaulescens were observed during some weeks in the winter, and they did
not sink, whilst those of G. Ibericum rose 27o at night.

Apium petroselinum (Umbelliferae).--A seedling had its cotyledons (Nov.
22nd) almost fully expanded during the day; by 8.30 P.M. they had risen
considerably, and at 10.30 P.M. were almost closed, their tips being only
8/100 of an inch apart. On the following morning (23rd) the tips were
58/100 of an inch apart,

* This plant, from Dammara Land in S. Africa, is remarkable from being the
one known member of the Family which is not a climber; it has been
described in 'Transact. Linn. Soc.,' xxvii. p. 30.
[page 305]

or more than seven times as much. On the next night the cotyledons occupied
nearly the same position as before. On the morning of the 24th they stood
horizontally, and at night were 60o above the horizon; and so it was on the
night of the 25th. But four days afterwards (on the 29th), when the
seedlings were a week old, the cotyledons had ceased to rise at night to
any plain degree.

Apium graveolens.--The cotyledons at noon were horizontal, and at 10 P.M.
stood at an angle of 61o above the horizon.

Lactuca scariola (Compositae).--The cotyledons whilst young stood
sub-horizontally during the day, and at night rose so as to be almost
vertical, and some were quite vertical and closed; but this movement ceased
when they had grown old and large, after an interval of 11 days.

Helianthus annuus (Compositae).--This case is rather doubtful; the
cotyledons rise at night, and on one occasion they stood at 73o above the
horizon, so that they might then be said to have been asleep.

Ipomoea caerulea vel Pharbitis nil (Convolvulaceae).--The cotyledons behave
in nearly the same manner as those of the Anoda and Nankin cotton, and like
them grow to a large size. Whilst young and small, so that their blades
were from .5 to .6 of an inch in length, measured along the middle to the
base of the central notch, they remained horizontal both during the middle
of the day and at night. As they increased in size they began to sink more
and more in the evening and early night; and when they had grown to a
length (measured in the above manner) of from 1 to 1.25 inch, they sank
between 55o and 70o beneath the horizon. They acted, however, in this
manner only when they had been well illuminated during the day.
Nevertheless, the cotyledons have little or no power of bending towards a
lateral light, although the hypocotyl is strongly heliotropic. They are not
provided with a pulvinus, but continue to grow for a long time.

Ipomoea purpurea (vel Pharbitis hispida).--The cotyledons behave in all
respects like those of I. caerulea. A seedling with cotyledons .75 inch in
length (measured as before) and 1.65 inch in breadth, having a small true
leaf developed, was placed at 5.30 P.M. on a klinostat in a darkened box,
so that neither weight nor geotropism could act on them. At 10 P.M. one
cotyledon stood at 77o and the other at 82o beneath the horizon. Before
being placed in the klinostat they stood at 15o and 29o
[page 306]
beneath the horizon. The nocturnal position depends chiefly on the
curvature of the petiole close to the blade, but the whole petiole becomes
slightly curved downwards. It deserves notice that seedlings of this and
the last-named species were raised at the end of February and another lot
in the middle of March, and the cotyledons in neither case exhibited any
nyctitropic movement.

Ipomoea bona-nox.--The cotyledons after a few days grow to an enormous
size, those on a young seedling being 3 1/4 inches in breadth. They were
extended horizontally at noon, and at 10 P.M. stood at 63o beneath the
horizon. five days afterwards they were 4 ½ inches in breadth, and at night
one stood at 64o and the other 48o beneath the horizon. Though the blades
are thin, yet from their great size and from the petioles being long, we
imagined that their depression at night might be determined by their
weight; but when the pot was laid horizontally, they became curved towards
the hypocotyl, which movement could not have been in the least aided by
their weight, at the same time they were somewhat twisted upwards through
apogeotropism. Nevertheless, the weight of the cotyledons is so far
influential, that when on another night the pot was turned upside down,
they were unable to rise and thus to assume their proper nocturnal
position.

Ipomoea coccinea.--The cotyledons whilst young do not sink at night, but
when grown a little older, but still only .4 inch in length (measured as
before) and .82 in breadth, they became greatly depressed. In one case they
were horizontal at noon, and at 10 P.M. one of them stood at 64o and the
other at 47o beneath the horizon. The blades are thin, and the petioles,
which become much curved down at night, are short, so that here weight can
hardly have produced any effect. With all the above species of Ipomoea,
when the two cotyledons on the same seedling were unequally depressed at
night, this seemed to depend on the position which they had held during the
day with reference to the light.

Solanum lycopersicum (Solaneae).--The cotyledons rise so much at night as
to come nearly in contact. Those of 'S. palinacanthum' were horizontal at
noon, and by 10 P.M. had risen only 27o 30 minutes; but on the following
morning before it was light they stood at 59o above the horizon, and in the
afternoon of the same day were again horizontal. The behaviour of the
cotyledons of this latter species seems, therefore, to be anomalous.
[page 307]

Mirabilis jalapa and longiflora (Nyctagineae).--The cotyledons, which are
of unequal size, stand horizontally during the middle of the day, and at
night rise up vertically and come into close contact with one another. But
this movement with M. longiflora lasted for only the three first nights.

Beta vulgaris (Polygoneae).--A large number of seedlings were observed on
three occasions. During the day the cotyledons sometimes stood
sub-horizontally, but more commonly at an angle of about 50o above the
horizon, and for the first two or three nights they rose up vertically so
as to be completely closed. During the succeeding one or two nights they
rose only a little, and afterwards hardly at all.

Amaranthus caudatus (Amaranthaceae).--At noon the cotyledons of many
seedlings, which had just germinated, stood at about 45o above the horizon,
and at 10.15 P.M. some were nearly and the others quite closed. On the
following morning they were again well expanded or open.

Cannabis sativa (Cannabineae).--We are very doubtful whether this plant
ought to be here included. The cotyledons of a large number of seedlings,
after being well illuminated during the day, were curved downwards at
