"The master saw that the stranger was the offender, and buzzed
angrily. Another moment, and the master would surely have returned
to the palace to inform the others; and then the stranger would have
been punished with the Head Out punishment. But instead the angel
very deliberately moved the blooming stick near unto the master; and
behold, it was helpless! Down it fell to the ground, dazed; I could
have picked it up, or killed it, without the slightest danger!

"Another master came out, and another, and another; and for each and
all the flowing blossom was too much! None would come near it
wittingly; and such as the angel approached with it were stricken
almost to death.

"When they were all made helpless the angel bade me hold my hand
near the bloom; and I was vastly surprised to feel a great warmth.
'Twas like the heat of a stone which has stood all day in the sun,
only much greater. Once my finger touched the bloom, and it gave me
a sharp pain."

Cunora was studying her friend very closely. "Ye could not have
devised this tale, Rolla. 'Tis too unlikely. Is there more of it?"

"A little. The angel once more took me by the hand, and shortly set
me down again in this hut. Then he said something which seemed to
mean, 'With this magic bloom thou shalt be freed from the masters.
They fear it; but ye, and all like ye, do not. Be ye ready to find
the blossom when I bid thee.' With that he disappeared, and I awoke.

"Tell me; do I look mad, to thine eyes?" Rolla was beginning to feel
a little anxious herself.

Cunora got up and led Rolla to the entrance. The glow of "the
Silvery Way" was all the help that the girl's catlike eyesight
needed; she seemed reassured.

"Ye look very strange and excited, Rolla, but not mad. Tell me again
what thou didst see and hear, that I may compare it with what ye
have already told."

Rolla began again; and meanwhile, on the earth, the doctor's
companions telepathically congratulated him on his success. He had
put the great idea into a fertile mind.

Presently they began to look for other minds. It seemed wise to get
the notion into as many Sanusian heads as possible. For some hours
this search proceeded; but in the end, after getting in touch with
some forty or fifty individuals in as many different parts of the
planet, they concluded that they had first hit upon the most
advanced specimens that Sanus afforded; the only ones, in fact,
whose intellect were strong enough to appreciate the value of what
they were told. The investigators were obliged to work with Rolla,
Dulnop, and Corrus only; upon these three depended the success of
their unprecedented scheme.

Rolla continued to keep watch upon Supreme; and toward morning--that
is, morning in that particular part of Sanus--the architect was
rewarded by catching the bee in a still drowsy condition. Using the
same method Kinney had chosen, Billie succeeded in giving the
soldier bee a very vivid idea of fire. And judging by the very human
way in which the half-asleep insect tossed about, thrashing her
wings and legs and making incoherent sounds, Billie succeeded
admirably. The other bees in the hive came crowding around, and
Supreme had some difficulty in maintaining her dignity and
authority. In the end she confided in the subordinate next in
command:

"I have had a terrible dream. One of our slaves, or a woman much
like one, assaulted me with a new and fearful weapon." She described
it more or less as Rolla had told Cunora. "It was a deadly thing;
but how I know this, I cannot say, except that it was exceedingly
hot. So long as the woman held it in her hand, I dared not go near
her.

"See to it that the others know; and if such a thing actually comes
into existence, let me know immediately."

"Very well, Supreme." And the soldier straightway took the tale to
another bee. This told, both proceeded to spread the news,
bee-fashion; so that the entire hive knew of the terror within a few
minutes. Inside an hour every hive in the whole "city" had been
informed.

"Give them time now," said the doctor, "and they will tell every bee
on the planet. Suppose we want a couple of weeks before doing
anything further? The more afraid the bees are in advance, the
easier for Rolla and her friends."

Meanwhile Corrus, after a sleepless night with his cattle, had
driven them hurriedly back to the huts surrounding the "experimental
station." Here the herdsman turned his herd over to another man, and
then strode over among the huts. Outside one of them--probably
Rolla's--he paused and gazed longingly, then gave a deep sigh and
went on. Shortly he reached another hut in which he found Dulnop.

"I was just going to seek ye!" exclaimed the younger man. "I have
seen a wondrous sight, Corrus!"

Thus the two men came to compare notes, finding that each had
learned practically the same thing. Corrus being denied the right to
visit any woman save Cunora, Dulnop hurried to Rolla and told her
what he and the herdsman had learned. The three testimonies made an
unshakable case.

"By the great god Mownoth!" swore Corrus in vast delight when Dulnop
had reported. "We have learned a way to make ourselves free! As free
as the squirrels!"

"Aye," agreed the younger. "We know the method. But--how shall we
secure the means?"

Corrus gave an impatient gesture. "'Twill come in time, Dulnop, just
as the dream came! Meanwhile we must tell every one of our kind, so
that all shall be ready when the day comes to strike!

"Then"--his voice lost its savagery, and became soft and
tender--"then, Dulnop, lad, ye shall have thy Cunora; and as for
Rolla and I--"

Corrus turned and walked away, that his friend might not see what
was in his eyes.






IX

FOUND!





It was two weeks to a day when the four on the earth, after having
seen very little of each other in the meanwhile, got together for
the purpose of finishing their "revelation" to the Sanusians.

"Mr. Van Emmon and I," stated Billie coolly, as they put on their
bracelets, "have been trying to decide upon the best way of telling
them how to obtain fire."

Neither Smith nor the doctor showed that he noticed her "Mr. Van
Emmon." Evidently the two were still unreconciled.

"I argue," remarked the geologist, "that the simplest method will be
a chemical one. There's lots of ways to produce fire spontaneously,
with chemicals; and this woman Rolla could do it easily."

Billie indulged in a small, superior smile. "He forgets that all
these chemical methods require pure chemicals. And you don't find
them pure in the natural state. You've got to have fire to reduce
them with."

"What's your proposition, then?" from the doctor.

"Optics!" enthusiastically. She produced a large magnifying-glass
from her pocket. "All we have to do is to show Dulnop--he's
something of a mineralogist--how to grind and polish a piece of
crystal into this shape!"

Van Emmon groaned. "Marvelous! Say, if you knew how infernally hard
it is to find even a small piece of crystal, you'd never propose
such a thing! Why, it would take years--Mrs. Van Emmon!"

Smith also shook his head. "Neither of you has the right idea. The
easiest way, under the circumstances, would be an electrical one."

He paused, frowning hard; then vetoed his own plan. "Thunder; I'm
always speaking first and thinking afterward. I never used to do
it," accusingly, "until I got in with you folks. Anyhow, electricity
won't do; you've got to have practically pure elements for that,
too."

"Guess it's up to you, doc," said Billie. And they all looked
respectfully toward their host.

He laughed. "You three will never learn anything. You'll continue to
think that I'm a regular wonder about these things, but you never
notice that I merely stay still and let you commit yourselves first
before I say anything. All I have to do is select the one idea
remaining after you've disproved the rest. Nothing to it!"

He paused. "I'm afraid we're reduced to the spark method. It would
take too long to procure materials pure enough for any other plan.
Friction is out of the question for such people; they haven't the
patience. Suppose we go ahead on the flint-and-spark basis."

They went at once into the familiar trance state. Nightfall was
approaching on the part of Sanus in which they were interested.
Smith and Van Emmon came upon Dulnop and Corrus as they were talking
together. The herdsman was saying:

"Lad, my heart is heavy this night." Much of his usual vigor was
absent. "When I were passing Cunora's field this day, some of the
masters came and drove me over to her side. I tried to get away, and
one threatened to kill. I fear me, lad, they intend to force us to
marry!"

"What!" fiercely, from the younger.

Corrus laid a hand upon his arm. "Nay, Dulnop; fear not. I have no
feeling for thy Cunora; I may marry her, but as for fathering her
children--no!"

"Suppose," through set teeth, "suppose They should threaten to kill
thee?"

"I should rather die, Dulnop, than be untrue to Rolla!"

The younger man bounded to his feet. "Spoken like a man! And I tell
thee, neither shall I have aught to do with Rolla! Rather death than
dishonor!"

Next moment silence fell between them; and then Van Emmon and Smith
noted that both men had been bluffing in what they had said. For,
sitting apart in the growing darkness, each was plainly in terror of
the morrow. Presently Corrus spoke in a low tone:

"All the same, Dulnop, it were well for me and thee if the secret of
the flowing blossom were given us this night. I"--he paused,
abashed--"I am not so sure of myself, Dulnop, when I hear Their
accursed buzzing. I fear--I am afraid I might give in!"

At this Dulnop broke down, and fell to sobbing. Nothing could have
told the investigators so well just how childlike the Sanusians
really were. Corrus had all he could do to hold in himself.

"Mownoth!" he exclaimed, his eyes raised fervently. "If it be thy
will to deliver us, give us the secret this night!"

Meanwhile, in Rolla's hut, a similar scene was going on under the
doctor's projected eye. Cunora lost her nerve, and Rolla came near
to doing the same in her efforts to comfort the other.

"They are heartless things!" Rolla exclaimed with such bitterness as
her nature would permit. "They know not what love is: They with
their drones and their egg-babes! What is family life to Them?
Nothing!

"Somehow I feel that Their reign is nearly at an end, Cunora.
Perhaps the great secret shall be given us to-night!"

The girl dried her tears. "Why say ye that, Rolla?"

"Because the time be ripe for it. Are not all our kind looking
forward to it? Are we not all expecting and longing for it? Know we
not that we shall, must, have what we all so earnestly desire?" It
was striking, to hear this bit of modern psychology uttered by this
primitive woman. "Let me hear no more of thy weeping! Ye shall not
be made to wed Corrus!"

Nevertheless, at the speaking of her lover's name, the older woman's
lips trembled despite themselves; and she said nothing further
beyond a brief "Sleep well." After which the two women turned in,
and shortly reached the drowsy point.

Thus it happened that Rolla, after a minute or two, once more
aroused Cunora in great excitement, and after securely closing the
entrance to the hut against all comers, proceeded to relate what she
had seen. She finished:

"The seed of the flower can be grown in the heart of rotting wood!"
And for hours afterward the two whispered excitedly in the darkness.
It was hard to have to wait till dawn.

As for Corrus and Dulnop, they even went so far as to search the
heaps of stone in the mineral yards, although neither really
expected to find what they sought.

But the four on the earth, not being able to do anything further
until morning, proceeded to make themselves at home in the doctor's
house. Smith and the doctor slept together, likewise Billie and Mrs.
Kinney; Van Emmon occupied the guest-room in lonely grandeur. When
he came down to breakfast he said he had dreamed that he was Corrus,
and that he had burned himself on a blazing cow.

Again in the trance state, the four found that Rolla and Cunora,
after reaching an understanding with Corrus and Dulnop, had already
left their huts in search of the required stone. Five bees
accompanied them. Within a few minutes however, Corrus and Dulnop
set out together in the opposite direction, as agreed upon; and
shortly the guards were withdrawn. This meant that the holiday was
officially sanctioned, so long as the two couples kept apart; but if
they were to join forces afterward, and be caught in the act, they
would be severely punished. Such was bee efficiency--and sentiment.

The doctor had impressed Rolla with the fact that she would find the
desired stone in a mountainous country. Cunora, however, was for
examining every rock she came to; Rolla was continually passing
judgment upon some specimen.

"Nay," said she, for the hundredth time. "Tis a very bright stone we
seek, very small and very shiny, like sunlight on the water. I shall
know it when I see it, and I shall see it not until we reach the
mountains." Soon Cunora's impatience wore off, and the two
concentrated upon making time. By midday they were well into the
hills, following the course of a very dry creek; and now they kept a
sharp lookout at every step.

Van Emmon and Smith had similarly impressed Corrus and Dulnop with
the result that there was no loss of time in the beginning. The two
men reached the hills on their side of the valley an hour before the
women reached theirs.

And thus the search began, the strangest search, beyond a doubt,
within the history of the universe. It was not like the work of some
of earth's prehistoric men, who already knew fire and were merely
looking up fresh materials; it was a quest in which an idea, an idea
given in a vision, was the sole driving force. The most curious part
of the matter was that these people were mentally incapable of
conceiving that there was intelligence at work upon them from
another world, or even that there was another world.

"Ye saw the stars last night?" Corrus spoke to Dulnop. "Well,'tis
just such stars as shall awaken the seed of the flower. Ye shall
see!"

Both knew exactly what to look for: the brassy, regularly cut
crystals with the black stripings, such as has led countless men to
go through untold hardships in the belief that they had found gold.
In fact, iron pyrites is often called "fool gold," so deceptive is
its glitter.

Yet, it was just the thing for the purpose. Flint they already had,
large quantities of it; practically all their tools, such as axes
and knives, were made of it. Struck against iron pyrites, a larger,
fatter, hotter spark could be obtained than with any other natural
combination.

It was Dulnop's luck to see the outcropping. He found the mineral
exposed to plain view, a few feet above the bottom of the ravine the
two were ascending. With a shout of triumph he leaped upon the rock.

"Here, Corrus!" he yelled, dancing like mad. "Here is the gift of
the gods!"

The older man didn't attempt to hide his delight. He grabbed his
companion and hugged him until his ribs began to crack. Then, with a
single blow from his huge club, the herdsman knocked the specimen
clear of the slate in which it was set. Such was their excitement,
neither dreamed of marking the place in any way.

First satisfying themselves that the pyrites really could produce
"stars" from the flint, the two hurried down-stream, in search of
the right kind of wood. In half an hour Corrus came across a dead,
worm-eaten tree, from which he nonchalantly broke off a limb as big
as his leg. The interior was filled with a dry, stringy rot, just
the right thing for making a spark "live."

Then came a real difficulty. It will be better appreciated when the
men's childish nature is borne in mind. Their patience was terribly
strained in their attempts to make the sparks fly into the tinder.
Again and again one of them would throw the rocks angrily to the
ground, fairly snarling with exasperation.

However, the other would immediately take them up and try again.
Neither man had a tenth the deftness that is common to adults on the
earth. In size and strength alone they were men; otherwise--it
cannot too often be repeated--they were mere children. All told, it
was over two hours before the punk began to smolder.

"By Mownoth!" swore the herdsman, staring reverently at the smoke.
"We have done a miracle, Dulnop--ye and I! Be ye sure this is no
dream?"

Quite in human fashion, Dulnop seriously reached out and pinched the
herdsman's tremendous arm. Corrus winced, but was too well pleased
with the result to take revenge, although the nature of these men
was such as to call for it.

"It be no dream!" he declared, still awestruck.

"Nay," agreed Dulnop. "And now--to make the flower grow!"

It was Corrus's lungs which really did the work. His prodigious
chest was better than a small pair of bellows, and he blew just as
he had been told in the vision. Presently a small flame appeared in
the tinder, and leaped eagerly upward. Both men jumped back, and for
lack of enough air the flame went out.

"Never mind!" exclaimed Dulnop at Corrus's crestfallen look. "I
remember that we must be ready with leaves, and the like, as soon as
the blossom appears. Blow, ye great wind-maker, and I shall feed the
flower!"

And thus it came about that two men of Sanus, for the first time in
the history of the planet, looked upon fire itself. And when they
had got it to burning well, each of them stared at his hands, and
from his hands to the little heap of "flowers"; from hands to fire
they looked, again and again; and then gazed at one another in awe.






X

AT HALF COCK





Rolla and Cunora searched for hours. They followed one creek almost
to its very beginning, and then crossed a ridge on the left and came
down another stream. Again and again Cunora found bits of mineral
such as would have deceived any one who had been less accurately
impressed than Rolla. As it afterward turned out, the very accuracy
of this impression was a great error, strange though that may seem.
Finally Rolla glanced up at the sun and sighed. "We will have to
give it up for this day," she told Cunora. "There be just time
enough to return before night." Neither said anything about the
half-rations upon which they would be fed in punishment for running
away.

So the two started back, making their way in gloomy silence through
the woods and fields of the valley. Cunora was greatly disappointed,
and soon began to show it as any child would, by maintaining a
sullenness which she broke only when some trifling obstacle, such as
a branch, got in her way. Then she would tear the branch from the
tree and fling it as far as she could, meanwhile screaming with
anger. Rolla showed more control.

It was nearing nightfall when they came within sight of the huts. At
a distance of perhaps half a mile they stopped and stared hard at
the scene ahead of them.

"Hear ye anything, Cunora?" asked the older woman.

The girl's keen ears had caught a sound. "Methinks something hath
aroused our people. I wonder--"

"Cunora!" gasped Rolla excitedly. "Think ye that Corrus and Dulnop
have succeeded in growing the flower?"

They ran nearer. In a moment it was clear that something most
certainly was arousing the people. The village was in an uproar.
"Stay!" cautioned Rolla, catching her friend's arm. "Let us use
cunning! Mayhap there be danger!"

They were quite alone in the fields, which were always deserted at
that hour. Crouching behind a row of bushes, they quickly drew near
to the village, all without being seen. Otherwise, this tale would
