Before us stretched the horizonless expanses of vast Pellucidar, the
Lidi Plains rolling up about us, while hanging high in the heavens to
the northwest of us I thought I discerned the many towers which marked
the entrances to the distant Mahar city, whose inhabitants preyed upon
the Thurians.

Juag suggested that we travel to the northeast, where, he said, upon
the verge of the plain we would find a wooded country in which game
should be plentiful.  Acting upon his advice, we came at last to a
forest-jungle, through which wound innumerable game-paths.  In the
depths of this forbidding wood we came upon the fresh spoor of thag.

Shortly after, by careful stalking, we came within javelin-range of a
small herd.  Selecting a great bull, Juag and I hurled our weapons
simultaneously, Dian reserving hers for an emergency.  The beast
staggered to his feet, bellowing.  The rest of the herd was up and away
in an instant, only the wounded bull remaining, with lowered head and
roving eyes searching for the foe.

Then Juag exposed himself to the view of the bull--it is a part of the
tactics of the hunt--while I stepped to one side behind a bush.  The
moment that the savage beast saw Juag he charged him.  Juag ran
straight away, that the bull might be lured past my hiding-place.  On
he came--tons of mighty bestial strength and rage.

Dian had slipped behind me.  She, too, could fight a thag should
emergency require.  Ah, such a girl! A rightful empress of a stone age
by every standard which two worlds might bring to measure her!

Crashing down toward us came the bull thag, bellowing and snorting,
with the power of a hundred outer-earthly bulls.  When he was opposite
me I sprang for the heavy mane that covered his huge neck.  To tangle
my fingers in it was the work of but an instant.  Then I was running
along at the beast's shoulder.

Now, the theory upon which this hunting custom is based is one long ago
discovered by experience, and that is that a thag cannot be turned from
his charge once he has started toward the object of his wrath, so long
as he can still see the thing he charges.  He evidently believes that
the man clinging to his mane is attempting to restrain him from
overtaking his prey, and so he pays no attention to this enemy, who, of
course, does not retard the mighty charge in the least.

Once in the gait of the plunging bull, it was but a slight matter to
vault to his back, as cavalrymen mount their chargers upon the run.
Juag was still running in plain sight ahead of the bull.  His speed was
but a trifle less than that of the monster that pursued him.  These
Pellucidarians are almost as fleet as deer; because I am not is one
reason that I am always chosen for the close-in work of the thag-hunt.
I could not keep in front of a charging thag long enough to give the
killer time to do his work.  I learned that the first--and last--time I
tried it.

Once astride the bull's neck, I drew my long stone knife and, setting
the point carefully over the brute's spine, drove it home with both
hands.  At the same instant I leaped clear of the stumbling animal.
Now, no vertebrate can progress far with a knife through his spine, and
the thag is no exception to the rule.

The fellow was down instantly.  As he wallowed Juag returned, and the
two of us leaped in when an opening afforded the opportunity and
snatched our javelins from his side.  Then we danced about him, more
like two savages than anything else, until we got the opening we were
looking for, when simultaneously, our javelins pierced his wild heart,
stilling it forever.

The thag had covered considerable ground from the point at which I had
leaped upon him.  When, after despatching him, I looked back for Dian,
I could see nothing of her.  I called aloud, but receiving no reply,
set out at a brisk trot to where I had left her.  I had no difficulty
in finding the self-same bush behind which we had hidden, but Dian was
not there.  Again and again I called, to be rewarded only by silence.
Where could she be? What could have become of her in the brief interval
since I had seen her standing just behind me?



CHAPTER XII

KIDNAPED!

I searched about the spot carefully.  At last I was rewarded by the
discovery of her javelin, a few yards from the bush that had concealed
us from the charging thag--her javelin and the indications of a
struggle revealed by the trampled vegetation and the overlapping
footprints of a woman and a man.  Filled with consternation and dismay,
I followed these latter to where they suddenly disappeared a hundred
yards from where the struggle had occurred.  There I saw the huge
imprints of a lidi's feet.

The story of the tragedy was all too plain.  A Thurian had either been
following us, or had accidentally espied Dian and taken a fancy to her.
While Juag and I had been engaged with the thag, he had abducted her.
I ran swiftly back to where Juag was working over the kill.  As I
approached him I saw that something was wrong in this quarter as well,
for the islander was standing upon the carcass of the thag, his javelin
poised for a throw.

When I had come nearer I saw the cause of his belligerent attitude.
Just beyond him stood two large jaloks, or wolf-dogs, regarding him
intently--a male and a female.  Their behavior was rather peculiar, for
they did not seem preparing to charge him.  Rather, they were
contemplating him in an attitude of questioning.

Juag heard me coming and turned toward me with a grin.  These fellows
love excitement.  I could see by his expression that he was enjoying in
anticipation the battle that seemed imminent.  But he never hurled his
javelin.  A shout of warning from me stopped him, for I had seen the
remnants of a rope dangling from the neck of the male jalok.

Juag again turned toward me, but this time in surprise.  I was abreast
him in a moment and, passing him, walked straight toward the two
beasts.  As I did so the female crouched with bared fangs.  The male,
however, leaped forward to meet me, not in deadly charge, but with
every expression of delight and joy which the poor animal could exhibit.

It was Raja--the jalok whose life I had saved, and whom I then had
tamed! There was no doubt that he was glad to see me.  I now think that
his seeming desertion of me had been but due to a desire to search out
his ferocious mate and bring her, too, to live with me.

When Juag saw me fondling the great beast he was filled with
consternation, but I did not have much time to spare to Raja while my
mind was filled with the grief of my new loss.  I was glad to see the
brute, and I lost no time in taking him to Juag and making him
understand that Juag, too, was to be Raja's friend.  With the female
the matter was more difficult, but Raja helped us out by growling
savagely at her whenever she bared her fangs against us.

I told Juag of the disappearance of Dian, and of my suspicions as to
the explanation of the catastrophe.  He wanted to start right out after
her, but I suggested that with Raja to help me it might be as well were
he to remain and skin the thag, remove its bladder, and then return to
where we had hidden the canoe on the beach.  And so it was arranged
that he was to do this and await me there for a reasonable time.  I
pointed to a great lake upon the surface of the pendent world above us,
telling him that if after this lake had appeared four times I had not
returned to go either by water or land to Sari and fetch Ghak with an
army.  Then, calling Raja after me, I set out after Dian and her
abductor.  First I took the wolf dog to the spot where the man had
fought with Dian.  A few paces behind us followed Raja's fierce mate.
I pointed to the ground where the evidences of the struggle were
plainest and where the scent must have been strong to Raja's nostrils.

Then I grasped the remnant of leash that hung about his neck and urged
him forward upon the trail.  He seemed to understand.  With nose to
ground he set out upon his task.  Dragging me after him, he trotted
straight out upon the Lidi Plains, turning his steps in the direction
of the Thurian village.  I could have guessed as much!

Behind us trailed the female.  After a while she closed upon us, until
she ran quite close to me and at Raja's side.  It was not long before
she seemed as easy in my company as did her lord and master.

We must have covered considerable distance at a very rapid pace, for we
had reentered the great shadow, when we saw a huge lidi ahead of us,
moving leisurely across the level plain.  Upon its back were two human
figures.  If I could have known that the jaloks would not harm Dian I
might have turned them loose upon the lidi and its master; but I could
not know, and so dared take no chances.

However, the matter was taken out of my hands presently when Raja
raised his head and caught sight of his quarry.  With a lunge that
hurled me flat and jerked the leash from my hand, he was gone with the
speed of the wind after the giant lidi and its riders.  At his side
raced his shaggy mate, only a trifle smaller than he and no whit less
savage.

They did not give tongue until the lidi itself discovered them and
broke into a lumbering, awkward, but none the less rapid gallop.  Then
the two hound-beasts commenced to bay, starting with a low, plaintive
note that rose, weird and hideous, to terminate in a series of short,
sharp yelps.  I feared that it might be the hunting-call of the pack;
and if this were true, there would be slight chance for either Dian or
her abductor--or myself, either, as far as that was concerned.  So I
redoubled my efforts to keep pace with the hunt; but I might as well
have attempted to distance the bird upon the wing; as I have often
reminded you, I am no runner.  In that instance it was just as well
that I am not, for my very slowness of foot played into my hands; while
had I been fleeter, I might have lost Dian that time forever.

The lidi, with the hounds running close on either side, had almost
disappeared in the darkness that enveloped the surrounding landscape,
when I noted that it was bearing toward the right.  This was accounted
for by the fact that Raja ran upon his left side, and unlike his mate,
kept leaping for the great beast's shoulder.  The man on the lidi's
back was prodding at the hyaenodon with his long spear, but still Raja
kept springing up and snapping.

The effect of this was to turn the lidi toward the right, and the
longer I watched the procedure the more convinced I became that Raja
and his mate were working together with some end in view, for the
she-dog merely galloped steadily at the lidi's right about op-posite
his rump.

I had seen jaloks hunting in packs, and I recalled now what for the
time I had not thought of--the several that ran ahead and turned the
quarry back toward the main body.  This was precisely what Raja and his
mate were doing--they were turning the lidi back toward me, or at least
Raja was.  Just why the female was keeping out of it I did not
understand, unless it was that she was not entirely clear in her own
mind as to precisely what her mate was attempting.

At any rate, I was sufficiently convinced to stop where I was and await
developments, for I could readily realize two things.  One was that I
could never overhaul them before the damage was done if they should
pull the lidi down now.  The other thing was that if they did not pull
it down for a few minutes it would have completed its circle and
returned close to where I stood.

And this is just what happened.  The lot of them were almost swallowed
up in the twilight for a moment.  Then they reappeared again, but this
time far to the right and circling back in my general direction.  I
waited until I could get some clear idea of the right spot to gain that
I might intercept the lidi; but even as I waited I saw the beast
attempt to turn still more to the right--a move that would have carried
him far to my left in a much more circumscribed circle than the
hyaenodons had mapped out for him.  Then I saw the female leap forward
and head him; and when he would have gone too far to the left, Raja
sprang, snapping at his shoulder and held him straight.

Straight for me the two savage beasts were driving their quarry!  It
was wonderful.

It was something else, too, as I realized while the monstrous beast
neared me.  It was like standing in the middle of the tracks in front
of an approaching express-train.  But I didn't dare waver; too much
depended upon my meeting that hurtling mass of terrified flesh with a
well-placed javelin.  So I stood there, waiting to be run down and
crushed by those gigantic feet, but determined to drive home my weapon
in the broad breast before I fell.

The lidi was only about a hundred yards from me when Raja gave a few
barks in a tone that differed materially from his hunting-cry.
Instantly both he and his mate leaped for the long neck of the ruminant.

Neither missed.  Swinging in mid-air, they hung tenaciously, their
weight dragging down the creature's head and so retarding its speed
that before it had reached me it was almost stopped and devoting all
its energies to attempting to scrape off its attackers with its
forefeet.

Dian had seen and recognized me, and was trying to extricate herself
from the grasp of her captor, who, handicapped by his strong and agile
prisoner, was unable to wield his lance effectively upon the two
jaloks.  At the same time I was running swiftly toward them.

When the man discovered me he released his hold upon Dian and sprang to
the ground, ready with his lance to meet me.  My javelin was no match
for his longer weapon, which was used more for stabbing than as a
missile.  Should I miss him at my first cast, as was quite probable,
since he was prepared for me, I would have to face his formidable lance
with nothing more than a stone knife.  The outlook was scarcely
entrancing.  Evidently I was soon to be absolutely at his mercy.

Seeing my predicament, he ran toward me to get rid of one antagonist
before he had to deal with the other two.  He could not guess, of
course, that the two jaloks were hunting with me; but he doubtless
thought that after they had finished the lidi they would make after the
human prey--the beasts are notorious killers, often slaying wantonly.

But as the Thurian came Raja loosened his hold upon the lidi and dashed
for him, with the female close after.  When the man saw them he yelled
to me to help him, protesting that we should both be killed if we did
not fight together.  But I only laughed at him and ran toward Dian.

Both the fierce beasts were upon the Thurian simu-taneously--he must
have died almost before his body tumbled to the ground.  Then the
female wheeled toward Dian.  I was standing by her side as the thing
charged her, my javelin ready to receive her.

But again Raja was too quick for me.  I imagined he thought she was
making for me, for he couldn't have known anything of my relations
toward Dian.  At any rate he leaped full upon her back and dragged her
down.  There ensued forthwith as terrible a battle as one would wish to
see if battles were gaged by volume of noise and riotousness of action.
I thought that both the beasts would be torn to shreds.

When finally the female ceased to struggle and rolled over on her back,
her forepaws limply folded, I was sure that she was dead.  Raja stood
over her, growling, his jaws close to her throat.  Then I saw that
neither of them bore a scratch.  The male had simply administered a
severe drubbing to his mate.  It was his way of teaching her that I was
sacred.

After a moment he moved away and let her rise, when she set about
smoothing down her rumpled coat, while he came stalking toward Dian and
me.  I had an arm about Dian now.  As Raja came close I caught him by
the neck and pulled him up to me.  There I stroked him and talked to
him, bidding Dian  do the same, until I think he pretty well understood
that if I was his friend, so was Dian.

For a long time he was inclined to be shy of her, often baring his
teeth at her approach, and it was a much longer time before the female
made friends with us. But by careful kindness, by never eating without
sharing our meat with them, and by feeding them from our hands, we
finally won the confidence of both animals.  However, that was a long
time after.

With the two beasts trotting after us, we returned to where we had left
Juag.  Here I had the dickens' own time keeping the female from Juag's
throat.  Of all the venomous, wicked, cruel-hearted beasts on two
worlds, I think a female hyaenodon takes the palm.

But eventually she tolerated Juag as she had Dian and me, and the five
of us set out toward the coast, for Juag had just completed his labors
on the thag when we arrived.  We ate some of the meat before starting,
and gave the hounds some.  All that we could we carried upon our backs.

On the way to the canoe we met with no mishaps.  Dian told me that the
fellow who had stolen her had come upon her from behind while the
roaring of the thag had drowned all other noises, and that the first
she had known he had disarmed her and thrown her to the back of his
lidi, which had been lying down close by waiting for him.  By the time
the thag had ceased bellowing the fellow had got well away upon his
swift mount.  By holding one palm over her mouth he had prevented her
calling for help.

"I thought," she concluded, "that I should have to use the viper's
tooth, after all."

We reached the beach at last and unearthed the canoe.  Then we busied
ourselves stepping a mast and rigging a small sail--Juag and I, that
is--while Dian cut the thag meat into long strips for drying when we
should be out in the sunlight once more.

At last all was done.  We were ready to embark.  I had no difficulty in
getting Raja aboard the dugout; but Ranee--as we christened her after I
had explained to Dian the meaning of Raja and its feminine
equivalent--positively refused for a time to follow her mate aboard.
In fact, we had to shove off without her.  After a moment, however, she
plunged into the water and swam after us.

I let her come alongside, and then Juag and I pulled her in, she
snapping and snarling at us as we did so; but, strange to relate, she
didn't offer to attack us after we had ensconced her safely in the
bottom alongside Raja.
