factory would accomplish if they were scattered, each man working
independently. Would you think it an exaggeration to say that the
utmost product of those workers, working thus apart, however amicable
their relations might be, was increased not merely by a percentage, but
many fold, when their efforts were organized under one control? Well
now, Mr. West, the organization of the industry of the nation under a
single control, so that all its processes interlock, has multiplied the
total product over the utmost that could be done under the former
system, even leaving out of account the four great wastes mentioned, in
the same proportion that the product of those millworkers was increased
by cooperation. The effectiveness of the working force of a nation,
under the myriad-headed leadership of private capital, even if the
leaders were not mutual enemies, as compared with that which it attains
under a single head, may be likened to the military efficiency of a
mob, or a horde of barbarians with a thousand petty chiefs, as compared
with that of a disciplined army under one general--such a fighting
machine, for example, as the German army in the time of Von Moltke."

"After what you have told me," I said, "I do not so much wonder that
the nation is richer now than then, but that you are not all Croesuses."

"Well," replied Dr. Leete, "we are pretty well off. The rate at which
we live is as luxurious as we could wish. The rivalry of ostentation,
which in your day led to extravagance in no way conducive to comfort,
finds no place, of course, in a society of people absolutely equal in
resources, and our ambition stops at the surroundings which minister to
the enjoyment of life. We might, indeed, have much larger incomes,
individually, if we chose so to use the surplus of our product, but we
prefer to expend it upon public works and pleasures in which all share,
upon public halls and buildings, art galleries, bridges, statuary,
means of transit, and the conveniences of our cities, great musical and
theatrical exhibitions, and in providing on a vast scale for the
recreations of the people. You have not begun to see how we live yet,
Mr. West. At home we have comfort, but the splendor of our life is, on
its social side, that which we share with our fellows. When you know
more of it you will see where the money goes, as you used to say, and I
think you will agree that we do well so to expend it."

"I suppose," observed Dr. Leete, as we strolled homeward from the
dining hall, "that no reflection would have cut the men of your
wealth-worshiping century more keenly than the suggestion that they did
not know how to make money. Nevertheless that is just the verdict
history has passed on them. Their system of unorganized and
antagonistic industries was as absurd economically as it was morally
abominable. Selfishness was their only science, and in industrial
production selfishness is suicide. Competition, which is the instinct
of selfishness, is another word for dissipation of energy, while
combination is the secret of efficient production; and not till the
idea of increasing the individual hoard gives place to the idea of
increasing the common stock can industrial combination be realized, and
the acquisition of wealth really begin. Even if the principle of share
and share alike for all men were not the only humane and rational basis
for a society, we should still enforce it as economically expedient,
seeing that until the disintegrating influence of self-seeking is
suppressed no true concert of industry is possible."



Chapter 23

That evening, as I sat with Edith in the music room, listening to some
pieces in the programme of that day which had attracted my notice, I
took advantage of an interval in the music to say, "I have a question
to ask you which I fear is rather indiscreet."

"I am quite sure it is not that," she replied, encouragingly.

"I am in the position of an eavesdropper," I continued, "who, having
overheard a little of a matter not intended for him, though seeming to
concern him, has the impudence to come to the speaker for the rest."

"An eavesdropper!" she repeated, looking puzzled.

"Yes," I said, "but an excusable one, as I think you will admit."

"This is very mysterious," she replied.

"Yes," said I, "so mysterious that often I have doubted whether I
really overheard at all what I am going to ask you about, or only
dreamed it. I want you to tell me. The matter is this: When I was
coming out of that sleep of a century, the first impression of which I
was conscious was of voices talking around me, voices that afterwards I
recognized as your father's, your mother's, and your own. First, I
remember your father's voice saying, "He is going to open his eyes. He
had better see but one person at first." Then you said, if I did not
dream it all, "Promise me, then, that you will not tell him." Your
father seemed to hesitate about promising, but you insisted, and your
mother interposing, he finally promised, and when I opened my eyes I
saw only him."

I had been quite serious when I said that I was not sure that I had not
dreamed the conversation I fancied I had overheard, so incomprehensible
was it that these people should know anything of me, a contemporary of
their great-grandparents, which I did not know myself. But when I saw
the effect of my words upon Edith, I knew that it was no dream, but
another mystery, and a more puzzling one than any I had before
encountered. For from the moment that the drift of my question became
apparent, she showed indications of the most acute embarrassment. Her
eyes, always so frank and direct in expression, had dropped in a panic
before mine, while her face crimsoned from neck to forehead.

"Pardon me," I said, as soon as I had recovered from bewilderment at
the extraordinary effect of my words. "It seems, then, that I was not
dreaming. There is some secret, something about me, which you are
withholding from me. Really, doesn't it seem a little hard that a
person in my position should not be given all the information possible
concerning himself?"

"It does not concern you--that is, not directly. It is not about you
exactly," she replied, scarcely audibly.

"But it concerns me in some way," I persisted. "It must be something
that would interest me."

"I don't know even that," she replied, venturing a momentary glance at
my face, furiously blushing, and yet with a quaint smile flickering
about her lips which betrayed a certain perception of humor in the
situation despite its embarrassment,--"I am not sure that it would even
interest you."

"Your father would have told me," I insisted, with an accent of
reproach. "It was you who forbade him. He thought I ought to know."

She did not reply. She was so entirely charming in her confusion that I
was now prompted, as much by the desire to prolong the situation as by
my original curiosity, to importune her further.

"Am I never to know? Will you never tell me?" I said.

"It depends," she answered, after a long pause.

"On what?" I persisted.

"Ah, you ask too much," she replied. Then, raising to mine a face which
inscrutable eyes, flushed cheeks, and smiling lips combined to render
perfectly bewitching, she added, "What should you think if I said that
it depended on--yourself?"

"On myself?" I echoed. "How can that possibly be?"

"Mr. West, we are losing some charming music," was her only reply to
this, and turning to the telephone, at a touch of her finger she set
the air to swaying to the rhythm of an adagio. After that she took good
care that the music should leave no opportunity for conversation. She
kept her face averted from me, and pretended to be absorbed in the
airs, but that it was a mere pretense the crimson tide standing at
flood in her cheeks sufficiently betrayed.

When at length she suggested that I might have heard all I cared to,
for that time, and we rose to leave the room, she came straight up to
me and said, without raising her eyes, "Mr. West, you say I have been
good to you. I have not been particularly so, but if you think I have,
I want you to promise me that you will not try again to make me tell
you this thing you have asked to-night, and that you will not try to
find it out from any one else,--my father or mother, for instance."

To such an appeal there was but one reply possible. "Forgive me for
distressing you. Of course I will promise," I said. "I would never have
asked you if I had fancied it could distress you. But do you blame me
for being curious?"

"I do not blame you at all."

"And some time," I added, "if I do not tease you, you may tell me of
your own accord. May I not hope so?"

"Perhaps," she murmured.

"Only perhaps?"

Looking up, she read my face with a quick, deep glance. "Yes," she
said, "I think I may tell you--some time": and so our conversation
ended, for she gave me no chance to say anything more.

That night I don't think even Dr. Pillsbury could have put me to sleep,
till toward morning at least. Mysteries had been my accustomed food for
days now, but none had before confronted me at once so mysterious and
so fascinating as this, the solution of which Edith Leete had forbidden
me even to seek. It was a double mystery. How, in the first place, was
it conceivable that she should know any secret about me, a stranger
from a strange age? In the second place, even if she should know such a
secret, how account for the agitating effect which the knowledge of it
seemed to have upon her? There are puzzles so difficult that one cannot
even get so far as a conjecture as to the solution, and this seemed one
of them. I am usually of too practical a turn to waste time on such
conundrums; but the difficulty of a riddle embodied in a beautiful
young girl does not detract from its fascination. In general, no doubt,
maidens' blushes may be safely assumed to tell the same tale to young
men in all ages and races, but to give that interpretation to Edith's
crimson cheeks would, considering my position and the length of time I
had known her, and still more the fact that this mystery dated from
before I had known her at all, be a piece of utter fatuity. And yet she
was an angel, and I should not have been a young man if reason and
common sense had been able quite to banish a roseate tinge from my
dreams that night.



Chapter 24

In the morning I went down stairs early in the hope of seeing Edith
alone. In this, however, I was disappointed. Not finding her in the
house, I sought her in the garden, but she was not there. In the course
of my wanderings I visited the underground chamber, and sat down there
to rest. Upon the reading table in the chamber several periodicals and
newspapers lay, and thinking that Dr. Leete might be interested in
glancing over a Boston daily of 1887, I brought one of the papers with
me into the house when I came.

At breakfast I met Edith. She blushed as she greeted me, but was
perfectly self-possessed. As we sat at table, Dr. Leete amused himself
with looking over the paper I had brought in. There was in it, as in
all the newspapers of that date, a great deal about the labor troubles,
strikes, lockouts, boycotts, the programmes of labor parties, and the
wild threats of the anarchists.

"By the way," said I, as the doctor read aloud to us some of these
items, "what part did the followers of the red flag take in the
establishment of the new order of things? They were making considerable
noise the last thing that I knew."

"They had nothing to do with it except to hinder it, of course,"
replied Dr. Leete. "They did that very effectually while they lasted,
for their talk so disgusted people as to deprive the best considered
projects for social reform of a hearing. The subsidizing of those
fellows was one of the shrewdest moves of the opponents of reform."

"Subsidizing them!" I exclaimed in astonishment.

"Certainly," replied Dr. Leete. "No historical authority nowadays
doubts that they were paid by the great monopolies to wave the red flag
and talk about burning, sacking, and blowing people up, in order, by
alarming the timid, to head off any real reforms. What astonishes me
most is that you should have fallen into the trap so unsuspectingly."

"What are your grounds for believing that the red flag party was
subsidized?" I inquired.

"Why simply because they must have seen that their course made a
thousand enemies of their professed cause to one friend. Not to suppose
that they were hired for the work is to credit them with an
inconceivable folly.[1] In the United States, of all countries, no
party could intelligently expect to carry its point without first
winning over to its ideas a majority of the nation, as the national
party eventually did."

"The national party!" I exclaimed. "That must have arisen after my day.
I suppose it was one of the labor parties."

"Oh no!" replied the doctor. "The labor parties, as such, never could
have accomplished anything on a large or permanent scale. For purposes
of national scope, their basis as merely class organizations was too
narrow. It was not till a rearrangement of the industrial and social
system on a higher ethical basis, and for the more efficient production
of wealth, was recognized as the interest, not of one class, but
equally of all classes, of rich and poor, cultured and ignorant, old
and young, weak and strong, men and women, that there was any prospect
that it would be achieved. Then the national party arose to carry it
out by political methods. It probably took that name because its aim
was to nationalize the functions of production and distribution.
Indeed, it could not well have had any other name, for its purpose was
to realize the idea of the nation with a grandeur and completeness
never before conceived, not as an association of men for certain merely
political functions affecting their happiness only remotely and
superficially, but as a family, a vital union, a common life, a mighty
heaven-touching tree whose leaves are its people, fed from its veins,
and feeding it in turn. The most patriotic of all possible parties, it
sought to justify patriotism and raise it from an instinct to a
rational devotion, by making the native land truly a father land, a
father who kept the people alive and was not merely an idol for which
they were expected to die."


[1] I fully admit the difficulty of accounting for the course of the
anarchists on any other theory than that they were subsidized by the
capitalists, but at the same time, there is no doubt that the theory is
wholly erroneous. It certainly was not held at the time by any one,
though it may seem so obvious in the retrospect.



Chapter 25

The personality of Edith Leete had naturally impressed me strongly ever
since I had come, in so strange a manner, to be an inmate of her
father's house, and it was to be expected that after what had happened
the night previous, I should be more than ever preoccupied with
thoughts of her. From the first I had been struck with the air of
serene frankness and ingenuous directness, more like that of a noble
and innocent boy than any girl I had ever known, which characterized
her. I was curious to know how far this charming quality might be
peculiar to herself, and how far possibly a result of alterations in
the social position of women which might have taken place since my
time. Finding an opportunity that day, when alone with Dr. Leete, I
turned the conversation in that direction.

"I suppose," I said, "that women nowadays, having been relieved of the
burden of housework, have no employment but the cultivation of their
charms and graces."

"So far as we men are concerned," replied Dr. Leete, "we should
consider that they amply paid their way, to use one of your forms of
expression, if they confined themselves to that occupation, but you may
be very sure that they have quite too much spirit to consent to be mere
beneficiaries of society, even as a return for ornamenting it. They
did, indeed, welcome their riddance from housework, because that was
not only exceptionally wearing in itself, but also wasteful, in the
extreme, of energy, as compared with the cooperative plan; but they
accepted relief from that sort of work only that they might contribute
in other and more effectual, as well as more agreeable, ways to the
common weal. Our women, as well as our men, are members of the
industrial army, and leave it only when maternal duties claim them. The
result is that most women, at one time or another of their lives, serve
industrially some five or ten or fifteen years, while those who have no
children fill out the full term."

"A woman does not, then, necessarily leave the industrial service on
marriage?" I queried.

"No more than a man," replied the doctor. "Why on earth should she?
Married women have no housekeeping responsibilities now, you know, and
a husband is not a baby that he should be cared for."

"It was thought one of the most grievous features of our civilization
that we required so much toil from women," I said; "but it seems to me
you get more out of them than we did."

Dr. Leete laughed. "Indeed we do, just as we do out of our men. Yet the
women of this age are very happy, and those of the nineteenth century,
unless contemporary references greatly mislead us, were very miserable.
The reason that women nowadays are so much more efficient colaborers
with the men, and at the same time are so happy, is that, in regard to
their work as well as men's, we follow the principle of providing every
one the kind of occupation he or she is best adapted to. Women being
inferior in strength to men, and further disqualified industrially in
special ways, the kinds of occupation reserved for them, and the
conditions under which they pursue them, have reference to these facts.
The heavier sorts of work are everywhere reserved for men, the lighter
occupations for women. Under no circumstances is a woman permitted to
follow any employment not perfectly adapted, both as to kind and degree
of labor, to her sex. Moreover, the hours of women's work are
considerably shorter than those of men's, more frequent vacations are
granted, and the most careful provision is made for rest when needed.
The men of this day so well appreciate that they owe to the beauty and
grace of women the chief zest of their lives and their main incentive
to effort, that they permit them to work at all only because it is
fully understood that a certain regular requirement of labor, of a sort
adapted to their powers, is well for body and mind, during the period
of maximum physical vigor. We believe that the magnificent health which
distinguishes our women from those of your day, who seem to have been
so generally sickly, is owing largely to the fact that all alike are
furnished with healthful and inspiriting occupation."

"I understood you," I said, "that the women-workers belong to the army
of industry, but how can they be under the same system of ranking and
discipline with the men, when the conditions of their labor are so
different?"

"They are under an entirely different discipline," replied Dr. Leete,
"and constitute rather an allied force than an integral part of the
army of the men. They have a woman general-in-chief and are under
exclusively feminine regime. This general, as also the higher officers,
is chosen by the body of women who have passed the time of service, in
correspondence with the manner in which the chiefs of the masculine
army and the President of the nation are elected. The general of the
women's army sits in the cabinet of the President and has a veto on
measures respecting women's work, pending appeals to Congress. I should
have said, in speaking of the judiciary, that we have women on the
bench, appointed by the general of the women, as well as men. Causes in
which both parties are women are determined by women judges, and where
a man and a woman are parties to a case, a judge of either sex must
consent to the verdict."

"Womanhood seems to be organized as a sort of imperium in imperio in
your system," I said.

"To some extent," Dr. Leete replied; "but the inner imperium is one
from which you will admit there is not likely to be much danger to the
nation. The lack of some such recognition of the distinct individuality
of the sexes was one of the innumerable defects of your society. The
passional attraction between men and women has too often prevented a
perception of the profound differences which make the members of each
sex in many things strange to the other, and capable of sympathy only
with their own. It is in giving full play to the differences of sex
rather than in seeking to obliterate them, as was apparently the effort
of some reformers in your day, that the enjoyment of each by itself and
the piquancy which each has for the other, are alike enhanced. In your
day there was no career for women except in an unnatural rivalry with
men. We have given them a world of their own, with its emulations,
ambitions, and careers, and I assure you they are very happy in it. It
seems to us that women were more than any other class the victims of
your civilization. There is something which, even at this distance of
time, penetrates one with pathos in the spectacle of their ennuied,
undeveloped lives, stunted at marriage, their narrow horizon, bounded
so often, physically, by the four walls of home, and morally by a petty
circle of personal interests. I speak now, not of the poorer classes,
who were generally worked to death, but also of the well-to-do and
rich. From the great sorrows, as well as the petty frets of life, they
had no refuge in the breezy outdoor world of human affairs, nor any
interests save those of the family. Such an existence would have
softened men's brains or driven them mad. All that is changed to-day.
No woman is heard nowadays wishing she were a man, nor parents desiring
boy rather than girl children. Our girls are as full of ambition for
their careers as our boys. Marriage, when it comes, does not mean
incarceration for them, nor does it separate them in any way from the
larger interests of society, the bustling life of the world. Only when
maternity fills a woman's mind with new interests does she withdraw
