since it is all-inclusive and embraces the entire field of weird,
fantastic, and scientific fiction. With that title, the mag has a good
start toward success--and I certainly hope it attains it!"

From Conrad H. Ruppert we learn that; "You never get anywhere if you
don't try anything. I certainly wish you all the success in the world,
and will do my best to help."

Brief, but ever welcome, is the message from Mortimer Weisinger: "Best
of luck in your venture."

Julius Schwartz also drops a line: "With all the articles you have,
THE FANTASY FAN should get along quite well."

This column would not be complete without a good word from that
super-active fan, Forrest J. Ackerman, who says: "I'm looking forward
to every number of THE FANTASY FAN. Good luck!"

We have received many other letters on the same trend. They encourage
us, and we appreciate them. We know you feel the same way. Boost THE
FANTASY FAN to your friends.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Have you any original fan material you would like us to print?
Anything you submit will be carefully considered. All accepted
material will be paid for in copies of TFF--we hope, later, in cash.




INFORMATION


In this department each month we will answer your questions concerning
science and weird fiction. Do you want to know when and where a
certain story was first printed?--who wrote a certain story?--the date
and a list of stories of the first issue of a magazine?--a list of
your favorite author's stories?--anything at all that you would like
to know. This column may clear up many doubtful points in your mind,
and you are free to use it.




THIS MONTH'S CASH CONTEST


Each month we shall award a one dollar bill for the best answer to the
simple questions that we ask. The best answer to

"Why do you read fantasy fiction?"

will win this month. Simple, isn't it? Entries will be judged entirely
on the interest and convincing qualities. Do not go over 100 words.
All entries must be in our office by Thursday, August 17. If you would
rather have a one year subscription to THE FANTASY FAN (in the case
that you do not already subscribe) let us know. This contest is too
easy for you to pass up. You have never had an easier opportunity of
winning a dollar!




QUESTIONNAIRE


(Try to answer these questions to test your knowledge of fantasy
fiction. The answers will appear in the next issue.)

    1. What was Dr. Keller's first story?

    2. In what stories did Tom Jenkins appear?

    3. What author writes mostly of Central and South America?

    4. What story explained the fairy myth scientifically?

    5. Who wrote "Dr. Hackensaw's Secrets"?

                     *      *      *      *      *

Join the Jules Verne Prize Club, for the advancement of science
fiction, for details write to:

    Raymond A. Palmer
    4331 North 27th Street
    Milwaukee, Wisconsin




CONGLAMITORIAL


Drury D. Sharp's first story, "The Goddess of the Painted Priests," in
the April, 1929 Weird, was the only one where his first name was
spelled out.... Years ago, Weird would occasionally print the
illustration with the installment of a story that had been the cover
picture of the first installment the month before.... The last issue
of Astounding had two illustrations by Marchionni--the only issue so
honored, and a story named "The End of Time," the title of a story in
Wonder two years ago.... Speaking about reprints! Believe it or not,
the March, 1933 Amazing contained four of them! Only--these reprints
were letters which appeared in the February number.... Among the
oddities of science fiction should go down the March, 1933 Wonder
Stories. This issue was the first Wonder not to contain an installment
of a serial. The narrow band on the top of the cover, which had a
motto for Wonder since April, 1930, for the first time in its history
did not contain such but instead the name of a story in the mag....
The November, 1931 Astounding was the only issue to have a few words
in quotations on the cover. They were: "And then his skeleton
appeared!"... "Faster Than Light," by J. Harvey Haggard in the
October, 1930 Wonder Stories was announced as "Beyond the Universe" in
the previous issue.... If any person doubts that Forrest J. Ackerman
is the most active science fiction fan--let him look into the
Discussions of the April 1933 Amazing. Three of his letters appear.
Yea, verily, "An issue without Forrest's letter is incomplete" ...
more next month....




HOW TO COLLECT FANTASY FICTION

by Julius Schwartz


