bear. The professor calculated that the drop in temperature from high
noon was, two hours after sunset, exactly seventy degrees Fahrenheit.

"Human life will become extinct upon this fragmentary planet, if nothing
further happens to it, in a very few years," he said, thoughtfully.
"We are not attuned to such frightful changes."

They had eaten, and had packed their supplies. The earth had long since
appeared again and the radiance she reflected fell softly upon the
ice-field. It glistened like silver, stretching, miles and miles away
before them when they climbed down from the fringe of trees in which
they had encamped, and set out down the glacier.

They traveled carefully at first, for there were sinks in the ice which
had barely skimmed over since sun-down. The thermometer registered 18
above zero, however, and the biting cold was congealing all lakes and
pools very rapidly. Where they tramped through the slush their
footprints froze behind them. In an hour the mercury had fallen ten
degrees more and they were beating their gloved hands across their
breasts to keep up the circulation.

They tramped on at good speed for several hours. Here and there along
either edge of the glacier, were groves of fir trees like the one they
had encamped in. But in places the ice had melted from under and around
these patches of rock and soil and the roots of the trees were exposed,
while the earth had slumped away in small land-slips until nothing but
a heap of debris was left.

The old professor grew weary and Andy insisted upon making camp again
and resting. While they were warming themselves over the fire the old
hunter built, and Wash was boiling some coffee, Jack suddenly beheld
several shining points of light in the little wood on the edge of which
they had halted.

"Look out! We're being watched," he whispered in Andy's ear.

The hunter grabbed his rifle and looked where Jack pointed. At once
he seemed relieved.

"The wolves," he said. "They know their way out of this valley. I don't
want to travel on this ice any longer than I can help."

With a word to the professor, and taking Roebach with him, the old
hunter made a determined charge into the brush at the lurking wolves.
The pack scattered at first, but finding themselves determinedly
followed, and both hunters having been wise enough to take torches
with them (for wolves are very much afraid of fire) the pack finally
gathered once more and trailed away up a narrow path upon the rocky
wall close at hand.

In the white light furnished by the earth-planet Andy counted thirty
and more of the beasts climbing this rugged path. He was sure it was
no mere lair they went to among the rocks, but a path leading out of
the valley altogether. Therefore, when the party was again refreshed,
they took up their line of march, in single file, following the wolf
trail.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE FIGHT AT ALEUKAN


Phineas Roebach knew nothing about this narrow defile through which
the party traveled. But he agreed that they were breaking through the
wall of the glacier on the right side. Aleukan, the big native
settlement, was in this direction.

There seemed to be a narrow crack through this cliff which had guarded
the river of ice. It had never been used by man as a right of way, but
the beasts of the wilderness had used it from time immemorial, as the
marks along the way proclaimed.

The scurrying feet of the wolf pack, were long since out of the way.
But yonder a mountain sheep had been killed by a puma, or other big
feline, and the wolves had picked its bones after the Master of the
Chase had eaten his fill.

Where a little rill of sweet water sprang from between two boulders,
boiling out white sand from the depths of its spring, was the print
of a bear's paw. Many of these marks Jack and Mark saw for themselves;
but Andy was quick to point them out as he led the way up the steep
path.

Their progress was necessarily slow because of the aged professor.
Although the scientist was not the man to retard the party, Andy would
let nobody take the lead but himself, so that he could watch the old
man's flagging steps and call a halt whenever he thought it best for
Mr. Henderson to rest.

"You are babying me, Andy!" ejaculated the professor, with some
irritation.

"You're the most important person in this party, sir," declared the
hunter. "We can lose any other person and not miss him much. But without
you we'd be without a head."

Therefore, when they had clambered through the last steep cut and
reached the farther slope of the cliff, the hunter called a halt and
built a camp, determined to bivouac here although the oil man assured
him that they were now less than twenty miles from Aleukan.

A few hours later they awoke to find the sun rising once more and the
heat of the exposed hillside becoming unbearable. Were it not for the
wonderful clearness of the air they could not have stood the heat at
all. But all agreed that they would better descend the hill to the
forest and so be sheltered from the direct rays of the sun.

The bearing of their extra clothing in this tropical heat was an effort,
and they were all glad to find shelter beneath the huge-limbed trees
at the foot of the slope.

There they lay in the shade and discussed the direction they should
travel from this point. It was not until this time they discovered
that their pocket compasses pointed the north as being in a totally
different direction from what they had supposed. Phineas Roebach had
declared the native settlement of Aleukan to be directly north and
west of the place where he had tapped the mud-spouter. But now, although
he was positive of the contour of the hills and the line of peaks of
the Endicott Range under which Aleukan was established, their compasses
made the direction southwest.

"Not at all strange, sir," said Professor Henderson. "In becoming
detached from the old earth, our new planet was shifted a good bit,
and that which was to the north is now almost west. If, by chance,
this island in the air includes that point on the earth's surface which
once represented the most northerly spot--the North Pole, in fact--it
is the North Pole no longer. The magnetic needle points instead to a
new North Pole, established on this fragment of a planet since it was
shot off into space from its parent world."

Phineas Roebach grunted his disbelief in all this. He could not get
it into his head that they were riding on a piece of the old earth
far, far above that stable planet. He would not believe it. No marvel
of this situation could change his belief. He would not accept the
professor's theory of what had happened to them.

The sun went down again and the frost began to creep after it. Already
the bulk of vegetation about them (save the hardy firs and kindred
trees and shrubs) were black and dead. The change in climate had tolled
the knell of all those plants that had withstood heretofore the rigors
of the Alaskan summer.

"What do you suppose has happened to the _Chrysothele-Byzantium_
herb that Dr. Todd sent us for?" demanded Jack Darrow. "Seems to me
that will be badly frost-bitten by the time we find it; won't it?"

"I fear so, indeed," admitted Professor Henderson.

"Lawsy-massy!" gasped Wash. "Do yo' mean ter tell me dat we ain't gwine
ter fin' dat chrysomela bypunktater plant after all? What fo' did we
come away off here on dis floatin' islan' if we ain't gwine ter git
dat specimen of botanical horrorforbilicalness? I done hoped I could
tell ma friends w'en I returned dat we done was successful, an' cure
some ob dem ob craziness in de haid by applyin' some ob de bypunktater.
If we don't find it, den dey all say we been follerin' a
chimera-infantum--in odder words, dat we needs some ob de bypunktater
our own selfs!"

"You mean," said Jack, seriously, "that they will think we are crazy
if we do not bring home what we were sent for?"

"Dat's wot I done said," grumbled the colored man.

"No, you didn't say it; but you meant it, most likely," admitted Jack.
"And I reckon you are right. It does seem as though we have come a
long way for nothing."

"And no likelihood of our ever getting back!" added Mark, despondently.

But this was out of the professor's hearing. The party was already on
their way again, and the traveling was much easier now. Andy and Roebach
led the way, followed by the professor and the boys, Wash, with his
rooster in a fur bag, following on behind. They covered the twenty
miles to the hilltop which overlooked Aleukan without making more than
one short stop. By that time both the earth and her largest satellite,
the moon, were shining brightly upon this little planet on which our
friends had become marooned.

"Hurrah!" cried Jack. "We are _somewhere_ at last! Do you suppose
those supplies got over from Coldfoot before that last eruption?" "If
the train did not arrive before that time," said Mark, "make up your
mind that it never will arrive. Probably there is no Coldfoot on this
planet."

"There are some natives on hand, at least," said the professor, with
satisfaction.

They indeed saw several men moving about the town; but Phineas Roebach
did not seem at all pleased.

"I don't like that a bit," he declared.

"Don't like what?" asked Andy Sudds, quickly.

"There's always a slather of squaws and children around Aleukan. There
are two white traders here, too--one representing the Hudson Bay Company
and the other working for the French Company. And always a heap of
dogs are in sight."

"What do you suppose is the matter?" Jack queried.

"Don't know," grunted the oil man. "Looks as though the squaws and
young ones had been sent off with the sleds. Why, those fellows are
all armed, too!"

"I expect that the strange happenings have puzzled and frightened the
aborigines," suggested Professor Henderson. "We had better go down
into the town and try to allay their fears."

The hunter and Roebach evidently had their doubts regarding the wisdom
of this move. Yet they had come all this distance for the express
purpose of going into Aleukan. They set out down the trail to enter
the big village of cabins and skin huts.

Suddenly the group of bucks in the principal street of the town turned
and ran shouting toward the little party descending from the heights.
Their actions were extremely warlike.

Then up from a side gulch appeared twice as many other Indians, armed
with spears and guns. Several shots were fired at the party approaching
the town.

"Lawsy-massy!" yelled Washington White. "Disher don't seem like de
us'al 'Welcome to our City' warcry. Dem fellers don't want us nohow!"

"Now we see just how popular we are with the natives of Alaska," said
Jack. "What do you think of it, Mark?"

"I think we're in bad," returned his chum, gripping his rifle nervously.

"Quite remarkable! quite remarkable!" repeated Professor Henderson.

"Back to that bunch o' rocks!" shouted Andy Sudds, who had taken in
the strategic advantages of a position they had just passed, at a
glance.

All saw the wisdom of the old hunter's suggestion. They hurried to the
group of boulders. They made a natural breastwork behind which a few
determined men could hold at bay a horde of enemies--for a time, at
least.

"The Indians are coming right on," cried Mark, excitedly.

"And I see some of my old workmen among them," declared Phineas Roebach.
"That is what is the trouble. Those fellows have got it into their
heads that we are somehow the cause of these misfortunes that have
overtaken this part of the hemisphere."

"You go out and parley with them, Mr. Roebach," suggested the professor.

"You can't parley with them while their 'mad' is up," said the oil
man. "They're charging. Give them a volley--and don't be afraid to
shoot low. They will listen better to reason after they taste some of
our lead."

His final words were lost in the explosion of the guns. All but the
professor fired. He had no weapon. Several Indians fell, wounded in
the legs, for all had taken Roebach's advice and fired low.

With shrieks of rage and pain the Aleuts fell back, and found shelter
for themselves behind trees and rocks. But they were not minded to
give up the fight so easily. They gradually extended their line of
battle until they had our friends completely surrounded. Their desultory
fire, however, did not at first do any damage to those in the fortress,
and the whites replied only occasionally, taking careful aim and winging
an Indian at almost every shot.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE FLIGHT TOWARD THE COAST


Washington White was a good shot, but he did not like fighting. And
he was particularly careful not to show himself above the breastwork
of boulders behind which he, with his companions, were crouching,
holding the Aleuts at bay.

"Disher ain't no place for a'spectable pusson ob color," he muttered.
"Wot do Buttsy an' me want o' shootin'? Wah! Dat bullet chipped de
rock right near ma haid! Ain't dat Injun got no respec' for who I is?"

"I don't believe he knows who you really are, Wash," chuckled Jack,
whose wounded hand was now so much better that it did not keep him
from handling his rifle in a way to make old Andy proud of his pupil's
marksmanship.

"Can dat be a posserbility?" demanded Wash, vainly. "Ain't dey nebber
hearn tell ob me, d'yo s'pose, Massa Jack?"

"I believe they are quite ignorant of who you are," returned Jack,
with gravity.

"But some ob 'em done seed me ober dar at Massa Roebach's camp. Yas,
sah! I reckernize one o' dem Injuns--de short feller behin' dat tree
close up yere. Gollyation! he jest fired dat shot dat come purt nigh
hittin' Buttsy."

"He's trying to kill that Shanghai, Wash," said Jack, wickedly. "That's
what he's trying to do."

"Dat settles it!" ejaculated the colored man, mighty wroth at this
thought. "I ain't goin' ter stan' no sech doin's. Tryin' ter shoot
Buttsy; is he? I'll show him in jest erbout a minute dat nobody kin
shoot at ma Shanghai wid imputation an' git erway wid it--no sah!"

The boys had no idea that he would do so reckless a thing. Wash was
not ordinarily a courageous person. But he was "riled all up" now, and
he feared for the Shanghai's safety.

Up he jumped, threw down his rifle, and agilely leaped the fortification
in the direction of the short Indian who had attracted his anger. He
streaked it across the intervening space so quickly that the startled
enemy did not even fire at him.

But Andy Sudds began firing his magazine rifle as fast as he could
sight her and pull the trigger, and Roebach followed his example. This
volley drove all the Indians to cover and doubtless saved the strangely
reckless negro's life.

Wash reached the cover of the Aleut accused by him of aiming directly
to finish the Shanghai rooster, and before that startled aborigine
could escape, he was disarmed by the black man and dragged across the
intervening space to the fort.

Wash was powerful and could easily do this, for the Indian was not a
heavy fellow. But on the way one Indian had fired at the darkey and
wounded the Aleut in the leg.

