Write your opinions and suggestions into "Our Readers Say," fans--we
want to run the magazine the way you like it best. As a special
feature in next month's issue, we are presenting a full-page original
illustration by Morey.




MY FAVORITE FANTASY STORY

by Julius Schwartz


It's really impossible to name one's favorite fantasy story without
taking into account not only the merit of the story but also the mood
of the reader at the time he read it. I, therefore, have no _one_
favorite story, but rather a list of stories that I liked immensely at
the time I read them; they gripped, fascinated, and held me. They are
those stories that can be read and reread dozens of times without
finding a lack of interest in them. Four of these stories are, "The
Blind Spot," by Hall and Flint; "The Man Who Evolved," by Hamilton;
"The Second Deluge" by Serviss; and "Short Wave Castle" by Calvin
Peregov. These four tales may not be the best I've read, but they're
certainly way up near the top the list. [Let us know what you consider
your favorite fantasy story.]




Polaris

by H. P. Lovecraft


Into the north window of my chamber glows the Pole Star with uncanny
light. All through the long hellish hours of blackness it shines
there. And in the autumn of the year, when the winds from the north
curse and whine, and the red-leaved trees of the swamp mutter things
to one another in the small hours of the morning under the horned
waning moon, I sit by the casement and watch that star. Down from the
heights reels the glittering Cassiopeia as the hours wear on, while
Charles' Wain lumbers up from behind the vapour-soaked swamp trees
that sway in the night wind. Just before dawn Arcturus winks ruddily
from above the cemetery on the low hillock, and Coma Berenices
shimmers weirdly afar off in the mysterious east; but still the Pole
Star leers down from the same place in the black vault, winking
hideously like an insane watching eye which strives to convey some
strange message, yet recalls nothing save that it once had a message
to convey. Sometimes, when it is cloudy, I can sleep.

Well do I remember the night of the great Aurora, when over the swamp
played the shocking coruscation's of the daemon light. After the beam
came clouds, and then I slept.

And it was under a horned waning moon that I saw the city for the
first time. Still and somnolent did it lie, on a strange plateau in a
hollow betwixt strange peaks. Of ghastly marble were its walls and its
towers, its columns, domes, and pavements. In the marble street, were
marble pillars, the upper parts of which were carven into the images
of grave bearded men. The air was warm and stirred not. And overhead,
scarce ten degrees from the zenith, glowed that watching Pole Star.
Long did I gaze on the city, but the day came not. When the red
Aldebaran, which blinked low in the sky but never set, had crawled a
quarter of the way around the horizon, I saw light and motion in the
houses and the streets. Forms strangely robed, but at once noble and
familiar, walked abroad and under the horned waning moon men talked
wisdom in a tongue which I understood, though it was unlike any
language I had ever known. And when the red Aldebaran had crawled more
than halfway around the horizon, there were again darkness and
silence.

When I awaked, I was not as I had been. Upon my memory was graven the
vision of the city, and within my soul had arisen another and vaguer
recollection, of whose nature I was not then certain. Thereafter, on
the cloudy nights when I could sleep, I saw the city often; sometimes
under that horned waning moon, and sometimes under the hot yellow rays
of a sun which did not set, but which wheeled low around the horizon.
And on the clear nights the Pole Star leered as never before.

Gradually I came to wonder what might be my place in that city on the
strange plateau betwixt strange peaks. At first content to view the
scene as an all-observant uncorporeal presence, I now desired to
define my relation to it, and to speak my mind amongst the grave men
who conversed each day in the public squares. I said to myself, "This
is no dream, for by what means can I prove the greater reality of that
other life in the house of stone and brick south of the sinister swamp
and the cemetery on the low hillock, where the Pole Star peeps into my
north window each night?"

One night as I listened to the discourse in the large square
containing many statues I felt a change; and perceived that I had at
last a bodily form. Nor was a stranger in the streets of Olathoe,
which lies on the plateau of Sarkis, betwixt the peaks Noton and
Kadiphonek. It was my friend Alos who spoke, and his speech was one
that pleased my soul, for it was the speech of a true man and patriot.
That night had the news come of Daikos' fall, and of the advance of
the Inutos; squat, hellish yellow fiends who five years ago had
appeared out of the unknown west to ravage the confines of our kingdom
and finally to besiege our towns. Having taken the fortified places at
the foot of the mountains, their way now lay open to the plateau,
unless every citizen could resist with the strength of ten men. For
the squat creatures were mighty in the arts of war, and knew not the
scruples of honour which hold back our tall, grey-eyed men of Lomar
from ruthless conquest.

Alos, my friend, was commander of all the forces on the plateau, and
in him lay the last hope of our country. On this occasion he spoke of
the perils to be faced and exhorted the men of Olathoe, bravest of the
Lomarians, to sustain the traditions of their ancestors, who when
forced to move southward from Zobna before the advance of the great
ice sheet, (even as our descendants must some day flee from the land
of Lomar) valiantly and victoriously swept aside the hairy,
long-armed, cannibal Gnophkehs that stood in their way. To me Alos
denied a warrior's part, for I was feeble and given to strange
faintings when subjected to stress and hardships. But my eyes were the
keenest in the city, despite the long hours I gave each day to the
study of the Pnakotic manuscripts and the wisdom of the Zobnarian
Fathers; so my friend, desiring not to doom me to inaction, rewarded
me with that duty which was second to nothing in importance. To the
watchtower of Thapnen he sent me, there to serve as the eyes of our
army. Should the Inutos attempt to gain the citadel by the narrow pass
behind the peak Noton and thereby surprise the garrison, I was to give
the signal of fire which would warn the waiting soldiers, and, save
the town from immediate disaster.

Alone I mounted the tower, for every man of stout body was needed in
the passes below. My brain was sore dazed with excitement and fatigue,
for I had not slept in many days; yet was my purpose firm, for I loved
my native land of Lomar, and the marble city Olathoe that lies betwixt
the peaks of Noton and Kadiphonek.

But as I stood in the tower's topmost chamber, I beheld the horned
waning moon, red and sinister, quivering through the vapours that
hovered over the distant valley of Banof. And through an opening in
the roof glittered the pale Pole Star, fluttering as if alive, and
leering like a fiend and tempter. Methought its spirit whispered evil
counsel, soothing me to traitorous somnolence with a damnable
rhythmical promise which it repeated over and over:

    "Slumber, watcher, till the spheres,
    Six and twenty thousand years
