
The construction and arrangement of whistle with gage valve whereby to
indicate the sound produced by steam or steam and water commingled or
water unmingled with steam, substantially as set foath.


49,847.--STEAM GENERATOR.--John R. Eckman, Green Post office Pa.,
assignee of John D. Beers, Philadelphia, Pa. Dated Sept. 12, 1865.
Application for reissue received and filed Sept. 30, 1867.

1st. Broadly the circular plate or ring, b, as shown and described.

2d, The plate, H, encircling the fire box, substantially as shown and
described.

3d, Forming a water space between the inner surface of the boiler shell,
A, and the plate or ring, b, as shown and described.


9,286.--MACHIHFRY FOR CUTTING LATHS PROM A REVOLVING LOG.--Jonathan C.
Brown, Brooklyn, N.Y., assignee of Henry C. Smith, Cleveland, Ohio.
Dated Sept. 28, 1852. Application for reissue received and filed Dec, 5,
1867.

1st, Turning the log to be cut by driving the mandrels at each end
thereof by gearing them directly with the driving shaft, substantially
as and for the purposes set forth.

2d, The dog, a, and its appurtenances for connecting the log with the
mandrels and disconnecting it therefrom, as specified.

3d, The combination of the cylinder cutter, K, and the stripping knife
moved up simultaneously and automatically, all substantially as and for
the purposes set forth.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--_The above claims for Reissue are now pending before the Patent
Office and will not be officially passed upon until the expiration of 30
days from the date of filing the application. All persons who desire
to oppose the grant of any of these claims should make immediate
application.

MUNN & CO., Solicitors of Patents, 37 Park Row, N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *




SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

MUNN & COMPANY, Editors and Proprietors.


PUBLISHED WEEKLY AT NO. 37 PARK ROW (PARK BUILDING), NEW YORK.

O.D. MUNN. S.H. WALES. A.E. BEACH.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The American News Company," Agents, 121 Nassau street, New York

"The New York News Company," 8 Spruce street

Messrs. Sampson Low, Son & Co, Booksellers, 47 Ludgate Hill, London,
England, are the Agents to receive European subscriptions or
advertisements for the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Orders sent to them will be
promptly attended to.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XVII., No. 26....[NEW SERIES.]...._Twenty-first Year_.

NEW YORK, SATURDAY, DECEMBER 28, 1867.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LAST NUMBER OF VOLUME XVII.


We give in this number a full index of the volume of which this is
the last issue. No doubt this will be more satisfactory to our
readers--those at least who preserve their numbers for binding, and
probably most do--than publishing the index in a separate sheet. The
list of claims in this number will be found to be unusually full, a
gratifying evidence that dullness of business does not cripple the
resources nor abate the industry of our inventors. With a parting word
of good will to our present subscribers and a welcome to those who begin
with our new volume, we wish for all a HAPPY NEW YEAR.

       *       *       *       *       *




COMMENCEMENT OF A NEW VOLUME.


With the next number the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN enters upon its
twenty-third year. Probably no publication extent will furnish a more
complete and exhaustive exhibit of the progress of science and the arts
in this country for the past twenty-two years than a complete file of
the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. It is a curious and interesting pastime to
compare the condition of the mechanic arts as presented in some of our
first volumes with that shown in our more recent ones. During all this
time, nearly a quarter of a century, our journal has endeavored to
represent the actual condition of our scientific and mechanical progress
and to record the discoveries and improvements in these departments
wherever made. The result is a compendium of valuable information
unattainable through any other means.

But the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN has aimed not only to gratify a laudable
curiosity by collecting and presenting such information, but to give
practical knowledge which could be applied to valuable uses.

We labor for the producers--the mechanics, farmers, laborers--those who
build up a country and make the wilderness to blossom like the rose. We
believe that the workers are the power, especially in this country; and
while we do not wish to detract from the value of the products of merely
intellectual speculators, we still think that the world needs specially
the laborer. We use the term "laborer" in this connection in its widest
sense, comprehending he who uses brain as well as he who employs muscle;
scientific investigation and discovery should be followed by and united
to practical application.

The improvement exhibited in our past volumes will be no less noticeable
hereafter. Keeping pace with the "march of mind" we shall endeavor
always to lead rather than to follow. The different departments of our
paper are managed by those who are practically acquainted with the
subjects they profess to elucidate. "To err is human," but we shall
spare no pains nor expense to make the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN as reliable
in its statements as it is interesting in the variety and matter of its
subjects. There are none of our people, from the student or professional
man to the day laborer, but will find something in every number, of
present or future value to him in his business.

       *       *       *       *       *




A CHANGE AT THE PATENT OFFICE.


T.C. Theaker has resigned as Commissioner of Patents. A number of
gentlemen are mentioned as candidates for the succession, prominent
among whom are B. T. James and Charles Mason. Mr. James has acted in the
capacity of primary Examiner in the Engineering Class for a number of
years, and has filled his position acceptably. Judge Mason held the
Commissionership from 1853 to 1857, and his whole administration was
marked with reform and ability. Judge Mason was educated at West Point,
and he is a man of sterling integrity, a sound jurist, experienced in
patent law, and a splendid executive officer. One thing may be relied
upon, if Judge Mason should receive and accept the appointment of
Commissioner, inventors will not have to complain long of delay in the
examination of their cases The Judge is as industrious by nature as he
is stern and systematic by education and he will have no drones about
him. The work of the office under his administration would be brought up
and kept up.

A good day for inventors and all persons having business with the Patent
Office will dawn when Judge Mason takes the Commissioner's chair again,
and we hope the proper influences may be brought to bear to secure his
acceptance.

       *       *       *       *       *




OBITUARY.


Ebenezer Winship, died at his home in this city Dec. 6, 1867, at the age
of 67. A long and eminently useful although unobtrusive life entitles
his memory to respect. He commenced his career as a mechanic in
the steam engine establishment of James P. Allaire, soon after the
application of steam for the propulsion of boats and long before its
application to ships for the purposes of commerce or war. For fifty-two
years, with the exception of one or two brief intervals, he was
connected with the Allaire works in this city, and for more than forty
years he was the master mechanic and general superintendent of the
works. Probably no man now living has had a more intimate connection
with the construction of the marine steam engine in all its remarkable
changes and improvements, or been so long employed at one engine
establishment.

James P. Allaire, the founder of the Allaire Works, died May 20,1858, at
the age of 73. He was an intimate acquaintance of Fulton and from the
engine of Fulton's first boat, the _Clermont_, took drawings which he
used in the construction of his first marine engines. He built the
engines for the _Chancellor Livingston_ which ran between New York and
Albany. He built also the first marine engines ever constructed in this
country, which were put into the steamship _Savannah_, the first steamer
that crossed the Atlantic, and also those for the _Pacific_ and
_Baltic_ of the Collins line, which ships surpassed in speed any before
constructed.

Under such tutelage and with such advantages Mr. Winship rose
successively through the grades of apprentice, journeyman, boss,
and foreman, to the position of master mechanic and superintendent.
Connected intimately with the progress of marine engineering for over
half a century, he was the teacher of a large number of our engineers
who now reflect credit upon their instructor. Mr. Winship's professional
skill was unsurpassed; his ability in directing and managing others and
thorough acquaintance with the minutest details made him invaluable in
the position he so long honorably filled. His personal characteristics
were faithfulness, industry, earnestness, kindness of heart, and
unvarying punctuality and promptness. As master mechanic it was his
invariable rule to be at the works an hour before the time for beginning
labor to lay out the work for the hands, getting his breakfast in winter
by gas light and returning from dinner in time to see the condition
of the work before the men arrived. In short, he made his employers'
business his own and neglected nothing which might contribute to their
success. He was a connecting link between the present generation of
mechanics and that which saw the beginnings of that great power, steam,
which has revolutionized the world. His funeral on the 8th of December
was attended by all the employes of the Allaire Works, by many from
other mechanical establishments, and a large number of citizens.

       *       *       *       *       *




How to Make Intelligent Workmen--Go and Do Likewise.


Mr. H. O. Osborn, of Castleton, Vt., in a letter covering an order for a
club of subscribers, says:--"It may not be uninteresting to you to learn
that the last six names are those of young men in my employ. I have
myself been your subscriber for the past four years, and knowing as
I did the value of your paper, I felt it a duty I owed to my men to
recommend the paper to their notice, and the result is as above. I am
proud to think that I have so many in my mill who can appreciate its
worth. I hope at no remote date to send you another list of names from
among my own men, and I am certain that if every manufacturer would
consult his own best interest he would do all he could to place your
paper in the hands of his workmen, for I feel it to be a valuable
acquisition to all in any way connected with machines."

We believe that employers who wish to improve the condition of their
employes can render them no better service than to make each of them a
Christmas present of a year's subscription to this paper. Send in the
names early, so that we may know how large an edition to print to
supply the demand. We close this Volume with over 30,000--nearly
35,000--subscribers, and we wish to commence the new with at least
50,000. Send in your names.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Iron-Clads at Sea.


In his last annual report to Congress, the Secretary of the Navy thus
refers to the cruise of the _Miantonomah_ to Europe and her return and
of the _Monadnock_ to San Francisco, voyages the most remarkable ever
undertaken by turreted iron-clad vessels. These vessels encountered
every variety of weather, and under all circumstances proved themselves
to be staunch, reliable sea-going ships. The monitor type of vessel
has been constructed primarily for harbor defence, and it was not
contemplated that they would do more than move from port to port on our
own coast. These voyages demonstrate their ability to go to any part of
the world, and it is believed by experienced naval officers that with
slight modifications above the water line, in no way interfering with
their efficiency in action, they will safely make the longest and most
difficult voyages without convoy.

Steam, turreted iron-clads and fifteen-inch guns have revolutionized
naval warfare, and foreign governments, becoming sensible of this great
change, are slowly but surely coming to the conclusion that turreted
vessels and heavy ordnance are essential parts of an efficient fighting
navy.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN AS A MEDIUM OF BUSINESS.


We seldom publish the favorable opinions expressed by our correspondents
when in their letters they allude to this journal. If we chose we could
fill columns with notices similar to those which follow.

R. S. Miller of Logansport, Ind., under date of Dec. 2d, says:--

I have a club of 10 or 12 engaged, and will send names and money about
the 20th inst. I have been reading the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN for several
years and frequently I find items in it of more value than the year's
subscription. In No. 9, present volume, you illustrated a plan for
setting steam boilers. I was much pleased with it and showed it to a
friend of mine who was about re-setting a 60-horse power boiler in his
machine shop. He adopted the plan. Four week's use of the improved
furnace proves all you claimed for it. My friend will be one of your new
subscribers. I shall, in a few days, re-set my 15-horse power boiler
according to the plan. Every live mechanic should take your valuable
journal.

The Lamb Knitting Machine Manufacturing Co, Chicopee Falls, Mass.,
say:--

In payment of your bill please find inclosed draft, etc. Please insert
our advertisement every other week hereafter. We are compelled to this
being overrun with orders. Unless they hold up we shall be obliged to
withdraw it entirely. So much for the advantages of your medium for
advertising.

C.W. Le Count, Manufacturer of lathe dogs and steam engine governors,
South Norwalk, Conn., writes concerning his advertisement in these
columns:

What business I have I can trace three-quarters of it directly to your
