  --Lester Anderson

"H'ray and so forth! I've discovered a magazine that isn't published in
N'Yawk--namely THE FANTASY FAN. Well, be that as it may, I must tell
you that I enjoyed your February issue. I like such a page as you have
wherein the readers can have their sayso about stories and authors and
whatnot that fills a magazine. I always look for such a page in any
magazine, and I was both surprised and pleased to find that you feature
yours on the first page. Boy, I must admit that I liked that tale by H.
P. Lovecraft, 'Polaris.' I enjoyed Miss Ferguson's visit to Jules de
Grandin (hope she reads this)."

  --Gertrude Hemken

"I hope that your future issues will be as good as this February issue
was and is. All of the articles were very fine, and the stories were
very good, too."

  --Fred John Walsen

"I enjoyed the February issue of THE FANTASY FAN thoroughly.
Lovecraft's story was fine, as usual, and I particularly like C. A.
Smith's article about M. R. James. Could you persuade him to write
further articles about other famous fantasy writers? Your list of
stories to come looks very good."

  --Emil Petaja

"Those poems by Richard F. Searight and William Lumley in the February
issue are great and certainly have a touch of the bizarre that grips
one. I am looking forward to the verse by Clark Ashton Smith in much
anticipation. The story by Lovecraft hits the bull's-eye for February,
but is closely followed by the excellent series by Barlow, 'The Tomb of
the God' in the 'Annals of the Jinns.' I hope, like the rest, that the
future instalments of Lovecraft's 'Supernatural Horror in Literature'
will be longer. I just about get interested when I read 'continued next
month.' I'm all for THE FANTASY FAN and hope it gets better and better!"

  --Duane W. Rimel

"I liked Lovecraft's 'Polaris' even better than 'The Other
Gods'--beautifully told--like a sweet-scented wind from the tainted
unknown."

  --Robert Nelson

"The February issue of TFF was the best of the issues up to date.
The choice of material was much better than usual and there was more
variety which is a very strong factor. Keep it up! Of course, I know
you get that song and dance from all quarters, but I may as well add
mine, too. 'The Weird Works of M. R. James' was a very fine review.
This is what makes a magazine. I hope it will be possible to have Mr.
Smith write one of those fine columns every month."

  --F. Lee Baldwin

"I was delighted to see the bibliographical note on 'The Time Machine'
by R. H. Barlow in the last issue. Similar short items on some of the
better known stories should prove of extreme interest to the readers. I
hope to see many more of them.

"May I take the liberty of adding a bit of information for the benefit
of collectors of Wells' works? The college magazine 'The Science
Schools Journal' was founded by Wells in 1886. In the April, May and
June, 1888, issues Wells contributed and published his serial entitled,
'The Chronic Argonauts'--the main idea being one of time-traveling.
As Mr. Barlow points out, this story was the first version of the
time-machine. Collectors of Wells, however, will find that copies of
the Journal are extremely rare and almost impossible to obtain because
about 20 years ago, Wells purchased all of the back numbers still
in stock and destroyed them. I have no doubt that Wells did this in
order to prevent book dealers and others from cornering the supply and
selling the issues at a high premium.

"Howard's story and Smith's poem were both splendid and I am indeed
glad to learn that you intend to lengthen the instalments of
Lovecraft's article."

  --H. Koenig

 Let's hear what you think of the April issue, readers. In this number
 you will find the first weird fiction attempt of Eando Binder, famous
 science fiction author. Next month we will give you the sixth 'Annals
 of the Jinns' by R. H. Barlow, 'The Flower-God,' and 'Phantom Lights'
 by August W. Derleth.

 Here's big news! Beginning next month, we are presenting a brand new
 newsy fantasy column by those super-snoopers supreme, Julius Schwartz
 and Mortimer Weisinger.

 _Fantasy Magazine_ will have a change of Editors with its June number.
 Chr is retiring because, he says, "I'm going to be too busy with the
 printing, and besides that, Julius Schwartz will do a much better job,
 I won't be missed a little bit."




    PROSE PASTELS

    by Clark Ashton Smith


    I. _Chinoiserie_

Ling Yang, the poet, sits all day in his willow-hidden hut by the river
side, and dreams of the Lady Moy. Spring and the swallows have returned
from the timeless isles of amaranth, further than the flight of sails
in the unknown south; the silver buds of the willow are breaking into
gold; and delicate jade-green reeds have begun to push their way among
the brown and yellow rushes of yesteryear. But Ling Yang is heedless
of the brightening azure, the light that lengthens; and he has no eye
for the northward flight of the waterfowl, and the passing of the last
clouds, that melt and vanish in the flames of an amber sunset. For him,
there is no season save that moon of waning summer in which he first
met the Lady Moy. But a sorrow deeper than the sorrow of autumn abides
in his heart: for the heart of Moy is colder to him than high mountain
snows above a tropic valley; and all the songs he has made for her, the
songs of the flute and the songs of the lute, have found no favor in
her hearing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leagues away, in her pavilion of scarlet lacquer and ebony, the Lady
Moy reclines on a couch piled with sapphire-coloured silks. All day,
through the gathering gold of the willow-foliage, she watches the
placid lake, on whose surface the pale-green lily pads have begun to
widen. Beside her, in a turquoise-studded binding, there lie the
verses of the poet Ling Yung, who lived six centuries ago, and who sang
in all his songs the praise of the Lady Loy, who disdained him. Moy has
no need to peruse them any longer, for they live in her memory even as
upon the written page. And, sighing, she dreams ever of the great poet
Ling Yung, and of the melancholy romance that inspired his songs, and
wonders enviously at the odd disdain that was shown toward him by the
Lady Loy.




    SIDE GLANCES

    by F. Lee Baldwin


R. H. Barlow is getting out a fine book of the late Rev. Henry S.
