the cornerstone had been laid that rainy morning in the spring of the
year 2085. Twenty-four years had passed since that day, and in those
years the Hoffman Center had never once faltered in its leadership.

The men in the car sat in stony silence. Finally, Jeff Meyer stirred,
extended his hand briefly to Ted Bahr. "You'll cover things out here?"

"Don't worry about it." Bahr shook the hand. "Well wait to hear from
you." He watched, almost wistfully, as the huge man cut through the
traffic and headed for the large glass doors. Then, with a sigh, he
stepped on the starter button and snaked the little jet car into the
stream of traffic moving toward the city.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jeff Meyer stopped in the great, bustling lobby and stared about him
almost in awe. He had never been inside the Hoffman Center before,
though he had heard of it many times and in many places. Since it had
taken over service of the huge metropolis of Boston-New Haven-New
York-Philadelphia, the newspapers and TV had been full of stories of
the lifesaving and healing that had gone on within its walls. The
disease research, conducted by specialists in all phases of medicine
who were for the first time gathered together under one agency, had
startled the world again and again.

But there had been other stories, too--not from the papers and TV, not
these stories. These tales had come by word of mouth: a short sentence
or two, a nervous laugh, a sneering joke, a rumor, a whispered story
from a wide-eyed alky hanging over a bar. Not the sort of stories one
really believed, but the sort that made one wonder.

Several dozen white-garbed women moved across the floor of the huge
lobby and talked quietly among themselves. Jeff sniffed uneasily.
There was a curiously distasteful odor in the air, an odor of almost
unhealthy cleanliness and spotless preservation. The lobby was a mill
of activity: the elevators and interbuilding jitneys terminated here;
people moved briskly, carrying with them the familiar air of hurry and
vast pressure that infected the whole world outside.

Jeff watched, spotting the corridor leading to the main administrative
offices. He saw the elevators constantly rising to and returning from
the huge admission offices. He noted the corridor twisting off to the
staff living quarters. He stood silent, his quick gray eyes cautiously
probing and watching. He tried to print an indelible picture in his
mind of the layout of the building and was almost floored by the
hive-like bustle of the place. There was a complexity in the curved
doorways and the brightly lighted corridors.

Somewhere here he could find Paul Conroe. Somewhere in this maze of
buildings and passageways was the man he had hunted for. Logic told him
that. They had spent the night searching every possible alternative.
His muscles ached and his eyes were red from sleeplessness, but there
was a hot, angry glow in his heart. He knew that this was the only
place that Conroe could have gone. Yet the place where he must be
hiding was a place Jeff had heard of only in rumor, a place whose
mention carried with it a half-knowledge of staggering wealth and
almost indescribable horror.

Someone tapped him on the shoulder. He turned, startled, to face a
huge, burly man with a suspicious face and a gray uniform. "You got
business here, mister, or are we just sight-seeing?"

Jeff forced a grin. "I don't know where to go," he said truthfully.

"Maybe you should go back out then. No visitors until this afternoon."

"No, I'm not a visitor. I'm looking for the Volunteer's Bank. The ads
said to come to the administration offices--"

The guard's face softened a little. He pointed a finger toward a
corridor marked RESEARCH ADMINISTRATION. "Right over there," he said.
"Office is the first door to your right. The nurse will take care of
you."

Meyer strolled toward the corridor, his mind fumbling with the rumors
and bits of half-knowledge that were all that he had to work on:
stories of drunks stumbling into the Emergency Rooms and never coming
out; tales of quiet, swift raids on narcotics houses, of people who
never reached the police stations.

But how could he make the right contact here? "Research Administration"
covered a multitude of meanings. He had read the advertisements for
Hoffman volunteers in all the buses, in the 'copters, on the roads.
Newspapers and TV had carried them for years. Meyer glanced down at
his unpolished shoes, rubbed a finger over his purposely unshaven
chin. What would they expect a volunteer to look like? How could they
detect a fraud, an interloper? He shivered as he faced the office door.
It would be a gamble, a terrible chance. Because with all the other
publicity, no mention had ever been made of the Mercy Men. He glanced
back, found the guard still staring at him, and walked into the office.

Several people sat along the wall. A small, mousy-looking man with a
bald head and close-set eyes had just sat down in the chair before the
desk. He waited for the prim-looking woman wearing a ridiculous little
white hat to put down her pen. She didn't even glance up as Jeff took
a seat, and she kept writing for several minutes before turning her
attention to the little bald man. Then she looked up and gave a frosty
smile at him. "Yes, sir?"

"Dr. Bennet asked me to come back today," the little man said.
"Follow-up on last week's work."

"Name please?" The woman took his name and punched the button on a
panel before her; an instant later a card flipped down in a slot. She
checked it, made an entry and nodded to the man. "Dr. Bennet will be
ready for you at eleven. You'll find magazines in the lounge." She
indicated another door, and the little man disappeared through it.

Another person, a middle-aged woman, moved to take the little man's
place before the desk. Jeff felt restless and glanced at his watch. It
was almost eleven. Must she move so slowly? Nothing seemed to hurry
her. She worked from person to person, smiling, impersonal, just a
trifle chilly. Finally she nodded to Jeff, and he moved to the chair.

"Name, please?"

"You don't have a card on me."

She looked up briefly. "A new volunteer? We're happy to have you, sir.
Now if you'll give me your name, I can start the papers through."

Jeff cleared his throat, felt his pulse pounding in his forehead. "I'm
not sure just what I want to volunteer for," he said cautiously.

The woman smiled. "We have a rather large selection to choose from.
There are the regular 'mycin drug runs every week on Tuesdays and
Thursdays. You take the drug by mouth in the morning and give blood
samples at ten, two and four. Many of our new Volunteers start on that.
It pays six dollars and your lunch while you're here. Or you could give
blood, but the law restricts you to once every three months on that,
and it only pays thirty-five dollars. Or--"

Jeff shook his head and leaned forward. He looked directly into her
eyes. "I don't think you understand," he said softly. "I want money.
Lots of it. Not five or ten dollars." He looked down at the desk. "I've
heard you have other kinds of work."

The woman's eyes narrowed. "There are higher-paying categories of
Volunteer work, of course. But you must understand that they are
higher paying because they involve a greater risk to the health of the
Volunteer. For instance, we've been running circulation studies with
heart catheterizations. We pay a hundred dollars for these, but there
is an appreciable risk involved. Or sternal marrow punctures for blood
studies. Usually we start--"

"I said money," said Jeff implacably. "Not peanuts."

Her eyes widened and she stared at him for a long moment. It was a
strange, penetrating stare that took him in from his face to his feet.
Her smile faded and her fingers were suddenly nervous. "Have you any
idea what you're talking about?"

"I have. I'm talking about the Mercy Men."

She stood up abruptly and disappeared into an inner office. Jeff
waited, his whole body trembling. Beads of sweat broke out on his
forehead, and he gave a visible start when the woman opened the door
again.

"Come in here, please."

Then he was on the right track. He tried to conceal the excitement in
his eyes as he took a seat in the small room. He waited, fidgeting.
The woman packed up a small telephone on the desk and punched several
buttons in rapid succession. The silence was almost intolerable as he
waited, a silence that was alive and vibrant. Finally a signal light
flickered and she took up the receiver.

"Dr. Schiml? This is the Volunteer office, Doctor." She shot Jeff a
swift glance. "There's another man here to see you."

Meyer felt his heart pound. He shifted in his chair and started to take
out a cigarette. Then he checked himself.

"That's right," the woman was saying, eyeing him as if he were a
biological specimen. "I'm sorry, he hasn't given a name.... Ten
minutes? All right, Doctor, I'll have him wait." With that, she
replaced the receiver and left the room without a word.

Jeff stood up, stretched his legs and looked about the room. It was
small, with just a desk and two or three chairs. Obviously it served
as a conference room of some sort. One wall held the panel of file
buttons; another held the telephone and visiphone viewer. Over the
visiphone screen, a large lighted panel announced the date in sharp
black letters: 32 April, 2109. Below it, the little transistor clock
had just changed to read 11:23 A.M. Almost noon. And every passing
minute his quarry drew farther and farther away.

He glanced out the window at the rising tiers of buildings. Across the
courtyard the first of the ward-towers rose. To one side of it were a
series of long, low structures with skylights. These were the kitchens,
perhaps, or maintenance buildings. There were dozens of them--any one
of which could be hiding Paul Conroe. Jeff clenched his hands until the
nails bit his palms. He stared down at the buildings. Conroe could be
anywhere down there. _Another man had already seen Dr. Schiml...._

A door clicked behind him and he turned sharply. A man entered the room
and closed the door behind him. Smiling, he walked over to the desk.
Meyer nodded and watched the man. He felt a sinking feeling in the pit
of his stomach. For the briefest instant the doctor had caught his eye,
and Jeff felt everything that he had planned to say crumble like dust
around him.

The man hardly looked like a doctor, although his white jacket was
immaculate and a stethoscope peeped from his side pocket. He was tall
and slender, almost fifty years old, with round, cheerful pink cheeks
and a little pug nose that seemed completely out of place on his face.

A harmless-looking man, Jeff thought, except for his eyes. But his
eyes--they were the sharpest, most penetrating eyes Jeff had ever seen.
And they were watching him. Quite independent of the smiling face, they
watched his every move, studying him. The eyes were full of wisdom, but
they were also tinged with caution.

The doctor sat down and motioned Jeff to the seat facing the desk. He
pushed a cigar case across the desk to him.

Jeff hesitated, then took one. "I thought these were slightly illegal,"
he said.

The doctor grinned. "Slightly. Thanks to us, as you probably know. We
did most of the work here on tobacco smoke and cancer--actually got
legislation pushed through on it." He leaned back easily in his chair
as he lit his own cigar. "Still, one once in a while won't do too much
harm. And there's nothing like a good smoke to get things talked out.
I'm Roger Schiml, by the way. I didn't get your name."

"Meyer," said Jeff. "Jeffrey Meyer."

The doctor's eyes narrowed quizzically. "I hope my girl didn't bother
you too much. She channels most of the volunteer work here, as you see.
Then, occasionally, cases come in which she'd rather turn over to me."
He paused for a moment. "Cases like yours, for instance."

Jeff blinked, his mind racing. It would take acting, he thought, real
acting to fool this man. The face was deceptively young and benign,
almost complacent. But the eyes were far from young. They were old, old
eyes. They had seen more than eyes should see. They missed nothing. To
fool a man with eyes like that--Jeff took a deep breath and said, "I
want to join the Mercy Men."

Dr. Schiml's eyes widened very slightly. For a long moment he said
nothing, just stared at the huge man before him. Then he said, "That's
interesting. It's also very curious. The name, I mean--oh, I can
understand the attraction such an idea might have for people, but the
name that's become so popular--it baffles me. 'Mercy Men.' It gives
you a curious feeling, don't you think? Brings up mental pictures of
handsome young interns fighting the forces of evil and death, the brave
heroes giving their all for the upward flight of humanity--all that
garbage, you know." The eyes hardened quite suddenly. "Where did you
hear of the Mercy Men, I wonder?"

Jeff shrugged. "The word's been around for quite a while. A snatch
here, a story there--even though it isn't advertised too openly."

Dr. Schiml looked him straight in the eye. "And suppose I told you that
there is no such organization, either here or anywhere else on Earth
that I know of?"

A tight smile appeared on Jeff's face. "I'd call you a class-A liar."

Schiml's eyebrows went up. "I see. That's a big word. Maybe you can
support it."

"I can. There are Mercy Men here. There have been for several years."

"You're sure of that."

"Quite. I know one. He was a skid-rower with a taste for morphine when
I first ran into him--a champagne appetite to go with a beer income.
Then he went out of circulation for about six months. Now he has a
place up in the Catskills, with many, many thousands of dollars in the
bank. Of course, he uses the money to feed several hundred cats in his
basement." Jeff's eyes narrowed. "He never liked cats very much before
he left here. There are other funny things he does--nothing serious, of
course, but peculiar. Still, he doesn't need the dope any more."

Schiml smiled and put his fingers together. "That would be Luke
Tandy. Yes, Luke was a little different when he left, but the work was
satisfactory and we paid off."

"Yes," said Jeff softly. "One hundred and fifty thousand dollars. Cash
on the line. To him or his heirs. He was lucky."

"So what are you doing here?"

"I want a hundred and fifty thousand dollars too."

The doctor's eyes met Jeff's squarely. "And you are a liar too."

Jeff reddened. "What do you mean--"

"Look, let's get this straight right now. Don't lie to me. I'll catch
you every time." The doctor's eyes were hard. "I see a man who's eaten
well for a long time, wearing dirty but expensive clothes, who doesn't
drink, who doesn't use drugs, who is young and strong and capable. He
tells me he wants to join the Mercy Men for money. He tells me a lie.
Now I'll ask you again: why are you here?"

"For money. For one hundred and fifty thousand dollars."

The doctor sighed and leaned back. "All right, no matter. We'll go
into it later, I suppose. But I think you'd better understand certain
things. It's no accident that your information on the Mercy Men is
so vague. We've been careful to keep it that way, of course. The
more vague the stories, the fewer curiosity-seekers and busybodies
we have to contend with. Also, the more distasteful the stories,
the more desperate people will become before they come to us. This
we particularly desire. Because the work we do here requires a very
desperate man to volunteer."

As he talked, the doctor brought out a pack of cards from the desk
and began riffling them nervously in his fingers. Jeff's eyes caught
them and a chill went down his back. They were curious cards, not the
regular playing variety. These were smaller, with a peculiar marking
system in bright red on the white faces. Jeff shivered and he was
puzzled at the chill that gripped his body. He shifted in his chair in
growing tension and tried to take his eyes from the cards.

The doctor snubbed out his cigar, leaned back in the chair and gave
the cards a riffle and regarded Jeff closely. "We've done a lot here
since the Center opened--work based on years of background research. A
century or more ago there were terrible medical problems to be faced:
polio was a killer then; they had no idea of cancer control; they were
faced with a terrific death rate from heart disease. All those things
are beaten now, a thing of the past. But as the old killers moved out,
new ones took their place. Look at the half-dozen NVI plagues we've
had in the past few years--neurotoxic virus infections that started to
appear out of nowhere twenty years ago. Look at the alky-sikys you
see in every bar today, a completely new type of alcoholism-psychosis
that we haven't even been able to describe, much less cure. Look at the
statistics on mental disease, rising in geometric progression almost
every year."

The tall doctor stood up and walked to the window. "We don't know why
it's happening, but it is. Something's on the march, something ghastly
and evil among the people. Something that has to be stopped." He gave
the cards a sharp riffle and tossed them onto the desk with a sigh. "We
can't stop it until we know something about the human brain and how it
works, and why it does what it does, and how. We don't even understand
fully the structure of the nervous system, much less understand its
function. And we've learned all we can from cats and dogs and monkeys.
Any further study of a monkey's brain will give us great insight into
the neuroses and complexes of monkeys, no doubt. But it won't teach us
anything more about _men_." His voice was very soft. "You can see where
this leads, I think."

Jeff Meyer nodded slowly. "You need men," he said.

"We need men. Men to study. Cruel as it may sound, men to experiment
upon. We can't learn any more from any other variety of ...
experimental animal. But there are problems. Toy around with a man's
brain and he is likely to die, quite abruptly. Or he may be deranged,
or he may go violently insane. Most of the work, however well planned,
however certain we were of results, however safe it appeared, proved to
be completely unpredictable. Much of the work and many of the results
were quite horrible. But we're making progress, slow--but progress
nonetheless. So the work continues.

"It hasn't been very popular. No man in his right mind would volunteer
for such a job. So we hired men. For the most truly altruistic work in
the world, our workers come with the most mercenary of motives: we pay
for their services and we pay well. A hundred thousand dollars is a
small fee, on our scale. We have the government behind us. The sky is
the limit, if we need a man for a job. The money is paid, when the work
is completed, either to the man himself or to his heirs. You see why
the name they've given themselves is so curious--Medical Mercenaries,
the 'Mercy Men.' That's why a man must be desperate to come to us.
That's why we must be so very careful who joins us, for what motives."

Jeff Meyer stared at his hands and waited in the silence of the room.
His eyes strayed once again to the curious cards, and the chill of fear
went through him like a ghastly breeze. This was a port of last resort,
a road that could end in horror and death. Ted Bahr had said it wasn't
worth it--that Conroe would never escape alive--but he knew that Conroe
could. And he knew Conroe well enough to know that he would.

Jeff felt the old bitterness and hatred swell up in his mind, and his
hands trembled as he sat. He had long since thrown aside his life as
he had known it, cast off the veneer of civilized life that he had
acquired, to hunt Paul Conroe down and kill him. There was nothing else
in his life that mattered. It had been a long, grueling hunt, tracking
him, following him, studying him, tracing his movements and habits,
plotting trap after trap, driving the man to desperation. But there had
been no indication, anywhere along the line, that Conroe would turn to
such a desperate gamble as this.

But he must have known that death otherwise was inevitable. Here he
could be changed. He might disappear from the face of the Earth in
the oblivion of quiet death, to be sure, but he also might emerge,
unscathed, to live in wealth the rest of his life, unrecognizable and
safe.

Jeff Meyer looked up at the doctor and his eyes were hard. "I haven't
changed my mind," he said. "What has to be done to join?"

Dr. Schiml sighed, and turned resignedly to the file panel. "There are
tests that are necessary and rules to be obeyed. You'll be confined
and regimented. And once you're assigned to a job and sign a release,
you're in." He leaned forward and punched the visiphone button. Tapping
his fingers idly on the desk, he waited until an image blinked and
cleared on the screen. "Blackie," he said tiredly. "Better send the
Nasty Frenchman up here. We've got a new recruit."

The visiphone snapped off and Jeff sat frozen to his seat, his pulse
throbbing in his neck, every nerve in his body screaming in excitement.
The face on the screen had been clearly visible for a moment: a pale
face with large gray eyes--a woman's face, surrounded by flowing black
hair. It was a face that was impressed indelibly on his memory. It
belonged to the girl who had danced the night before in the red light.




CHAPTER THREE


There was no doubt of it. She was the girl in the night club, the
dancing girl with the flowing black hair and the mask-like smile,
who had led him to Conroe and then brought the spotlight to his face
to spring the trap too soon. Frantically Jeff fought to control his
excitement. He knew his face was white and he avoided the doctor's
puzzled glance. But he couldn't control the angry fire burning in
his mind, the little voice screaming out: "_He's here; he's here,
somewhere!_"

But why was she here? The doctor had called her "Blackie." He had
spoken to her with familiarity. Jeff's mind whirled. He had the
strangest feeling that he had missed something somewhere along the
line, that he knew the answer but couldn't quite grasp it. What could
the girl's sudden appearance in the Center involve?

Or had her appearance at the night club been the unusual one?

A buzzer rang and the office door opened to admit a small, weasel-faced
man. The doctor looked up and smiled. "Hello, Jacques. This is Jeff
Meyer, the new recruit. Take him down and get him quartered in, all
right? And you might brief him a little. He's awfully green."

The little man scratched his long nose and regarded Jeff with a nasty
smile. "A new one, huh? Where are you going to line him up?"

"No telling. We'll see where the tests put him, first. Then we'll talk
about jobs."

The smile widened on the little man's face, turning down the end of his
long pointed nose and revealing a dirty yellow row of teeth. His eyes
ran over Jeff from head to toe. "Big one too. But then, they fall just
as hard as the rest. Want me to take him right down?"

Schiml nodded. "Maybe he can still get lunch." His eyes shifted to
Jeff. "This is the Nasty Frenchman," he said, motioning toward the
little man with his thumb. "He's been around for a long time; he can
show you the ropes. And don't let him bother you too much--his sense of
humor, I mean. Like I say, he's been around here a long time. You'll
get quarters and you'll be expected to stay with your group for meals
and everything else. That means no contacts outside the hospital as
long as you're here. You'll get the daily news reports, and there
are magazines and books in the library. If you've got other business
outside, you haven't any business in here. Any time you leave the
Center it's considered an automatic breach of contract."

He paused for a long moment and gave Jeff a strange look, almost a half
smile. "And you'll find that questions aren't appreciated around here,
Jeff. Any kind of questions. The men don't like people too much when
they ask questions."

The Nasty Frenchman shuffled his feet nervously, and Jeff started out
the door. Then the little man turned back to Dr. Schiml. "They brought
Tinker back from the table about ten minutes ago. He's in pretty bad
shape. Maybe you should look at him?"

"This was the big job today, wasn't it?" Schiml's eyes were sharp.
"What did Dr. Bartel say?"

"He said no dice. It was a bust."

"I see. Well, it may be just the diodrax wearing off now, but I'll be
down to see."

The Nasty Frenchman grunted and turned back to Jeff. His face still
wore the nasty little grin. "Let's go, big boy," he said, and started
down the hall.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jeff watched the corridors as they passed, counting them one by one,
trying desperately to keep himself oriented. He glanced at his watch
and angrily sucked in his breath. Minutes were slipping by, precious
minutes, minutes that could mean success or failure. A thousand
questions crowded his mind, and behind them all was the girl. She was
the key, he was sure of it. She would know where Conroe was, where he
could be found....

They reached an elevator, stepped aboard and shot down at such dizzying
speed that Jeff nearly choked. Then, suddenly, they came to a jolting
stop and stepped into a dingy, gray corridor that was dimly lit by bare
bulbs in the ceiling.

The Nasty Frenchman punched a button in the wall and turned to regard
Jeff. The sneering little smile was still on his lips as the far-off
rumble of a jitney grew to a sharp clatter. A little car dropped down
from its ceiling track. The little man hopped in nimbly and motioned
Jeff in beside him. Then the car took off for the ceiling again,
swinging crazily and speeding down the maze of corridors and curves.

Jeff stirred uneasily, growing more and more confused with every turn.
"Look," he broke out finally, "where's this thing taking us?"

The Nasty Frenchman turned pale eyes toward him. "You worried or
something?"

"Well, it looks like we're headed for the center of the Earth. I'd like
to be able to find my way out sometime--"

"Why?"

The question was so blunt that it left Jeff's jaw sagging for a moment.
"Well, I'm not planning to spend the rest of my life in here."

The Nasty Frenchman guffawed. It was not a pleasant laugh. "Here for a
nice restful vacation, huh? You wise guys are all the same. Go ahead,
dream--I won't bother you."

The little man turned his attention to the controls and the car swung
sharply to the right and headed down another corridor. Jeff scowled as
he watched the lighted corridors flash by. Were they speeding so far,
so deep in the depths of the building? Or was this part of a definite
plan to confuse, to lose recruits in the mammoth place so completely
that they could never find their way out? Jeff shrugged, finally. It
really didn't matter too much. He had one job and only one. He could
worry about escape when it had been accomplished.

"That girl," he said finally. "The doctor called her 'Blackie.' Is she
down here where we're going?"
