time that a god had sought him out personally, he had heard of such
happenings all his life. Since the god hadn't killed him instantly,
he probably didn't intend to--right away, at least. Hence: "No god of
Lomarr approves of me. Also, our gods are solid and heavy. What do you
want of me, strange god?"

"I'm not a god. If you could get through this grill, you could cut off
my head with your sword and I would die."

"Of course. So would Sar ..." Tedric broke off in the middle of the
word.

"I see. It is dangerous to talk?"

"Very. Even though a man is alone, the gods and hence the priests who
serve them have power to hear. Then the man lies on the green rock and
loses his brain, liver, and heart."

"You will not be overheard. I have power enough to see to that."

Tedric remained silent.

"I understand your doubt. Think, then; that will do just as well. What
is it that you are trying to do?"

"I wonder how I can hear when there is no sound, but men cannot
understand the powers of gods. I am trying to find or make a metal that
is very hard, but not brittle. Copper is no good, I cannot harden it
enough. My soft irons are too soft, my hard irons are too brittle; my
in-betweens and the melts to which I added various flavorings have all
been either too soft or too brittle, or both."

"I gathered that such was your problem. Your wrought iron is beautiful
stuff; so is your white cast iron; and you would not, ordinarily,
in your lifetime, come to know anything of either carburization or
high-alloy steel, to say nothing of both. I know exactly what you want,
and I can show you exactly how to make it."

"You can, Lord?" The smith's eyes flamed. "And you will?"

"That is why I have come to you, but whether or not I will teach you
depends on certain matters which I have not been able entirely to
clarify. What do you want it for--that is, what, basically, is your
aim?"

"Our greatest god, Sarpedion, is wrong and I intend to kill him."
Tedric's eyes flamed more savagely, his terrifically muscled body
tensed.

"Wrong? In what way?"

"In every way!" In the intensity of his emotion the smith spoke aloud.
"What good is a god who only kills and injures? What a nation needs,
Lord, is _people_--people working together and not afraid. How can
we of Lomarr _ever_ attain comfort and happiness if more die each
year than are born? We are too few. All of us--except the priests, of
course--must work unendingly to obtain only the necessities of life."

"This bears out my findings. If you make high-alloy steel, exactly what
will you do with it?"

"If you give me the god-metal, Lord, I will make of it a sword and
armor--a sword sharp enough and strong enough to cut through copper
or iron without damage; armor strong enough so that swords of copper
or iron cannot cut through it. They must be so because I will have to
cut my way alone through a throng of armed and armored mercenaries and
priests."

"Alone? Why?"

"Because I cannot call in help; cannot let anyone know my goal. Any
such would lie on the green stone very soon. They suspect me; perhaps
they know. I am, however, the best smith in all Lomarr, hence they have
slain me not. Nor will they, until I have found what I seek. Nor then,
if by the favor of the gods--or by _your_ favor, Lord--the metal be
good enough."

"It will be, but there's a lot more to fighting a platoon of soldiers
than armor and a sword, my optimistic young savage."

"That the metal be of proof is all I ask, Lord," the smith insisted,
stubbornly. "The rest of it lies in my care."

"So be it. And then?"

"Sarpedion's image, as you must already know, is made of stone, wood,
copper, and gold--besides the jewels, of course. I take his brain,
liver, and heart; flood them with oil, and sacrifice them ..."

"Just a minute! Sarpedion is not alive and never has been; does not, as
a matter of fact, exist. You just said, yourself, that his image was
made of stone and copper and ..."

"Don't be silly, Lord. Or art testing me? Gods are spirits; bound to
their images, and in a weaker way to their priests, by linkages of
spirit force. Life force, it could be called. When those links are
broken, by fire and sacrifice, the god may not exactly die, but he can
do no more of harm until his priests have made a new image and spent
much time and effort in building up new linkages. One point now settled
was bothering me; what god to sacrifice him to. I'll make an image for
you to inhabit, Lord, and sacrifice him to you, my strange new god. You
will be my only god as long as I live. What is your name, Lord? I can't
keep on calling you 'strange god' forever."

"My name is Skandos."

"S ... Sek ... That word rides ill on the tongue. With your
permission, Lord, I will call you Llosir."

"Call me anything you like, except a god. I am _not_ a god."

"You are being ridiculous, Lord Llosir," Tedric chided. "What a man
sees with his eyes, hears with his ears--especially what a man hears
_without_ ears, as I hear now--he knows with certain knowledge to be
the truth. No mere man could possibly do what you have done, to say
naught of what you are about to do."

"Perhaps not an ordinary man of your ..." Skandos almost said "time,"
but caught himself "... of your culture, but I am ordinary enough and
mortal enough in my own."

"Well, that could be said of all gods, everywhere." The smith's mien
was quiet and unperturbed; his thought was loaded to saturation with
unshakable conviction.

Skandos gave up. He could argue for a week, he knew, without making any
impression whatever upon what the stubborn, hard-headed Tedric knew so
unalterably to be the truth.

"But just one thing, Lord," Tedric went on with scarcely a break.
"Have I made it clear that I intend to stop human sacrifice? That
there is to be no more of it, even to you? We will offer you anything
else--_anything_ else--but not even your refusal to give me the
