had before. For minutes it moved along steadily, then faded.

"That thing," said Evers suddenly, "was goin' along Fifth Avenue.
Spooks don't need a route of ascent, even up Precipice. All of a
sudden, the lights of Precipice Peak are gettin' solid. I got a feelin'
they'll leave sign."

"Sign?" Royston's voice went up in the darkness. There was the familiar
pause, then Royston's satisfied tone: "Ah, yes, traces."

"Right--traces, tracks, spoor. Only mystery about those lights is,
we don't know who makes them. But they're gettin' to be a tourist
attraction. Maybe that's a lead."

"How many trips have there been up Precipice this season?" Royston
queried softly.

"Fifteen or so," John Drinkard said, "and the boy has something. Any
sign on Fifth Avenue or across Bighorn would have been seen by now.
There've been some good mountain men on the Peak this summer. Some of
'em don't miss much."

Royston hugged his narrow shoulders and made himself small in his
chair, shivering again as the chill mountain breeze blew across the
porch of the Lodge.

"Over the swamps of my native Louisiana, where I wish I now was, I
have seen balls of fire go drifting. It is swamp gas, methane, slowly
oxidizing and glowing. Could this on the mountain be something like?"

"It's almost impossible," said Evers. "And anyhow," he added
stubbornly, "balls of gases wouldn't follow a trail. Those blasted
lights do."

John Drinkard rose easily, stretched his thick arms wide.

"Tomorrow, Chuck, tomorrow!" he reminded. "Take it easy, boy. Tomorrow
you can look for yourself, remember? At day-break, we go up to solve
the mystery of the lights."

"Ghastly," said Royston. "To go out at dawn is as bad as eating raw
flesh. But tap on my cabin door when you go by. I will wave to you from
the window."

       *       *       *       *       *

John Drinkard swung his nailed short boots along the trail with a
steady, satisfying rhythm. Ahead of him, Chuck Evers set the pace, an
easy, loose-jointed shamble that ate up the mountain miles. They were a
good team. They felt the trail alike.

Drinkard swelled his big chest, then exhaled gustily, as though to
expel the last of the tainted air of the settlements below. He warmed
slowly to a climb approach and he would have liked a breather. Ahead,
the trail switched back sharply.

At the switchback, Evers broke his stride, swung the pack-sack from his
shoulders and leaned his long frame against a boulder.

"Break," he said. "I heard you heave like a foundered mule."

John Drinkard grinned. He shrugged off his own pack. "It'll be good to
enjoy the view and not have to look at your silly hat."

Chuck tilted the Swiss mountaineer's hat, complete with eagle feather.

"These are the Alps of America," he observed, "so my hat is fitting."

"It doesn't even fit _you_," said Drinkard.

Forests of lodgepole pine and spruce lay below them. Already the
resort town seemed a toy settlement at the edge of the valley, and the
sagebrush world stretched away east to the horizon. To the north, the
big peaks of the range tumbled in a massive, orderly row, with lakes
flashing along their bases and a vast and timbered plateau rearing up
beyond.

It was West, good American West, twentieth century and solid, with
clean cold mountain air, yellow sunlight on the cliffs and snowfields
above. As if by signal, both men turned their gazes upward. The
cutback was a vantage point from which could be seen the jumble of
ridges and crags surmounted by the glistening white expanse of Bighorn
Glacier and, higher still, the seamed front of the eastern face of the
mountain, tapering upward to the pinnacle of the peak.

The men swung up their pack-sacks and shook hands.

"Good luck, friend," said John Drinkard. "Let's go and see if our names
are still on the register up there."

"Good luck," said Evers. "To-night we'll be up where the lights are.
Punch me if you see one first."

"Lights, nuts," John Drinkard said. "There'll be none while we're on
the peak. Five bucks says so."

Evers raised his eyebrows. "I'm not a rich man, but I love a sporting
chance. Here's my five. Where'll we put 'em?"

Drinkard fumbled in his jacket pocket, brought out a tobacco tin. He
poured the remaining tobacco into a pouch and held out the tin.

"Stick it in there," he said. "Here's mine."

