gilded throne of the House of Hohenzollern.

Seated upon the throne was a man--a very little man he seemed amidst
such vast and vivid surroundings. He was robed in a cape of dazzling
white, and on his head he wore a helmet of burnished platinum. Before
the throne and slightly to one side stood the round form of a
paper globe.

His Majesty rose, stepped a few paces forward; and, as he with solemn
deliberation raised his hand into the shaft of burning light, from the
throng there came a frenzied shouting, which soon changed into a sort of
chanting and then into a throaty song.

His Majesty lowered his hand; the song ceased; a great stillness hung
over the multitude. Eitel I, Emperor of the Germans, now raised his face
and stared for a moment unblinkingly into the beam of sunlight, then he
lowered his gaze toward the sea of upturned faces.

"My people," he said, in a voice which for all his pompous effort, fell
rather flat in the immensity, "you are assembled here in the Place of
the Sun to do honour to God's anointed ruler of the world."

From ten thousand throats came forth another raucous shout.

"Two and a half centuries ago," now spoke His Majesty, "God appointed
the German race, under William the Great, of the House of Hohenzollern,
to be the rulers of the world.

"For nineteen hundred years, God in his infinite patience, had awaited
the outcome of the test of the Nazarene's doctrine of servile humility
and effeminate peace. But the Christian nations of the earth were
weighed in the balance of Divine wrath and found wanting. Wallowing in
hypocrisy and ignorance, wanting in courage and valour; behind a
pretence of altruism they cloaked their selfish greed for gold.

"Of all the people of the earth our race alone possessed the two keys to
power, the mastery of science and the mastery of the sword. So the
Germans were called of God to instil fear and reverence into the hearts
of the inferior races. That was the purpose of the First World War under
my noble ancestor, William II.

"But the envious nations, desperate in their greed, banded together to
defy our old German God, and destroy His chosen people. But this was
only a divine trial of our worth, for the plans of God are for eternity.
His days to us are centuries. And we did well to patiently abide the
complete unfoldment of the Divine plan.

"Before two generations had passed our German ancestors cast off the
yoke of enslavement and routed the oppressors in the Second World War.
Lest His chosen race be contaminated by the swinish herds of the mongrel
nations God called upon His people to relinquish for a time the fruits
of conquest, that they might be further purged by science and become a
pure-bred race of super-men.

"That purification has been accomplished for every German is bred and
trained by science as ordained by God. There are no longer any mongrels
among the men of Germany, for every one of you is created for his
special purpose and every German is fitted for his particular place as a
member of the super-race.

"The time now draws near when the final purpose of our good old German
God is to be fulfilled. The day of this fulfilment is known unto me. The
sun which shines upon this throne is but a symbol of that which has been
denied you while all these things were being made ready. But now the day
draws near when you shall, under my leadership, rule over the world and
the mongrel peoples. And to each of you shall be given a place in
the sun."

The voice had ceased. A great stillness hung over the multitude. Eitel
I, Emperor of the Germans, threw back his cape and drew his sword. With
a sweeping flourish he slashed the paper globe in twain.

From the myriad throated throng came a reverberating shout that rolled
and echoed through the vaulted catacomb. The crimson curtain dropped.
The shutters were thrown athwart the reflected beam of sunlight. The
lights of man again glowed pale amidst the maze of columns.

Singing and marching, the men filed toward the elevators. The guards
urged haste to clear the way, for the God of the Germans could not stay
the march of the sun across the roof of Berlin, and a score of paper
globes must yet be slashed for other shouting multitudes before the
sun's last gleam be twisted down to shine upon a king.

~2~

Although the working hours of the day were scarcely one-fourth gone, it
was impossible for me to return to my laboratory for the lighting
current was shut off for the day. I therefore decided to utilize the
occasion by returning the geography which I had rescued from Bertha.

Dr. Zimmern's invitation to make use of his library had been cordial
enough, but its location in Marguerite's apartment had made me a little
reticent about going there except in the Doctor's company. Yet I did not
wish to admit to Zimmern my sensitiveness in the matter--and the
geography had been kept overlong.

This occasion being a holiday, I found the resorts on the Level of Free
Women crowded with merrymakers. But I sought the quieter side streets
and made my way towards Marguerite's apartment.

"I thought you would be celebrating today," she said as I entered.

"I feel that I can utilize the time better by reading," I replied.
"There is so much I want to learn, and, thanks to Dr. Zimmern, I now
have the opportunity."

"But surely you are to see the Emperor in the Place in the Sun," said
Marguerite when she had returned the geography to the secret shelf.

"I have already seen him," I replied, "my ticket was for the first
performance."

"It must be a magnificent sight," she sighed. "I should so love to see
the sunlight. The pictures show us His Majesty's likeness, but what is a
picture of sunlight?"

"But you speak only of a reflected beam; how would you like to see real
sunshine?"

"Oh, on the roof of Berlin? But that is only for Royalty and the roof
guards. I've tried to imagine that, but I know that I fail as a blind
man must fail to imagine colour."

"Close your eyes," I said playfully, "and try very hard."

Solemnly Marguerite closed her eyes.

For a moment I smiled, and then the smile relaxed, for I felt as one who
scoffs at prayer.

"And did you see the sunlight?" I asked, as she opened her eyes and
gazed at me with dilated pupils.

"No," she answered hoarsely, "I only saw man-light as far as the walls
of Berlin, and beyond that it was all empty blackness--and it
frightens me."

"The fear of darkness," I said, "is the fear of ignorance."

"You try," and she reached over with a soft touch of her finger tips on
my closing eyelids. "Now keep them closed and tell me what you see. Tell
me it is not all black."

"I see light," I said, "white light, on a billowy sea of clouds, as from
a flying plane.... And now I see the sun--it is sinking behind a rugged
line of snowy peaks and the light is dimming.... It is gone now, but it
is not dark, for moonlight, pale and silvery, is shimmering on a choppy
sea.... Now it is the darkest hour, but it is never black, only a dark,
dark grey, for the roof of the world is pricked with a million points of
light.... The grey of the east is shot with the rose of dawn.... The
rose brightens to scarlet and the curve of the sun appears--red like the
blood of war.... And now the sky is crystal blue and the grey sands of
the desert have turned to glittering gold."

I had ceased my poetic visioning and was looking into Marguerite's face.
The light of worship I saw in her eyes filled me with a strange
trembling and holy awe.

"And I saw only blackness," she faltered. "Is it that I am born blind
and you with vision?"

"Perhaps what you call vision is only memory," I said--but, as I
realized where my words were leading, I hastened to add--"Memory, from
another life. Have you ever heard of such a thing as the reincarnation
of the soul?"

"That means," she said hesitatingly, "that there is something in us that
does not die--immortality, is it not?"

"Well, it is something like that," I answered huskily, as I wondered
what she might know or dream of that which lay beyond the ken of the
gross materialism of her race. "Immortality is a very beautiful idea," I
went on, "and science has destroyed much that is beautiful. But it is a
pity that Col. Hellar had to eliminate the idea of immortality from the
German Bible. Surely such a book makes no pretence of being scientific."

"So Col. Hellar has told you that he wrote 'God's Anointed'?" exclaimed
Marguerite with eager interest.

"Yes, he told me of that and I re-read the book with an entirely
different viewpoint since I came to understand the spirit in which it
was written."

"Ah--I see." Marguerite rose and stepped toward the library. "We have a
book here," she called, "that you have not read, and one that you cannot
buy. It will show you the source of Col. Hellar's inspiration."

She brought out a battered volume. "This book," she stated, "has given
the inspectors more trouble than any other book in existence. Though
they have searched for thirty years, they say there are more copies of
it still at large than of all other forbidden books combined."

I gazed at the volume she handed me--I was holding a copy of the
Christian Bible translated six centuries previous by Martin Luther. It
was indeed the very text from which as a boy I had acquired much of my
reading knowledge of the language. But I decided that I had best not
reveal to Marguerite my familiarity with it, and so I sat down and
turned the pages with assumed perplexity.

"It is a very odd book," I remarked presently. "Have you read it?"

"Oh, yes," exclaimed Marguerite. "I often read it; I think it is more
interesting than all these modern books, but perhaps that is because I
cannot understand it; I love mysterious things."

"There is too much of it for a man as busy as I am to hope to read," I
remarked, after turning a few more pages, "and so I had better not
begin. Will you not choose something and read it aloud to me?"

Marguerite declined at first; but, when I insisted, she took the
tattered Bible and turned slowly through its pages.

And when she read, it was the story of a king who revelled with his
lords, and of a hand that wrote upon a wall.

Her voice was low, and possessed a rhythm and cadence that transmuted
the guttural German tongue into musical poetry.

Again she read, of a man who, though shorn of his strength by the wiles
of a woman and blinded by his enemies, yet pushed asunder the pillars
of a city.

At random she read other tales, of rulers and of slaves, of harlots and
of queens--the wisdom of prophets--the songs of kings.

Together we pondered the meanings of these strange things, and exulted
in the beauty of that which was meaningless. And so the hours passed;
the day drew near its close and Marguerite read from the last pages of
the book, of a voice that cried mightily--"Babylon the great is fallen,
is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils and the hold of every
foul spirit."



CHAPTER VIII

FINDING THEREIN ONE RIGHTEOUS MAN I HAVE COMPASSION ON BERLIN


~1~

My first call upon Marguerite had been followed by other visits when we
had talked of books and read together. On these occasions I had
carefully suppressed my desire to speak of more personal things. But,
constantly reminded by my own troubled conscience, I grew fearful lest
the old doctor should discover that the books were the lesser part of
the attraction that drew me to Marguerite's apartment, and my fear was
increased as I realized that my calls on Zimmern had abruptly ceased.

Thinking to make amends I went one evening to the doctor's apartment.

"I was going out shortly," said Zimmern, as he greeted me. "I have a
dinner engagement with Hellar on the Free Level. But I still have a little
time; if it pleases you we might walk along to our library."

I promptly accepted the invitation, hoping that it would enable me
better to establish my relation to Marguerite and Zimmern in a safe
triangle of mutual friendship. As we walked, Zimmern, as if he read my
thoughts, turned the conversation to the very subject that was uppermost
in my mind.

"I am glad, Armstadt," he said with a gracious smile, "that you and
Marguerite seem to enjoy each other's friendship. I had often wished
there were younger men in our group, since her duties as caretaker of
our books quite forbids her cultivating the acquaintance of any men
outside our chosen few. Marguerite is very patient with the dull talk of
us old men, but life is not all books, and there is much that youth
may share."

For these words of Zimmern's I was quite unprepared. He seemed to be
inviting me to make love to Marguerite, and I wondered to what extent
the prevailing social ethics might have destroyed the finer
sensibilities that forbid the sharing of a woman's love.

When we reached the apartment Marguerite greeted us with a perfect
democracy of manner. But my reassurance of the moment was presently
disturbed when she turned to Zimmern and said: "Now that you are here, I
am going for a bit of a walk; I have not been out for two whole days."

"Very well," the doctor replied. "I cannot remain long as I have an
engagement with Hellar, but perhaps Armstadt will remain until
you return."

"Then I shall have him all to myself," declared Marguerite with quiet
seriousness.

Though I glanced from the old doctor to the young woman in questioning
amazement, neither seemed in the least embarrassed or aware that
anything had been said out of keeping with the customary propriety
of life.

Marguerite, throwing the blue velvet cape about her bare white
shoulders, paused to give the old doctor an affectionate kiss, and with
a smile for me was gone.

For a few moments the doctor sat musing; but when he turned to me it was
to say: "I hope that you are making good use of our precious
accumulation of knowledge."

In reply I assured him of my hearty appreciation of the library.

"You can see now," continued Zimmern, "how utterly the mind of the race
has been enslaved, how all the vast store of knowledge, that as a whole
makes life possible, is parcelled out for each. Not one of us is
supposed to know of those vital things outside our own narrow field.
That knowledge is forbidden us lest we should understand the workings of
our social system and question the wisdom of it all. And so, while each
is wiser in his own little cell than were the men of the old order, yet
on all things else we are little children, accepting what we are taught,
doing what we are told, with no mind, no souls of our own. Scientists
have ceased to be men, and have become thinking machines, specialized
for their particular tasks."

"That is true," I said, "but what are we to do about it? You have by
these forbidden books acquired a realization of the enslavement of the
race--but the others, all these millions of professional men, are they
not hopelessly rendered impotent by the systematic Suppression of
knowledge?"

"The millions, yes," replied Zimmern, "but there are the chosen few; we
who have seen the light must find a way for the liberation of all."

"Do you mean," I asked eagerly, "that you are planning some secret
rebellion--that you hope for some possible rising of the people to
overthrow the system?"

