Miller stepped forward, moving slowly in the bulk of his spacesuit.
Deliberately, he removed a small torch from his side and pressed the
brilliant flame against the metal.

A few minutes later, the elderly mineralogist gave his opinion: "It's
steel ... made thousands of years ago."

Someone gasped over the intercom, "Thousands of years! But wouldn't it
be in worse shape than this if it was that old?"

Miller pointed at the small cut his torch had made in the metal. The
notch was only a quarter of an inch deep. "I say _steel_ because it's
_similar_ to steel. Actually, it's a much stronger alloy. Besides that,
on the Moon, there's been no water or atmosphere to rust it. Not even
a wind to disturb its surface. It's _at least_ several thousand years
old."

       *       *       *       *       *

We slowly circled the alien structure. Several minutes later, Kane
shouted, "Look!"

A few feet above the ground, the structure's smooth surface was broken
by a circular opening that yawned invitingly. Kane ran ahead and
flashed his head-lamp into the dark recess.

"There's a small room inside," he told us, and climbed through the
opening.

We waited outside and focused our lamps through the five-foot opening
to give him as much light as possible.

"Come on in, Marie," he called to his wife. "This is really something!
It _must_ be an alien race. There's all kinds of weird drawings on the
walls and gadgets that look like controls for something...."

Briefly, my lamp flickered over Marie's pale face. Her features
struggled with two conflicting emotions: She was frightened by the
alienness of the thing and yet she wanted to be with her husband. She
hesitated momentarily, then climbed through the passage.

"You want to go in?" my wife asked.

"Do you?"

"Let's."

I helped Verana through the opening, climbed through myself and turned
to help Miller.

Miller was sixty years old. He was an excellent mineralogist, alert
mentally, but with a body that was almost feeble. I reached out to help
him as he stepped into the passageway.

For a brief second, he was framed in the opening, a dark silhouette
against the star-studded sky.

The next second, he was thrown twenty yards into the air. He gasped
with pain when he struck the ground. "_Something_ pushed me!"

"Are you all right?"

"Yes."

He had fallen on a spot beyond our angle of vision. I started through
the passage....

... and struck an invisible solid wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

My eyes were on the circular opening. A metal panel emerged from a
recess on one side and slid across the passage. The room darkened with
the absence of starlight.

"_What happened?_"

"The door to this damned place closed," I explained.

"_What?_"

Before we could recover from the shock, the room filled with a
brilliant glare. We turned off our lamps.

The room was approximately twelve feet long and nine feet wide. The
ceiling was only a few inches above our heads and when I looked at the
smooth, hard metal, I felt as if I were trapped in some alien vault.

The walls of the room were covered with strange drawings and
instruments. Here and there, kaleidoscopic lights pulsed rhythmically.

Kane brushed past me and beat his gloved fists against the metal door
that had imprisoned us.

"Miller!"

"Yes?"

"See if you can get this thing open from the outside."

I knelt before the door and explored its surface with my fingers. There
were no visible recesses or controls.

Over the intercom network, everyone's breath mingled and formed a
rough, harsh sound. I could discern the women's quick, frightened
breaths that were almost sobs. Kane's breath was deep and strong;
Miller's was faltering and weak.

"Miller, get help!"

"I'll--" The sound of his breathing ceased. We listened intently.

"What happened to him?"

"I'll phone Lunar City." My fingers fumbled at the radio controls and
trembled beneath the thick gloves.

I turned the dials that would connect my radio with Lunar City....
