Maskull addressed him. "Did the drumming come from you?"

The man shook his head.

"What is your name?"

He replied in a strange, strained, twisted voice. Maskull gathered that
the name he gave was "Dreamsinter."

"What is that drumming?"

"Surtur," said Dreamsinter.

"Is it advisable for me to follow it?"

"Why?"

"Perhaps he intends me to. He brought me here from Earth."

Dreamsinter caught hold of him, bent down, and peered into his face.
"Not you, but Nightspore."

This was the first time that Maskull had heard Nightspore's name since
his arrival on the planet. He was so astonished that he could frame no
more questions.

"Eat this," said Dreamsinter. "Then we will chase the sound together."
He picked something up from the ground and handed it to Maskull. He
could not see distinctly, but it felt like a hard, round nut, of the
size of a fist.

"I can't crack it."

Dreamsinter took it between his hands, and broke it into pieces. Maskull
then ate some of the pulpy interior, which was intensely disagreeable.

"What am I doing in Tormance, then?" he asked.

"You came to steal Muspel-fire, to give a deeper life to men--never
doubting if your soul could endure that burning."

Maskull could hardly decipher the strangled words.

"Muspel.... That's the name I've been trying to remember ever since I
awoke."

Dreamsinter suddenly turned his head sideways, and appeared to listen
for something. He motioned with his hand to Maskull to keep quiet.

"Is it the drumming?"

"Hush! They come."

He was looking toward the upper forest. The now familiar drum rhythm was
heard--this time accompanied by the tramp of marching feet.

Maskull saw, marching through the trees and heading toward them, three
men in single file separated from one another by only a yard or so. They
were travelling down hill at a swift pace, and looked neither to left
nor right. They were naked. Their figures were shining against the black
background of the forest with a pale, supernatural light--green and
ghostly. When they were abreast of him, about twenty feet off, he
perceived who they were. The first man was himself--Maskull. The second
was Krag. The third man was Nightspore. Their faces were grim and set.

The source of the drumming was out of sight. The sound appeared to come
from some point in front of them. Maskull and Dreamsinter put themselves
in motion, to keep up with the swiftly moving marchers. At the same time
a low, faint music began.

Its rhythm stepped with the drum beats, but, unlike the latter, it
did not seem to proceed from any particular quarter of the forest. It
resembled the subjective music heard in dreams, which accompanies the
dreamer everywhere, as a sort of natural atmosphere, rendering all his
experiences emotional. It seemed to issue from an unearthly orchestra,
and was strongly troubled, pathetic and tragic. Maskull marched, and
listened; and as he listened, it grew louder and stormier. But the pulse
of the drum interpenetrated all the other sounds, like the quiet beating
of reality.

His emotion deepened. He could not have said if minutes or hours were
passing. The spectral procession marched on, a little way ahead, on
a path parallel with his own and Dreamsinter's. The music pulsated
violently. Krag lifted his arm, and displayed a long, murderous-looking
knife. He sprang forward and, raising it over the phantom Maskull's
back, stabbed him twice, leaving the knife in the wound the second time.
Maskull threw up his arms, and fell down dead. Krag leaped into the
forest and vanished from sight. Nightspore marched on alone, stern and
unmoved.

The music rose to crescendo. The whole dim, gigantic forest was roaring
with sound. The tones came from all sides, from above, from the ground
under their feet. It was so grandly passionate that Maskull felt his
soul loosening from its bodily envelope.

He continued to follow Nightspore. A strange brightness began to glow in
front of them. It was not daylight, but a radiance such as he had never
seen before, and such as he could not have imagined to be possible.
Nightspore moved straight toward it. Maskull felt his chest bursting.
The light flashed higher. The awful harmonies of the music followed hard
one upon another, like the waves of a wild, magic ocean.... His body was
incapable of enduring such shocks, and all of a sudden he tumbled over
in a faint that resembled death.



Chapter 14. POLECRAB

The morning slowly passed. Maskull made some convulsive movements, and
opened his eyes. He sat up, blinking. All was night-like and silent
in the forest. The strange light had gone, the music had ceased,
Dreamsinter had vanished. He fingered his beard, clotted with Tydomin's
blood, and fell into a deep muse.

"According to Panawe and Catice, this forest contains wise men. Perhaps
Dreamsinter was one. Perhaps that vision I have just seen was a specimen
of his wisdom. It looked almost like an answer to my question.... I
ought not to have asked about myself, but about Surtur. Then I would
have got a different answer. I might have learned something... I might
have seen him."

He remained quiet and apathetic for a bit.

"But I couldn't face that awful glare," he proceeded. "It was bursting
my body. He warned me, too. And so Surtur does really exist, and my
journey stands for something. But why am I here, and what can I do? Who
is Surtur? Where is he to be found?"

Something wild came into his eyes.

"What did Dreamsinter mean by his 'Not you, but Nightspore'? Am I a
secondary character--is he regarded as important; and I as unimportant?
Where is Nightspore, and what is he doing? Am I to wait for his time and
pleasure--can I originate nothing?"

He continued sitting up, with straight-extended legs.

"I must make up my mind that this is a strange journey, and that the
strangest things will happen in it. It's no use making plans, for
I can't see two steps ahead--everything is unknown. But one thing's
evident: nothing but the wildest audacity will carry me through, and I
must sacrifice everything else to that. And therefore if Surtur shows
himself again, I shall go forward to meet him, even if it means death."

Through the black, quiet aisles of the forest the drum beats came
again. The sound was a long way off and very faint. It was like the last
mutterings of thunder after a heavy storm. Maskull listened, without
getting up. The drumming faded into silence, and did not return.

He smiled queerly, and said aloud, "Thanks, Surtur! I accept the omen."

When he was about to get up, he found that the shrivelled skin that had
been his third arm was flapping disconcertingly with every movement of
his body. He made perforations in it all around, as close to his chest
as possible, with the fingernails of both hands; then he carefully
twisted it off. In that world of rapid growth and ungrowth he judged
that the stump would soon disappear. After that, he rose and peered into
the darkness.

The forest at that point sloped rather steeply and, without thinking
twice about it, he took the downhill direction, never doubting it would
bring him somewhere. As soon as he started walking, his temper became
gloomy and morose--he was shaken, tired, dirty, and languid with hunger;
moreover, he realised that the walk was not going to be a short one. Be
that as it may, he determined to sit down no more until the whole dismal
forest was at his back.

One after another the shadowy, houselike trees were observed, avoided,
and passed. Far overhead the little patch of glowing sky was still
always visible; otherwise he had no clue to the time of day. He
continued tramping sullenly down the slope for many damp, slippery
miles--in some places through bogs. When, presently, the twilight seemed
to thin, he guessed that the open world was not far away. The forest
grew more palpable and grey, and now he saw its majesty better. The tree
trunks were like round towers, and so wide were the intervals that they
resembled natural amphitheatres. He could not make out the colour of
the bark. Everything he saw amazed him, but his admiration was of the
growling, grudging kind. The difference in light between the forest
behind him and the forest ahead became so marked that he could no longer
doubt that he was on the point of coming out.

Real light was in front of him; looking back, he found he had a shadow.
The trunks acquired a reddish tint. He quickened his pace. As the
minutes went by, the bright patch ahead grew luminous and vivid; it had
a tinge of blue. He also imagined that he heard the sound of surf.

All that part of the forest toward which he was moving became rich with
colour. The boles of the trees were of a deep, dark red; their leaves,
high above his head, were ulfire-hued; the dead leaves on the ground
were of a colour he could not name. At the same time he discovered the
use of his third eye. By adding a third angle to his sight, every
object he looked at stood out in greater relief. The world looked less
flat--more realistic and significant. He had a stronger attraction
toward his surroundings; he seemed somehow to lose his egotism, and to
become free and thoughtful.

Now through the last trees he saw full daylight. Less than half a mile
separated him from the border of the forest, and, eager to discover
what lay beyond, he broke into a run. He heard the surf louder. It was
a peculiar hissing sound that could proceed only from water, yet was
unlike the sea. Almost immediately he came within sight of an enormous
horizon of dancing waves, which he knew must be the Sinking Sea. He fell
back into a quick walk, continuing to stare hard. The wind that met him
was hot, fresh and sweet.

When he arrived at the final fringe of forest, which joined the wide
sands of the shore without any change of level, he leaned with his back
to a great tree and gazed his fill, motionless, at what lay in front of
him. The sands continued east and west in a straight line, broken only
here and there by a few creeks. They were of a brilliant orange colour,
but there were patches of violet. The forest appeared to stand sentinel
over the shore for its entire length. Everything else was sea and
sky--he had never seen so much water. The semicircle of the skyline
was so vast that he might have imagined himself on a flat world, with
a range of vision determined only by the power of his eye. The sea was
unlike any sea on Earth. It resembled an immense liquid opal. On a body
colour of rich, magnificent emerald-green, flashes of red, yellow, and
blue were everywhere shooting up and vanishing. The wave motion was
extraordinary. Pinnacles of water were slowly formed until they attained
a height of perhaps ten or twenty feet, when they would suddenly sink
downward and outward, creating in their descent a series of concentric
rings for long distances around them. Quickly moving currents, like
rivers in the sea, could be seen, racing away from land; they were of
a darker green and bore no pinnacles. Where the sea met the shore,
the waves rushed over the sands far in, with almost sinister
rapidity--accompanied by a weird, hissing, spitting sound, which was
what Maskull had heard. The green tongues rolled in without foam.

About twenty miles distant, as he judged, directly opposite him, a
long, low island stood up from the sea, black and not distinguished in
outline. It was Swaylone's Island. Maskull was less interested in that
than in the blue sunset that glowed behind its back. Alppain had
set, but the whole northern sky was plunged into the minor key by its
afterlight. Branchspell in the zenith was white and overpowering, the
day was cloudless and terrifically hot; but where the blue sun had sunk,
a sombre shadow seemed to overhang the world. Maskull had a feeling
of disintegration--just as if two chemically distinct forces were
simultaneously acting upon the cells of his body. Since the afterglow of
Alppain affected him like this, he thought it more than likely that he
would never be able to face that sun itself, and go on living. Still,
some modification might happen to him that would make it possible.

The sea tempted him. He made up his mind to bathe, and at once walked
toward the shore. The instant he stepped outside the shadow line of the
forest trees, the blinding rays of the sun beat down on him so savagely
that for a few minutes he felt sick and his head swam. He trod quickly
across the sands. The orange-coloured parts were nearly hot enough to
roast food, he judged, but the violet parts were like fire itself. He
stepped on a patch in ignorance, and immediately jumped high into the
air with a startled yell.

The sea was voluptuously warm. It would not bear his weight, so he
determined to try swimming. First of all he stripped off his skin
garment, washed it thoroughly with sand and water, and laid it in the
sun to dry. Then he scrubbed himself as well as he could and washed out
his beard and hair. After that, he waded in a long way, until the water
reached his breast, and took to swimming--avoiding the spouts as far
as possible He found it no pastime. The water was everywhere of unequal
density. In some places he could swim, in others he could barely save
himself from drowning, in others again he could not force himself
beneath the surface at all. There were no outward signs to show what
the water ahead held in store for him. The whole business was most
dangerous.

He came out, feeling clean and invigorated. For a time he walked up and
down the sands, drying himself in the hot sunshine and looking around
him. He was a naked stranger in a huge, foreign, mystical world, and
whichever way he turned, unknown and threatening forces were glaring
at him. The gigantic, white, withering Branchspell, the awful,
body-changing Alppain, the beautiful, deadly, treacherous sea, the dark
and eerie Swaylone's Island, the spirit-crushing forest out of which he
had just escaped--to all these mighty powers, surrounding him on every
side, what resources had he, a feeble, ignorant traveller to oppose,
from a tiny planet on the other side of space, to avoid being utterly
destroyed?... Then he smiled to himself. "I've already been here two
days, and still I survive. I have luck--and with that one can balance
the universe. But what is luck--a verbal expression, or a thing?"

As he was putting on his skin, which was now dry, the answer came to
him, and this time he was grave. "Surtur brought me here, and Surtur
is watching over me. That is my 'luck.'... But what is Surtur in
this world?... How is he able to protect me against the blind and
ungovernable forces of nature? Is he stronger than Nature?..."

Hungry as he was for food, he was hungrier still for human society, for
he wished to inquire about all these things. He asked himself which way
he should turn his steps. There were only two ways; along the shore,
either east or west. The nearest creek lay to the east, cutting the
sands about a mile away. He walked toward it.

The forest face was forbidding and enormously high. It was so squarely
turned to the sea that it looked as though it had been planed by tools.
Maskull strode along in the shade of the trees, but kept his head
constantly turned away from them, toward the sea--there it was more
cheerful. The creek, when he reached it, proved to be broad and
flat-banked. It was not a river, but an arm of the sea. Its still, dark
green water curved around a bend out of sight, into the forest. The
trees on both banks overhung the water, so that it was completely in
shadow.

He went as far as the bend, beyond which another short reach appeared.
A man was sitting on a narrow shelf of bank, with his feet in the water.
He was clothed in a coarse, rough hide, which left his limbs bare. He
was short, thick, and sturdy, with short legs and a long, powerful arms,
terminating in hands of an extraordinary size. He was oldish. His face
was plain, slablike, and expressionless; it was full of wrinkles, and
walnut-coloured. Both face and head were bald, and his skin was tough
and leathery. He seemed to be some sort of peasant, or fisherman; there
was no trace in his face of thought for others, or delicacy of feeling.
He possessed three eyes, of different colors--jade-green, blue, and
ulfire.

In front of him, riding on the water, moored to the bank, was an
elementary raft, consisting of the branches of trees, clumsily corded
together.

Maskull addressed him. "Are you another of the wise men of the Wombflash
Forest?"

The man answered him in a gruff, husky voice, looking up as he did so.
"I'm a fisherman. I know nothing about wisdom."

"What name do you go by?"

"Polecrab. What's yours?"

"Maskull. If you're a fisherman, you ought to have fish. I'm famishing."

Polecrab grunted, and paused a minute before answering.

"There's fish enough. My dinner is cooking in the sands now. It's easy
enough to get you some more."

Maskull found this a pleasant speech.

"But how long will it take?" he asked.

The man slid the palms of his hands together, producing a shrill,
screeching noise. He lifted his feet from the water, and clambered onto
the bank. In a minute or two a curious little beast came crawling up to
his feet, turning its face and eyes up affectionately, like a dog. It
was about two feet long, and somewhat resembled a small seal, but had
six legs, ending in strong claws.

"Arg, go fish!" said Polecrab hoarsely.

The animal immediately tumbled off the bank into the water. It swam
gracefully to the middle of the creek and made a pivotal dive beneath
the surface, where it remained a great while.

"Simple fishing," remarked Maskull. "But what's the raft for?"

"To go to sea with. The best fish are out at sea. These are eatable."

"That arg seems a highly intelligent creature."

Polecrab grunted again. "I've trained close on a hundred of them. The
bigheads learn best, but they're slow swimmers. The narrowheads
swim like eels, but can't be taught. Now I've started interbreeding
them--he's one of them."

"Do you live here alone?"

"No, I've got a wife and three boys. My wife's sleeping somewhere, but
where the lads are, Shaping knows."

Maskull began to feel very much at home with this unsophisticated being.

"The raft's all crazy," he remarked, staring at it. "If you go far out
in that, you've got more pluck than I have."

"I've been to Matterplay on it," said Polecrab.

The arg reappeared and started swimming to shore, but this time
clumsily, as if it were bearing a heavy weight under the surface. When
it landed at its master's feet, they saw that each set of claws was
clutching a fish--six in all. Polecrab took them from it. He proceeded
to cut off the heads and tails with a sharp-edged stone which he picked
up; these he threw to the arg, which devoured them without any fuss.

Polecrab beckoned to Maskull to follow him and, carrying the fish,
walked toward the open shore, by the same way that he had come. When
they reached the sands, he sliced the fish, removed the entrails, and
digging a shallow hole in a patch of violet sand, placed the remainder
of the carcasses in it, and covered them over again. Then he dug up his
own dinner. Maskull's nostrils quivered at the savoury smell, but he was
not yet to dine.

Polecrab, turning to go with the cooked fish in his hands, said, "These
are mine, not yours. When yours are done, you can come back and join me,
supposing you want company."

"How soon will that be?"

"About twenty minutes," replied the fisherman, over his shoulder.

Maskull sheltered himself in the shadows of the forest, and waited. When
the time had approximately elapsed, he disinterred his meal, scorching
his fingers in the operation, although it was only the surface of the
sand which was so intensely hot. Then he returned to Polecrab.

In the warm, still air and cheerful shade of the inlet, they munched in
silence, looking from their food to the sluggish water, and back again.
With every mouthful Maskull felt his strength returning. He finished
before Polecrab, who ate like a man for whom time has no value. When he
had done, he stood up.

"Come and drink," he said, in his husky voice.

Maskull looked at him inquiringly.

The man led him a little way into the forest, and walked straight up
to a certain tree. At a convenient height in its trunk a hole had been
tapped and plugged. Polecrab removed the plug and put his mouth to the
aperture, sucking for quite a long time, like a child at its mother's
breast. Maskull, watching him, imagined that he saw his eyes growing
brighter.

When his own turn came to drink, he found the juice of the tree somewhat
