"Where do you come from? Kanem? Torkou? You laugh too much for a
Targa."

Unbroken silence. The Negro was as speechless as he was hilarious.

"After all, I am making a fool of myself," I said, giving up the case.
"Such as he is, he is more agreeable than Le Mesge with his
nightmarish erudition. But, on my word, what a recruit he would be for
Hamman on the rue des Mathurins!"

"Cigarette, sidi?"

Without awaiting my reply, he placed a cigarette between my lips and
lighted it, and resumed his task of polishing every inch of me.

"He doesn't talk much, but he is obliging," I thought.

And I sent a puff of smoke into his face.

This pleasantry seemed to delight him immensely. He showed his
pleasure by giving me great slaps.

When he had dressed me down sufficiently, he took a little jar from
the dressing-table and began to rub me with a rose-colored ointment.
Weariness seemed to fly away from my rejuvenated muscles.

A stroke on a copper gong. My masseur disappeared. A stunted old
Negress entered, dressed in the most tawdry tinsel. She was talkative
as a magpie, but at first I did not understand a word in the
interminable string she unwound, while she took first my hands, then
my feet, and polished the nails with determined grimaces.

Another stroke on the gong. The old woman gave place to another Negro,
grave, this time, and dressed all in white with a knitted skull cap on
his oblong head. It was the barber, and a remarkably dexterous one. He
quickly trimmed my hair, and, on my word, it was well done. Then,
without asking me what style I preferred, he shaved me clean.

I looked with pleasure at my face, once more visible.

"Antinea must like the American type," I thought. "What an affront to
the memory of her worthy grandfather, Neptune!"

The gay Negro entered and placed a package on the divan. The barber
disappeared. I was somewhat astonished to observe that the package,
which my new valet opened carefully, contained a suit of white
flannels exactly like those French officers wear in Algeria in summer.

The wide trousers seemed made to my measure. The tunic fitted without
a wrinkle, and my astonishment was unbounded at observing that it even
had two gilt _galons_, the insignia of my rank, braided on the cuffs.
For shoes, there were slippers of red Morocco leather, with gold
ornaments. The underwear, all of silk, seemed to have come straight
from the rue de la Paix.

"Dinner was excellent," I murmured, looking at myself in the mirror
with satisfaction. "The apartment is perfectly arranged. Yes, but...."

I could not repress a shudder when I suddenly recalled that room of
red marble.

The clock struck half past four.

Someone rapped gently on the door. The tall white Targa, who had
brought me, appeared in the doorway.

He stepped forward, touched me on the arm and signed for me to follow.

Again I followed him.

We passed through interminable corridors. I was disturbed, but the
warm water had given me a certain feeling of detachment. And above
all, more than I wished to admit, I had a growing sense of lively
curiosity. If, at that moment, someone had offered to lead me back to
the route across the white plain near Shikh-Salah, would I have
accepted? Hardly.

I tried to feel ashamed of my curiosity. I thought of Maillefeu.

"He, too, followed this corridor. And now he is down there, in the red
marble hall."

I had no time to linger over this reminiscence. I was suddenly bowled
over, thrown to the ground, as if by a sort of meteor. The corridor
was dark; I could see nothing. I heard only a mocking growl.

The white Targa had flattened himself back against the wall.

"Good," I mumbled, picking myself up, "the deviltries are beginning."

We continued on our way. A glow different from that of the rose night
lights soon began to light up the corridor.

We reached a high bronze door, in which a strange lacy design had
been cut in filigree. A clear gong sounded, and the double doors
opened part way. The Targa remained in the corridor, closing the doors
after me.

I took a few steps forward mechanically, then paused, rooted to the
spot, and rubbed my eyes.

I was dazzled by the sight of the sky.

Several hours of shaded light had unaccustomed me to daylight. It
poured in through one whole side of the huge room.

The room was in the lower part of this mountain, which was more
honeycombed with corridors and passages than an Egyptian pyramid. It
was on a level with the garden which I had seen in the morning from
the balcony, and seemed to be a continuation of it; the carpet
extended out under the great palm trees and the birds flew about the
forest of pillars in the room.

By contrast, the half of the room untouched by direct light from the
oasis seemed dark. The sun, setting behind the mountain, painted the
garden paths with rose and flamed with red upon the traditional
flamingo which stood with one foot raised at the edge of the sapphire
lake.

Suddenly I was bowled over a second time.

I felt a warm, silky touch, a burning breath on my neck. Again the
mocking growl which had so disturbed me in the corridor.

With a wrench, I pulled myself free and sent a chance blow at my
assailant. The cry, this time of pain and rage, broke out again.

It was echoed by a long peal of laughter. Furious, I turned to look
for the insolent onlooker, thinking to speak my mind. And then my
glance stood still.

Antinea was before me.


In the dimmest part of the room, under a kind of arch lit by the mauve
rays from a dozen incense-lamps, four women lay on a heap of
many-colored cushions and rare white Persian rugs.

I recognized the first three as Tuareg women, of a splendid regular
beauty, dressed in magnificent robes of white silk embroidered in
gold. The fourth, very dark skinned, almost negroid, seemed younger.
A tunic of red silk enhanced the dusk of her face, her arms and her
bare feet. The four were grouped about a sort of throne of white rugs,
covered with a gigantic lion's skin, on which, half raised on one
elbow, lay Antinea.

Antinea! Whenever I saw her after that, I wondered if I had really
looked at her before, so much more beautiful did I find her. More
beautiful? Inadequate word. Inadequate language! But is it really the
fault of the language or of those who abuse the word?

One could not stand before her without recalling the woman for whom
Ephractoeus overcame Atlas, of her for whom Sapor usurped the scepter
of Ozymandias, for whom Mamylos subjugated Susa and Tentyris, for whom
Antony fled....

    _O tremblant coeur humain, si jamais tu vibras
    C'est dans l'etreinte altiere et chaude de ses bras_.

An Egyptian _klaft_ fell over her abundant blue-black curls. Its two
points of heavy, gold-embroidered cloth extended to her slim hips. The
golden serpent, emerald-eyed, was clasped about her little round,
determined forehead, darting its double tongue of rubies over her
head.

She wore a tunic of black chiffon shot with gold, very light, very
full, slightly gathered in by a white muslin scarf embroidered with
iris in black pearls.

That was Antinea's costume. But what was she beneath all this? A slim
young girl, with long green eyes and the slender profile of a hawk. A
more intense Adonis. A child queen of Sheba, but with a look, a smile,
such as no Oriental ever had. A miracle of irony and freedom.

I did not see her body. Indeed I should not have thought of looking at
it, had I had the strength. And that, perhaps, was the most
extraordinary thing about that first impression. In that unforgettable
moment nothing would have seemed to me more horribly sacrilegious than
to think of the fifty victims in the red marble hall, of the fifty
young men who had held that slender body in their arms.

She was still laughing at me.

"King Hiram," she called.

I turned and saw my enemy.

On the capital of one of the columns, twenty feet above the floor, a
splendid leopard was crouched. He still looked surly from the blow I
had dealt him.

"King Hiram," Antinea repeated. "Come here."

The beast relaxed like a spring released. He fawned at his mistress's
feet. I saw his red tongue licking her bare little ankles.

"Ask the gentleman's pardon," she said.

The leopard looked at me spitefully. The yellow skin of his muzzle
puckered about his black moustache.

"Fftt," he grumbled like a great cat.

"Go," Antinea ordered imperiously.

The beast crawled reluctantly toward me. He laid his head humbly
between his paws and waited.

I stroked his beautiful spotted forehead.

"You must not be vexed," said Antinea. "He is always that way with
strangers."

"Then he must often be in bad humor," I said simply.

Those were my first words. They brought a smile to Antinea's lips.

She gave me a long, quiet look.

"Aguida," she said to one of the Targa women, "you will give
twenty-five pounds in gold to Cegheir-ben-Cheikh."

"You are a lieutenant?" she asked, after a pause.

"Yes."

"Where do you come from?"

"From France."

"I might have guessed that," she said ironically, "but from what part
of France?"

"From what we call the Lot-et-Garonne."

"From what town?"

"From Duras."

She reflected a moment.

"Duras! There is a little river there, the Dropt, and a fine old
chateau."

"You know Duras?" I murmured, amazed.

"You go there from Bordeaux by a little branch railway," she went
on. "It is a shut-in road, with vine-covered hills crowned by
the feudal ruins. The villages have beautiful names: Monsegur,
Sauve-terre-de-Guyenne, la Tresne, Creon, ... Creon, as in Antigone."

"You have been there?"

She looked at me.

"Don't speak so coldly," she said. "Sooner or later we will be
intimate, and you may as well lay aside formality now."

This threatening promise suddenly filled me with great happiness. I
thought of Le Mesge's words: "Don't talk until you have seen her. When
you have seen her, you will renounce everything for her."

"Have I been in Duras?" she went on with a burst of laughter. "You are
joking. Imagine Neptune's granddaughter in the first-class compartment
of a local train!"

She pointed to an enormous white rock which towered above the palm
trees of the garden.

"That is my horizon," she said gravely.

She picked up one of several books which lay scattered about her on
the lion's skin.

"The time table of the _Chemin de Fer de l'Ouest_," she said.
"Admirable reading for one who never budges! Here it is half-past five
in the afternoon. A train, a local, arrived three minutes ago at
Surgeres in the Charente-Inferieure. It will start on in six minutes.
In two hours it will reach La Rochelle. How strange it seems to think
of such things here. So far away! So much commotion there! Here,
nothing changes."

"You speak French well," I said.

She gave a little nervous laugh.

"I have to. And German, too, and Italian, and English and Spanish. My
way of living has made me a great polygot. But I prefer French, even
to Tuareg and Arabian. It seems as if I had always known it. And I am
not saying that to please you."

There was a pause. I thought of her grandmother, of whom Plutarch
said: "There were few races with which she needed an interpreter.
Cleopatra spoke their own language to the Ethiopians, to the
Troglodytes, the Hebrews, the Arabs, the Medes and the Persians."

"Do not stand rooted in the middle of the room. You worry me. Come
sit here, beside me. Move over, King Hiram."

The leopard obeyed with good temper.

Beside her was an onyx bowl. She took from it a perfectly plain ring
of orichalch and slipped it on my left ring-finger. I saw that she
wore one like it.

