filled the air. Evidently something good was being cooked.

"It's chicken pot-pie," said Washington. "How I does love chicken!"

Presently one of the natives removed the pot from the stove and set it
in front of the captives. The contents were steaming hot, and seemed to
be some sort of meat stew, made with chunks of flesh, gravy and moss.

"How are we going to eat, without knives, forks or spoons?" asked Andy.

He soon found out. The natives who had remained in the hut drew up to
the pot. They dipped their bare hands in, drew out pieces of meat and
wads of the moss, and ate without ceremony.

"Fingers were made before forks," quoted the professor. "We'll have to
eat as the old cave-dwellers did. Well, I'm hungry enough not to stand
on politeness."

He reached in the vessel and got some meat. It was hot, but he did not
mind that, and ate it with a relish. Andy and Washington followed his
example, and soon the travelers from the _Monarch_ and the Esquimaux
were eating together as if they had been friends all their lives.

When the rude meal had ended, the prisoners felt much better. They were
warm, their hunger was appeased, and, in spite of their many worries
over the loss of the airship and their companions, they were so tired
out that they felt very sleepy. Soon the professor's head nodded over,
shortly Andy was snoring and in a little while Washington too slumbered.

They did not know how long they had slept, but they were suddenly and
rudely awakened by being shaken. Opening their eyes, they saw the hut
was filled with Esquimaux, all clothed in suits of spotless white fur.

"These must all be chiefs," remarked the professor.

With quick motions the natives bound their captives again, with stout
thongs. Then, like so many logs of wood, they were pulled out of the hut
on their backs, a native outside hauling on one end of the skin ropes.

There was no telling what hour it was, for the sun shone as brightly as
it had been doing for days past. Once more the three men were tossed on
sleds, and the dogs, driven by the Esquimaux, hauled them off. But it
was not a far journey this time. In about fifteen minutes the sleds came
to a stop, the prisoners were lifted off, and carried, as they could
see, toward a large opening in a hill of ice and snow.

As soon as they had passed from the sunlight to darkness, the captives
knew they were in a sort of cave. The blackness was intense, but in a
short time there was a faint glow observed ahead, caused by a number of
the stone lamps burning.

At that point were gathered several more of the Esquimaux, all attired
in white furs. There was some excitement when the prisoners were brought
in, and all crowded around to see them.

Then began what seemed a discussion among the natives. They talked loud
and long. Finally from some other part of the cave two tall men, dressed
as the others were, in white, came in. They seemed to be in authority,
for when they had spoken all the others were silent.

While the captives waited in anxiety for what would happen next, the
whole cave was illuminated with a wonderful light. It was rosy red at
first, then changed to a golden hue, then to green, yellow, blue and
purple. The captives could not see where the fire came from, but they
gazed at the light in mingled fear and admiration.

"It is the northern light; the aurora borealis!" exclaimed the
professor. "It is the most beautiful light in the world."

"What makes it?" asked Andy.

"Electricity, magnetism, the sun and the intense cold; no one knows
exactly what produces it," replied Amos Henderson. "It is quite likely
that there is some opening to this cave, and the sun shines in it, or
the lights may be reflected from outside by reason, of the ice, which
acts as a mirror."

"It's pretty," observed Andy, "but all the same I'd rather--"

He got no further for the two giant-sized natives advanced quickly
toward them. One roughly seized Professor Henderson, and, with the help
of his companion, began stripping off his clothes. Andy started forward
to aid the captain, but the other natives held him back. Washington,
too, was restrained by several hands.

In a few minutes the professor was stripped, except for a piece of fur
about his middle. Then a rude litter was brought in. The two big
natives, after pouring some oil over the old man, placed their victim on
the stretcher, and then began a march up the cave. Washington and Andy
were forced to walk directly behind the inventor, and were surrounded by
natives on every side. The poor professor soon became half insensible
from the cold.

"This is terrible!" groaned Andy.

"Dey is goin' to slaughter him!" wailed Washington. "He'll be sacrificed
and burned up! See, de altar ob de sacrifice am just ahead. Oh! I wisht
we wuz all dead!"

"We're likely to be, soon enough," muttered Andy. "But keep up your
courage!"

At that instant the head of the procession was close to the ice altar.
Behind it the mysterious lights played and flickered in streamers of
red, green and gold. Up the steps went the two gigantic men, carrying
the professor. They were about to sacrifice him in a horrible way!

"Oh! Oh! Oh!" screamed a woman's voice. At the sound of it Andy started.

"That was Dirola!" exclaimed the old hunter. "How did she get here?"




CHAPTER XXIV

SAVED BY DIROLA


Instantly the ice cavern was a scene of great uproar and confusion. The
procession broke up as soon as Dirola cried out and the intruders at the
sacrifice were observed. All, save those carrying the victim and those
guarding Andy and Washington, rushed with their long bone knives at Jack
and Mark and the two helpers from the airship.

"There are the boys!" cried Andy, trying to break away from those who
held him.

"An' Tom an' Bill is there likewise!" exclaimed Washington, who had
caught a glimpse of the two helpers. "De heathen am goin' to kill 'um!"

"We're here, Jack!" sung out the hunter. "Make the best fight you can,
for we are in terrible hands. The poor professor is done for, I guess,
and we'll soon be, too!"

His voice rang out high above the shouts and yells of the natives, who
were now in a dense circle about the two boys and their companions.

"We haven't anything to fight with!" called back Mark.

"Well, I have!" yelled Andy.

With a quick motion he snatched his arms from the encircling ones of his
captors. His fists went back. There were two quick, sharp blows, and two
of the Esquimaux who were guarding the old hunter toppled backward.

With suddenness that was startling Andy drew a brace of revolvers from
his inner pockets. He leveled them at the mass of white figures in front
of him, on whose fierce faces the colored lights gleamed and flickered.

Andy's fingers trembled on the triggers. He was about to fire.

"Lay low, boys!" he called to the _Monarch's_ crew. "I'll get rid of a
few of these savages before I go!"

"No shoot! No shoot!" screamed Dirola.

She darted from her place, broke through the circle of natives, and
rushed up to where Andy stood with leveled weapons.

"No shoot! Me save!" she cried.

She was all but too late. Andy's fingers had crooked on the triggers,
but Dirola pushed his arms upward, and when the two reports rang out the
bullets struck the icy roof of the cavern.

In the confined space the shots sounded almost like thunder. A silence
that was startling in its suddenness fell as the echoes of the reports
died away. Dirola ran toward the altar. She grasped the arms of the two
big Esquimaux, who had taken Professor Henderson from the litter with
the intention of sacrificing the old inventor.

She cried out one word in a strange tongue.

The men stopped as though she had struck them. Then, with a dramatic
gesture, she mounted to the top step of the altar.

A chorus of cries greeted her. She seemed to pay no heed. Silent and
straight she stood there on the steps of ice, her figure in dark relief
against the background of flickering lights.

The next instant Dirola, with a motion so quick the eye could scarcely
follow, slipped off her suit of black fur, and stood revealed in dress
of white fur, the exact counterpart of that worn by all the others in
the cave.

A low murmur of astonishment ran around the vast cavern. Then, as if by
common impulse, every one kneeled down, Dirola alone of all the
Esquimaux remaining upright. The cave dwellers were bowing down to one
they either feared or loved.

Then Dirola spoke. At first her words were slow. Gradually she talked
faster, until she was speaking a very torrent of sounds. She pointed,
first to the insensible body of the old inventor at her feet, next to
the group of white men and boys, and then to Andy and Washington. She
gave some command, evidently, for no sooner had she ceased than those
who had attacked Mark, Jack and the two farmers drew back, and left them
free.

At the same time, those surrounding Andy and the negro withdrew. Then
some warm furs were thrown over the cold body of the professor and he
was borne gently away.

Dirola glided to where Andy stood, not knowing what to make of it all.

"No be feared now," she said. "They take ole man way an' warm him an'
feed him. He be all right. So you be all right, an' boys an' oder mans.
No be feared now. Them do what I tell 'um!" and she motioned to the
natives, who had risen to their feet as soon as she left the ice altar.

"How in the world did you do it?" asked the old hunter.

"Me chief one--what you call 'um--queen here. Long time go. Me be take
prisoner when you found me. Me come back. Me glad. No let Ingliss mans
an' boys be hurt, nor 'um black man too. Me save. Me be queen agin!"

"How does that strike you?" went on Andy, to Mark and Jack, who had
joined him. "The luckiest thing we ever did was to pick up Dirola."

"To think we should land right among her own people, too!" spoke up
Jack. "It's just like a fairy story."

"But where in the world did you come from?" asked Andy. "We thought you
were all killed by falling from the ship."

"Not a bit," replied Jack, and he told the old hunter what had happened
to himself, Mark and the others. In turn Andy related his experiences.

"If only the poor professor comes around all right we'll be in pretty
good shape," finished the old man. "But I'm afraid he's frozen. I wonder
what they were going to do with him."

"Put him in big hole, where all ice," broke in Dirola. "That what we do
when the lights shine. But we no hurt any you now. You all safe. Me
save!"

"I guess that was their intention," muttered Andy. "They were going to
sacrifice him to the Goddess of Ice, I suppose. Well, well, we certainly
are having plenty of experiences."

Many of the natives had now left the cave. Dirola gave an order to one
of the big Esquimaux who had remained, and he went off on the run.

"We eat now," the woman remarked. "Me plenty hungry too, Professor
come back an' eat wid you."

In a few minutes Professor Henderson, warmly clad, was brought in,
leaning on the shoulder of the big man who, a little while before, had
been about to sacrifice him. The old inventor was weak, but had suffered
no serious harm. His body had been coated with thick oil before the
proposed sacrifice, as part of the ceremony, and this had served, in a
large measure, to keep the cold out.

He was warmly greeted by his friends, and then they all squatted down on
the ice, while in a few minutes a big earthen pot of hot stew was
brought in. Dirola ate with them, dipping her fingers in with the
others.

"It's the first time I ever ate with a queen," said Jack with a smile.

"Me sure queen," said the woman with a laugh. "Me tell you 'bout it."

Whereupon she related how she was of the royal house, and had, on the
death of her father, ascended to the throne. Then came the visit of the
white men, including Andre, whose strange message the adventurers had
found. He was driven, with his companions, from the land. Then the
Esquimaux of Dirola's tribe had been attacked by others living farther
south. A great battle had been fought and the queen and others were
taken prisoners. Dirola had been held captive until the advent of the
_Monarch_.

She did not know how close she was to her own people and the big
sacrificial cave, until she fell into it with the boys and farmers. Then
the procession came in and Dirola recognized Professor Henderson as the
victim. She at once resolved to declare herself, and did so, showing
that beneath the black fur she wore the white robes that none but
members of the royal household could don.

The woman also explained how the big cave was used for religious
services by her people, who worshiped the northern lights, or magnetic
fire that never burned, and she told how they sacrificed to it at times.

"Well, I hope they don't sacrifice any of us," said the professor. "I
was as near death as I ever care to go. I wonder what has become of my
airship. If we--"

"What's that?" cried Jack, starting up.

"Listen!" came from another.

Far off in the cave sounded a strange, wild, weird chant. Then came the
tramp of many feet. A little later a great concourse of people came
rushing into the cave, led by a score of the white-robed men.

"They're coming back after us!" cried Andy. "Here, take a revolver,
Professor, and defend yourself!"




CHAPTER XXV

ADRIFT ON THE ICE


"No shoot! Me save!" exclaimed Dirola, springing in front of Andy. "You
trust me!"

On came the crowd, plainly visible because of the magnetic fire. It came
to a halt a short distance in front of the adventurers, while from the
ranks of the white-robed ones stepped forth a native. He spoke rapidly
to Dirola, who answered him in fierce tones.

For several minutes the conversation was kept up. At length Dirola
appeared to gain her point, for the crowd withdrew and once more the
captives were alone with their Esquimaux friend.

"What did they want?" asked Andy.

"Some people no believe me queen," explained the newly-discovered ruler.
