
"In reviewing the history of selenography, one must be impressed by the
singular fact that, while most of the astronomers who have made a
special study of the moon, such as Schroeter, Maedler, Schmidt, Webb,
Neison, and Elger, have all believed that its surface was still subject
to changes readily visible from the earth, the great majority of
astronomers who have paid little attention to the subject have quite as
strenuously denied the existence of such changes."

In regard to the lunar atmosphere, it may be said, in a word, that even
those who advocate the existence of vegetation and of clouds of dust or
ice crystals on the moon do not predicate any greater amount, or greater
density, of atmosphere than do those who consider the moon to be wholly
dead and inert. Professor Pickering himself showed, from his
observations, that the horizontal refraction of the lunar atmosphere,
instead of being less than 2 sec., as formerly stated, was less than
0.4 sec. Yet he found visual evidence that on the sunlit side of the
moon this rare atmosphere was filled to a height of four miles with some
absorbing medium which was absent on the dark side, and which was
apparently an emanation from the lunar crust, occurring after sunrise.
And Messrs. Loewy and Puiseux, of the Paris Observatory, say, after
showing reasons for thinking that the great volcanic eruptions belong to
a recent period in the history of the moon, that "the diffusion of
cinders to great distances infers a gaseous envelope of a certain
density.... The resistance of the atmosphere must have been sufficient
to retard the fall of this dust [the reference is to the white trails,
like those from Tycho], during its transport over a distance of more
than 1,000 kilometers [620 miles]."[20]

[Footnote 20: Comptes Rendus, June 23, July 3, 1899.]

We come now to a brief consideration of certain peculiarities in the
motions of the moon, and in the phenomena of day and night on its
surface. The moon keeps the same side forever turned toward the earth,
behaving, in this respect, as Mercury does with regard to the sun. The
consequence is that the lunar globe makes but one rotation on its axis
in the course of a month, or in the course of one revolution about the
earth. Some of the results of this practical identity of the periods of
rotation and revolution are illustrated in the diagram on page 250. The
moon really undergoes considerable libration, recalling the libration of
Mercury, which was explained in the chapter on that planet, and in
consequence we are able to see a little way round into the opposite
lunar hemisphere, now on this side and now on the other, but in the
diagram this libration has been neglected. If it had been represented we
should have found that, instead of only one half, about three fifths of
the total superficies of the moon are visible from the earth at one time
or another.

[Illustration: PHASES AND ROTATION OF THE MOON.]

Perhaps it should be remarked that in drawing the moon's orbit about the
earth as a center we offer no contradiction to what was shown earlier
in this chapter. The moon does travel around the earth, and its orbit
about our globe may, for our present purpose, be treated independently
of its motion about the sun. Let the central globe, then, represent the
earth, and let the sun be supposed to shine from the left-hand side of
the diagram. A little cross is erected at a fixed spot on the globe of
the moon.

At _A_ the moon is between the earth and the sun, or in the phase of new
moon. The lunar hemisphere facing the earth is now buried in night,
except so far as the light reflected from the earth illuminates it, and
this illumination, it is interesting to remember, is about fourteen
times as great--reckoned by the relative areas of the reflecting
surfaces--as that which the full moon sends to the earth. An inhabitant
of the moon, standing beside the cross, sees the earth in the form of a
huge full moon directly above his head, but, as far as the sun is
concerned, it is midnight for him.

In the course of about seven days the moon travels to _B_. In the
meantime it has turned one quarter of the way around its axis, and the
spot marked by the cross is still directly under the earth. For the
lunar inhabitant standing on that spot the sun is now on the point of
rising, and he sees the earth no longer in the shape of a full moon, but
in that of a half-moon. The lunar globe itself appears, at the same
time from the earth, as a half-moon, being in the position or phase that
we call first quarter.

Seven more days elapse, and the moon arrives at _C_, opposite to the
position of the sun, and with the earth between it and the solar orb. It
is now high noon for our lunarian standing beside the cross, while the
earth over his head appears, if he sees it at all, only as a black disk
close to the sun, or--as would sometimes be the case--covering the sun,
and encircled with a beautiful ring of light produced by the refraction
of its atmosphere. (Recall the similar phenomenon in the case of Venus.)
The moon seen from the earth is now in the phase called full moon.

Another lapse of seven days, and the moon is at _D_, in the phase called
third quarter, while the earth, viewed from the cross on the moon, which
is still pointed directly at it, appears again in the shape of a huge
half-moon.

During the next seven days the moon returns to its original position at
_A_, and becomes once more new moon, with "full earth" shining upon it.

Now it is evident that in consequence of the peculiar law of the moon's
rotation its days and nights are each about two of our weeks, or
fourteen days, in length. That hemisphere of the moon which is in the
full sunlight at _A_, for instance, is buried in the middle of night at
_C_. The result is different than in the case of Mercury, because the
body toward which the moon always keeps the same face directed is not
the luminous sun, but the non-luminous earth.

It is believed that the moon acquired this manner of rotation in
consequence of the tidal friction exercised upon it by the earth. The
tidal attraction of the earth exceeds that of the sun upon the moon
because the earth is so much nearer than the sun is, and tidal
attraction varies inversely as the cube of the distance. In fact, the
braking effect of tidal friction varies inversely as the sixth power of
the distance, so that the ability of the earth to stop the rotation of
the moon on its axis is immensely greater than that of the sun. This
power was effectively applied while the moon was yet a molten mass, so
that it is probable that the moon has rotated just as it does now for
millions of years.

As was remarked a little while ago, the moon traveling in an elliptical
orbit about the earth has a libratory movement which, if represented in
our picture, would cause the cross to swing now a little one way and now
a little the other, and thus produce an apparent pendulum motion of the
earth in the sky, similar to that of the sun as seen from Mercury. But
it is not necessary to go into the details of this phenomenon. The
reader, if he chooses, can deduce them for himself.

But we may inquire a little into the effects of the long days and nights
of the moon. In consequence of the extreme rarity of the lunar
atmosphere, it is believed that the heat of the sun falling upon it
during a day two weeks in length, is radiated away so rapidly that the
surface of the lunar rocks never rises above the freezing temperature
of water. On the night side, with no warm atmospheric blanket such as
the earth enjoys, the temperature may fall far toward absolute zero, the
most merciful figure that has been suggested for it being 200 deg. below
the zero of our ordinary thermometers! But there is much uncertainty
about the actual temperature on the moon, and different experiments, in
the attempt to make a direct measurement of it, have yielded discordant
results. At one time, for instance, Lord Rosse believed he had
demonstrated that at lunar noon the temperature of the rocks rose above
the boiling-point of water. But afterward he changed his mind and
favored the theory of a low temperature.

In this and in other respects much remains to be discovered concerning
our interesting satellite, and there is plenty of room, and an abundance
of original occupation, for new observers of the lunar world.




CHAPTER IX

HOW TO FIND THE PLANETS


There is no reason why everybody should not know the principal planets
at sight nearly as well as everybody knows the moon. It only requires a
little intelligent application to become acquainted with the other
worlds that have been discussed in the foregoing chapters, and to be
able to follow their courses through the sky and recognize them wherever
they appear. No telescope, or any other instrument whatever, is required
for the purpose. There is but one preliminary requirement, just as every
branch of human knowledge presupposes its A B C. This is an acquaintance
with the constellations and the principal stars--not a difficult thing
to obtain.

Almost everybody knows the "Great Dipper" from childhood's days,
except, perhaps, those who have had the misfortune to spend their youth
under the glare of city lights. Some know Orion when he shines
gloriously in the winter heavens. Many are able to point out the north
star, or pole star, as everybody should be able to do. All this forms a
good beginning, and may serve as the basis for the rapid acquirement of
a general knowledge of the geography of the heavens.

If you are fortunate enough to number an astronomer among your
acquaintance--an amateur will do as well as a professor--you may, with
his aid, make a short cut to a knowledge of the stars. Otherwise you
must depend upon books and charts. My Astronomy with an Opera-Glass was
prepared for this very purpose. For simply learning the constellations
and the chief stars you need no opera-glass or other instrument. With
the aid of the charts, familiarize yourself with the appearance of the
constellations by noticing the characteristic arrangements of their
chief stars. You need pay no attention to any except the bright stars,
and those that are conspicuous enough to thrust themselves upon your
attention.

Learn by observation at what seasons particular constellations are on,
or near, the meridian--i.e., the north and south line through the middle
of the heavens. Make yourself especially familiar with the so-called
zodiacal constellations, which are, in their order, running around the
heavens from west to east: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. The
importance of these particular constellations arises from the fact that
it is across them that the tracks of the planets lie, and when you are
familiar with the fixed stars belonging to them you will be able
immediately to recognize a stranger appearing among them, and will
correctly conclude that it is one of the planets.[21] How to tell
which planet it may be, it is the object of this chapter to show you. As
an indispensable aid--unless you happen already to possess a complete
star atlas on a larger scale--I have drawn the six charts of the
zodiacal constellations and their neighbors that are included in this
chapter.

[Footnote 21: In our latitudes, planets are never seen in the northern
quarter of the sky. When on the meridian, they are always somewhere
between the zenith and the southern horizon.]

[Illustration: CHART NO. 1.--FROM RIGHT ASCENSION 0 HOURS TO 4 HOURS;
DECLINATION 30 deg. NORTH TO 10 deg. SOUTH.]

Having learned to recognize the constellations and their chief stars on
sight, one other step, an extremely easy one, remains to be taken before
beginning your search for the planets--buy the American Ephemeris and
Nautical Almanac for the current year. It is published under the
direction of the United States Naval Observatory at Washington, and can
be purchased for one dollar.

This book, which may appear to you rather bulky and formidable for an
almanac, contains hundreds of pages and scores of tables to which you
need pay no attention. They are for navigators and astronomers, and are
much more innocent than they look. The plain citizen, seeking only an
introduction to the planets, can return their stare and pass by,
without feeling in the least humiliated.

[Illustration: CHART NO. 2.--FROM RIGHT ASCENSION 4 HOURS TO 8 HOURS;
DECLINATION 30 deg. NORTH TO 10 deg. SOUTH.]

In the front part of the book, after the long calendar, and the tables
relating to the sun and the moon, will be found about thirty pages of
tables headed, in large black letters, with the names of the
planets--Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, etc. Two months are
represented on each page, and opposite the number of each successive day
of the month the position of the planet is given in hours, minutes, and
seconds of right ascension, and degrees, minutes, and seconds of north
and south declination, the sign + meaning north, and the sign - south.
Do not trouble yourself with the seconds in either column, and take the
minutes only when the number is large. The hours of right ascension and
the degrees of declination are the main things to be noticed.

Right ascension, by the way, expresses the distance of a celestial body,
such as a star or a planet, east of the vernal equinox, or the first
point of Aries, which is an arbitrary point on the equator of the
heavens, which serves, like the meridian of Greenwich on the earth, as
a starting-place for reckoning longitude. The entire circuit of the
heavens along the equator is divided into twenty-four hours of right
ascension, each hour covering 15 deg. of space. If a planet then is in
right ascension (usually printed for short R.A.) 0 h. 0 m. 0 s., it is on
the meridian of the vernal equinox, or the celestial Greenwich; if it is
in R.A. 1 h., it will be found 15 deg. east of the vernal equinox, and
so on.

[Illustration: CHART NO. 3.--FROM RIGHT ASCENSION 8 HOURS TO 12 HOURS;
DECLINATION 30 deg. NORTH TO 10 deg. SOUTH.]

Declination (printed D. or Dec.) expresses the distance of a celestial
body north or south of the equator of the heavens.

With these explanations we may proceed to find a planet by the aid of
the Nautical Almanac and our charts. I take, for example, the ephemeris
for the year 1901, and I look under the heading "Jupiter" on page 239,
for the month of July. Opposite the 15th day of the month I find the
right ascension to be 18 h. 27 m., neglecting the seconds. Now 27
minutes are so near to half an hour that, for our purposes, we may say
Jupiter is in R.A. 18 h. 30 m. I set this down on a slip of paper, and
then examine the declination column, where I find that on July 15
Jupiter is in south declination (the sign - meaning south, as before
explained) 23 deg. 17 min. 52 sec., which is almost 23 deg. 18 min.,
and, for our purposes, we may call this 23 deg. 20 min., which is what
I set down on my slip.

[Illustration: CHART NO. 4.--FROM RIGHT ASCENSION 12 HOURS TO 16 HOURS;
DECLINATION 10 deg. NORTH TO 30 deg. SOUTH.]

Next, I turn to Chart No. 5, in this chapter, where I find the meridian
line of R.A. 18 h. running through the center of the chart. I know that
Jupiter is to be looked for about 30 m. east, or to the left, of that
line. At the bottom and top of the chart, every twenty minutes of R.A.
is indicated, so that it is easy, with the eye, or with the aid of a
ruler, to place the vertical line at some point of which Jupiter is to
be found.

[Illustration: CHART NO. 5.--FROM RIGHT ASCENSION 16 HOURS TO 20 HOURS;
DECLINATION 10 deg. NORTH TO 30 deg. SOUTH.]

Then I consult my note of the declination of the planet. It is south
23 deg. 20 min. On the vertical borders of the chart I find the figures of
the declination, and I observe that 0 deg. Dec., which represents the
equator of the heavens, is near the top of the chart, while each parallel
horizontal line across the chart indicates 10 deg. north or south of its
next neighbor. Next to the bottom of the chart I find the parallel of
20 deg., and I see that every five degrees is indicated by the figures at
the sides. By the eye, or with the aid of a ruler, I easily estimate
where the horizontal line of 23 deg. would fall, and since 20 min. is the
third of a degree I perceive that it is, for the rough purpose of merely
finding a conspicuous planet, negligible, although it, too, can be
included in the estimate, if thought desirable.

Having already found the vertical line on which Jupiter is placed and
having now found the horizontal line also, I have simply to regard their
crossing point, which will be the situation of the planet among the
stars. I note that it is in the constellation Sagittarius in a certain
position with reference to a familiar group of stars in that
constellation, and when I look at the heavens, there, in the place thus
indicated, Jupiter stands revealed.

[Illustration: CHART NO. 6.--FROM RIGHT ASCENSION 20 HOURS TO 24 HOURS
(0 II.); DECLINATION 10 deg. NORTH TO 30 deg. SOUTH.]

The reader will readily perceive that, in a precisely similar manner,
