hop into the outback."

"Let's see your authorization."

"What authorization?"

The guard's head wagged in his helmet.

"Y'gotta have authorization for a distant
destination, buddy. That's orders. Otherwise,
take a taxi."

"Orders, hell," Zolan growled. "I can't get where I
have to go using a taxi. I can't do my work with you
security types puttin' the chocks to me for 'orders'
each time I need to check a work site." His tone
became scathing. "Get your superior on-line and
tell him my name and what I want. If he has any
questions, tell him to check with Brad Curtin on
President Narval's staff. C'mon now. Move, man,
move."

The guard's manner changed with the name-dropping.

"Yes sir," he said. "Right away, sir."

Zolan's comm contact with the guard went on hold
as the guard switched to another line. Ignoring the
guard, Zolan surveyed several nearby utilities.

Moments later his line with the guard reopened.
The guard's voice was deferential.

"Clearance received, sir," he said. "Got a real
good single-seater here for you. Just came out
of the maintenance shops. All systems have been
checked and she's ready to go. Shall I warm her
up and crank in the coordinates for you, sir?"

"That's OK," Zolan replied, "I'll do the set ups
myself. I've got several places to visit and want
to work out the trip on the box so I don't waste
any more time. Which bird?"

"Follow me, sir."

Moving along the line the guard stopped at a
low-slung framework from which a crude cage hung
suspended, held in position by braces angling in
from connecting structures. Behind the cage,
halfway along a shaft running aft, hung a tiny
nuclear power plant. Nozzles of cone-shaped
propulsion units on gimbals hung in neutral.
That would change as soon as Zolan inserted his
coordinates and activated the thrusters.

"Here she is, sir," the guard exclaimed, proudly,
offering Zolan a checklist. "All yours."

"Right," Zolan grunted. Shifting his eyes
critically from the checklist to flitter and back,
he walked around the tiny flyer inspecting the
spars for alignment and cracks. Moving to the
power plant he examined the reactor's cover
and seals for seepage and the thruster nozzles and
gimbals for cracks and wear. Finally, satisfied after
scrutinizing the instrument panel, he stepped back,
initialed the checklist and handed it to the guard.

"Looks OK on the outside," he said. "I'll check out
the warm up. If it cooks OK, I'm out of your way."

He squeezed into the cage, set and activated the
reactor. Observing the power levels rise on the
gauges, his fingers stroked the flitter's keys
and levers. He tapped his coordinates into the
nav-comp as the plant warmed.

The guard moved closer.

"Know how to set her? Maybe I can help, sir."

He stuck his head into the crowded space and
watched the computer screen flip through the
coordinates that Zolan inserted. The screen
stabilized and reflected a series of vectors.
The guard studied them. Zolan ignored him.

Zolan adjusted the torso belts and rechecked
the reactor and weight-and-balance indicators.
He heaved a heavy sigh.

"Well, time to hit the road," he said. "Stand back,
man, I'm taking her up."

The guard stepped back and saluted. Zolan moved
the power lever and directional controls. The
framework and cage quivered and the flitter lifted
up and away.

Looking down, Zolan saw the guard bending backward,
watching his direction of flight.

"Hope he got them all down right," he thought as he
entered new data into the computer.





 Chapter TWENTY-SIX


Zolan peered ahead. Reaching the depot's perimeter
was less of a problem than he had anticipated.
Following a few short stops to surface stations
to inspect military tunnels and comm links, and
validate the flitter's flight record, he diverted
to a depression between Coldfield and the horizon.
Resetting coordinates had taken seconds. Resuming
flight, he quickly merged for a short distance with
a queue of tugs and taxis along a crowded lane, then
veered sharply up toward the Logistics Depot.

Blending his flitter's comm with the flood of
electronic signals from nearby tugs and transports
at the Gateway, Zolan drew closer to the huge
Depot and took shelter in a knot of lashed vessels.
Taking several deep breaths, he fixed his eyes and
mind on the depot. Concentrating, he constricted
and relaxed his neck and shoulder muscles in an
irregular pattern, and repeated the rhythm until it
invoked a slight pressure high in his left shoulder.
The stresses energized the short-range sending
device implanted in him prior to the Sentinel's
escape.

His words, inaudible beyond his voice box, opened
contact with the depot's command post.

"Calling Ditch-digger," he intoned. "Ditch-digger,
refer to your k-library program file 6756, and
respond on Bootstrap."

He repeated the message and waited. It would take
time for the comm technician on duty to work it
out. The communications staff would scurry about,
searching for the program. Restricted to Sentinel,
this contact would be its initial activation.

The receiver in his ear whispered, "This is
Ditch-digger in Bootstrap. Continue."

"Ditch-digger. Scramble 16."

Zolan hunched and tightened his shoulders to switch
channels.

The voice came through. "Done."

"I want to speak with Colonel Hanno."

"One moment, please."

A short pause.

"Hanno."

"This is a Sentinel call. Break the seal on your
copy of the Sentinel Support Plan and refer to
Annex C, Section 21, line numbers 416 to 422.
Note the encryption structure. I will cite the line
in the structure that authenticates my request
for support. Waiting."

Minutes passed. Breaking the seal on the highest
classification Sentinel Support Plan was a grave
responsibility that Hanno would not take lightly.
He would need to do it in the station's security
vault with no witnesses present. The comm center
would then need to be cleared of personnel other
than Hanno before the exchange could proceed.
Finally, the receiver whispered again.

"I have the lines you refer to. Continue."

"Note how the authenticator is to be stated,"
Zolan said.

He rattled off a sequence of numbers, letters
and symbols. Injecting a short, prescribed silence,
he spun off another set. The authenticator was
in two parts, each requiring its own style for
presentation.

"Authenticator confirmed," Hanno said after a
pause. "State request?"

"I'm in a flitter near the Gateway," Zolan said.
"Request permission to come aboard and have
unattended access to the spunnel transmitter
for about five minutes. I will then depart."

"Permission granted. Do you wish an escort from
your present position to the dock?"

"Yes, please send an unarmed tug to lead me through
the gate, match me up, and point me at the dock. Tug
operator and anyone else that observes my presence
or the flitter must not repeat must not log the
serial number of my flitter or any of its features.
Clear all your people to beyond five meters in all
direction from the passageways I'll be using, and
from the spunnel comm center. I am armed with
a hand weapon set for maximum effect without
collateral damage to non-organics. My mission
requires such precautions. Do you accept these
conditions?"

"I accept."

"Noted. Have an unarmed guide at the air lock to
precede me to the spunnel console. Instruct him to
not speak to me, no questions, and to not interfere
in any manner in what I do. When I've completed
my work in the comm room the guide is to lead me
back to the air lock. The same tug is then to get
me through the Gateway, same conditions, and I'll
be out of your way. When I'm gone conduct your
highest-level UIPS security briefing. This mission
is classified UIPS Black. Understood?"

"Understood. Ready?"

"Ready. I am moving toward the Gateway and will be
there in two minutes. Have your man flash his reds
and greens at one-second intervals. I will respond
with standard flitter yellows at the same spacing.
Over. Out."

Zolan carefully adjusted the controls to slip the
flitter away from the screening vessels. Clear,
he maneuvered his craft close to a space buoy
that marked the route through Fandango.

A yellow-green striped tug appeared in the distance
and grew larger. The Gateway's diameter could expand
to pass the largest freighters or close completely.
It could be straight or as convoluted as a randomly
configured corkscrew. The tug passed through,
flashing the agreed-on signals.

Zolan responded. The tug stopped, reversed heading,
and waited for him to line up. Inside the force
field, the route took them over, under and around
huge freighters and through swarms of shuttles,
tugs, and barges. Five hundred meters from the
depot Zolan pressed a disk on his control column
and a mag beam reached out and locked on to the tug.

The tug's thrusters glowed brighter with the power
to match up both craft. Aligned, Zolan released the
tug, and gentling his thrusters, brought his flitter
to rest on a landing platform that had articulated
from a portal.

Space suit closed and glare screens partially
activated to veil his features, Zolan strode the
Depot's corridors behind his escort. Although he
had docked at the portal nearest his destination,
the spunnel console was still almost a quarter kay
from the air lock.

Reaching the console chamber, Zolan motioned his
guide to wait outside. He entered and inspected
the area for intruders and bugs. It seemed secure.

Approaching the squat spunnel transmitter he noted
that Hanno had activated the system for immediate
use and disengaged all logs and file-for-record
links. Confirming the disconnect, Zolan wasted
no time in preliminaries. Inserting the capsule he
keyed the transmitter to the channels assigned
to Sentinel and set off his burst.

The transmitter was a model that dated back several
centuries to the depot's construction. Zolan knew
from his training for the mission that a spunnel
burst from the depot had to be arranged in parts.
Each segment was to be inserted separately into
the spunnel dispatch slot. The ancient transmitter
could process only so much at a bite.

Zolan held the final segment and reached to insert
it. A couple of seconds and the transmission would
be complete. The console was coded to dissolve
the capsule immediately following the burst; there
would be no residue.

Zolan bent to insert the end of the message.

Sensing movement behind him, he slipped sideways
and hit the deck. Without warning and in the
line-of-fire, the squat console disintegrated as
a rending flash arced across to where he had been
a fraction of second before. Off balance, twisting
to face the door, Zolan drew his weapon.

The flash blinded him. His suit shielded him
against the instant hell-fire that bounced off
the console.

Silence followed the attacker's second shot. Zolan
crouched, weapon extended, vision clearing. No
further shots. Snapping a quick glance around, he
took in the damage. The console was a melted lump
and the room a shambles. He had to get out and away.

Up on his feet, he raced through the open doorway,
gun raised. His escort to the comm room lay
spread-eagled in the corridor, head burned to a
crisp by what must have been a max shot. The
corridor was empty.

"They cleared the area of everyone but the killer,"
he thought bitterly.

Having committed the route to memory as he followed
the escort to the spunnel room, Zolan raced along
the corridors, gun in hand. No one barred his way.

The air lock came in view. He hurried through and
twisted into the flitter driver's cage. He cut the
mag beam to the dock and signaled the waiting tug.

 ##

They met on the transit strip.

Standing close, facing off the strip, observant,
Zolan briefed Brad in quick, terse phrases.

"What's your assessment?" Brad asked when
Zolan finished.

"It was a long, straight corridor. The escort must
have been shot from the bend some distance away.
Damage to the comm room was extensive. Scarf
must have an agent there. My having the area
cleared alerted him. That brought on the attack."

"Did you get word to Hanno?"

"No. It would have raised questions I couldn't
answer without breaking our cover. He'll have
to figure it out for himself. I'm concerned about
what the agent will report to his control."

"Whatever they conclude, the action eliminates
the depot as a comm resource for us. Did you
get the entire message on its way?"

"I don't know. The last fragment included the Point
Icarus coordinates."

Their eyes met.





 Chapter TWENTY-SEVEN


President Camari stonily contemplated the
incomplete communication and turned to Intelligence
Director Dynal. Ram sat immobile, nearby.

"Allen?" Camari's raised brows posed his question.

"We couldn't get through directly to Hanno to find
out why the message was cut short. So we went
spunnel to the Terminals and patched in to the
Depot on coded conventional. Hanno reports his
spunnel transmitter was destroyed. He was certain
he was hoodwinked into permitting a saboteur aboard
and screamed about a security breach on the Sentinel
Support Plan. He said the 'saboteur' escaped before
the alarm could be acted on. A damned lucky delay,
I think."

"Did you enlighten Hanno?"

"No, sir. Too risky for Sentinel, and he has no
need-to-know. I did tell him to run deep background
checks and truth verification tests on all Depot
personnel. He objected, thinking he had already
pinpointed the culprit. I told him to do it anyhow,
slap into the brig anyone who didn't pass,
and report the results to me under highest
classification through the construction site's
spunnel center."

"Good. No question they've been infiltrated. We
must consider the depot compromised for classified
until Hanno assures us he's cleared the problem
from his facility."

The President touched a button on his desk,
running the message through again in its entirety.
He switched the screen dark.

"The Outer Region's target might be the depot,
but I wonder." Ram said. "Perhaps destroying
the depot's spunnel transmitter is prelude to
an attack. If it is, they must realize that the
incident set off alarms throughout our defenses.
They'll also know we can maintain spunnel contact
and relay messages to and from our patrollers
and other craft through the construction site."

"Considering Hanno's report on what happened,
the attack on his spunnel transmitter focused on
keeping this message from getting through, not to
merely destroy the machine. That alone would not
have been worth the effort."

"We're down to one comm spunnel link in the Special
Zone," Dynal added. "The one we built on Planet
Pluto is controlled by Narval's people."

"Does Sentinel have access to the transmitter at
the Terminals?"

"The sender would need to personally key in
the clearances as well as the text," said Ram,
"otherwise the message would be compromised.
Sentinel would be compromised. We do have the
last resort."

"Have you checked it lately?"

"We run random tests from this end to be certain
that it's ready to function. As you know, sir, it
has its uncertainties and imposes a high price."

"Back to the message," Camari sighed and rubbed
his temple gently as he pondered. "Their combined
forces, and the distances involved, place us at an
enormous disadvantage."

"Without question."

"Ram, what's your estimate concerning the missing
piece?" Camari pointed to the message in his hand.

