on catching sight of us, immediately recognized us as belonging to the
strange squadron in the sky. As such she felt that we must be her friends,
and saw in us her only possible hope of escape. For that reason she had
instantly thrown herself under our protection. This accounted for the
singular confidence which she had manifested in us from the beginning.

Her wonderful story had so captivated our imaginations that for a long
time after it was finished we could not recover from the spell. It was
told over and over again from mouth to mouth, and repeated from ship to
ship, everywhere exciting the utmost astonishment.

Destiny seemed to have sent us on this expedition into space for the
purpose of clearing off mysteries that had long puzzled the minds
of men. When on the moon we had unexpectedly to ourselves settled the
question that had been debated from the beginning of astronomical history
of the former habitability of that globe.


A Question Settled.

Now, on Mars, we had put to rest no less mysterious questions relating to
the past history of our own planet. Adelung, as the Heidelberg Professor
asserted, had named the Vale of Cashmere as the probable site of the
Garden of Eden, and the place of origin of the human race, but later
investigators had taken issue with this opinion, and the question where
the Aryans originated upon the earth had long been one of the most
puzzling that science presented.

This question seemed now to have been settled.

Aina had said that Mars had completed 5,000 circuits about the sun since
her people were brought to it as captives. One circuit of Mars occupies
687 days. More than 9,000 years had therefore elapsed since the first
invasion of the earth by the Martians.

Another great mystery--that of the origin of those gigantic and
inexplicable monuments, the great pyramids and the Sphinx, on the banks of
the Nile, had also apparently been solved by us, although these Egyptian
wonders had been the furthest things from our thoughts when we set out
for the planet Mars.

We had travelled more than thirty millions of miles in order to get
answers to questions which could not be solved at home.

But from these speculations and retrospects we were recalled by the
commander of the expedition.


Does Aina Hold the Secret?

"This is all very interesting and very romantic, gentlemen," he said,
"but now let us get at the practical side of it. We have learned Aina's
language and have heard her story. Let us next ascertain whether
she cannot place in our hands some key which will place Mars at our
mercy. Remember what we came here for, and remember that the earth
expects every man of us to do his duty."

This Nelson-like summons again changed the current of our thoughts,
and we instantly set to work to learn from Aina if Mars, like Achilles,
had not some vulnerable point where a blow would be mortal.




Chapter XIV.


It was a curious scene when the momentous interview which was to
determine our fate and that of Mars began. Aina had been warned of what
was coming. We in the flagship had all learned to speak her language with
more or less ease, but it was deemed best that the Heidelberg Professor,
assisted by one of his colleagues, should act as interpreter.

The girl, flushed with excitement of the novel situation, fully
appreciating the importance of what was about to occur, and looking
more charming than before, stood at one side of the principal
apartment. Directly facing her were the interpreters, and the rest of
us, all with ears intent and eyes focused upon Aina, stood in a double
row behind them.

As heretofore, I am setting down her words translated into our own tongue,
having taken only so much liberty as to connect the sentences into a
stricter sequence than they had when falling from her lips in reply to
the questions that were showered upon her.


She Has a Plan.

"You will never be victorious," she said, "if you attack them openly as
you have been doing. They are too strong and too numerous. They are well
prepared for such attacks, because they have had to resist them before."

"They have waged war with the inhabitants of the asteroid Ceres, whose
people are giants greater than themselves. Their enemies from Ceres have
attacked them here. Hence these fortifications, with weapons pointing
skyward, and the great air fleets which you have encountered."

"But there must be some point," said Mr. Edison, "where we can."

"Yes, yes," interrupted the girl quickly, "there is one blow you can
deal them which they could not withstand."

"What is that?" eagerly inquired the commander.

"You can drown them out."

"How? With the canals?"


We Must Drown Them Out.

"Yes, I will explain to you. I have already told you, and, in fact,
you must have seen it for yourselves, that there are almost no mountains
on Mars. A very learned man of my race used to say that the reason was
because Mars is so very old a world that the mountains it once had have
been almost completely levelled, and the entire surface of the planet had
become a great plain. There are depressions, however, most of which are
occupied by the seas. The greater part of the land lies below the level
of the oceans. In order at the same time to irrigate the soil and make it
fruitful, and to protect themselves from overflows by the ocean breaking
in upon them, the Martians have constructed the immense and innumerable
canals which you see running in all directions over the continents."

"There is one period in the year, and that period has now arrived, when
there is special danger of a great deluge. Most of the oceans of Mars
lie in the southern hemisphere. When it is Summer in that hemisphere,
the great masses of ice and snow collected around the south pole melt
rapidly away."

"Yes, that is so," broke in one of our astronomers, who was listening
attentively. "Many a time I have seen the vast snow fields around the
southern pole of Mars completely disappear as the Summer sun rose high
upon them."

"With the melting of these snows," continued Aina, "a rapid rise in the
level of the water in the southern oceans occurs. On the side facing
these oceans the continents of Mars are sufficiently elevated to prevent
an overflow, but nearer the equator the level of the land sinks lower."

"With your telescopes you have no doubt noticed that there is a great
bending sea connecting the oceans of the south with those of the north
and running through the midst of the continents."

"Quite so," said the astronomer who had spoken before, "we call it the
Syrtis Major."

"That long narrow sea," Aina went on, "forms a great channel through
which the flood of waters caused by the melting of the southern polar
snows flows swiftly toward the equator and then on toward the north until
it reaches the sea basins which exist there. At that point it is rapidly
turned into ice and snow, because, of course, while it is Summer in the
southern hemisphere it is Winter in the northern."


Mars Will Be Ours.

"The Syrtis Major (I am giving our name to the channel of communication in
place of that by which the girl called it) is like a great safety valve,
which, by permitting the waters to flow northward, saves the continents
from inundation."

"But when mid-Summer arrives, the snows around the pole having been
completely melted away, the flood ceases and the water begins to
recede. At this time, but for a device which the Martians have employed,
the canals connected with the oceans would run dry, and the vegetation,
left without moisture under the Summer sun, would quickly perish."

"To prevent this they have built a series of enormous gates extending
completely across the Syrtis Major at its narrowest point (latitude 25
degrees south). These gates are all controlled by machinery collected
at a single point on the shore of the strait. As soon as the flood in
the Syrtis Major begins to recede, the gates are closed, and, the water
being thus restrained, the irrigating canals are kept full long enough
to mature the harvests."

"The clew! The clew at last!" exclaimed Mr. Edison. "That is the place
where we shall nip them. If we can close those gates now at the moment
of high tide we shall flood the country. Did you say," he continued,
turning to Aina, "that the movement of the gates was all controlled from
a single point?"


The Great Power House.

"Yes," said the girl. "There is a great building (power house) full of
tremendous machinery which I once entered when my father was taken there
by his master, and where I saw one Martian, by turning a little handle,
cause the great line of gates, stretching a hundred miles across the sea,
to slowly shut in, edge to edge, until the flow of the water toward the
north had been stopped."

"How is the building protected?"

"So completely," replied Aina, "that my only fear is that you may not be
able to reach it. On account of the danger from their enemies on Ceres,
the Martians have fortified it strongly on all sides, and have even
surrounded it and covered it overhead with a great electrical network,
to touch which would be instant death."

"Ah," said Mr. Edison, "they have got an electric shield, have they? Well,
I think we shall be able to manage that."

"Anyhow," he continued, "we have got to get into that power house, and we
have got to close those gates, and we must not lose much time in making
up our minds how it is to be done. Evidently this is our only chance. We
have not force enough to contend in open battle with the Martians, but
if we can flood them out, and thereby render the engines contained in
their fortifications useless, perhaps we shall be able to deal with the
airships, which will be all the means of defence that will then remain
to them."

This idea commended itself to all the leaders of the expedition. It was
determined to make a reconnaissance at once.

But it would not do for us to approach the planet too hastily, and we
certainly could not think of landing upon it in broad daylight. Still,
as long as we were yet at a considerable distance from Mars, we felt that
we should be safe from observation, because so much time had elapsed
while we were hidden behind Deimos that the Martians had undoubtedly
concluded that we were no longer in existence.

So we boldly quitted the little satellite with our entire squadron and
once more rapidly approached the red planet of war. This time it was
to be a death grapple and our chances of victory still seemed good.


Ready for a Death Grapple.

As soon as we arrived so near the planet that there was danger of our
being actually seen, we took pains to keep continually in the shadow
of Mars, and the more surely to conceal our presence all lights upon
the ships were extinguished. The precaution of the commander even went
so far as to have the smooth metallic sides of the cars blackened over
so that they should not reflect light, and thus become visible to the
Martians as shining specks, moving suspiciously among the stars.

The precise location of the great power house on the shores of the Syrtis
Major having been carefully ascertained, the squadron dropped down one
night into the upper limits of the Martian atmosphere, directly over
the gulf.

Then a consultation was called on the flagship and a plan of campaign
was quickly devised.

It was deemed wise that the attempt should be made with a single
electrical ship, but that the others should be kept hovering near, ready
to respond on the instant to any signal for aid which might come from
below. It was thought that, notwithstanding the wonderful defences,
which, according to Aina's account surrounded the building, a small
party would have a better chance of success than a large one.

Mr. Edison was certain that the electrical network which was described
as covering the power house would not prove a serious obstruction to
us, because by carefully sweeping the space where we intended to pass
with the disintegrators before quitting the ship, the netting could be
sufficiently cleared away to give us uninterrupted passage.

At first the intention was to have twenty men, each armed with two
disintegrators (that being the largest number that one person could carry
to advantage) descend from the electrical ship and make the venture. But,
after further discussion, this number was reduced; first to a dozen,
and finally, to only four. These four consisted of Mr. Edison, Colonel
Smith, Mr. Sidney Phillips and myself.

Both by her own request and because we could not help feeling that her
knowledge of the locality would be indispensable to us, Aina was also
included in our party, but not, of course, as a fighting member of it.

It was about an hour after midnight when the ship in which we were to
make the venture parted from the remainder of the squadron and dropped
cautiously down. The blaze of electric lights running away in various
directions indicated the lines of innumerable canals with habitations
crowded along their banks, which came to a focus at a point on the
continent of Aeria, westward from the Syrtis Major.


Destroying The Martians.

With Aina's Aid Our Warriors Prepare an Awful Revenge on the Enemy.

We stopped the electrical ship at an elevation of perhaps three hundred
feet above the vast roof of a structure which Aina assured us was the
building we were in search of.

Here we remained for a few minutes, cautiously reconnoitring. On that
side of the power house which was opposite to the shore of the Syrtis
Major there was a thick grove of trees, lighted beneath, as was apparent
from the illumination which here and there streamed up through the cover
of leaves, but, nevertheless, dark and gloomy above the tree tops.

"The electric network extends over the grove as well as over the
building," said Aina.

This was lucky for us, because we wished to descend among the trees,
and, by destroying part of the network over the tree tops, we could
reach the shelter we desired and at the same time pass within the line
of electric defences.

With increased caution, and almost holding our breath lest we should
make some noise that might reach the ears of the sentinels beneath, we
caused the car to settle gently down until we caught sight of a metallic
net stretched in the air between us and the trees.

After our first encounter with the Martians on the asteroid, where, as
I have related, some metal which was included in their dress resisted
the action of the disintegrators, Mr. Edison had readjusted the range
of vibrations covered by the instruments, and since then we had found
nothing that did not yield to them. Consequently, we had no fear that
the metal of the network would not be destroyed.

There was danger, however, of arousing attention by shattering
holes through the tree tops. This could be avoided by first carefully
ascertaining how far away the network was, and then with the adjustable
mirrors attached to the disintegrators focusing the vibratory discharge
at that distance.


Overcoming Their Precautions.

So successful were we that we opened a considerable gap in the network
without doing any perceptible damage to the trees beneath.

The ship was cautiously lowered through the opening and brought to rest
among the upper branches of one of the tallest trees. Colonel Smith,
Mr. Phillips, Mr. Edison and myself at once clambered out upon a strong
limb.

For a moment I feared our arrival had been betrayed on account of the
altogether too noisy contest that arose between Colonel Smith and
Mr. Phillips as to which of them should assist Aina. To settle the
dispute I took charge of her myself.

At length we were all safely in the tree.

Then followed the still more dangerous undertaking of descending from
this great height to the ground. Fortunately, the branches were very
close together and they extended down within a short distance of the
soil. So the actual difficulties of the descent were not very great
after all. The one thing that we had particularly to bear in mind was
the absolute necessity of making no noise.

At length the descent was successfully accomplished, and we all five
stood together in the shadow at the foot of the great tree. The grove
was so thick around that while there was an abundance of electric lights
among the trees, their illumination did not fall upon us where we stood.

Peering cautiously through the vistas in various directions, we
ascertained our location with respect to the wall of the building. Like
all the structures that we had seen on Mars, it was composed of polished
red metal.


Looking for an Entrance.

"Where is the entrance?" inquired Mr. Edison, in a whisper.

"Come softly this way, and look out for the sentinel," replied Aina.

Gripping our disintegrators firmly, and screwing up our courage, with
noiseless steps we followed the girl among the shadows of the trees.

We had one very great advantage. The Martians had evidently placed so
much confidence in the electric network which surrounded the power house
that they never dreamed of enemies being able to penetrate it--at least,
without giving warning of their coming.

But the hole which we had blown in this network with the disintegrators
had been made noiselessly, and Mr. Edison believed, since no enemies
had appeared, that our operations had not been betrayed by any automatic
signal to watchers inside the building.

Consequently, we had every reason to think that we now stood within
the line of defence, in which they reposed the greatest confidence,
without their having the least suspicion of our presence.

Aina assured us that on the occasion of her former visit to the power
house there had been but two sentinels on guard at the entrance. At the
inner end of a long passage leading to the interior, she said, there
were two more. Besides these there were three or four Martian engineers
watching the machinery in the interior of the building. A number of air
ships were supposed to be on guard around the structure, but possibly
their vigilance had been relaxed, because not long ago the Martians had
sent an expedition against Ceres which had been so successful that the
power of that planet to make an attack upon Mars had for the present
been destroyed.

Supposing us to have been annihilated in the recent battle among the
clouds, they would have no fear or cause for vigilance on our account.

The entrance to the great structure was low--at least, when measured by
the stature of the Martians. Evidently the intention was that only one
person at a time should find room to pass through it.

Drawing cautiously near, we discerned the outlines of two gigantic forms,
standing in the darkness, one on either side of the door. Colonel Smith
whispered to me:


The Disintegrator Again.

"If you will take the fellow on the right, I will attend to the other
one."

Adjusting our aim as carefully as was possible in the gloom, Colonel
Smith and I simultaneously discharged our disintegrators, sweeping
them rapidly up and down in the manner which had become familiar to us
when endeavoring to destroy one of the gigantic Martians with a single
stroke. And so successful were we that the two sentinels disappeared as
if they had been ghosts of the night.

Instantly we all hurried forward and entered the door. Before us extended
a long, straight passage, brightly illuminated by a number of electric
candles. Its polished sides gleamed with blood-red reflections, and
the gallery terminated, at a distance of two or three hundred feet,
with an opening into a large chamber beyond, on the further side of
which we could see part of a gigantic and complicated mass of machinery.

Making as little noise as possible, we pushed ahead along the passage,
but when we had arrived within a distance of a dozen paces from the
inner end, we stopped, and Colonel Smith, getting down upon his knees,
crept forward until he had reached the inner end of the passage. There
he peered cautiously around the edge into the chamber, and, turning his
head a moment later, beckoned us to come forward. We crept to his side,
