thirty-one, sir!"

"Very well, Corbett," replied Connel. "Space Academy sends the crew a
'_well done!_' Everything's set back home to take over the beam as soon
as Junior starts on his way back. How much time until zero blast-off on
the satellite?"

Tom glanced at the clock. "Less than two minutes, sir!"

"All right," said Connel over the intercom, "everybody to the control
deck if you want to see Junior do his stuff!"

In a moment the six spacemen were gathered around the magnascope waiting
for the final act of their great effort. Breathlessly, their eyes
flicking back and forth from the solar clock to the magnascope, they
waited for the red hand to sweep around.

"Here it comes," said Tom excitedly. "One second--two
seconds--three--four--_five!_"

On the surface of the planetoid, giant mushrooming clouds appeared
climbing into the airless void. One by one the reactor units exploded.
Connel counted them as they blew up.

"One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight--" he paused. Junior
began moving away from them. "Nine!" shouted Connel. "What happened to
nine?"

"Roger," shouted Astro, "you made a mistake on the timer!"

"But I couldn't. I--I--"

Connel spun around, his eyes blazing, breathing hard. "What time did you
set the last one for, Roger?" he demanded.

"Why, twenty minutes to blast-off time, sir," answered the blond-headed
cadet.

"Then it won't go off for another forty minutes," said Connel.

"But, sir--" began Roger, and then fell silent. The room was quiet.
Everyone looked at Roger and then at Connel. "Honestly, sir, I didn't
mean to make a mistake. I--" pleaded Roger.

Connel turned around. His face suddenly looked very tired. "That's all
right, Roger," he said quietly. "We've all been working pretty hard. One
little mistake is bound to show up in an operation like this." He
paused. "It's my fault. I should have checked those fuses myself."

"Does it make so much difference, sir?" asked Astro.

"A lot of difference, Astro," said Connel. He sat down heavily.

"But how, sir?" asked Tom.

"It's very simple, Tom," answered Connel. His voice was strangely quiet.
"Junior spins on its axis in two hours, just as Earth spins in
twenty-four hours. I thought we had the explosions timed so at the
proper moment we'd push Junior out of his orbit around Tara, and the
greater orbit around Alpha Centauri, by utilizing both speeds, plus the
initial thrust. But by being one blast short, forty minutes late, the
explosion will take place when Junior is forty minutes out of
position"--he paused and calculated rapidly in his mind--"that's about
forty-eight thousand miles out of position. When it goes off, instead of
sending Junior out into space, it'll blast it right into its own sun!"

"Isn't there something we can do, sir?" asked Tom.

"Nothing, Corbett," answered Connel wearily. "Instead of supplying the
Solar Alliance with copper, in another week Junior will be hardly more
than a molten piece of space junk." He looked at the teleceiver screen.
All ready, Junior was falling away.

"Stand by for full acceleration, hyperdrive," said the big officer in a
hoarse whisper. "We're heading home!"




CHAPTER 17


The subdued whine of the hyperdrive filled the power deck and made Roger
wince as he stepped through the hatch and waved at Astro. He climbed
down the ladder and stopped beside the big Venusian who stood stripped
to the waist, watching the pressure gauges on the power-deck control
board.

"Hiya, Roger," said Astro with a big grin.

"Hello, Astro," replied Roger and sat down on a stool near by.

"Excuse me a minute, hot-shot," said Astro. "Gotta check the baffling
around reaction tube three." The big cadet hurriedly donned a lead-lined
protective suit and entered the reaction chamber. After a moment he
reappeared and took off the suit. He poured a glass of water, handed it
to Roger, and poured another for himself.

"Gets pretty hot down here," he said. "I don't like to use the air
conditioner when I'm on hyperdrive. Sucks my power output and reduces
pressure on the oxygen pumps."

Roger nodded absently at the needlessly detailed explanation. Astro
looked at him sharply. "Say, what's eating you?"

"Honestly, Astro," said Roger, "I've never felt more miserable in my
life."

"Don't let it get you down, Roger," said Astro. "The major said it was a
mistake anyone could make."

"Yeah," flared Roger, "but have you seen the way he just--_talks_?"

"Talks?" asked Astro blankly.

"Yeah, talks," said Roger. "No yelling, or blasting off, or handing out
demerits like they were candy. Nothing! Why he hasn't even chewed Alfie
out since we left Junior. He just sits in his quarters."

Astro understood now and nodded his head in agreement. "Yeah, you're
right. I'd rather have him fusing his tubes than the way he is now."

"Tom must feel pretty rotten, too," said Roger. "I haven't seen much of
him either."

"Or Alfie," put in Astro. "Neither of them have done anything but work.
I don't think either of them has slept since we left Tara."

"It's all my fault!" said Roger. "I'm nothing but a loudmouthed bag of
space gas--with an asteroid for a head!" He got up and lurched toward the
ladder.

"Hey, where you going?" yelled Astro.

"Almost forgot," yelled Roger from the top of the ladder. "I've got to
feed our prisoners a meal. And the way I feel, I'd like to shove it down
their throats!"

Roger went directly to the galley off the control deck and prepared a
hasty meal for Loring and Mason. He piled it on a tray and went below to
the brig.

"All right, Loring," he growled, "come and get it!"

"Well, well, well," sneered Loring. "Where's the big Manning spirit? You
boys are kinda down since you blew that little operation, huh?"

"Listen, you space crawler," said Manning coldly, "one more word out of
you and I'll bring you out in the passageway and pound that head of
yours into space junk!"

"I wish you'd try that, you little squirt!" snarled Loring. "I'd break
you in two!"

"O.K., pal," said Roger, "I'm going to give you that chance!" He opened
the door to the cell and Loring stepped out. Holding the paralo-ray gun
on him, Roger relocked the door. Left inside, Mason stuck his face close
to the grille.

"Give it to him, Loring," he hissed. "Take him apart!"

Roger threw the paralo-ray gun in the corner of the passageway and faced
the heavier spaceman. He held his arms loosely at his side, and he
balanced on the balls of his feet. A slight smile played at the corners
of his mouth.

"Start breaking, Loring," he said quietly.

"Why, you--" snarled Loring and rushed in. He swung wildly for Roger's
head, but the cadet slipped inside the punch and drove a hard right to
Loring's mid-section. The prisoner doubled over, staggered back, and
slowly straightened up. Roger's lips were drawn tightly in a grimace of
cold anger. His eyes were shining hard and bright. He stepped in quickly
and chopped two straight lefts to Loring's jaw, then doubled the
spaceman up again with a hard right to the heart. Loring gasped and
tried to clinch. But Roger threw a straight jolting right to his jaw.
The prisoner slumped to the floor, out cold. The fight was finished.

Roger went over, picked up the paralo-ray gun, and opened the cell door
again.

"All right, Mason," he said coldly, "drag him inside. And if you want to
try me for size, just say so."

Mason didn't answer. He merely hurried out, and grabbing Loring by the
feet, dragged him inside. Roger slammed the door and locked it.

[Illustration]

Rubbing his knuckles and feeling better than he had felt for days, he
started back to the radar bridge. As he neared Major Connel's quarters,
he heard Connel's voice. He stopped and listened outside the door.

"It's a beautiful job of calculation, Tom," Connel was saying. "I don't
see how you and Higgins could have done it in so short a time. And
without an electronic computer to aid you. Beautiful job--really
excellent--but I'm afraid it's too risky."

"I've already talked to Astro and Mr. Shinny, sir," said Tom, "and
they've volunteered. I haven't spoken to Roger yet, but I'm sure he'd
be willing to try."

Roger stepped through the door.

"Whatever it is," said Roger, "I'm ready."

"Eavesdropping on your commanding officer," said Connel, eying the
blond-headed cadet speculatively, "is a very serious offense."

"I just happened to hear my name mentioned, sir," replied Roger with a
smile.

Connel turned back to Tom. "Go over that again, Tom."

"Well, sir," said Tom, "Junior's falling into the sun at a speed of
twenty-two miles a second right now. But we could still land a jet boat
on Junior, set up more nuclear explosions to blast him out of the sun's
grip, and send him on his way to our solar system. We wouldn't get as
much speed as before, but we'd still save the copper."

By this time, Astro and Shinny had joined the group and were standing
outside the door in the passageway, listening silently.

Connel tugged at his chin. "Let's see," he said, "if we could get back
to Tara in three days ..." He looked up at Astro. "Do you think you
could get us back in three days, Astro?"

"Major Connel, for another crack at Junior," roared the big Venusian,
"I'd get you back in a day and a half!"

"All right," said Connel. "That's one problem. But there are others."

"What, sir?" asked Tom.

"We have to prepare reactant fuses and we have to build new reactor
units. If we could do that--"

"If Astro can get us back," said Shinny, "and Roger and this smart young
feller here, Alfie, can make up some fuses, I'll build them there
units. After all, Astro showed me how once. I guess I can follow his
orders!"

"Good!" said Connel. "Now there is the element of time. How much time
would we need on Junior?" He looked at Tom.

"Let me answer this way, sir," said Tom. "We'd only have two hours to
plant the reaction charges and trigger them, but that should be enough."

"Why so close, Tom?" asked Roger.

"It has to be," answered Tom. "We know what the pull of the sun is, and
the power of the jet boat. When the sun's pull becomes greater than the
escape speed of the jet boat, the boat would never clear. It would keep
falling into the sun. I've based this figure on reaching Junior at the
last possible moment."

"It'd take at least five men to set up the five explosions we need,"
mused Connel. "That means one of us will have to stay on the _Polaris_."

There was an immediate and loud chorus of "Not me!" from everyone.

"All right," said Connel, "we'll draw numbers. One, two, three, four,
five, and six. The man who draws number six will stay with the
_Polaris_. All right?"

"Yes, sir," said Tom, glancing around. "We agree to that."

Connel went to his desk and wrote quickly on six slips of paper. He
folded each one, dumped them in his cap, and offered it to Astro.

"All right, Astro," said Connel, "draw!"

Astro licked his lips and stuck in his big paw. The Venusian fingered
several, then pulled out a slip of paper. He opened it and read aloud.
"Number two! I go!" He turned and grinned at the others.

Connel offered his cap to Alfie. Alfie dipped in two fingers and pulled
out a slip. "Number four! I go!" he squealed.

Roger and Shinny drew numbers one and three. Tom looked at the major.
"Go ahead, Corbett," said Connel.

"After you, sir," said Tom.

"I said draw one!" roared Connel.

"Yes, sir," said Tom. He reached in and quickly pulled out one of the
two remaining slips.

"Number six," he said quietly. "I stay."

Connel, not bothering to open the last one, slapped the hat on his head
and turned away.

"But, sir," said Tom, "I--ah--"

Connel cut him off with a wave of his hands. "No _buts_!" He turned to
the others. "Manning, Higgins! Get me a course back to Junior and make
it clean and straight. Astro, Shinny, stand by on the power deck for
course change. Tom, get on the control deck. We're going back to snatch
a hot copper filling right out of a sun's teeth!"


Once again the energy of the six spacemen was burned in twenty-four hour
stretches of improvisation and detailed calculations. Roger and Alfie
redesigned the fuse to ensure perfect co-ordination of the explosions.
Astro and Shinny surpassed their previous efforts by putting enough
power in the five small reaction units to more than do the job required.
Tom, standing long watches on the control deck, devoted his spare time
to the torturous equations that would mean failure or success to the
whole project. And Major Connel, alert and alive once more, drove his
crew toward greater goals than it had achieved before.

Nearly three days later, the _Polaris_ appeared over the twin oceans of
Tara and glided into an orbit just beyond the pull of the planet's
gravity. Aboard the spaceship, last-minute preparations were made by the
red-eyed spacemen.

In constant contact with Space Academy, using the resources of the
Academy's scientific staff to check the more difficult calculations, the
six men on the _Polaris_ worked on.

Connel appeared on the radar bridge and flipped on the long-range
scanner.

"Have to find out where Junior is," he said to Roger and Alfie.

"That doesn't work, sir," said Roger.

"What do you mean it doesn't work?" exploded Connel.

"Junior's falling into the sun, sir. The radiations are blocking it out
from our present position."

"Couldn't we move to another position?" asked the officer.

"Yes, sir," said Roger, "we could. But to do that would take extra time,
and we haven't got it."

"Then how are you going to find Junior?" asked Connel.

"Alfie's busy with a special scanner, sir, one that's especially
sensitive to copper. Since the sun is composed mostly of gas, with this
filter only Junior will show up on the screen."

"By the rings of Saturn," exclaimed Connel, "you mean to tell me that
Alfie Higgins is building a new radar scanner, just like that?"

"Why, yes, sir," answered Roger innocently. "Is there something wrong
with that?"

"No--no--" said Connel, backing off the bridge. "Just--just go right on.
You're doing fine! Yessirree, fine!" He literally ran from the bridge.

"Most humorous of you, Manning," said Alfie, smiling.

"I'll tell you something funnier than that," said Roger. "I feel the
same way he does. Is there anything you _can't_ do, Alfie?"

Alfie thought a moment. "Yes, there is," he said at last.

"What?" demanded Roger.

"I can't--shall I say?--make as much progress as you do with--er--space
dolls."

