Professor Henderson had turned the steering of the craft over to Mark,
who, with Jack as an assistant was sending her along at a good speed,
when suddenly the submarine seemed to slacken in her progress.

"What's the matter now I wonder?" asked Mark.

"Maybe the engine bearings got hot, and Washington had to slow up to
cool them," suggested Jack.

He looked through one of the side windows in the conning tower, a moment
later, and uttered a cry of fear.

"What is it?" asked Mark.

Jack pointed with a hand that trembled from fright. Staring at them
through the thick glass of the bull's-eye the boys beheld the most
hideous sea monster they had yet encountered.

It seemed to be a vast circular mass of flesh, twenty feet in diameter,
and, in the middle were two openings each three feet across. They were
like big holes, and, at the farther end of them could be seen two
unblinking eyes. In the centre was a horrible mouth, armed with a triple
row of teeth.

Down below there was a short body, at the end of which was a smaller
disk, armed with a sharp horny point.

"What is it?" asked Jack in a whisper.

"I don't know," replied Mark.

A moment later Mr. Henderson came up the companionway into the tower. He
caught one glimpse of the monster.

"It is the great sucker of the polar seas!" he exclaimed. "Quick! Speed
up the engine! If that one, and the mates of it, fasten on to us we will
have trouble!"

He pressed the signal that connected with the engine room, and told
Washington to start the engine at its greatest power. The next instant
the ship throbbed and trembled under the vibrations of the big screw.

"We may escape!" cried the professor.

As he spoke the ship seemed to come to a sudden stop. The engine could
still be felt moving, and the big screw still churned the water to foam
in the tunnel, but the craft was stationary.

"We are caught!" exclaimed the professor.

"So we are!"

The windows in the conning tower were darkened. The big sucker had
thrown itself forward and spread itself over the glass, clasping its
horrible form half way about the submarine.

"Let's look at the other windows! There may be only one of the
creatures!" Mr. Henderson exclaimed, as he hurried down the companion
way and into the main cabin. He threw back the slides covering the
glass.

The sight that met his eyes caused him to recoil in horror. There,
pressing their shapes against the steel sides, and over the bull's-eyes
of the ship were two more of the gigantic suckers!

The ship had now ceased to move, and Washington, in the engine room,
feeling that something was wrong, had shut off the power. The
adventurers were caught in a trap more terrible than that of the ice,
the volcanic mountain, or the Sargasso Sea. It was a trap from which
they might never escape.

The suckers, thinking the submarine was perhaps a species of fish, like
themselves, and one of their enemies, had fastened on it their fatal
vice-like grip. To move through the water, with the weight of all that
clinging flesh was impossible.

"What sort of creatures are they?" asked Jack, speaking in a whisper, so
great was the terror inspired by the presence of the gigantic sea
suckers.

"I never saw any of them before," replied the professor, "but I have
read about them. They live only in the polar regions and are a species
of octupus, only more terrible. Their powers of suction are enormous,
and once they fasten on a fish or animal they never let go until they
have absorbed it completely. They act in the same way that a star fish
does on an oyster."

"But they can't eat the ship," said Jack.

"No, I fancy the steel and iron sides will prevent them from making a
meal of us."

"Then where is the danger?"

"They will not let go until they discover that they cannot devour us,
and it may take days. We can only remain under water a comparatively
short time at the most. So you see where the danger is."

"But can't we go out and kill them? Then they would let go."

"It would be most risky to venture out, protected even with a diving
suit, and carrying the electric guns," the professor went on. "No, I
must think of some other plan to free ourselves from the creatures."

"Blow 'em up wif dynamite an' send 'em inter disproportionately
contrastedable circumferences!" exclaimed Washington, who had been
listening to the conversation.

"This isn't any time to joke," Mr. Henderson said sternly.

"I wasn't joking," replied the colored man. "Can't we squirt acid on 'em
or chop 'em up, or--or--"

"We can do nothing for the time being," said the professor. "Come, we
will have a consultation on the subject. Perhaps some one may be able to
think of a plan of rescue."

"Let us hope so."

They all gathered in the cabin. The professor explained the nature of
the creatures, as far as he knew them from what he had read or heard. He
pointed out, through the glass windows, over which the suckers were
still clinging, how they maintained their grip, by exhausting, through
their big mouths, the air between their saucer-like surfaces and the
ship to which they were clinging.

"Can't we go out and fight 'em?" asked Andy, who was always ready to use
a gun.

"I doubt if we could get out," replied the professor. "Though we can not
see them, I believe the creatures cover every part of the ship from stem
to stern. We could never open the door of the diving chamber with that
terrible sucker covering the iron portal."

"Maybe if we wait long enough a lot of sharks will come along and eat
'em up," put in Jack.

"I am afraid sharks will not come to these frozen waters," said the
professor. "They like a warm climate."

"And you don't think it would be feasible to use dynamite," asked Mark.

"We can't get out to place it where it would blow up the fish and not
us," answered Mr. Henderson. "If we could it might serve."

A silence fell on the group. They were in sore straits and there seemed
no hope of rescue. The big disk-like bodies that covered the windows did
not move, but remained there, staring with horrible persistency into the
interior of the ship.




CHAPTER XXVI

LAND UNDER ICE


Suddenly the craft began to move. Slowly at first, then, with more speed
it forged ahead through the water.

"Are we free?" asked Andy, starting up.

"Who started the machinery?" demanded the professor.

"No one," replied Jack. "We are all here. There is no one in the engine
room."

"But we are moving," said Mark.

"It's dem sucker-fish!" exclaimed Washington. "Dey is takin' us off to
der dens an' dere we'll all be eat up!"

"I'm afraid part of it is true," said Mr. Henderson. "The creatures are
certainly making off with us. How powerful they must be!"

"Will dey take us to a cave?" faltered Washington. "Will dey eat us up?"

"I don't think they'll eat us up," spoke the inventor. "It would defy
even their powerful sucking apparatus to bore through the steel sides of
the _Porpoise_. What I am afraid of is that they may move us to some
hidden depth where we will be caught under the rocks or in the ice, and
so lose what little chance there is of getting free."

"And the worst of it is we can't do a thing to help ourselves!"
exclaimed Andy. "This is the worst game I was ever up against!"

The adventurers were indeed helpless. They could not get out of their
ship to attack the monsters, even had they dared to. Their engine,
powerful as it was, had proved no match for the creatures, and now they
were being carried away, ship and all, to some unknown place.

The ship did not go through the water fast. Though the suckers seemed to
be working in union their bodies were too unwieldly, and the ship so
large, that their pace was slow. Nevertheless they kept steadily on.

Several times, in their desperation, the adventurers tried the force of
the big screw against that of the suckers. It was of no avail. Neither
was the device of emptying the tanks, and trying to force the craft up
as far as the roof of ice would permit it to go.

"It's of no use," announced Mr. Henderson with something that sounded
like a groan. "We must prepare for the worst."

"How long can we live here without going to the surface after a fresh
supply of air?" asked Bill.

"About three days," was the answer. "I took the precaution to put a
double supply into the tanks, in readiness for an emergency, but I never
thought of such a terrible situation as this."

The submarine seemed to be moving more rapidly now. It was useless to
try to see through either the windows in the side or in the conning
tower, for all the glass was covered by the horrible bodies.

"What will they do with us when they get us where they want us?" asked
Andy.

"What can they do except hold us prisoners until--until--" The professor
broke off the sentence he dared not finish.

For an hour or more the craft was moved through the water at moderate
speed. Then it came to a stop. Those on board were alert for what might
happen next.

"I guess dey done got us in der cave," said Washington with chattering
teeth. "Now dey'll begin to devour us wid dem terrible big mouths!
Golly, I wish I was home!"

"Stop that nonsense!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "Be a man! There is no
danger yet. The sides of the _Porpoise_ will defy worse enemies than
those attacking us!"

At that instant the ship began to move again. It was hauled slowly
through the water.

"They are pulling us backward!" said Andy, as he watched the needle of
the compass.

Once more the submarine was stopped. Then it moved forward at a more
rapid pace than at any time since the suckers had seized it. An instant
later it brought up against some solid object with such a jar that those
inside were thrown off their feet.

"Something has hit us!" cried Jack.

"More likely we've struck something," said the professor.

Again the ship forged to the rear, and once again it was sent swiftly
ahead. Then came the second shock, harder than the first, which sent
some of the party headlong.

"They are banging us against a rock!" cried Mr. Henderson.

"Do you mean those sea suckers?"

"Yes. They have probably found that the shell of the _Porpoise_ is too
hard even for their powerful jaws. So they have taken us to some place
where the rocks show and are banging us against them in order to break
the ship, so they can get at what is inside."

Once more the ship was drawn backward and again dashed against the
stone. The shock was a hard one and toppled over all who were not
clinging to something.

"They are ramming us bow on against the rocks," cried Andy. "It will
break us apart if they hit us many more times!"

Washington hurried forward. He came back with his eyes showing terror.

"There's a lot of rocks right ahead ob us!" he exclaimed. "I see 'em
through th' little window jest above th' screw. There's land under this
here water!"

"Land under this ice do you mean?" asked the professor.

"That's what I mean, an' we's bein' rammed agin th' rocks!"

"There it goes again!" cried Jack, as the ship shivered from stem to
stern against the impact of the blow.

"This can not last long," said Mr. Henderson. "If they strike us many
more times some of the places will start, the water will come in, and we
will drown!"

"But what can we do?" asked Jack.

"Let's go out now and see if we can't kill some of the beasts with the
guns," suggested Andy.

"I cannot permit it," answered the inventor. "Our position is bad enough
as it is, but to go out would be to lose our lives for a certainty. The
suckers would swallow us up in a moment. I must find some other way."

There was a period of silence, while all waited anxiously for what was
to happen next. It was not long in coming. The next impact of the ship
against the rocks was the hardest yet, and it seemed that more of the
suckers must have gripped the craft.

"She's leakin' a little!" exclaimed Washington coming back from an
inspection forward. "De water am tricklin' in!"

"We must fight them!" exclaimed Andy. He ran to get a gun and his diving
suit.

"Don't try to go out!" warned the professor. "You will surely be
killed."

"I'd rather be killed out there than die shut up in the ship!" cried the
old hunter. "I'm going out!"

"Wait!" exclaimed Jack suddenly. "I have a plan that may save us!"

"What is it? Speak quickly!" said Mr. Henderson. "We are in desperate
straits!"

As he spoke there came another crash against the rocks.

"We must electrocute the suckers!" cried the boy.

"Electrocute them? What do you mean?"

"Take the wires from the electric light circuit, attach one to each end
of the ship, and start the dynamo at full speed!" answered Jack.

"What good will that do?"

"The ship is steel," went on the boy. "It will become charged with a
powerful current. We can insulate ourselves by putting on rubber boots,
but the shock of the electricity will kill the creatures!"

"Good for you!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "Quick boys, everybody lend a
hand! Washington, detach the wires and run one to the bow and the other
to the stern of the ship. Then get out the boots."

In a few minutes the dynamo was ready to send a death-dealing current
through the entire ship. The professor and all the others put on the
boots, that were a part of the diving equipment. The dynamo was started
at full speed and the purring hum told that electricity of great power
was being developed.

The professor stood with his hand on a switch, ready to close the
circuit as soon as sufficient power had accumulated. Once more the
suckers backed the ship in order to give it impetus for another impact
on the stones.

Click! The professor snapped the switch shut. There was a burst of
bluish-green flame, and the movement of the boat suddenly ceased.

"I guess that does for 'em!" shouted Andy.

"Wait a few minutes," advised the professor. "The suckers may not all be
dead yet!"

He kept the current flowing throughout the length of the ship for
several minutes, and then turned it off.

"Now to see if the plan worked," he said. The windows in the cabin were
eagerly scanned.

"Hurrah!" cried Mark. "The suckers have gone!"

"I guess the electricity killed them," spoke Mr. Henderson. "We will
venture out now in our diving suits and see what sort of a place we are
in."

Soon the adventurers were arrayed in the heavy suits. Under them they
wore thick clothing, and in each suit was placed a small flat heater,
operated by a storage battery. The heaters were made of coils of fine
wires, and the electric current, meeting with much resistance in passing
through them, heated the coils, so there was considerable warmth.
