begin to imagine now--but they probably would be occupying planets
entirely different from ours in some essential feature of atmosphere,
temperature, or mass."

"But the Fenachrone world is entirely different," Dorothy argued, "and
they're more or less human--they're bipeds, anyway, with recognizable
features. I've been studying that record with you, you know, and their
world has so much more mass than ours that their gravitation is simply
frightful!"

"That much difference is comparatively slight, not a real fundamental
difference. I meant a hundred or so times either way--greater or less.
And even their gravitation has modified their structure a lot--suppose
it had been fifty times as great as it is? What would they have been
like? Also, their atmosphere is very similar to ours in composition, and
their temperature is bearable. It is my opinion that atmosphere and
temperature have more to do with evolution than anything else, and that
the mass of the planet runs a poor third."

"You may be right," admitted Crane, "but it seems to me that you are
arguing from insufficient premises."

"Sure I am--almost no premises at all. I would be just about as well
justified in deducing the structure of a range of mountains from a
superficial study of three pebbles picked up in a creek near them.
However, we can get an idea some time, when we have a lot of time."

"How?"

"Remember that planet we struck on the first trip, that had an
atmosphere composed mostly of gaseous chlorin? In our ignorance we
assumed that life there was impossible, and didn't stop. Well, it may be
just as well that we didn't. If we go back there, protected as we are
with our rays and stuff, it wouldn't surprise me a bit to find life
there, and lots of it--and I've got a hunch that it'll be a form of life
that'd make your grandfather's whiskers curl right up into a ball!"

"You do get the weirdest ideas, Dick!" protested Dorothy. "I hope you
aren't planning on exploring it, just to prove your point?"

"Never thought of it before. Can't do it now, anyway--got our hands full
already. However, after we get this Fenachrone mess cleaned up we'll
have to do just that little thing, won't we, Mart? As that intellectual
guy said while he was insisting upon dematerializing us, 'Science
demands it.'"

"By all means. We should be in a position to make contributions to
science in fields as yet untouched. Most assuredly we shall investigate
those points."

"Then they'll go alone, won't they, Peggy?"

"Absolutely! We've seen some pretty middling horrible things already,
and if these two men of ours call the frightful things we have seen
normal, and are planning on deliberately hunting up things that even
they will consider monstrous, you and I most certainly shall stay at
home!"

"Yeah? You say it easy. Bounce back, Peg, you've struck a rubber fence!
Rufus, you red-headed little fraud, you know you wouldn't let me go to
the corner store after a can of tobacco without insisting on tagging
along!"

"You're a...." began Dorothy hotly, but broke off in amazement and
gasped, "For Heaven's sake, what was that?"

"What was what? It missed me."

"It went right through you! It was a kind of funny little cloud, like
smoke or something. It came right through the ceiling like a
flash--went right through you and on down through the floor. There it
comes back again!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Before their staring eyes a vague, nebulous something moved rapidly
upward through the floor and passed upward through the ceiling. Dorothy
leaped to Seaton's side and he put his arm around her reassuringly.

"'Sall right folks--I know what that thing is."

"Well, shoot it, quick!" Dorothy implored.

"It's one of those projections from where we're heading for, trying to
get our range; and it's the most welcome sight these weary old eyes have
rested upon for full many a long and dreary moon. They've probably
located us from our power-plant rays. We're an awful long ways off yet,
though, and going like a streak of greased lightning, so they're having
trouble in holding us. They're friendly, we already know that--they
probably want to talk to us. It'd make it easier for them if we'd shut
off our power and drift at constant velocity, but we'd use up valuable
time and throw our calculations all out of whack. We'll let them try to
match our acceleration If they can do that, they're good."

The apparition reappeared, oscillating back and forth
irregularly--passing through the arenak walls, through the furniture and
the instrument boards, and even through the mighty power-plant itself,
as though nothing was there. Eventually, however, it remained stationary
a foot or so above the floor of the control-room. Then it began to
increase in density until apparently a man stood before them. His skin,
like that of all the inhabitants of the planets of the green suns, was
green. He was tall and well-proportioned when judged by Earthly
standards, except for his head, which was overly large, and which was
particularly massive above the eyes and backward from the ears. He was
evidently of great age, for what little of his face was visible was
seamed and wrinkled, and his long, thick mane of hair and his
square-cut, yard-long beard were a dazzling white, only faintly tinged
with green.

While not in any sense transparent, nor even translucent, it was evident
that the apparition before them was not composed of flesh and blood. He
looked at each of the four Earth-beings intensely for a moment, then
pointed toward the table upon which stood the mechanical educator, and
Seaton placed it in front of the peculiar visitor. As Seaton donned a
headset and handed one to the stranger, the latter stared at him,
impressing upon his consciousness that he was to be given a knowledge of
English. Seaton pressed the lever, receiving as he did so a sensation of
an unbroken calm, a serenity profound and untroubled, and the projection
spoke.

"Dr. Seaton, Mr. Crane, and ladies--welcome to Norlamin, the planet
toward which you are now flying. We have been awaiting you for more than
five thousand years of your time. It has been a mathematical
certainty--it has been graven upon the very Sphere itself--that in time
someone would come to us from without this system, bringing a portion,
however small, of Rovolon--of the metal of power, of which there is not
even the most minute trace in our entire solar system. For more than
five thousand years our instruments have been set to detect the
vibrations which would herald the advent of the user of that metal. Now
you have come, and I perceive that you have vast stores of it. Being
yourselves seekers after truth, you will share it with us gladly as we
will instruct you in many things you wish to know. Allow me to operate
the educator--I would gaze into your minds and reveal my own to your
sight. But first I must tell you that your machine is too rudimentary to
work at all well, and with your permission I shall make certain minor
alterations."

Seaton nodded permission, and from the eyes and from the hands of the
figure there leaped visible streams of force, which seized the
transformers, coils and tubes, and reformed and reconnected them, under
Seaton's bulging eyes, into an entirely different mechanism.

"Oh, I see!" he gasped. "Say, what are you anyway?"

"Pardon me; in my eagerness I became forgetful. I am Orlon, the First of
Astronomy of Norlamin, in my observatory upon the surface of the planet.
This that you see is simply my projection, composed of forces for which
you have no name in your language. You can cut it off, if you wish, with
your ray-screens, which even I can see are of a surprisingly high order
of efficiency. There, this educator will now work very well. Please put
on the remodeled headsets, all four of you."

They did so, and the rays of force moved levers, switches, and dials as
positively as human hands could have moved them, and with infinitely
greater speed and precision. As the dials moved, each brain received
clearly and plainly a knowledge of the customs, language, and manners of
the inhabitants of Norlamin. Each mind became suffused with a vast,
immeasurable peace, calm power, and a depth and breadth of mental vision
theretofore undreamed of. Looking deep into his mind they sensed a
quiet, placid certainty, beheld power and knowledge to them illimitable,
perceived depths of wisdom to them unfathomable.

Then from his mind into theirs there flowed smoothly a mighty stream of
comprehension of cosmic phenomena. They hazily saw infinitely small
units grouped into planetary formations to form practically
dimensionless particles. These particles in turn grouped to form
slightly larger ones, and after a long succession of such grouping they
knew that the comparatively gigantic aggregates which then held their
attention were in reality electrons and protons, the smallest units
recognized by Earthly science. They clearly understood the combination
of these electrons and protons into atoms. They perceived plainly the
way in which atoms build up molecules, and comprehended the molecular
structure of matter. In mathematical thoughts, only dimly grasped even
by Seaton and Crane, were laid before them the fundamental laws of
physics, of electricity, of gravitation, and of chemistry. They saw
globular aggregations of matter, the suns and their planets, comprising
solar systems; saw solar systems, in accordance with those immutable
laws, grouped into galaxies, galaxies in turn--here the flow was
suddenly shut off as though a valve had been closed, and the astronomer
spoke.

"Pardon me. Your brains should be stored only with the material you
desire most and can use to the best advantage, for your mental capacity
is even more limited than my own. Please understand that I speak in no
derogatory sense; it is only that your race has many thousands of
generations to go before your minds should be stored with knowledge
indiscriminately. We ourselves have not yet reached that stage, and we
are perhaps millions of years older than you. And yet," he continued
musingly, "I envy you. Knowledge is, of course, relative, and I can
know _so_ little! Time and space have yielded not an iota of their
mystery to our most penetrant minds. And whether we delve baffled into
the unknown smallness of the small, or whether we peer, blind and
helpless, into the unknown largeness of the large, it is the
same--infinity is comprehensible only to the Infinite One: the
all-shaping Force directing and controlling the Universe and the
unknowable Sphere. The more we know, the vaster the virgin fields of
investigation open to us, and the more infinitesimal becomes our
knowledge. But I am perhaps keeping you from more important activities.
As you approach Norlamin more nearly, I shall guide you to my
observatory. I am glad indeed that it is in my lifetime that you have
come to us, and I await anxiously the opportunity of greeting you in the
flesh. The years remaining to me of this cycle of existence are few, and
I had almost ceased hoping to witness your coming."

       *       *       *       *       *

The projection vanished instantaneously, and the four stared at each
other in an incredulous daze of astonishment. Seaton finally broke the
stunned silence. "Well, I'll be kicked to death by little red spiders!"
he ejaculated. "Mart, did you see what I saw, or did I get tight on
something without knowing it? That sure burned me up--it breaks me right
off at the ankles, just to think of it!"

Crane walked to the educator in silence. He examined it, felt the
changed coils and transformers, and gently shook the new insulating base
of the great power-tube. Still in silence he turned his back, walked
around the instrument board, read the meters, then went back and again
inspected the educator.

"It was real, and not a higher development of hypnotism, as at first I
thought it must be," he reported seriously. "Hypnotism, if sufficiently
advanced, might have affected us in that fashion, even to teaching us
all a strange language, but by no possibility could it have had such an
effect upon copper, steel, bakelite, and glass. It was certainly real,
and while I cannot begin to understand it, I will say that your
imagination has certainly vindicated itself. A race of beings, who can
do such things as that, can do almost anything--you have been right,
from the start."

"Then you can beat those horrible Fenachrone, after all!" cried Dorothy,
and threw herself into her husband's arms.

"Do you remember, Dick, that I hailed you once as Columbus at San
Salvador?" asked Margaret unsteadily from Crane's encircling arm. "What
could a man be called who from the sheer depths of his imagination
called forth the means of saving from destruction all the civilization
of millions of entire worlds?"

"Don't talk that way, please, folks," Seaton was plainly very
uncomfortable. He blushed intensely, the burning red tide rising in
waves up to his hair as he wriggled in embarrassment, like any
schoolboy. "Mart's done most of it, anyway, you know; and even at that,
we ain't out of the woods yet, by forty-seven rows of apple trees."

"You will admit, will you not, that we can see our way out of the woods,
at least, and that you yourself feel rather relieved?" asked Crane.

"I think we'll be able to pull their corks now, all right, after we get
some dope. It's a cinch they've either got the stuff we need or know how
to get it--and if that zone is impenetrable, I'll bet they'll be able to
dope out something just as good. Relieved? That doesn't half tell it,
guy--I feel as if I had just pitched off the Old Man of the Sea who's
been sitting on my neck! What say you girls get your fiddle and guitar
and we'll sing us a little song? I feel kind of relieved--they had me
worried some--it's the first time I've felt like singing since we cut
that warship up."

Dorothy brought out her "fiddle"--the magnificent Stradivarius, formerly
Crane's, which he had given her--Margaret her guitar, and they sang one
rollicking number after another. Though by no means a Metropolitan Opera
quartette, their voices were all better than mediocre, and they had sung
together so much that they harmonized readily.

"Why don't you play us some real music, Dottie?" asked Margaret, after a
time. "You haven't practiced for ages."

"I haven't felt like playing lately, but I do now," and Dorothy stood up
and swept the bow over the strings. Doctor of Music in violin, an
accomplished musician, playing upon one of the finest instruments the
world has ever known, she was lifted out of herself by relief from the
dread of the Fenachrone invasion and that splendid violin expressed
every subtle nuance of her thought.

She played rhapsodies and paeans, and solos by the great masters. She
played vivacious dances, then "Traumerei" and "Liebestraum." At last she
swept into the immortal "Meditation," and as the last note died away
Seaton held out his arms.

"You're a blinding flash and a deafening report, Dottie Dimple, and I
love you," he declared--and his eyes and his arms spoke volumes that his
light utterance had left unsaid.

       *       *       *       *       *

Norlamin close enough so that its image almost filled number six
visiplate, the four wanderers studied it with interest. Partially
obscured by clouds and with its polar regions two glaring caps of
snow--they would be green in a few months, when the planet would swing
inside the orbit of its sun around the vast central luminary of that
complex solar system--it made a magnificent picture. They saw sparkling
blue oceans and huge green continents of unfamiliar outlines. So
terrific was the velocity of the space-cruiser, that the image grew
larger as they watched it, and soon the field of vision could not
contain the image of the whole disk.

"Well, I expect Orlon'll be showing up pretty quick now," remarked
Seaton; and it was not long until the projection appeared in the air of
the control room.

"Hail, Terrestrials!" he greeted them. "With your permission, I shall
direct your flight."

Permission granted, the figure floated across the room to the board and
the rays of force centered the visiplate, changed the direction of the
bar a trifle, decreased slightly their negative acceleration, and
directed a stream of force upon the steering mechanism.

"We shall alight upon the grounds of my observatory upon Norlamin in
seven thousand four hundred twenty-eight seconds," he announced
presently. "The observatory will be upon the dark side of Norlamin when
we arrive, but I have a force operating upon the steering mechanism
which will guide the vessel along the required curved path. I shall
remain with you until we land, and we may converse upon any topic of
most interest to you."

"We've got a topic of interest, all right. That's what we came out here
for. But it would take too long to tell you about it--I'll show you!"

He brought out the magnetic brain record, threaded it into the machine
and handed the astronomer a head-set. Orlon put it on, touched the
lever, and for an hour there was unbroken silence as the monstrous brain
of the menace was studied by the equally capable intellect of the
Norlaminian scientist. There was no pause in the motion of the magnetic
tape, no repetition--Orlon's brain absorbed the information as fast as
it could be sent, and understood that frightful mind in every
particular.

As the end of the tape was reached and the awful record ended, a shadow
passed over Orlon's face.

