ground on Mekin.

But it did not get down. From time to time--at intervals of a few
hours--specks appeared in emptiness. Mekin monopolized the off-planet
trade of its satellite world. There would be many times the
space-traffic here that would be found off any other planet in the
Mekinese empire.

One ship got to ground unchallenged. By pure accident it came out of
overdrive within half a million miles of Mekin. To have attacked it
would have been noted. But he got two more cargo-ships. Then he found
the _Horus_ alongside a passenger-ship. But it couldn't be allowed to
ground, to report that it had been stopped by an armed ship. A
prize-crew took it off to Glamis.

Bors made a formal announcement to his crew. "I think," he told them
over the all-speaker circuit, "that we got the ship which could have
reported our action off Meriden. I'm sure we've sent four shiploads of
food back to the fleet, besides the passenger-ship we'd rather have
missed. But there's still something to be done. To confuse Mekin and
keep it busy, and therefore off Kandar's neck, we have to start trouble
elsewhere. From now on we are pirates pure and simple."

And he headed the _Horus_ for the planet Cassis, which was another
victim of the Mekinese. It was a rocky, mountainous world with many
mines. Mekin depended on it for metal in vast quantities. The _Horus_
hovered over it and sent down a sardonic challenge. One missile came up
in defiance. But it was badly aimed and Bors ignored it. Then voices
called to him, sharp with excitement. He heard shots and shouting and a
voice said feverishly that rebels on Cassis, who had been fighting in
the streets, had rushed a transmitter to welcome the enemies of Mekin.

Bors had one light cruiser and merely a minimum crew for it. He couldn't
be of much help to insurrectionists. Then he heard artillery-fire over
the communicator, and voices gasped that the Mekinese garrison was
charging out of its highly-fortified encampment. Bors sent down a
missile to break the back of the counter-attack. Then the communicator
gave off the sound of gunfire and men in battle, and presently yells of
triumph.

He took the _Horus_ away. Its arrival and involvement in the revolt was
pure accident. It was no part of any thought-out plan. But he was wryly
relieved when he had convinced himself that Mekin needed the products of
this world too much to exterminate its population with fusion-bombs.

More days of travel in overdrive tedium. Bors was astounded and
appalled. Interference here would only make matters worse. The _Horus_
went on.

There was a cargo-ship aground on Dover, and the _Horus_ threatened
bombs and a space-boat went down and brought it up. That ship also went
away to Glamis where the fleet was accumulating an inconvenient number
of prisoners. The fact that the capture of this ship only added to that
number made Bors realize that King Humphrey would be especially
disturbed about the passengers on the liner sent back from Mekin. Unless
they were murdered, sooner or later they would reveal the facts about
the Fleet. And King Humphrey was a highly conscientious man.

There was dissention even on Dover. The landing-party was cheered from
the edge of the spaceport. Bors could not understand. He tried to guess
what was going on in the Mekinese empire. He could not know whether or
not disaster had yet struck Kandar. He could only hope that there were
ships lurking near it, ready to use the recent technical combat
improvements against any single Mekinese ship that might appear, so no
report would be carried back. But it seemed to him that utter and
complete catastrophe was inevitable.

He reflected unhappily about Tralee, and wondered what the Pretender,
his uncle, really thought about his loosing of chemical-explosive
missiles against puppet government buildings there. He found himself
worrying again about the truck drivers who'd warned his men of
booby-traps in the supplies they delivered. He hoped they hadn't been
caught.

The _Horus_ arrived at Deccan, and called down the savage message of
challenge.

There came a tumultuous, roaring reply.

"_Captain Bors!_" cried a voice from the ground exultantly. "_Land and
welcome! We didn't hope you'd come here, but you're a thousand times
welcome! We've smashed the garrison here, Captain! We rose days ago and
we hold the planet! We'll join you! Come to ground, sir! We can supply
you!_"

Bors went tense all over. He'd been called by name! If he was known by
name on _this_ world--twenty light-years from Mekin and thirty-five from
Kandar--then everything was lost.

"Can you send up a space-boat?" he asked in a voice he did not
recognize. "I'd like to have your news."

It must be a trap. It was possible that there'd been revolt on Deccan;
he'd found proof of rebellion elsewhere. There'd been claims of revolt
on Cassis, but he hadn't been suspicious then. He'd sent down a missile
to help the self-proclaimed rebels there. Now he wondered desperately if
he'd been tricked there as, it was all too likely, he would be here.
There'd been reported fighting on Avino. There was cheering for his men
on Dover, and he might have landed there. But there were too many
coincidences, far too many.

He waited, fifty thousand miles high, with the ship at combat-alert. He
felt cold all over. Somehow, news had preceded him. It was garbled
truth, but there was enough to make his spine feel like ice.

He spoke over the all-speaker hook-up, in a voice he could not keep
steady by any effort of will.

"All hands attention," he said heavily. "I just called ground. We have
had a reply calling me by name. You will see the implication. It looks
like somehow the Mekinese have managed to send word ahead of us. They've
found out that no one can stand against us. They know we have new and
deadly weapons. Probably there have been orders given to lure us to
ground by the pretense of a successful revolt. It would be hoped that we
can be fooled to the point where we will land and our ship can be
captured _undestroyed_.--That's the way it looks."

He swallowed, with difficulty.

"If that's so," he said after an instant, "you can guess what's been
done about Kandar. The grand fleet was assembled on Mekin. It could have
gone to Kandar...."

He swallowed again. Then he said savagely, "Well make sure first. If the
worst has happened we'll take our fleet and head for Mekin and pour down
every ounce of atomic explosive we've got. We may not be able to turn
its air to poison, but if there are survivors, they won't celebrate what
they did to Kandar!"

He clicked off. His fists clenched. He paced back and forth in the
control room. He almost did not wait to make sure. Almost. But he had
never seen a Mekinese fighting man face to face. He'd gone into exile
with his uncle when that unhappily reasonable man let Tralee surrender
rather than be bombed to depopulation. He'd served in the Kandarian navy
without ever managing to be in any port when a Mekinese ship was in.
He'd fought in the battle off Kandar, he'd destroyed a Mekinese cruiser
off Tralee, another in the Mekinese system itself and a squadron off
Meriden. But he had never seen a Mekinese fighting-man face to face.
Filled with such hatred as he felt, he meant to do so now.

A space-boat came up from the ground. The _Horus_ trained weapons on it.
Bors painstakingly arranged for its occupants to board the _Horus_ in
space-suits, which could not conceal bombs.

There were six men in the space-boat. They came into the _Horus's_
control room and he saw that they were young, almost boys. When they
learned that he was Captain Bors, they looked at him with shining,
admiring, worshipping eyes. It could not be a trick. It could not be a
trap. He was incredulous.

The message from the ground was true.




Chapter 11


The news as Bors got it from the men of Deccan was remarkable for two
reasons: that so much of it was true, and that all of it was glamorized
and romanticized and garbled. It was astonishing to find any relation at
all between such fabulously romantic tales and the facts, because there
was no way for news to travel between solar systems except on ships, and
no ships had carried stories like these!

Here on Deccan, the shining-eyed young men _knew_ that Bors had landed
on Tralee and on Garen. They _knew_ that there was a fleet in being
which had fought and annihilated a Mekinese task-force many times its
size.

To the Captain, their knowledge was undiluted catastrophe!

They admired Bors because they believed he commanded that fleet, which
he now had in hiding while he flashed splendidly about the subjugated
worlds, performing prodigious feats of valor and destruction, half
pirate and half hero. The story had it that he'd been driven from his
native Tralee by the invaders, and that now he fought Mekin in
magnificent knight-errantry, and that it was _he_ who'd set alight the
flame of rebellion on so many worlds.

Bors listened, and was numbed. He heard references to the fight off
Meriden, and the temporary escape of one of his enemies, and that he'd
pursued it to the solar system of Mekin itself and there destroyed it
while Mekin watched, helpless to interfere.

The distortion of facts was astounding. But the mere existence of facts
at this distance was impossible! Then Bors found himself thinking that
these tales sounded like fantasies or daydreams, and he went white. He
knew what had happened.

Just before he'd left the fleet, he'd talked to a fat woman and a
scowling man who, together, made up the Talents, Incorporated brand new
Department for Disseminating Truthful Seditious Rumors, so that rumors
of a high degree of detail got started, nobody knew how. If such rumors
spread, and everybody heard them, nobody would doubt them. It was
appallingly probable that the fighting on Cassis and Avino and Deccan
had no greater justification in reason than that an enormously fat woman
romantically pictured such things as resulting from the derring-do of
one Captain Bors, of whom she thought sentimentally and glamorously and
without much discrimination.

But she'd daydreamed about the fleet, too! And that it had destroyed a
Mekinese squadron many times its size....

He heard the leader of the young men from Deccan speaking humorously.
"Your revolt, sir," he told Bors, "is spreading everywhere! On Cela,
sir, there are great space-ship yards, where they build craft for the
Mekinese navy. Not long ago they finished one and it went out to space
for a trial run. It didn't come back. Sabotage. Everybody knew it. The
Mekinese raged. A little while later they finished another ship. But the
Mekinese were smart! They sent it off for its trial run with only Celans
on board. If there were sabotage this time, it wouldn't be Mekinese who
died in space! But that ship didn't come back either! It touched down
here, sir, three weeks ago, and we supplied it with food and missiles
and some of us joined it. It went off to try to find you."

"I'd better--go after it," said Bors, dry-throated. "It could blunder
into trouble. At best--"

The youthful leader of Deccan's revolt grinned widely.

"It's got plenty of missiles," he told Bors. "It can take care of
itself! And it has plenty of food. We even gave them target-balloons to
practice launching missiles on. We've been storing up missiles to lay an
ambush for a Mekinese squadron if one comes by. A lot of us joined the
ship, though."

"In any case," said Bors, with the feel of ashes in his throat, "I'll
track it down so it can join the fleet."

He could not bring himself to tell these confident and admiring young
men that there was no hope and never had been; that the tales of his
achievements were only partly true and that they had popped into
people's minds because a very fat woman far away indulged in daydreams
and fantasies.

They wouldn't have understood. If they had, they wouldn't have believed.
He found that he savagely resisted the conviction himself. But there was
no other way for such garbled tales with such a substratum of fact to be
spread among the stars. And whoever spread them knew of events up to the
last news sent back by Bors, but nothing after that. Undoubtedly,
Talents, Incorporated's Department for Disseminating Truthful Seditious
Rumors had been at work on Mekin, but the damage done elsewhere was a
thousand times greater than any benefit done there.

It was too late to repair the damage, here or anywhere else. This planet
and all the rest were too far committed to rebellion ever to be forgiven
by Mekin. Mekin would take revenge. It was not pleasant to think about.

So the _Horus_ departed, and traveled in high-speed overdrive for
ship-days seemingly without end, toward Glamis. It knew nothing that
happened outside its own cocoon of overdrive field. It knew nothing of
any of the thousands of myriads of stars, whose planetary systems
offered unlimited room for humanity to live in freedom and without fear.

During the journey Bors only endured being alive. All this disaster was
ultimately his fault. The fleet's survival was due to his work with
Talents, Incorporated. The raids of a single ship--which now would have
such disastrous results--were the fruits of his suggestion, the
consequence of his actions.

Talents, Incorporated was involved, to be sure, but only because he'd
allowed it to be. He should have realized that Madame Porvis would work
havoc if her talent was as described. No mere romantic daydreamer would
fashion fantasies with military secrecy in mind and security as a
principle. Everything was betrayed. Everything was ruined. And if he,
Bors, had only been properly skeptical, the fleet would have been
destroyed and Kandar now occupied by the Mekinese--doomed to servitude
but not necessarily to annihilation--and other worlds would also be
safely servile. They'd still be resentful and they'd bitterly hate
Mekin, but they would not have before them the monstrous vengeance now
in store.

Bors, in fact, felt guilty because he was still alive.

There was only one small thing he could still try to set aright. He
could insist that Morgan take Gwenlyn far away from the dangerous
possibility that Mekin might somehow find her. He _had_ to make Morgan
see the need for it. If necessary, he would convince King Humphrey that
a royal order must be issued to send the _Sylva_ light-centuries away,
before the Mekinese empire began to restore itself to devastated
calm--if that process hadn't already begun.

Mekin had its grand fleet assembled and ready. If convincing and,
unfortunately, truthful rumors ran about Mekin, as elsewhere, concerning
the fleet and Bors's attempts to hide it, then their dictator need only
give a single order and the grand fleet would lift off. When it found
Kandar unoccupied it would leave Kandar dead. Then it would seek out the
fleet, and destroy it, and then it would move from one to another of
its rebellious tributaries and take revenge upon them....

And Bors could only hope to salvage the life of one girl from the
wreckage of everything that human beings prefer to believe in. He could
only hope to send Gwenlyn away--if he was not already too late.

The _Horus_ broke out into normal space twelve days after leaving
Deccan. The untrustworthy sun of Glamis still shone brightly. The inner
planet revolved about it with one side glowing low red heat and the
other side piled high with frozen atmosphere. The useless outer planet
remained a lush green, save for its seas. And the fleet still circled it
from pole to pole.

Bors had himself ferried to the flagship by space-boat, because what he
had to report was too disheartening to be spoken where all the fleet
might hear. Gwenlyn met him at the flagship's airlock. She looked very
glad, as if she'd been uneasy about him.

"Call for a boat," Bors commanded her curtly, "to take you to the
_Sylva_. Go on board with anybody else who belongs on it, your father,
anybody. I'm going to ask the king to insist that the _Sylva_ get away
from here--fast! Before the Mekinese turn up."

Gwenlyn shook her head, her eyes searching his face.

"The _Sylva's_ not here. It's gone to Kandar as a sort of
dispatch-boat."

Bors groaned.

"Then I'll try to get another ship assigned to take you away," he said
formidably. "Maybe one of the captured cargo-ships I sent back."

"No," said Gwenlyn. "They're going to be released. They'll go to Mekin,
and we _couldn't_ go there!"

Bors groaned again. Then he said savagely, "Wait here for me. I'll
arrange something as soon as I've seen the king."

He strode down the corridor to King Humphrey's cabin. A sentry came to
attention. Bors passed through a door. The king and half a dozen of the
top-ranking officers of the fleet were listening apathetically to
Morgan, at once vexed and positive and uncertain.

"But you can't ignore it!" protested Morgan. "I don't understand it
