from usquebaugh to sake, though during the present conflict for obvious
patriotic reasons, I cross vodka from my list, while as a man born south
of the Mason-Dixon Line, sir, I leave gin to Nigras."

I must say, though somewhat startled by his manner of imbibing, I was
inclined to like General Thario, but I was impatient to discuss the
matter of a contract for Consolidated Pemmican. Every time I attempted
to bring the subject round to it he waved me grandly aside. "Dinner," he
confirmed, when the waiters brought in their trays. "Yes; no drink is
complete without a little bit of the right food to garnish it. Eating in
moderation I approve of; but mark my words, Albert, the man who takes a
meal on an empty stomach is digging his grave with his teeth."

If he would not talk business I could only hope his amiability would
carry over till I saw him again in his office tomorrow. I settled down
as far as I could, simply to enjoy his company. "You may have been
surprised at my referring to my life as unfortunate, Albert, but it is a
judicious adjective. Vilely unfortunate. I come of a military family,
you know; you will find footnotes mentioning the Tharios in the history
of every war this country has had."

He finished what was in his glass. "My misfortunes, like Tristram
Shandy's, began before my birth--and in the same way, exactly the same
way. My father was a scholar and a gentleman who dreamed his life away
over the campaigns of the great captains instead of attempting to become
a great captain himself. I do not condemn him for this: the organization
of the army is such as to encourage impracticality and inadvertence, but
the consequences were unfortunate for me. He named me after his favorite
heroes, Stuart Hannibal Ireton Thario, and so aloof was he from the
vulgarities of everyday life that it was not until my monogram was
ordered painted upon my first piece of luggage that the unfortunate
combination of my initials was noted. Hannibal and Ireton promptly
suppressed in the interests of decency, nevertheless at West Point my
surname was twisted by fellow classmates into Lothario, giving it a
connotation quite foreign to my nature. I lived down both vexations only
to encounter a third. Though Ireton remained successfully concealed, the
Hannibal leaked out and when, during the World War, I had the misfortune
to lead a company which was decimated"--his hand strayed to the ribbons
on his chest--"behind my back the enlistedmen called me Cannibal
Thario."

He began discussing another drink. "Of one thing I'm resolved: my son
shall not suffer as I have suffered. I did not send him to West Point so
he might win decorations on the field of valor and then be shunted off
to sit behind an unsoldierly desk. I broke with tradition when I kept
him from a military career, quite on purpose, just as I was thinking of
his welfare and not some silly foible of my own when I called him by the
simplest name I could find."

"What is your son's name?" I was constrained to ask.

"George," he answered proudly, "George Thario. There is no nickname for
George as far as I know."

"And he's not in the army now?" I queried, more in politeness than
interest.

"No, and I don't intend he shall be." The general's pink face grew
pinker with his vehemence. "Albert, there are plenty of dunderheads and
duffers like me in the country who are good for nothing better than
cannonfodder. Let them go and be killed. I'm willing enough--only an
idiotic General Staff has booted me into the Quartermaster Corps for
which I am no more fitted than to run an academy for lady marines--but
I'm not willing for a fine sensitive boy, a talented musician like
George to suffer the harsh brutalities of a trainingcamp and
battlefield."

"The draft ..." I began tentatively.

"If George had a civilian position in an essential industry--say one
holding a contract with the army for badly needed fieldrations...."

"I should like to meet your son," I said. "I have been looking around
for some time for a reliable manager...."

"George might consider it." General Thario squinted his glass against
the light. "I'll have him stop by your hotel tomorrow."

The little radio behind the bar, which had been mumbling to itself for
hours, spoke loudly. "We interrupt this program to bring you a
newsflash: Eire has declared war on the Soviet Union. I repeat, war has
been declared on the Union of Soviet Republics by Eire. Keep tuned to
this station for further details. We return you now to our regular
program."

There was an absent pattering of applause and General Thario stood up
gravely, glass in hand. "Gallant little Eire--or, if I may be permitted
once the indulgence of using the good old name we know and love so
well--brave old Ireland. When the world was at war, despite every
provocation, she stayed peaceful. Now that the world is disgracefully
pacific--and you have all heard foreign ministers unanimously declaring
their countries neutral--so fast did they rush to the microphones that
they were still panting when they went on the air--when the whole world
was cautious, Ireland, true to her traditions, joined the just cause.
Gentlemen, I give you our fighting ally, Eire."

Departing from his usual custom, he drank the toast in one gulp, but no
one else in the room paid any attention. I considered this lack of
enthusiasm for a courageous gesture quite unworthy and meditated for a
moment on the insensitivity into which our people seemed to have sunk.

As the evening went on, the general grew more and more affable and, if
possible, less and less reticent. He had, he assured me, been the
constant victim, either of men or of circumstances. At the military
academy he had trained for the cavalry only to find himself assigned to
the tank corps. He had reconciled himself, pursued his duties with zeal,
and was shunted off to the infantry, where, swallowing chagrin, he had
led his men bravely into a crossfire from machineguns. For this he got
innumerable decorations and a transfer to the Quartermaster's
Department. His marriage to the daughter of an influential politician
should have assured peacetime promotion, but the nuptials coincided with
an election depriving the family's party of power.

Now another war had come and he was a mere brigadier pigeonholed in an
unimportant office with juniors broadly hinting at his retirement while
classmates were leading divisions and even army corps to glorious
victory on the field of battle. At least, they would have been leading
them to glorious victory if there had been any action at all.

"Invade," insisted General Thario, becoming sufficiently stirred by his
fervor to lapse into sober incoherence. "Invade them before they invade
us. Aircraft out ... gentlemen's agreement ... quite understand ... well
... landingbarges ... Bering Sea ... strike south ... shuttle
transports ... drive left wing TransSiberian ... holding operation by
right and center ... abc ..."

No doubt it was a pity he was deprived of the opportunity to try these
tactics. I was one of the few who had not become a military theoretician
upon the outbreak of the war, but to my lay mind his plan sounded
feasible. Nevertheless, I was more interested in the possible contract
for food concentrates than in any strategy, no matter how brilliant. I'm
afraid I showed my boredom, for the general abruptly declared it was
time to go home.


_41._ I was a little dubious that after all the drinking and confidences
he would remember to send his son around, and to tell the truth, in the
calm morning, I felt I would not be too sorry if he didnt, for he had
not given me a very high opinion of that young man. What on earth
Consolidated Pemmican could do with a musician and a draftevader as
generalmanager--even if the title, as it must be, were purely
honorary--I couldnt imagine.

I had been long up, shaved and breakfasted and had attended to my
correspondence, before the telephone rang and George Thario announced
himself at my disposal.

He was what people call a handsome young man. That is, he was big and
burly and slow and his eyelashes were perceptible. His hair was short
and he wore no hat, but lounged about the room with his hands, thumbs
out, in his jacketpockets, looking at me vaguely through the curling
smoke from a bent pipe. I had never seen anyone look less like a
musician and I began to wonder if his father had been serious in so
describing him.

"I don't like it," he announced abruptly.

"Don't like what, Mr Thario?" I inquired.

"Joe to you," he corrected. "Mister from you to me belies our
prospective relationship. Just call me Joe."

"I thought your name was George."

"Baptismal--whim of the Old Man's. But it's a stuffy label--no
shortening it, you know, so the fellows all call me Joe. Chummier. Don't
like the idea of evading the draft. Shows a lack of moral courage. By
rights I ought to be a conchie, but that would just about kill the Old
Lady. She's in a firstclass uproar as it is--like to see me in the
frontlines right now, bursting with dulce et decorum. I don't believe it
would bother the Old Man any if I sat out the duration in a C O camp,
but it'd hurt his job like hell and the poor old boy is straining his
guts to get into the trenches and twirl a theoretical saber. So I guess
I'm slated to be your humble and obedient, Mr Weener."

"I'll be delighted to have you join our firm," I said wryly, for I felt
he would be a completely useless appendage. In this I am glad to say I
did him an injustice, for though he never denied his essential lack of
interest in concentrates and the whole process of moneymaking, he proved
nevertheless--at such times as he chose to attend to his duties--a
faithful and conscientious employee, his only faults being lack of
initiative and a tendency to pamper the workers in the plant.

But I have anticipated; at the moment I looked upon him only as a
liability to be balanced in good time by the asset of his father's
position. It was therefore with irritation I listened to his insistence
on my coming to the Thario home that afternoon to meet his mother and
sisters. I had no desire for purely social intercourse, last evening's
outing being in the nature of a business investment and it seemed
superfluous to be forced to extend courtesies to an entire family
because of involvement with one member.

However great my reluctance I felt I couldnt afford to risk giving
offense and so at fouroclock promptly I was in Georgetown, using the
knocker of a door looking like all the other doors on both sides of the
street.

"I'm Winifred Thario and youre the chewinggum man--no, wait a minute,
I'll get it--the food concentrate man who's going to make Joe essential
to the war effort. Do come in, and excuse my rudeness. I'm the youngest,
you know, except for Joe, so everybody excuses me." Her straight, blond
hair looked dead. The vivacity which lit her windburned face seemed a
false vivacity and when she showed her large white teeth I thought it
was with a calculated effort.

She led me into a livingroom peopled like an Earlyvictorian
conversationpiece. Behind a low table, in a rockingchair, sat a large,
fullbosomed woman with the same dead hair and weatherbeaten cheeks, the
only difference being that the blondness of her hair was mitigated by
gray and in her face were the tiny broken red lines which no doubt in
time would come to Winifred.

"This is Mama," said Winifred, accenting the second syllable strongly
and contriving at once to be vivacious and reverent.

Mama inclined her head toward me without the faintest smile, welcoming
or otherwise, placing her hand as she did so regally upon the teacozy,
as upon a royal orb.

"Mrs Thario," I said, "I am delighted to meet you."

Mama found this beneath her condescension.

"And this is Constance, the general's firstborn," introduced Winifred,
still retaining her liveliness despite Mama's low temperature. Constance
was the perfect connectinglink between Winifred and her mother, not yet
gray but soon to be so, without Winifred's animation, but with the same
voluntary smile showing the same white teeth. She rose and shook my hand
as she might have shaken a naughty puppy, with a vigorous sidewise jerk,
disengaging the clasp quickly.

"And this," announced Winifred brightly, "is Pauline."

To say that Pauline Thario was beautiful would be like saying Mount
Everest is high. In her, the blond hair sparkled like newly threshed
straw, the teeth were just as white and even, but they did not seem too
large for her mouth, and her complexion was faultless as a cosmetic ad.
She was an unbelievably exquisite painting placed in an appropriate
frame.

And yet ... and yet the painting had a quality of unreality about it, as
though it were the delineation of a madonna without child, or of a nun.
There was no vigor to her beauty, no touch of the earthiness or of
blemish necessary to make the loveliness real and bring it home. She did
not offer me her hand, but bowed in a manner only slightly less distant
than her mother's.

I sat down on the edge of a petitpoint chair, thoroughly illatease. "You
must tell us about your pills, Mr Weener," urged Winifred.

"Pills?" I asked, at a loss.

"Yes, the thingamyjigs youre going to have Joe make for you," explained
Constance.

Mama made a loud trumpeting noise which so startled me I half rose from
my seat. "Damned slacker!" she exclaimed, looking fiercely right over my
head.

"Now, Mama--bloodpressure," enjoined Pauline in a colorless voice.

Mama relapsed into immobility and Winifred went on, quite as if there
had been no explosion. "Are you married, Mr Weener?"

I said I was not.

"Then here's our chance for Pauline," decided Winifred. "Mr Weener, how
would you like to marry Pauline?"

I could do nothing but smile uncomfortably. Was this the sort of
conversation habitually carried on in their circle or were they quite
mad? Constance mentioned with apparent irrelevance, "Winifred is so
giddy," and Pauline smiled at me understandingly.

But Winifred went on, "Weve been trying to marry Pauline off for years,
you know. She's wonderful to look at, but she hasnt any sexappeal."

Mama snorted, "Damned vulgar thing to have."

"Would you like some tea, Mr Weener?" asked Constance.

"Tea! He looks like a secret cocacola guzzler to me! Are you an American
Mr Uh?" Mama demanded fiercely, deigning for the first time to address
me.

"I was born in California, Mrs Thario," I assured her.

"Pity. Pity. Damned shame," she muttered.

I was partially relieved from my uneasiness by the appearance of George
Thario, who bounded in, waved lightly at his sisters and kissed his
mother just below her hairline. "My respectful duty, Mama," he greeted.

"Damned hypocrisy. You did your duty youd be in the army."

"Bloodpressure," warned Constance.

"Have they made you thoroughly miserable, Mr Weener? Don't mind
them--there's something wrong with all the Tharios except the Old Man.
Blood gone thin from too much intermarriage."

"Just like incest," exclaimed Winifred. "Don't you think incest's
fascinating, Mr Weener? Eugene O'Neill and all that sort of thing?"

"Morbid," objected Constance.

"Damned nonsense," grunted Mama.

"Cream or lemon, Mr Weener?" inquired Constance. Mama, moved by a
hospitable reflex, filled a grudging cup.

"Cream, please," I requested.

"Turn it sour," muttered Mama, but she poured the cream and handed the
cup to Constance who passed it to Pauline who gave it to me with a
gracious smile.

"You just mustnt forget to keep Pauline in mind, Mr Weener; she would be
a terrific help when you become horribly rich and have to do a lot of
stuffy entertaining."

"Really, Winifred," protested Constance.

"Help him to the poorhouse and a damned good riddance."

I spent another uneasy fifteen minutes before I could decently make my
departure, wondering whether I hadnt made a mistake in becoming involved
with the Tharios at all. But there being no question of the solidity of
the general's position, I decided, since it was not afterall incumbent
upon me to continue a social connection with them, to bear with it and
confine my acquaintance as far as possible to Joe and his father.


_42._ As soon as the contracts were awarded the struggle began to obtain
necessary labor and raw materials. We were straining everything to do a
patriotic service to the country in time of war, but we came up against
the competition for these essentials by ruthless capitalists who had no
thought but to milk the government by selling them supplies at an
enormous profit. Even with the wholehearted assistance of General Thario
it was an endless and painful task to comply with, break through, or
evade the restrictions and regulations thrown up by an uncertain and
slowmoving administration, restrictions designed to aid our competitors
and hamper us. Yet we got organized at last and by the time three
Russian marshals had been purged and the American highcommand had been
shaken up several times, we had doubled the capacity of our plant and
were negotiating the purchase of a new factory in Florida.

I set aside a block of stock for the general, but its transfer was a
delicate matter on account of the indefatigable nosiness of the
government and I approached his son for advice. "Alberich!" exclaimed
Joe incomprehensibly. "Just wrap it up and mail it to him. Mama, God
bless her, takes care of all financial transactions anyway." And
doubtless with great force, I thought.

Such directness, I pointed out, might have embarrassing repercussions
because of inevitably smallminded interpretation if the facts ever
became public. We finally solved the problem by putting the gift in
George Thario's name, he making a will leaving it to the general. I
informed his father in a guarded letter of what we had done and he
replied at great length and somewhat indiscreetly, as the following
quotation may show:

"... In spite of pulling every handy and unhandy wire I am still
billeted on this ridiculous desk. The General Staff is the most
incompetent set of blunderers ever to wear military uniform since Bull
Run. They've never heard of Foch, much less of Falkenhayn and Mackensen,
to say nothing of Rommel, Guderian or Montgomery. They rest idly behind
their Washington breastworks when the order of the day should be attack,
attack, and again attack; keeping the combat entirely verbal, weakening
the spirit of our forces and waiting supinely for the enemy to bring the
war to us...."

Although I was too much occupied with the press of business to follow
the daytoday progress of hostilities, there was little doubt the general
was justified in his strictures. The war was entirely static. With fear
of raids by marauding aircraft allayed, the only remaining uneasiness of
the public had been whether the words "heavier than air craft" covered
robot or V bombs. But when weeks had passed without these dreadful
missiles whistling downward, this anxiety also went and the country
settled down to enjoy a wartime prosperity as pleasant, notwithstanding
the fiftyhour week, rationing, and the exorbitant incometax, as the
peacetime panic had been miserable. In my own case Consolidated Pemmican
was quoted at 38 and I was on my way, in spite of all hampering
circumstances, to reap the benefits of foresight and industry. Unique
among great combats, not a shot had so far been exchanged and everyone,
except cranks, began to look upon the academic conflict as an unalloyed
benefit.

Gradually the war began leaving the frontpages, military analysts found
themselves next to either the chessproblems, Today's Selected Recipe, or
the weekly horoscope; people once more began to concern themselves with
the grass. It now extended in a vast sweep from a point on the Mexican
coast below the town of Mazatlan, northward along the slope of the Rocky
Mountains up into Canada's Yukon Province. It was wildest at its point
of origin, covering Southern California and Nevada, Arizona and part of
New Mexico, and it was narrowest in the north where it dabbled with
delicate fingers at the mouth of the Mackenzie River. It had spared
practically all of Alaska, nearly all of British Columbia, most of
Washington, western Oregon and the seacoast of northern California.

Why it surged up to the Rockies and not over them when it had conquered
individually higher mountains was not understood, but people were quick
once more to take hope and remember the plant's normal distaste for cold
or think there was perhaps something in the rarefied atmosphere to
paralyze the seeds or inhibit the stolons, so preventing further
progress. Even through the comparatively low passes it came at such a
slow pace methods tried fruitlessly in Los Angeles were successful in
keeping it back. Everyone was quite ready to wipe off the Far West if
the grass were going to spare the rest of the country.

General Thario's indiscreet letters kept coming. If anything, they
increased in frequency, indiscretion, and length as his continued
frustration in securing a field command was added to his helpless wrath
at the generalstaff's ineptitude. "... They have got hold of that odd
female scientist, Francis," he wrote, "and have made her turn over her
formula for making grass go crazy. It's to be used as a war weapon, but
how or where I don't know. Just the sort of silly rot a lot of armchair
theorists would dream up...."

Later he wrote indignantly: "... They are sending a group of picked men
to Russia to inoculate the grasses on the steppes with this Francis
stuff. Sheer waste of trained men; bungling incompetence. Why not send a
specially selected group of hypnotists to persuade the Russians to sue
for peace? It would be better to have given them Mills bombs and let
them blow up the Kremlin. Time and effort and good men thrown away ..."

Still later he wrote with unconcealed satisfaction: "... Well, that
silly business of inoculating the steppes came to exactly nothing. Our
fellows got through of course and did their job, but nothing happened to
the grass. Either Francis gave them the wrong formula (possibly mislaid
the right one in her handbag) or else what worked in California wouldn't
do elsewhere. She is busy trying to explain herself to a military
commission right now. For my part they can either shoot her or put her
in charge of the WAC. It's of no moment. You can't fight a determined
enemy with sprayguns and formulas. Attack with infantry by way of
Siberia ..."


_43._ While everyone, except possibly General Thario and others in
similar position, was enjoying the new comradeinarms atmosphere the
abortive war had brought on, a sudden series of submarine attacks on the
Pacific Fleet provided a disagreeable jolt and ended the bloodless stage
of the conflict. Tried and proved methods of detection and defense
became useless; the warships were nothing more than targets for the
enemy's torpedoes.

In quick succession the battleships _Montana_, _Louisiana_, _Ohio_, and
_New Hampshire_ were sunk, as were the carriers _Gettysburg_,
_Antietam_, _Guadalcanal_, and _Chapultepec_ as well as the cruisers
_Manitowoc_, _Baton Rouge_, _Jackson_, _Yonkers_, _Long Beach_,
_Evanston_ and _Portsmouth_, to say nothing of the countless destroyers
and other craft. Never had the navy been so crippled and the people,
presaging correctly a forthcoming invasion, suffered a new series of
terrors which was only relieved by the news of the Russian landings on
the California coast at Cambria, San Simeon and Big Sur.

"... What did I tell you? What did I tell them, the duffers and
dunderheads? We could have been halfway across Asia by now; instead we
waited and hemmed and hawed till the enemy, from the sheer weight of our
inertia, was forced to attack. The whole crew should be courtmartialed
and made to study the campaigns of Generals Shafter and Wheeler as
punishment." General Thario's always precise handwriting wavered and
trembled with the violence of his disgust.
