
"That's it," he said.

"What? I don't see anything," Douglas said suspiciously.

"Here--I'll shine a light." Kennon reached for his belt.

"No you don't! I know that trick. You're not going to blind me. Take
that torch loose carefully--that's it--now hand it to me." Douglas' hand
closed over the smooth plastic. Cautiously he turned on the beam and
directed it downward.

"A spacer!" he gasped. "How did that get here?" He leaned forward to
look into the pit as a dark shadow materialized behind him.

Kennon choked back the involuntary cry of warning that rose in his
throat. Copper! His muscles tensed as her arm came up and down--a
shadow almost invisible in the starlight. The leaning figure of Douglas
collapsed like a puppet whose strings had been suddenly released. The
torch dropped from his hand and went bouncing and winking down the wall
of the pit, followed by Douglas--a limp bundle of arms and legs that
rotated grotesquely as he disappeared down the slope. Starlight gleamed
on the Burkholtz lying on the lip of the crater, where it had fallen
from his hand.

"I told you that not even Man Alexander could order me since I gave my
love to you," Copper said smugly as she peered over the edge of the pit,
a chunk of lava gripped in one small capable hand. "Maybe this proves
it."

"Douglas isn't Alexander," Kennon said slowly as he picked up the
blaster, "but I believe you."

"Didn't I act convincingly?" she said brightly.

"Very," he said. "You fooled me completely."

"The important thing was that I fooled Douglas."

"You did that all right. Now let's get him out of that pit."

"Why?"

"The jet blast will fry him when we take off."

"What difference would that make?"

"I told you," Kennon said, "that I never destroy things
unnecessarily--not even things like Douglas."

"But he would have destroyed you."

"That's no excuse for murder. Now go back to the jeep and fetch a rope.
I'll go down and get him out."

"Do we have to bother with him?" Copper asked, and then shrugged. It
was an eloquent gesture expressing disgust, resignation, and unwilling
compliance in one lift of smoothly muscled shoulders.

"There's no question about it," Kennon said. "You're becoming more human
every day."

He chuckled as he slid over the edge of the pit following the path
Douglas had taken a moment before. He found him sitting on a pile of
ashes, shaking his head.

"What happened?" Douglas asked querulously. There was fear in his voice.

"Copper hit you on the head with a rock," Kennon said as he bent over
and retrieved the torch, still burning near Douglas' feet.

"The Lani?" Douglas' voice was incredulous.

"Not a Lani," Kennon corrected. "She's as human as you or I."

"That's a lie," Douglas said.

"Maybe this spacer's a lie too. Her ancestors came in it--a pair
of humans named Alfred and Melissa Weygand. They were Christian
missionaries from a planet called Heaven out in Ophiuchus Sector. Went
out to convert aliens and landed here when their fuel ran out."
Kennon paused. "That was about four millennia ago. Their descendants,
naturally, reverted to barbarism in a few generations, but there's
enough evidence in the ship to prove that the Lani were their
children."

"But the tails--the differences--the failure of the test," Douglas said.

"Mutation," Kennon replied. "Those old spindizzy converters weren't
too choosy about how they scattered radiation. And they had come a long
way." He paused, looking down at Douglas, feeling a twinge of pity for
the man. His world was crumbling. "And there was no other human blood
available to filter out their peculiarities. It might have been done
during the first couple of generations, but constant inbreeding fixed
the genetic pattern."

"How did you discover this?" Douglas asked.

"Accident," Kennon said briefly.

"You'll never be able to prove they're human!" Douglas said.

"The ship's log will do that."

"Not without a humanity test--they can't pass that."

"Sorry to disappoint you. Your grandfather used the wrong sort of sperm.
Now if there had been a Betan in the crew--"

"You mean she's pregnant!"

Kennon nodded. "There's been mutation on Beta," he said. "And it's
apparently a similar one to hers. Betan-Lani matings are fertile."

Douglas's shoulders sagged, and then straightened. "I don't believe it,"
he said. "You're just a damned sneaking spy. Somehow or other you got
a spacer in here after you wormed your way into Cousin Alex's
confidence--and now you're going to space out with the nucleus of a new
farm. Just wait. When Alex learns of this the galaxy'll be too small to
hold you."

"Don't babble like a fool!" Kennon said with disgust. "How could I land
a spacer here without being spotted? You sound like a two-credit novel.
And even if I did--would it be a can like this?" Kennon played the torch
over the blue-black durilium protruding from the ashes.

Douglas' eyes widened as he took in the details of construction. "What
an antique!" he blurted. "Where did you get this can?"

"I found it here."

"Tell me another one."

"You won't believe," Kennon said flatly, "because you don't dare
believe. You have a mental block. You've killed, maimed, tortured--
treated them like animals--and now your mind shrinks from admitting
they're human. You know what will happen if the old court decision is
reversed. It will wreck your little empire, dry up your money, break
you--and you can't stand the thought of that. You don't dare let us
leave, yet you can't stop us because I have your blaster and I'd just
as soon shoot you as look at your rotten face. Now get on your feet and
start climbing if you want to stay alive. We're getting out of here, and
you'll fry inside this pit."

"Where are you taking me?"

"Back to your airboat. I'm going to tie you up and set you off on
autopilot. You'll be able to get loose quickly enough but it'll be too
late to stop us. We'll be gone, and you can think of how you'll manage
to face the human race."

"I hope you blow yourself and that antique clear out of space."

"We might. But you'll never know for sure. But mark this--if I live I'll
be back with the Brotherhood. You can count on it."

They struggled up the side of the pit and halted, panting, on the rim.
"How much radiation was down there?" Douglas asked worriedly.

"Not enough to hurt you."

"That's good." Douglas accepted the statement at face value, a fact
which failed to surprise Kennon. "You know," he said, "I've been around
Lani all my life. And I know that they're not human. No self-respecting
human would take a tenth of what they put up with."

"Their ancestors didn't," Kennon said. "They fought to the end. But your
Grandfather was a smart man even though he was a Degrader."

"He wasn't!" Douglas exploded. "No Alexander is a Degrader."

"He realized," Kennon went on, "that he'd never succeed in enslaving the
Lani unless he separated the sexes. And since women are more subjective
in their outlook--and more pliable--he picked them for his slaves. The
males he retired to stud. Probably the fact that there were more women
than men helped him make up his mind.

"In every society," Kennon went on inexorably, "there are potential
freeman and potential slaves. The latter invariably outnumber the
former. They're cowards: the timid, the unsacrificing--the ones that
want peace at any price--the ones who will trade freedom for security.
Those were the ones who hid rather than risk their lives fighting
the aggressor. Those were the ones who survived. Old Alexander had a
ready-made slave cadre when he finished off the last of the warriors.
For four centuries the survivors have been bred and selected to
perpetuate slave traits. And the system works. The men don't want
freedom--they want liberty to kill each other. The women don't want
freedom--they want males. And they'd serve them precisely as the Sarkian
women serve their menfolk. You've killed any chance they had to become
a civilization. It's going to take generations perhaps before they're
reoriented. There's plenty you Alexanders should answer for."

"If there's any fault, it's yours," Douglas snarled. "We were doing all
right until you came here. We'd still be doing all right if I had shot
you both." His shoulders sagged. "I should have killed you when I had
the chance," he said bitterly.

"But you didn't," Kennon said, "and to show my gratitude I'm letting you
get away with a whole skin. I don't expect you to be grateful, but at
least you'll not be on my conscience. I don't enjoy killing, not even
things like you."

Douglas sneered. "You're soft--a soft sentimental fool."

"Admitted," Kennon said, "but that's my nature."

"Yet you'd destroy the family, wreck Outworld Enterprises, and throw a
whole world into chaos over a few thousand animals. I don't understand
you."

"They're human," Kennon said flatly.

"Admitting they might once have been, they're not now."

"And whose fault is that?"

"Not ours," Douglas said promptly. "If there is any fault it's that of
the court who decided they were humanoid."

"You didn't help any."

"Why should we? Does one treat a shrake like a brother?--or a varl?--or
a dog? We treat them like the animals they are. And we've done no worse
with the Lani. Our consciences are clear."

Kennon laughed humorlessly. "Yet this clear conscience makes you want
to kill me, so you can keep on treating them as animals--even though you
know they're human."

"I know nothing of the sort. But you're right about the killing, I'd
kill you cheerfully if I had the chance. It's our necks if you get away
with this. Of course, you probably won't, but why take the chance. I
like my neck more than I like yours."

"You're honest at any rate," Kennon admitted. "And in a way I don't
blame you. To you it's probably better to be a rich slaver living off
the legacy of a Degrader than a penniless humanitarian. But you've lost
your chance."

Douglas screamed with rage. He whirled on Kennon, his face a distorted
mask of hate.

"Hold it!" Kennon barked. "I don't want to kill you, but I'll burn a
hole clear through your rotten carcass if you make another move. I have
no love for your kind."

Douglas spat contemptuously. "You haven't got the guts," he snarled. But
he didn't move.

"Just stand still--very still," Kennon said softly. The iron in his
voice was not hidden by the quiet tone.

Douglas shivered. "I'll get you yet," he said, but there was no force in
the threat.

"Here's the rope you wanted," Copper said as she emerged abruptly from
the darkness. "I had a hard time finding it."

"You haven't been too long," Kennon said. "Now tie Douglas' hands behind
him while I keep him covered."

"It's a pleasure," Copper murmured.



CHAPTER XVIII

"I'm frightened," Copper said, twisting uncomfortably in the shock chair
beside Kennon's.

"After you have been so brave?" Kennon asked. "That's nonsense. It's
just nervous reaction. Now web in like I showed you. It's time for
blast-off. We don't dare wait much longer."

"All right--but I have a feeling that this isn't right. Something is
going to go wrong."

"I hope you don't have precognition." Kennon smiled. "I've checked
everything. The ship is as good as she'll ever be. There's nothing more
that we can do."

"There's one consolation," Copper said wanly. "At we'll die together."

"There's a better chance that we'll live together."

"I hope so."

"Ready?" Kennon asked.

She nodded.

He flipped the switches that would send the fuel rods into the reactor.
Below them a soft, barely audible whine ascended the sonic scale to
a point of irritating inaudibility. Kennon smiled. The spindizzy was
functioning properly. He flipped a second bank of switches and a dull
roar came from the buried stem. Ashes and pumice heated to incandescence
were blown through the air. Molten drops of radioactive lava skittered
across the durilium hull as Kennon advanced the power. The whole stem
of the ship was immersed in a seething lake of bolling rock as the Egg
lifted slowly with ponderous dignity into the night sky.

"Hang on!" Kennon said. "I'm going to hyper." His hand moved a red lever
and the Egg shimmered and vanished with a peculiar wrenching motion
into an impossible direction that the mind could not grasp. And the
interceptor missile from Otpen One nosed through the space the Egg had
occupied.

* * *

"We made it!" Kennon said, looking across the writhing semifluid control
board, shifting oddly in the harsh yellow monochromatic light that
pervaded the cabin. The screens were leaking like sieves, but they were
holding well enough to keep Cth yellow from being anything more than an
annoyance. He glanced over at Copper, a fantastically elongated Copper
who looked like a madman's dream of chaos.

And Copper screamed! The sound echoed and re-echoed, dying away with a
lingering discordant reverberation that made his skin tingle.

"Copper! It's all right! It's all fight! Stop it!"

Copper screamed again and her elongated figure suddenly foreshortened
and collapsed into a small writhing ball from which two small pink hands
emerged clutching at a gelid mass of air that flowed sluggishly around
them.

And Kennon knew what he had forgotten! Hyperspace with leaky screens was
nothing to inflict upon an unprepared mind. It is one thing to endure
partial exposure after months of training, with experienced medics
standing by to help you through the shock phase, but quite another to
be thrust from a safe and sheltered existence into the mind shattering
distortions of the Cth continuum.

The Egg was old. Her screens, never good at best, were hardly more than
filters. Through the hull, through the drive lattice, the viciously
distorted Cth environment seeped into the ship turning prosaic shapes
of controls and instruments into writhing masses of obscene horror that
sent extensions wiggling off into nothingness at eye-aching angles. A
spaceman could take this--knowing it wasn't real--but a tyro could not.

Copper collapsed. Her mind, assaulted by sensations no untrained person
should experience, went into shock. But she wasn't granted the mercy
of unconsciousness. Terrified by a pseudo reality that surpassed her
wildest nightmares, she stared wide-eyed at the control room and the
thing that had been Kennon. She screamed until her throat was raw,
until the monster beside her touched her with Kennon's hands. Then,
mercifully, she felt a stinging in her arm and all sensation ceased.

Kennon stared glumly at the controls. Fleming alone knew how many
objective years were passing outside as they hurtled through four-space.
Subjectively it would only be hours aboard the Egg, but a decade--or
maybe a century--might pass outside this mad universe where neither time
nor speed had meaning. The old ships didn't have temporal compensators,
nor could they travel through upper bands of Cth where subjective
and objective time were more nearly equal. They were trapped in
a semi-stasis of time as the ship fled on through the distorted
monochromatic regions that bypassed normal space.

The Egg slipped smoothly out of the hyper jump, back into the normal
universe. Beta floated above them, the blue shield of her atmosphere
shining softly in the light of Beta's sun.

"Couldn't hit it that good again in a hundred tries," Kennon gloated.
"Halfway across the galaxy--and right on the nose." He looked at the
shock chair beside him. Copper was curled into a tight ball inside the
confining safety web, knees drawn up, back bent, head down--arms wrapped
protectingly around her legs--the fetal position of catatonic shock.

He shook her shoulder--no response. Her pulse was thready and irregular.
Her breathing was shallow. Her lips were blue. Her condition was
obvious--space shock--extreme grade. She'd need medical attention if she
was going to live. And she'd need it fast!

"Just why, you educated nitwit," he snarled at himself, "didn't you have
sense enough to give her that injection of Sonmol before we hypered! You
haven't the sense of a decerebrate Capellan grackle!"

He turned on the radio. "Emergency!" he said. "Any station! Space-shock
case aboard. Extreme urgency."

"Identify yourself--give your license. Over."

"What port are you?"

"Hunterstown--will you please identify? Over."

"Your co-ordinates," Kennon snapped. "Over."

"280.45--67.29 plus. Repeat--request your identification."

"Pilot Kennon, Jac, Beta 47M 26429. I have no I.D. for the ship--and
you'll see why when I land. Over."

"Hunterstown Port to Kennon. You are not--repeat not--cleared to land.
Go into orbit and report your position. Over."

"Sorry, Hunterstown. You wouldn't have checked in if you didn't have
room, and a hospital. This is an emergency. I'm setting down. Out."

"But--" The words got no farther. Kennon was already spinning the ship.

"All right--we have you on the scope. But this is a class one violation.
You may come in on Landing Beam One."

"Sorry. I have no GCA."

"What?--what sort of ship are you flying?" The voice was curious.

"I'm matching intrinsics over your port. Talk me in when I break through
