
There were guns down in pits so their muzzles wouldn't interfere with
the radar. There were enough non-recoil anti-aircraft guns to defend the
Shed against anything one could imagine.

"And there are jet planes overhead too," said Sally. "Dad asked to have
them reinforced, and two new wings of jet fighters landed yesterday at a
field somewhere over yonder. There are plenty of guards!"

The Platform was guarded as no object in all history had ever been
guarded. It was ironic that it had to be protected so, because it was
actually the only hope of escape from atomic war. But that was why some
people hated the Platform, and their hatred had made it seem obviously
an item of national defense. Ironically that was the reason the money
had been provided for its construction. But the greatest irony of all
was that its most probable immediate usefulness would be the help it
would give in making nuclear experiments that weren't safe enough to
make on Earth.

That was pure irony. Because if those experiments were successful, they
should mean that everybody in the world would in time become rich beyond
envy.

But Joe couldn't react to the fact. He was drained and empty of emotion
because his job was done and he'd lost a very flimsy hope to be one of
the Platform's first crew.

He didn't really feel better until late that night, when suddenly he
realized that life was real and life was earnest, because a panting man
was trying to strangle Joe with his bare hands. Joe was hampered in his
self-defense because a large number of battling figures trampled over
him and his antagonist together. They were underneath the Platform, and
Joe expected to be blown to bits any second.




11


Joe sat on the porch of Major Holt's quarters in the area next to the
Shed. It was about eight-thirty, and dark, but there was a moon. And Joe
had come to realize that his personal disappointment was only his
personal disappointment, and that he hadn't any right to make a nuisance
of himself about it. Therefore he didn't talk about the thing nearest in
his mind, but something else that was next nearest or farther away
still. Yet, with the Shed filling up a full quarter of the sky, and a
gibbous moon new-risen from the horizon, it was not natural for a young
man like Joe to speak purely of earthly things.

"It'll come," he said yearningly, staring at the moon. "If the Platform
gets up day after tomorrow, it's going to take time to ferry up the
equipment it ought to have. But still, somebody ought to land on the
moon before too long."

He added absorbedly: "Once the Platform is fully equipped, it won't take
many rocket pay loads to refill a ship's tanks at the Platform, before
it can head on out."

Mathematically, a rocket ship that could leave the Platform with full
fuel tanks should have fuel to reach the moon and land on it, and take
off again and return to the Platform. The mathematical fact had a
peculiar nagging flavor. When a dream is subjected to statistical
analysis and the report is in its favor, a dreamer's satisfaction is
always diluted by a subconscious feeling that the report is only part of
the dream. Everybody worries a little when a cherished dream shows a
likelihood of coming true. Some people take firm steps to stop things
right there, so a romantic daydream won't be spoiled by transmutation
into prosaic fact. But Joe said doggedly: "Twenty ferry trips to pile up
fuel, and the twenty-first ship should be able to refuel and go on out.
And then somebody will step out on the moon!"

He was disappointed now. He wouldn't be the one to do it. But somebody
would.

"You might try for the ferry service," said Sally uneasily.

"I will," said Joe grimly, "but I won't be hoping too much. After all,
there are astronomers and physics sharks and such things, who'll be glad
to learn to run rockets in order to practice their specialties out of
atmosphere."

Sally said mournfully: "I can't seem to say anything to make you feel
better!"

"But you do," said Joe. He added grandiloquently, "But for your
unflagging faith in me, I would not have the courage to bear the burdens
of everyday life."

She stamped her foot.

"Stop it!"

"All right." But he said quietly, "You are a good kid, Sally. You know,
it's not too bright of me to mourn."

She drew a deep breath.

"That's better! Now, I want----"

There was a gangling figure walking down the concrete path between the
trim, monotonous cottages that were officers' quarters at the Shed.

Joe said sharply: "That's Haney! What's he doing here?" He called,
"Haney!"

Haney's manner took on purpose. He came across the grass--the lawns
around the officers' quarters contained the only grass in twenty miles.

"Hiya," said Haney uncomfortably. He spoke politely to Sally. "Hiya.
Uh--you want to get in on the party, Joe?"

"What kind?"

"The party Mike was talkin' about," said Haney. "He's set it up. He
wants me to get you and a kinda--uh--undercover tip-off to Major Holt."

Joe stirred. Sally said hospitably: "Sit down. You've noticed that my
father gave you full security clearance, so you can go anywhere?"

Haney perched awkwardly on the edge of the porch.

"Yeah. That's helped with the party. It's how I got here, as far as that
goes. Mike's on top of the world."

"Shoot it," said Joe.

"Y'know he's been pretty bitter about things," said Haney carefully.
"He's been sayin' that little guys like him ought to be the spacemen.
There's half a dozen other little guys been working on the Platform too.
They can get in cracks an' buck rivets an' so on. Useful. He's had 'em
all hopped up on the fact that the Platform coulda been finished months
ago if it'd been built for them, an' they could get to the moon an' back
while full-sized guys couldn't an' so on. Remember?"

"I remember," said Sally.

"They've all been beefin' about it," explained Haney. "People know how
they feel. So today Mike went and talked to one or two of 'em. An' they
started actin' mysterious, passin' messages back an' forth an' so on.
Little guys, actin' important. Security guys wouldn't notice 'em much.
Y'don't take a guy Mike's size serious, unless you know him. Then he's
the same as anybody else. So the security guys didn't pay any attention
to him. But some other guys did. Some special other guys. They saw those
little fellas actin' like they were cookin' up somethin' fancy. An' they
bit."

"Bit?" asked Sally.

"They got curious. So Mike an' his gang got confidential. An' they're
going to have help sabotagin' the Platform when the next shift changes.
The midgets gettin' even for bein' laughed at, see? They're pretending
their plan is that when the Platform's sabotaged--not smashed, but just
messed up so it can't take off--the big brass will let 'em take a ferry
rocket up in a hurry, an' get it in orbit, an' use it for a Platform
until the big Platform can be mended an' sent up. Once they're up there,
there's no use tryin' to stop the big Platform. So it can go ahead."

Joe said dubiously: "I think I see...."

"Mike and his gang of little guys are bein' saps--on purpose. If
anybody's goin' to pull some fast stuff, next shift change--that's the
time everybody's got to! Last chance! Mike and his gang don't know
what's gonna happen, but they sure know when! They're invitin' the real
saboteurs to make fools of 'em. And what'll happen?"

Joe said drily: "The logical thing would be to feel sorry for the big
guys who think they're smarter than Mike."

"Uh-huh," said Haney, deadly serious. "Mike's story is there's half a
dozen rocket tubes already loaded. They're goin' to fire those rockets
between shifts. The Platform gets shoved off its base an' maybe dented,
and so on. Mike's gang say they got the figures to prove they can go up
in a ferry rocket an' be a Platform, and the big brass won't have any
choice but to let 'em."

Sally said: "I don't think they know how the big brass thinks."

Haney and Joe said together, "No!" and Joe added: "Mike's not crazy! He
knows better! But it's a good story for somebody who doesn't know Mike."

Haney said in indignation: "I came out here to ask the Major to help us.
The Chief's gettin' a gang together, too. There's some Indians of his
tribe that work here. We can count on them for plenty of rough stuff.
And there's Joe and me. The point is that Mike's stunt makes it certain
that everything busts loose at a time we can know in advance. If the
Major gives us a free hand, and then in the last five minutes takes his
own measures--so they can't leak out ahead of time and tip off the gangs
we want to get--we oughta knock off all the expert saboteurs who know
the weak spots in the Platform. For instance those who know that
thermite in the gyros would mess everything up all over again."

Joe said quietly: "But Major Holt has to be told well in advance about
all this! That's absolute!"

"Yeah," agreed Haney. "But also he has got to keep quiet--not tell
anybody else! There've been too many leaks already about too many
things. You know that!"

Joe said: "Sally, see if you can get your father to come here and talk.
Haney's right. Not in his office. Right here."

Sally got up and went inside the house. She came back with an uneasy
expression on her face.

"He's coming. But I couldn't very well tell him what was wanted,
and--I'm not sure he's going to be in a mood to listen."

When the Major arrived he was definitely not in a mood to listen. He was
a harried man, and he was keyed up to the limit by the multiplied strain
due to the imminence of the Platform's take-off. He came back to his
house from a grim conference on exactly the subject of how to make
preparations against any possible sabotage incidents--and ran into a
proposal to stimulate them! He practically exploded. Even if provocation
should be given to saboteurs to lure them into showing their hands, this
was no time for it! And if it were, it would be security business. It
should not be meddled in by amateurs!

Joe said grimly: "I don't mean to be disrespectful, sir, but there's a
point you've missed. It isn't thinkable that you'll be able to prevent
something from being tried at a time the saboteurs pick. They've got
just so much time left, and they'll use it! But Mike's plan would offer
them a diversion under cover of which they could pull their own stuff!
And besides that, you know your office leaks! You couldn't set up a
trick like this through security methods. And for a third fact, this is
the one sort of thing no saboteur would expect from your security
organization! We caught the saboteurs at the pushpot field by guessing
at a new sort of thinking for sabotage. Here's a chance to catch the
saboteurs who'll work their heads off in the next twenty-four hours or
so, by using a new sort of thinking for security!"

Major Holt was not an easy man to get along with at any time, and this
was the worst of all times to differ with him. But he did think
straight. He stared furiously at Joe, growing crimson with anger at
being argued with. But after he had stared a full minute, the angry
flush went slowly away. Then he nodded abruptly.

"There you have a point," he said curtly. "I don't like it. But it is a
point. It would be completely the reverse of anything my antagonists
could possibly expect. So I accept the suggestion. Now--let us make the
arrangements."

He settled down for a quick, comprehensive, detailed plan. In careful
consultation with Haney, Joe worked it out. The all-important point was
that the Major's part was to be done in completely unorthodox fashion.
He would take measures to mesh his actions with those of Mike, the
Chief, Haney, and Joe. Each action the Major took and each order he gave
he would attend to personally. His actions would be restricted to the
last five minutes or less before shift-change time. His orders would be
given individually to individuals, and under no circumstances would he
transmit any order through anybody else. In every instance, his order
would be devised to mean nothing intelligible to its recipient until the
time came for obedience.

It was not an easy scheme for the Major to bind himself to. It ran
counter to every principle of military thinking save one, which was that
it was a good idea to outguess the enemy. At the end he said detachedly:
"This is distinctly irregular. It is as irregular as anything could
possibly be! But that is why I have agreed to it. It will be at
least--unexpected--coming from me!"

Then he smiled without mirth and nodded to Joe and to Haney, and went
striding away down the concrete walk to where his car waited.

Haney left a moment later to carry the list of arrangements to the Chief
and to Mike. And Joe went into the Shed to do his part.

There was little difference in the appearance of the Shed by night. In
the daytime there were long rows of windows in the roof, which let in a
vague, dusky, inadequate twilight. At night those windows were
shuttered. This meant that the shadows were a little sharper and the
contrasts of light and shade a trifle more abrupt. All other changes
that Joe could see were the normal ones due to the taking down of
scaffolding and the fastening up of rocket tubes. It was clear that the
shape of the Platform proper would be obscure when all its rocket tubes
were fast in place.

Joe went to look at the last pushpots, and they were ready to be taken
over to their own field for their flight test before use. There were
extras, anyhow, beyond the number needed to lift the Platform. He found
himself considering the obvious fact that after the Platform was aloft,
they would be used to launch the ferry rockets, too.

Then he moved toward the center of the Shed. A whole level of
scaffolding came apart and its separate elements were bundled together
as he watched. Slings lowered the bundles down to waiting trucks which
would carry them elsewhere. There were mixing trucks still pouring out
their white paste for the lining of the rocket tubes, and their product
went up and vanished into the gaping mouths of the giant wire-wound
pipes.

Presently Joe went into the maze of piers under the Space Platform
itself. He came to the temporary stairs he had reason to remember. He
nodded to the two guards there.

"I want to take another look at that gadget we installed," he said.

One of the guards said good-naturedly: "Major Holt said to pass you any
time."

He ascended and went along the curious corridor--it had handgrips on the
walls so a man could pull himself along it when there was no weight--and
went to the engine room. He heard voices. They were speaking a
completely unintelligible language. He tensed.

Then the Chief grinned at him amiably. He was in the engine room and
with him were no fewer than eight men of his own coppery complexion.

"Here's some friends of mine," he explained, and Joe shook hands with
black-haired, dark-skinned men who were named Charley Spotted Dog and
Sam Fatbelly and Luther Red Cow and other exotic things. The Chief said
exuberantly, "Major Holt told the guards to let me pass in some Indian
friends, so I took my gang on a guided tour of the Platform. None of 'em
had ever been inside before. And----"

"I heard you talking Indian," said Joe.

"You're gonna hear some more," said the Chief. "We're the first war
party of my tribe in longer'n my grandpa woulda thought respectable!"

Joe found it difficult to restrain a smile. The Chief took him off to
one side.

"Fella," he said kindly, "it bothers you, this business, because it
ain't organized. That's what this world needs, Joe. Everything figured
out by slide rules an' such--it's civilized, but it ain't human! What
everybody oughta be is a connoisseur of chaos, like me. Quit worryin'
an' get outside and pick up that security guy the Major was gonna send
to meet you!"

He gave Joe an amiable shove and rejoined his fellow Mohawks, each of
whom, Joe noticed suddenly, had somewhere on his person a twelve-inch
Stillson wrench or a reasonable facsimile to serve as a substitute
tomahawk. They grinned at him as he departed.

At the bottom of the flight of narrow wooden steps there was a third
security man. He greeted Joe.

"Major Holt told me to pick you up," he observed.

Joe walked to one side with him. Major Holt had promised to send a
first-class man to meet Joe at this place, with orders to take
instructions from Joe. Joe said curtly: "You're to snag as many Security
men as you can, place them more or less out of sight under the Platform
here, and tell them to turn off their walkie-talkies and wait. No matter
what happens, they're to wait right here until they're needed, right
here!"

He looked harassedly around him. The Security man nodded and moved
casually away. This was close timing. Something made Joe look up. He saw
the catwalk gallery nearly overhead. The expected guard was there.
Haney, though, was with him. There was nothing else in sight. Not yet.
But Haney was on the job. Joe saw a Security man step out of sight in
the scaffolding. He saw his own assigned security man speak to another,
who wandered casually toward the Platform's base.

