vogue. Non-astronomical writers have asserted that Alcyone, the
brightest Pleiad, is the centre of the entire universe; some have even
been sufficiently irreverent to declare that it is the seat of heaven,
the throne of God. A popular London divine, having noticed a bright ring
round Alcyone on a photograph of the group, took that halo, which every
photographer would at once recognize as a mere photographic defect, as a
confirmation of this baseless fancy. Foolishness of this kind has
nothing to support it in science or religion; it is an offence against
both. We have no reason to regard the Pleiades as the centre of the
universe, or as containing the attracting mass which draws our sun
forward in its vast mysterious orbit.

R. H. Allen, in his survey of the literature of the Pleiades, mentions
that "Drach surmised that their midnight culmination in the time of
Moses, ten days after the autumnal equinox, may have fixed the Day of
Atonement on the 10th of Tishri."[221:1] This is worth quoting as a
sample of the unhappy astronomical guesses of commentators. Drach
overlooked that his suggestion necessitated the assumption that in the
time of Moses astronomers had already learned, first, to determine the
actual equinox; next, to observe the culmination of stars on the
meridian rather than their risings and settings; and, third and more
important, to determine midnight by some artificial measurement of time.
None of these can have been primitive operations; we have no knowledge
that any of the three were in use in the time of Moses; certainly they
were not suitable for a people on the march, like the Israelites in the
wilderness. Above all, Drach ignored in this suggestion the fact that
the Jewish calendar was a lunar-solar one, and hence that the tenth day
of the seventh month could not bear any fixed relation either to the
autumnal equinox, or to the midnight culmination of the Pleiades; any
more than our Easter Sunday is fixed to the spring equinox on March 22.

The Pleiades were often associated with the late autumn, as Aratus
writes--

     "Men mark them rising with Sol's setting light,
      Forerunners of the winter's gloomy night."

This is what is technically known as the "acronical rising" of the
Pleiades, their rising at sunset; in contrast to their "heliacal
rising," their rising just before daybreak, which ushered in the spring
time. This acronical rising has led to the association of the group with
the rainy season, and with floods. Thus Statius called the cluster
"Pliadum nivosum sidus," and Valerius Flaccus distinctly used the word
"Pliada" for the showers. Josephus says that during the siege of
Jerusalem by Antiochus Epiphanes in 170 B.C., the besieged wanted for
water until relieved "by a large shower of rain which fell at the
setting of the Pleiades." R. H. Allen, in his _Star-Names and their
Meanings_, states that the Pleiades "are intimately connected with
traditions of the flood found among so many and widely separated
nations, and especially in the Deluge-myth of Chaldaea," but he does not
cite authorities or instances.

The Talmud gives a curious legend connecting the Pleiades with the
Flood:--

     "When the Holy One, blessed be He! wished to bring the Deluge
     upon the world, He took two stars out of Pleiades, and thus
     let the Deluge loose. And when He wished to arrest it, He took
     two stars out of Arcturus and stopped it."[223:1]

It would seem from this that the Rabbis connected the number of visible
stars with the number of the family in the Ark--with the "few, that
is, eight souls . . . saved by water," of whom St. Peter speaks. Six
Pleiades only are usually seen by the naked eye; traditionally seven
were seen; but the Rabbis assumed that two, not one, were lost.

Perhaps we may trace a reference to this supposed association of
_K[=i]mah_ with the Flood in the passage from Amos already quoted:--

     "Seek Him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, . . . that
     calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon
     the face of the earth: the Lord is His name."

Many ancient nations have set apart days in the late autumn in honour of
the dead, no doubt because the year was then considered as dead. This
season being marked by the acronical rising of the Pleiades, that group
has become associated with such observances. There is, however, no
reference to any custom of this kind in Scripture.

What is the meaning of the inquiry addressed to Job by the Almighty?

     "Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades?"

What was the meaning which it possessed in the thought of the writer of
the book? What was the meaning which we should now put on such an
inquiry, looking at the constellations from the standpoint which the
researches of modern astronomy have given us?

The first meaning of the text would appear to be connected with the
apparent movement of the sun amongst the stars in the course of the
year. We cannot see the stars by daylight, or see directly where the sun
is situated with respect to them; but, in very early times, men learnt
to associate the seasons of the year with the stars which were last seen
in the morning, above the place where the sun was about to rise; in the
technical term once in use, with the heliacal risings of stars. When the
constellations were first designed, the Pleiades rose heliacally at the
beginning of April, and were the sign of the return of spring. Thus
Aratus, in his constellation poem writes--

     "Men mark them (_i. e._ the Pleiades) rising with the solar ray,
        The harbinger of summer's brighter day."

They heralded, therefore, the revival of nature from her winter sleep,
the time of which the kingly poet sang so alluringly--

     "For, lo, the winter is past,
        The rain is over and gone;
      The flowers appear on the earth;
        The time of the singing of birds is come,
      And the voice of the turtle is heard in our land;
        The fig-tree ripeneth her green figs,
      And the vines are in blossom,
        They give forth their fragrance."

The constellation which thus heralded the return of this genial season
was poetically taken as representing the power and influence of spring.
Their "sweet influences" were those that had rolled away the gravestone
of snow and ice which had lain upon the winter tomb of nature. Theirs
was the power that brought the flowers up from under the turf; earth's
constellations of a million varied stars to shine upwards in answer to
the constellations of heaven above. Their influences filled copse and
wood with the songs of happy birds. Theirs stirred anew the sap in the
veins of the trees, and drew forth their reawakened strength in bud and
blossom. Theirs was the bleating of the new-born lambs; theirs the
murmur of the reviving bees.

Upon this view, then, the question to Job was, in effect, "What control
hast thou over the powers of nature? Canst thou hold back the sun from
shining in spring-time--from quickening flower, and herb, and tree with
its gracious warmth? This is God's work, year by year over a thousand
lands, on a million hills, in a million valleys. What canst thou do to
hinder it?"

The question was a striking one; one which must have appealed to the
patriarch, evidently a keen observer and lover of nature; and it was
entirely in line with the other inquiries addressed to him in the same
chapter.

     "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?"

The Revised Version renders the question--

     "Canst thou bind the _cluster_ of the Pleiades?"

reading the Hebrew word _Ma`anaddoth_, instead of _Ma'adannoth_,
following in this all the most ancient versions. On this view, Job is,
in effect, asked, "Canst thou gather together the stars in the family of
the Pleiades and keep them in their places?"

The expression of a chain or band is one suggested by the appearance of
the group to the eye, but it is no less appropriate in the knowledge
which photography and great telescopes have given us. To quote from Miss
Clerke's description of the nebula discovered round the brighter stars
of the Pleiades--Alcyone, Asterope, Celoeno, Electra, Maia, Merope and
Taygeta:--

     "Besides the Maia vortex, the Paris photographs depicted a
     series of nebulous bars on either side of Merope, and a
     curious streak extending like a finger-post from Electra
     towards Alcyone . . . Streamers and fleecy masses of cosmical
     fog seem almost to fill the spaces between the stars, as
     clouds choke a mountain valley. The chief points of its
     concentration are the four stars Alcyone, Merope, Maia, and
     Electra; but it includes as well Celoeno and Taygeta, and is
     traceable southward from Asterope over an arc of 1 deg. 10'. . . .
     The greater part of the constellation is shown as veiled in
     nebulous matter of most unequal densities. In some places it
     lies in heavy folds and wreaths, in others it barely qualifies
     the darkness of the sky-ground. The details of its
     distribution come out with remarkable clearness, and are
     evidently to a large extent prescribed by the relative
     situations of the stars. Their lines of junction are
     frequently marked by nebulous rays, establishing between them,
     no doubt, relations of great physical importance; and masses
     of nebula, in numerous instances, seem as if _pulled out of
     shape_ and drawn into festoons by the attractions of
     neighbouring stars. But the strangest exemplification of
     this filamentous tendency is in a fine, thread-like process,
     3'' or 4'' wide, but 35' to 40' long, issuing in an easterly
     direction from the edge of the nebula about Maia, and
     stringing together seven stars, met in its advance, like beads
     on a rosary. The largest of these is apparently the occasion
     of a slight deviation from its otherwise rectilinear course. A
     second similar but shorter streak runs, likewise east and
     west, through the midst of the formation."[229:1]

[Illustration: NEBULOSITIES OF THE PLEIADES.

Photographed by Dr. Max Wolf, Heidelberg.]

Later photographs have shown that not only are the several stars of the
Pleiades linked together by nebulous filaments, but the whole cluster is
embedded in a nebulous net that spreads its meshes far out into space.
Not only is the group thus tied or bound together by nebulous clouds, it
has other tokens of forming but a single family. The movements of the
several stars have been carefully measured, and for the most part the
entire cluster is drifting in the same direction; a few stars do not
share in the common motion, and are probably apparent members, seen in
perspective projected on the group, but in reality much nearer to us.
The members of the group also show a family likeness in constitution.
When the spectroscope is turned upon it, the chief stars are seen to
closely resemble each other; the principal lines in their spectra being
those of hydrogen, and these are seen as broad and diffused bands, so
that the spectrum we see resembles that of the brightest star of the
heavens, Sirius.

There can be little doubt but that the leaders of the group are actually
greater, brighter suns than Sirius itself. We do not know the exact
distance of the Pleiades, they are so far off that we can scarcely do
more than make a guess at it; but it is probable that they are so far
distant that our sun at like distance would prove much too faint to be
seen at all by the naked eye. The Pleiades then would seem to be a most
glorious star-system, not yet come to its full growth. From the
standpoint of modern science we may interpret the "chain" or "the sweet
influences" of the Pleiades as consisting in the enfolding wisps of
nebulosity which still, as it were, knit together those vast young suns;
or, and in all probability more truly, as that mysterious force of
gravitation which holds the mighty system together, and in obedience to
which the group has taken its present shape. The question, if asked us
to-day, would be, in effect, "Canst thou bind together by nebulous
chains scores of suns, far more glorious than thine own, and scattered
over many millions of millions of miles of space; or canst thou loosen
the attraction which those suns exercise upon each other, and move them
hither and thither at thy will?"


FOOTNOTES:

[217:1] _Glossary of Greek Birds_, pp. 28, 29.

[221:1] R. H. Allen, _Star Names and their Meanings_, p. 401.

[223:1] _Berachoth_, fol. 59, col. 1.

[229:1] _The System of the Stars_, 1st edit., pp. 230-232.




CHAPTER VII

ORION


_K[)e]s[=i]l_, the word rendered by our translators "Orion," occurs in
an astronomical sense four times in the Scriptures; twice in the Book of
Job, once in the prophecy of Amos, and once, in the plural, in the
prophecy of Isaiah. In the three first cases the word is used in
conjunction with _K[=i]mah_, "the Pleiades," as shown in the preceding
chapter. The fourth instance is rendered in the Authorized Version--

     "For the stars of heaven and the constellations
     (_K[)e]s[=i]lim_) thereof shall not give their light."

The Hebrew word _K[)e]s[=i]l_ signifies "a fool," and that in the
general sense of the term as used in Scripture; not merely a silly,
untaught, feckless person, but a godless and an impious one. Thus, in
the Book of Proverbs, Divine Wisdom is represented as appealing--

     "How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? the
     scorners delight in their scorning, and _fools_ hate
     knowledge?"

[Illustration: THE STARS OF ORION.]

What constellation was known to the ancient Hebrews as "the fool"? The
Seventy who rendered the Old Testament into Greek confess themselves at
fault. Once, in Amos, both _K[=i]mah_ and _K[)e]s[=i]l_ are left
untranslated. Instead of "Him that maketh the seven stars and Orion," we
have the paraphrase, "That maketh and transformeth all things." Once, in
Job, it is rendered "Hesperus," the evening star; and in the other two
instances it is given as "Orion." The tradition of the real meaning of
the word as an astronomical term had been lost, or at least much
confused before the Septuagint Version was undertaken. The Jews had
not, so far as there is any present evidence, learned the term in
Babylon, for the word has not yet been found as a star-name on any
cuneiform inscription. It was well known before the Exile, for Amos and
Isaiah both use it, and the fact that the author of Job also uses it,
indicates that he did not gain his knowledge of the constellation during
the Babylonian captivity.

The majority of translators and commentators have, however, agreed in
believing that the brightest and most splendid constellation in the sky
is intended--the one which we know as Orion. This constellation is one
of the very few in which the natural grouping of the stars seems to
suggest the figure that has been connected with it. Four bright stars,
in a great trapezium, are taken to mark the two shoulders and the two
legs of a gigantic warrior; a row of three bright stars, midway between
the four first named, suggest his gemmed belt; another row of stars
straight down from the centre star of the belt, presents his sword; a
compact cluster of three stars marks his head. A gigantic warrior, armed
for the battle, seems thus to be outlined in the heavens. As Longfellow
describes him--

     "Begirt with many a blazing star,
      Stood the great giant, Algebar,
      Orion, hunter of the beast!
      His sword hung gleaming by his side,
      And, on his arm, the lion's hide
      Scattered across the midnight air
      The golden radiance of its hair."

In accord with the form naturally suggested by the grouping of the
stars, the Syrians have called the constellation _Gabb[=a]r[=a]_; and
the Arabs, _Al Jabb[=a]r_; and the Jews, _Gibb[=o]r_. The brightest star
of the constellation, the one in the left knee, now generally known as
_Rigel_, is still occasionally called _Algebar_, a corruption of _Al
Jabb[=a]r_, though one of the fainter stars near it now bears that name.
The meaning in each case is "the giant," "the mighty one," "the great
warrior," and no doubt from the first formation of the constellations,
this, the most brilliant of all, was understood to set forth a warrior
armed for the battle. There were _gibb[=o]rim_ before the Flood; we are
told that after "the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and
they bare children to them, the same became mighty men (_gibb[=o]rim_)
which were of old, men of renown."

But according to Jewish tradition, this constellation was appropriated
to himself by a particular mighty man. We are told in Gen. x. that--

     "Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one (_gibb[=o]r_)
     in the earth."

and it is alleged that he, or his courtiers, in order to flatter him,
gave his name to this constellation, just as thousands of years later
the University of Leipzic proposed to call the belt stars of Orion,
_Stellae Napoleonis_, "the Constellation of Napoleon."[234:1]

There was at one time surprise felt, that, deeply as the name of Nimrod
had impressed itself upon Eastern tradition, his name, as such, was
"nowhere found in the extensive literature which has come down to us"
from Babylon. It is now considered that the word, Nimrod, is simply a
Hebrew variant of Merodach, "the well-known head of the Babylonian
pantheon." He was probably "the first king of Babylonia or the first
really great ruler of the country." It is significant, as Mr. T. G.
Pinches points out, in his _Old Testament in the Light of the Records
from Assyria and Babylonia_, that just as in Genesis it is stated that
"the beginning of his (Nimrod's) kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and
Accad, and Calneh," so Merodach is stated, in the cuneiform records, to
have built Babel and Erech and Niffer, which last is probably Calneh.
The Hebrew scribes would seem to have altered the name of Merodach in
two particulars: they dropped the last syllable, thus suggesting that
the name was derived from _Marad_, "the rebellious one"; and they
prefixed the syllable "Ni," just as "Nisroch" was written for "Assur."
"From a linguistic point of view, therefore, the identification of
Nimrod as a changed form of Merodach is fully justified."

[Illustration: ORION AND THE NEIGHBOURING CONSTELLATIONS.]

The attitude of Orion in the sky is a striking one. The warrior is
represented as holding a club in the right hand, and a skin or shield in
the left. His left foot is raised high as if he were climbing a steep
ascent, he seems to be endeavouring to force his way up into the zodiac,
and--as Longfellow expresses it--to be beating the forehead of the
Bull. His right leg is not shown below the knee, for immediately
beneath him is the little constellation of the Hare, by the early Arabs
sometimes called, _Al Kursiyy al Jabb[=a]r_, "the Chair of the Giant,"
from its position. Behind Orion are the two Dogs, each constellation
distinguished by a very brilliant star; the Greater Dog, by _Sirius_,
the brightest star in the heavens; the Lesser Dog, by _Procyon_, i.e.
the "Dog's Forerunner." Not far above Orion, on the shoulder of the
Bull, is the little cluster of the Pleiades.

There are--as we have seen--only three passages where _K[=i]mah_,
literally "the cluster" or "company,"--the group we know as the
Pleiades,--is mentioned in Scripture; and in each case it is associated
with _K[)e]s[=i]l_, "the fool,"--Orion. Several Greek poets give us the
same association, likening the stars to "rock-pigeons, flying from the
Hunter Orion." And Hesiod in his _Works and Days_ writes--

                "Do not to plough forget,
     When the Seven Virgins, and Orion, set:
     Thus an advantage always shall appear,
     In ev'ry labour of the various year.
     If o'er your mind prevails the love of gain,
     And tempts you to the dangers of the main,
     Yet in her harbour safe the vessel keep,
     When strong Orion chases to the deep
     The Virgin stars."

There is a suggestion of intense irony in this position of Orion amongst
the other constellations. He is trampling on the Hare--most timid of
creatures; he is climbing up into the zodiac to chase the little company
of the Pleiades--be they seven doves or seven maidens--and he is
thwarted even in this unheroic attempt by the determined attitude of the
guardian Bull.

A similar irony is seen in the Hebrew name for the constellation. The
"mighty Hunter," the great hero whom the Babylonians had deified and
made their supreme god, the Hebrews regarded as the "fool," the "impious
rebel." Since Orion is Nimrod, that is Merodach, there is small wonder
that _K[)e]s[=i]l_ was not recognized as his name in Babylonia.[238:1]

The attitude of Orion--attempting to force his way upward into the
zodiac--and the identification of Merodach with him, gives emphasis to
Isaiah's reproach, many centuries later, against the king of Babylon,
the successor of Merodach--

     "Thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I
     will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also
     upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:
     I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like
     the Most High."

In the sight of the Hebrew prophets and poets, Merodach, in taking to
himself this group of stars, published his shame and folly. He had
ascended into heaven, but his glittering belt was only his fetter; he
was bound and gibbeted in the sky like a captive, a rebel, and who could
loose his bands?

In the thirteenth chapter of Isaiah we have the plural of
_k[)e]s[=i]l_--_k[)e]s[=i]lim_. It is usually understood that we have
