Much, however, depends upon the keenness of vision of the observer, and
the transparency of the atmosphere. Argelander counted at Bonn more than
3,000 stars, and Hozeau, near the equator, where all the stars of the
sphere successively appear in view, enumerated 6,000 stars. This number
may be regarded as including all the stars in the heavens that are
visible to the naked eye. With the aid of an opera glass thousands of
stars can be seen that are imperceptible to ordinary vision.
Argelander, with a small telescope of 2-1/2 inches aperture, was able to
count 234,000 stars in the Northern Hemisphere. Large telescopes reveal
multitudes of stars utterly beyond the power of enumeration, nor do they
appear to diminish in number as depth after depth of space is penetrated
by powerful instruments. The star-population of the heavens has been
reckoned at 100,000,000, but this estimate is merely an assumption;
recent discoveries made by means of stellar photography indicate that
the stars exist in myriads. It is reasonable to believe that there is a
limit to the sidereal universe, but it is impossible to assign its
bounds or comprehend the apparently infinite extent of its dimensions.

Scintillation or twinkling of the stars is a property which
distinguishes them from the planets. It is due to a disturbed condition
of the atmosphere and is most apparent when a star is near the horizon;
at the zenith it almost entirely vanishes. Humboldt states that in the
clear air of Cumana, in South America, the stars do not twinkle after
they reach an elevation of 15 deg. above the horizon. The presence of
moisture in the atmosphere intensifies scintillation, and this is
usually regarded as a prognostication of rain. White stars twinkle more
than red ones. The occurrence of scintillation can be accounted for by
the fact that the stars are visible as single points of light which
twinkle as a whole, but in the case of the Sun, Moon, and planets, they
form discs from which many points of light are emitted; they,
therefore, do not scintillate as a whole, for the absence of rays of
light from one portion of their surface is compensated by those from
other parts of their discs, giving a mean average which creates a
steadiness of vision.

The stars are divided into separate classes called 'magnitudes,' by
which their relative apparent size and degree of brightness are
distinguished. The magnitude of a star does not indicate its mass or
dimensions, but its light-giving power, which depends partly upon its
size and distance, though mainly upon the intensity of its luminosity.
The most conspicuous are termed stars of the first magnitude; there are
ten of those in the Northern Hemisphere, and an equal number south of
the equator, but they are not all of the same brilliancy. Sirius
outshines every other star of the firmament, and Arcturus has no rival
in the northern heavens. The names of the first-magnitude stars north of
the equator are: Arcturus, Capella, Vega, Betelgeux, Procyon, Aldebaran,
Altair, Pollux, Regulus, and Deneb. The next class in order of
brightness are called second-magnitude stars; they are fifty or sixty in
number, the most important of which is the Pole Star. The stars diminish
in luminosity by successive gradations, and when they sink to the sixth
magnitude reach the utmost limit at which they appear visible to the
naked eye. In great telescopes this classification is carried so low as
to include stars of the eighteenth and twentieth magnitudes.

Entering into the structure of the stellar universe we have Single
Stars, Double Stars, Triple, Quadruple, and Multiple Stars, Temporary,
Periodical, and Variable Stars, Star-groups, Star-clusters, Galaxies,
and Nebulae.

SINGLE OR INSULATED STARS include all those orbs sufficiently isolated
in space so as not to be perceptibly influenced by the attraction of
other similar bodies. They are believed to constitute the centres of
planetary systems, and fulfil the purpose for which they were created by
dispensing light and heat to the worlds which circle around them.

The Sun is an example of this class of star, and constitutes the centre
of the system to which the Earth belongs. Reasoning from analogy, it
would be natural to conclude that there are other suns, numberless
beyond conception, the centres of systems of revolving worlds, and
although we are utterly unable to catch a glimpse of their planetary
attendants, even with the aid of the most powerful telescopes, yet they
have in a few instances been _felt_, and have afforded unmistakable
indications of their existence.

Since the Sun must be regarded as one of the stellar multitude that
people the regions of space, and whose surpassing splendour when
contrasted with that of other luminaries can be accounted for by his
proximity to us, it would be of interest to ascertain his relative
importance when compared with other celestial orbs which may be his
peers or his superiors in magnitude and brilliancy.

The Sun is one of a widely scattered group of stars situated in the
plane of the Milky Way and surrounded by that zone, and, as a star among
the stars, would be included in the constellation of the Centaur.

Although regarded as one of the leading orbs of the firmament, and of
supreme importance to us, astronomers are undecided whether to classify
the Sun with stars of greater magnitude and brightness, or assign him a
position among minor orbs of smaller size. Much uncertainty exists with
regard to star magnitudes. This arises from inability on the part of
astronomers to ascertain the distances of the vast majority of stars
visible to the naked eye, and also on account of inequality in their
intrinsic brilliancy. Among the stars there exists an indefinite range
of stellar magnitudes. There are many stars known whose dimensions have
been ascertained to greatly exceed those of the Sun, and there are
others of much smaller size. No approximation of the magnitude of
telescopic stars can be arrived at; many of them may rival Sirius,
Canopus, and Arcturus, in size and splendour, their apparent minuteness
being a consequence of their extreme remoteness. If the Sun were removed
a distance in space equal to that of many of the brightest stars, he
would in appearance be reduced to a minute point of light or become
altogether invisible; and there are other stars, situated at distances
still more remote, of which sufficient is known to justify us in
arriving at the conclusion that the Sun must be ranked among the minor
orbs of the firmament, and that many of the stars surpass him in
brilliancy and magnitude.

DOUBLE STARS.--To the unaided eye, these appear as single points of
light; but, when observed with a telescope of sufficient magnifying
power, their dual nature can be detected.

The first double star discovered was Mizar, the middle star of the three
in Ursa Major which form the tail of the bear. The components are of the
fourth and fifth magnitudes, of a brilliant white colour, and distant
fourteen seconds of arc.

In 1678, Cassini perceived stars which appeared as single points of
light when viewed with the naked eye, but when observed with the
telescope presented the appearance of being double.

The astronomer Bode, in 1781, published a list of eighty double stars,
and, in a few years after, Sir William Herschel discovered several
hundreds more of those objects. They are now known to exist in
thousands, Mr. Burnham, of the Lick Observatory, having, by his keen
perception of vision, contributed more than any other observer to swell
their number.

All double stars are not binaries; many of them are known as 'optical
doubles'--an impression created by two stars when almost in the same
line of vision, and, though apparently near, are situated at a great
distance apart and devoid of any physical relationship.

Binary stars consist of two suns which revolve round their common
centre of gravity, and form real dual systems.

The close proximity of the components of double stars impressed the
minds of some astronomers with the belief that a physical bond of union
existed between them. In the interval between 1718 and 1759, Bradley
detected a change of 30 deg. in the position angle of the two stars forming
Castor, and was very nearly discovering their physical connection.

In 1767, the Rev. John Michell wrote: 'It is highly probable in
particular, and next to a certainty in general, that such double stars
as appear to consist of two or more stars placed very near together do
really consist of stars placed near together and under the influence of
some general law.' Afterwards he says: 'It is not improbable that a few
years may inform us that some of the great number of double and triple
stars which have been observed by Mr. Herschel are systems of bodies
revolving about each other.' Christian Mayer, a German astronomer,
formed a list of stellar pairs, and announced, in 1776, the supposed
discovery of 'satellites' to many of the principal stars. His
observations were, however, not exact enough to lead to any useful
results, and the existence of his 'planet stars' was at that time
derided, and believed to find a place only in his imagination.

The conclusions arrived at by some astronomers with regard to double
stars were afterwards confirmed by Herschel, when, by his observation of
a change in the relative positions of many of their components, he was
able to announce that they form independent systems in mutual
revolution, and are controlled by the law of gravitation.

The number of binary stars in active revolution is known to exceed 500;
but, besides these, there are doubtless numerous other compound stars
which, on account of their extreme remoteness and the close proximity of
their components, are irresolvable into pairs by any optical appliances
which we possess.

The revolution of two suns in one sphere presents to our observation a
scheme of creative design entirely different to the single-star system
with which we are familiar--one of a higher and more complex order in
the ascending scale of celestial architecture. For, if we assume that
around each revolving sun there circles a retinue of planetary worlds,
it is obvious that a much more complicated arrangement must exist among
the orbs which enter into the formation of such a system than is found
among those which gravitate round our Sun.

The common centre of gravity of a binary system is situated on a line
between both stars, and distant from each in inverse proportion to their
respective masses. When the stars are of equal mass their orbits are of
equal dimensions, but when the mass of one star exceeds that of the
other, the orbit of the larger star is proportionately diminished as
compared with the circumference traversed by the smaller star. When
their orbits are circular--a rare occurrence--both stars pursue each
other in the same path, and invariably occupy it at diametrically
opposite points; nor is it possible for one star to approach the other
by the minutest interval of space in any duration of time, so long as
the synchronous harmony of their revolution remains undisturbed.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--A Binary Star System--70 Ophiuchi

(_Drawn by Mr. J. E. Gore._)]

When a pair of suns move in an ellipse, their orbits intersect and are
of equal dimensions when the stars are of equal mass, their common
centre of gravity being then at a point equidistant from each.
Consequently, neither star can approach or recede from this point
without the other affecting a similar motion, they must be at periastron
and apastron together, and any acceleration or retardation of speed must
occur simultaneously with each. Stars of unequal magnitude always
maintain a proportionate distance from their common focus, and both
simultaneously occupy corresponding parts of their orbits.

The nature of the motions of those distant suns, and the form of the
orbits which they traverse, have been investigated by several eminent
astronomers, and although the subject is one of much difficulty, on
account of their extreme remoteness and the minute angles which have to
be dealt with, necessitating the carrying out of very refined
observations, yet a considerable amount of information has been obtained
with regard to the paths which they pursue in the accomplishment of
their revolutions round each other.

The orbits of about sixty stellar pairs have been computed, but only
with partial success. Some stars have shown themselves to be totally
regardless of theory and computation, and have shot ahead far beyond the
limits ascribed to them, whilst others, by the slowness of their
motions, have upset the calculations of astronomers as much in the
opposite direction. So that out of this number the orbits of not more
than half a dozen are satisfactorily known.

The dimensions of stellar orbits are of very varied extent. Some pairs
are apparently so close that the best optical means which we possess are
incapable of dividing them, whilst others revolve in wide and spacious
orbits.

The most marked peculiarity of the orbits of binary stars is their high
eccentricity; they are usually much more eccentric than are those of
the planets, and in some instances approach in form that of a comet.

The finest binary star in the northern heavens is Castor, the brighter
of the two leading stars in the constellation Gemini. The components are
of the second and third magnitudes, and over five seconds apart. They
are of a brilliant white colour, and form a beautiful object in the
telescope.

In 1719 Bradley determined the relative positions of those stars, and on
comparing the results obtained by him with recent measurements it was
found that they had altered to the extent of 125 deg.. Travelling at the
same rate of speed, they will require a period of about 420 years to
complete an entire circuit of their orbits. This pace, however, has not
been maintained, for, their periastron having occurred in 1750, they
travelled more rapidly in the last century than they are doing at
present, and, as their orbits are so eccentric that when at apastron the
stars are twice as remote from each other as at periastron, they will
for the next three and a half centuries continue to slacken their pace,
until they shall have reached the most remote points of their orbits,
when they will again begin to approach with an increasing velocity; so
that the time in which an entire revolution can be accomplished will not
be much less than 1,000 years.[8]

As the distance of Castor is unknown, it is impossible to compute the
combined mass of its components. They are very remote, their light
period being estimated at forty-four years. Castor is doubtless a more
massive orb than our Sun, and possesses a higher degree of luminosity.

Alpha Centauri, in the Southern Hemisphere, is the brightest binary, and
also the nearest known star in the heavens; its estimated distance being
twenty-five billions of miles. Both components equal stars of the first
magnitude, and are of a brilliant white colour. Since they were first
observed, in 1709, they have completed two revolutions, and are now
accomplishing a third. The eccentricity of their orbit approaches in
form that of Faye's comet, which travels round the Sun; consequently the
stars, when at apastron, are twice their periastron distance. Their
period of revolution is about eighty-eight years. The mean radius of
their orbit corresponds to a span of 1,000 millions of miles, so that
those orbs are sometimes as close to each other as Jupiter is to the
Sun, and never so far distant as Uranus.[9] Their combined mass is twice
that of the Sun, and the luminosity of each star is slightly greater.

The double star 61 Cygni--one of the nearest to our system--is believed
to be a binary the components of which move in an orbit of more spacious
dimensions than that of any other known revolving pair. Though they have
been under continuous observation since 1753, it is only within the last
few years that any orbital motion has been perceived. Some observers
are disinclined to admit the accuracy of this statement; whilst others
believe that the stars have executed a hyperbolic sweep round their
common centre of gravity and are now separating.

The radius of the orbit in which those bodies travel is sixty-five times
the distance of the Earth from the Sun; which means that they travel in
an orbit twice the width of that of the planet Neptune. It has been
estimated that they complete a revolution in about eight centuries. The
united mass of the system is about one-half that of the Sun, and in
point of luminosity they are much inferior to that orb.

The star 70 Ophiuchi (fig. 3) may be regarded as typical of a binary
system. The components are five seconds apart, and of the fourth and
sixth magnitudes. Their light period is stated to be twenty years, and
the combined mass of the system is nearly three times that of the Sun.
The pair travel in an orbit from fourteen to forty-two times the radius
of the Earth's orbit; so that when at apastron they are three times as
distant from each other as when at periastron. They complete a
revolution in eighty-eight years.

The accompanying diagram (fig. 4) is a delineation of the beautiful
orbits of the components of Gamma Virginis. These may be described as
elongated ellipses. Both stars being of equal mass, their orbits are of
equal dimensions, and their common centre of gravity at a point
equidistant from each. Any approach to, or recession from this point,
must occur simultaneously with each; they must always occupy
corresponding parts of their orbits, and be in apastron and at
periastron in the same period of time. The ellipse described by this
pair is the most eccentric of known binary orbits, and approaches in
form the path pursued by Encke's comet round the Sun. These orbs
complete a revolution in 180 years, and when in apastron are seventeen
times more remote from each other than when at periastron.
