solar corona in the eclipse of 1882.

[Illustration: PLATE XVIII. DANIEL'S COMET OF 1907

From a photograph taken, on August 11th, 1907, by Dr. Max Wolf, at the
Astrophysical Observatory, Heidelberg. The instrument used was a 28-inch
reflecting telescope, and the time of exposure was fifteen minutes. As
the telescope was guided to follow the moving comet, the stars have
imprinted themselves upon the photographic plate as short trails. This
is clearly the opposite to what is depicted on Plate XIII.

(Page 258)]




CHAPTER XX

REMARKABLE COMETS


If eclipses were a cause of terror in past ages, comets appear to have
been doubly so. Their much longer continuance in the sight of men had no
doubt something to say to this, and also the fact that they arrived
without warning; it not being then possible to give even a rough
prediction of their return, as in the case of eclipses. As both these
phenomena were occasional, and out of the ordinary course of things,
they drew exceptional attention as unusual events always do; for it must
be allowed that quite as wonderful things exist, but they pass unnoticed
merely because men have grown accustomed to them.

For some reason the ancients elected to class comets along with meteors,
the aurora borealis, and other phenomena of the atmosphere, rather than
with the planets and the bodies of the spaces beyond. The sudden
appearance of these objects led them to be regarded as signs sent by the
gods to announce remarkable events, chief among these being the deaths
of monarchs. Shakespeare has reminded us of this in those celebrated
lines in _Julius Caesar_:--

"When beggars die there are no comets seen,
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes."

Numbed by fear, the men of old blindly accepted these presages of fate;
and did not too closely question whether the threatened danger was to
their own nation or to some other, to their ruler or to his enemy. Now
and then, as in the case of the Roman Emperor Vespasian, there was a
cynical attempt to apply some reasoning to the portent. That emperor, in
alluding to the comet of A.D. 79, is reported to have said: "This hairy
star does not concern me; it menaces rather the King of the Parthians,
for he is hairy and I am bald." Vespasian, all the same, died shortly
afterwards!

Pliny, in his natural history, gives several instances of the terrible
significance which the ancients attached to comets. "A comet," he says,
"is ordinarily a very fearful star; it announces no small effusion of
blood. We have seen an example of this during the civil commotion of
Octavius."

A very brilliant comet appeared in 371 B.C., and about the same time an
earthquake caused Helice and Bura, two towns in Achaia, to be swallowed
up by the sea. The following remark made by Seneca concerning it shows
that the ancients did not consider comets merely as precursors, but even
as actual _causes_ of fatal events: "This comet, so anxiously observed
by every one, _because of the great catastrophe which it produced as
soon as it appeared_, the submersion of Bura and Helice."

Comets are by no means rare visitors to our skies, and very few years
have elapsed in historical times without such objects making their
appearance. In the Dark and Middle Ages, when Europe was split up into
many small kingdoms and principalities, it was, of course, hardly
possible for a comet to appear without the death of some ruler occurring
near the time. Critical situations, too, were continually arising in
those disturbed days. The end of Louis le Debonnaire was hastened, as
the reader will, no doubt, recollect, by the great eclipse of 840; but
it was firmly believed that a comet which had appeared a year or two
previously presaged his death. The comet of 1556 is reported to have
_influenced_ the abdication of the Emperor Charles V.; but curiously
enough, this event had already taken place before the comet made its
appearance! Such beliefs, no doubt, had a very real effect upon rulers
of a superstitious nature, or in a weak state of health. For instance,
Gian Galeazzo Visconti, Duke of Milan, was sick when the comet of 1402
appeared. After seeing it, he is said to have exclaimed: "I render
thanks to God for having decreed that my death should be announced to
men by this celestial sign." His malady then became worse, and he died
shortly afterwards.

It is indeed not improbable that such superstitious fears in monarchs
were fanned by those who would profit by their deaths, and yet did not
wish to stain their own hands with blood.

Evil though its effects may have been, this morbid interest which past
ages took in comets has proved of the greatest service to our science.
Had it not been believed that the appearance of these objects was
attended with far-reaching effects, it is very doubtful whether the old
chroniclers would have given themselves the trouble of alluding to them
at all; and thus the modern investigators of cometary orbits would have
lacked a great deal of important material.

We will now mention a few of the most notable comets which historians
have recorded.

A comet which appeared in 344 B.C. was thought to betoken the success
of the expedition undertaken in that year by Timoleon of Corinth against
Sicily. "The gods by an extraordinary prodigy announced his success and
future greatness: a burning torch appeared in the heavens throughout the
night and preceded the fleet of Timoleon until it arrived off the coast
of Sicily."

The comet of 43 B.C. was generally believed to be the soul of Caesar on
its way to heaven.

Josephus tells us that in A.D. 69 several prodigies, and amongst them a
comet in the shape of a sword, announced the destruction of Jerusalem.
This comet is said to have remained over the city for the space of a
year!

A comet which appeared in A.D. 336 was considered to have announced the
death of the Emperor Constantine.

But perhaps the most celebrated comet of early times was the one which
appeared in A.D. 1000. That year was, in more than one way, big with
portent, for there had long been a firm belief that the Christian era
could not possibly run into four figures. Men, indeed, steadfastly
believed that when the thousand years had ended, the millennium would
immediately begin. Therefore they did not reap neither did they sow,
they toiled not, neither did they spin, and the appearance of the comet
strengthened their convictions. The fateful year, however, passed by
without anything remarkable taking place; but the neglect of husbandry
brought great famine and pestilence over Europe in the years which
followed.

In April 1066, that year fraught with such immense consequences for
England, a comet appeared. No one doubted but that it was a presage of
the success of the Conquest, and perhaps, indeed, it had its due weight
in determining the minds and actions of the men who took part in the
expedition. _Nova stella, novus rex_ ("a new star, a new sovereign") was
a favourite proverb of the time. The chroniclers, with one accord, have
delighted to relate that the Normans, "guided by a comet," invaded
England. A representation of this object appears in the Bayeux Tapestry
(see Fig. 19, p. 263).[26]

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--The comet of 1066, as represented in the Bayeux
Tapestry.

(From the _World of Comets_.)]

We have mentioned Halley's Comet of 1682, and how it revisits the
neighbourhood of the earth at intervals of seventy-six years. The comet
of 1066 has for many years been supposed to be Halley's Comet on one of
its visits. The identity of these two, however, was only quite recently
placed beyond all doubt by the investigations of Messrs Cowell and
Crommelin. This comet appeared also in 1456, when John Huniades was
defending Belgrade against the Turks led by Mahomet II., the conqueror
of Constantinople, and is said to have paralysed both armies with fear.

The Middle Ages have left us descriptions of comets, which show only too
well how the imagination will run riot under the stimulus of terror. For
instance, the historian, Nicetas, thus describes the comet of the year
1182: "After the Romans were driven from Constantinople a prognostic was
seen of the excesses and crimes to which Andronicus was to abandon
himself. A comet appeared in the heavens similar to a writhing serpent;
sometimes it extended itself, sometimes it drew itself in; sometimes, to
the great terror of the spectators, it opened a huge mouth; it seemed
that, as if thirsting for human blood, it was upon the point of
satiating itself." And, again, the celebrated Ambrose Pare, the father
of surgery, has left us the following account of the comet of 1528,
which appeared in his own time: "This comet," said he, "was so horrible,
so frightful, and it produced such great terror in the vulgar, that some
died of fear, and others fell sick. It appeared to be of excessive
length, and was of the colour of blood. At the summit of it was seen the
figure of a bent arm, holding in its hand a great sword, as if about to
strike. At the end of the point there were three stars. On both sides of
the rays of this comet were seen a great number of axes, knives,
blood-coloured swords, among which were a great number of hideous human
faces, with beards and bristling hair." Pare, it is true, was no
astronomer; yet this shows the effect of the phenomenon, even upon a man
of great learning, as undoubtedly he was. It should here be mentioned
that nothing very remarkable happened at or near the year 1528.

Concerning the comet of 1680, the extraordinary story got about that, at
Rome, a hen had laid an egg on which appeared a representation of the
comet!

But the superstitions with regard to comets were now nearing their end.
The last blow was given by Halley, who definitely proved that they
obeyed the laws of gravitation, and circulated around the sun as planets
do; and further announced that the comet of 1682 had a period of
seventy-six years, which would cause it to reappear in the year 1759. We
have seen how this prediction was duly verified. We have seen, too, how
this comet appeared again in 1835, and how it is due to return in the
early part of 1910.


[26] With regard to the words "Isti mirant stella" in the figure, Mr.
W.T. Lynn suggests that they may not, after all, be the grammatically
bad Latin which they appear, but that the legend is really "Isti
mirantur stellam," the missing letters being supposed to be hidden by
the building and the comet.




CHAPTER XXI

METEORS OR SHOOTING STARS


Any one who happens to gaze at the sky for a short time on a clear night
is pretty certain to be rewarded with a view of what is popularly known
as a "shooting star." Such an object, however, is not a star at all, but
has received its appellation from an analogy; for the phenomenon gives
to the inexperienced in these matters an impression as if one of the
many points of light, which glitter in the vaulted heaven, had suddenly
become loosened from its place, and was falling towards the earth. In
its passage across the sky the moving object leaves behind a trail of
light which usually lasts for a few moments. Shooting stars, or meteors,
as they are technically termed, are for the most part very small bodies,
perhaps no larger than peas or pebbles, which, dashing towards our earth
from space beyond, are heated to a white heat, and reduced to powder by
the friction resulting from their rapid passage into our atmosphere.
This they enter at various degrees of speed, in some cases so great as
45 miles a second. The speed, of course, will depend greatly upon
whether the earth and the meteors are rushing towards each other, or
whether the latter are merely overtaking the earth. In the first of
these cases the meteors will naturally collide with the atmosphere with
great force; in the other case they will plainly come into it with much
less rapidity. As has been already stated, it is from observations of
such bodies that we are enabled to estimate, though very imperfectly,
the height at which the air around our globe practically ceases, and
this height is imagined to be somewhere about 100 miles. Fortunate,
indeed, is it for us that there is a goodly layer of atmosphere over our
heads, for, were this not so, these visitors from space would strike
upon the surface of our earth night and day, and render existence still
more unendurable than many persons choose to consider it. To what a
bombardment must the moon be continually subject, destitute as she is of
such an atmospheric shield!

It is only in the moment of their dissolution that we really learn
anything about meteors, for these bodies are much too small to be seen
before they enter our atmosphere. The debris arising from their
destruction is wafted over the earth, and, settling down eventually upon
its surface, goes to augment the accumulation of that humble domestic
commodity which men call dust. This continual addition of material
tends, of course, to increase the mass of the earth, though the effect
thus produced will be on an exceedingly small scale.

The total number of meteors moving about in space must be practically
countless. The number which actually dash into the earth's atmosphere
during each year is, indeed, very great. Professor Simon Newcomb, the
well-known American astronomer, has estimated that, of the latter, those
large enough to be seen with the naked eye cannot be in all less than
146,000,000,000 per annum. Ten times more numerous still are thought to
be those insignificant ones which are seen to pass like mere sparks of
light across the field of an observer's telescope.

Until comparatively recent times, perhaps up to about a hundred years
ago, it was thought that meteors were purely terrestrial phenomena which
had their origin in the upper regions of the air. It, however, began to
be noticed that at certain periods of the year these moving objects
appeared to come from definite areas of the sky. Considerations,
therefore, respecting their observed velocities, directions, and
altitudes, gave rise to the theory that they are swarms of small bodies
travelling around the sun in elongated elliptical orbits, all along the
length of which they are scattered, and that the earth, in its annual
revolution, rushing through the midst of such swarms at the same epoch
each year, naturally entangles many of them in its atmospheric net.

The dates at which the earth is expected to pass through the principal
meteor-swarms are now pretty well known. These swarms are distinguished
from one another by the direction of the sky from which the meteors seem
to arrive. Many of the swarms are so wide that the earth takes days, and
even weeks, to pass through them. In some of these swarms, or streams,
as they are also called, the meteors are distributed with fair evenness
along the entire length of their orbits, so that the earth is greeted
with a somewhat similar shower at each yearly encounter. In others, the
chief portions are bunched together, so that, in certain years, the
display is exceptional (see Fig. 20, p. 269). That part of the heavens
from which a shower of meteors is seen to emanate is called the
"radiant," or radiant point, because the foreshortened view we get of
the streaks of light makes it appear as if they radiated outwards from
this point. In observations of these bodies the attention of astronomers
is directed to registering the path and speed of each meteor, and to
ascertaining the position of the radiant. It is from data such as these
that computations concerning the swarms and their orbits are made.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Passage of the Earth through the thickest
portion of a Meteor Swarm. The Earth and the Meteors are here
represented as approaching each other from opposite directions.]

For the present state of knowledge concerning meteors, astronomy is
largely indebted to the researches of Mr. W.F. Denning, of Bristol, and
of the late Professor A.S. Herschel.

During the course of each year the earth encounters a goodly number of
meteor-swarms. Three of these, giving rise to fine displays, are very
well known--the "Perseids," or August Meteors, and the "Leonids" and
"Bielids," which appear in November.

Of the above three the _Leonid_ display is by far the most important,
and the high degree of attention paid to it has laid the foundation of
meteoric astronomy in much the same way that the study of the
fascinating corona has given such an impetus to our knowledge of the
sun. The history of this shower of meteors may be traced back as far as
A.D. 902, which was known as the "Year of the Stars." It is related that
in that year, on the night of October 12th--the shower now comes about a
month later--whilst the Moorish King, Ibrahim Ben Ahmed, lay dying
before Cosenza, in Calabria, "a multitude of falling stars scattered
themselves across the sky like rain," and the beholders shuddered at
what they considered a dread celestial portent. We have, however, little
knowledge of the subsequent history of the Leonids until 1698, since
which time the maximum shower has appeared with considerable regularity
at intervals of about thirty-three years. But it was not until 1799 that
they sprang into especial notice. On the 11th November in that year a
splendid display was witnessed at Cumana, in South America, by the
celebrated travellers, Humboldt and Bonpland. Finer still, and
surpassing all displays of the kind ever seen, was that of November 12,
1833, when the meteors fell thick as snowflakes, 240,000 being estimated
to have appeared during seven hours. Some of them were even so bright as
to be seen in full daylight. The radiant from which the meteors seem to
diverge was ascertained to be situated in the head of the constellation
of the Lion, or "Sickle of Leo," as it is popularly termed, whence
their name--Leonids. It was from a discussion of the observations then
made that the American astronomer, Olmsted, concluded that these meteors
sprang upon us from interplanetary space, and were not, as had been
hitherto thought, born of our atmosphere. Later on, in 1837, Olbers
formulated the theory that the bodies in question travelled around the
sun in an elliptical orbit, and at the same time he established the
periodicity of the maximum shower.

The periodic time of recurrence of this maximum, namely, about
thirty-three years, led to eager expectancy as 1866 drew near. Hopes
were then fulfilled, and another splendid display took place, of which
Sir Robert Ball, who observed it, has given a graphic description in his
_Story of the Heavens_. The display was repeated upon a smaller scale in
the two following years. The Leonids were henceforth deemed to hold an
anomalous position among meteor swarms. According to theory the earth
cut through their orbit at about the same date each year, and so a
certain number were then seen to issue from the radiant. But, in
addition, after intervals of thirty-three years, as has been seen, an
exceptional display always took place; and this state of things was not
limited to one year alone, but was repeated at each meeting for about
three years running. The further assumption was, therefore, made that
the swarm was much denser in one portion of the orbit than
elsewhere,[27] and that this congested part was drawn out to such an
extent that the earth could pass through the crossing place during
several annual meetings, and still find it going by like a long
procession (see Fig. 20, p. 269).

In accordance with this ascertained period of thirty-three years, the
recurrence of the great Leonid shower was timed to take place on the
15th of November 1899. But there was disappointment then, and the
displays which occurred during the few years following were not of much
importance. A good deal of comment was made at the time, and theories
were accordingly put forward to account for the failure of the great
shower. The most probable explanation seems to be, that the attraction
of one of the larger planets--Jupiter perhaps--has diverted the orbit
somewhat from its old position, and the earth does not in consequence
cut through the swarm in the same manner as it used to do.

The other November display alluded to takes place between the 23rd and
27th of that month. It is called the _Andromedid_ Shower, because the
meteors appear to issue from the direction of the constellation of
Andromeda, which at that period of the year is well overhead during the
early hours of the night. These meteors are also known by the name of
_Bielids_, from a connection which the orbit assigned to them appears to
have with that of the well-known comet of Biela.

M. Egenitis, Director of the Observatory of Athens, accords to the
Bielids a high antiquity. He traces the shower back to the days of the
Emperor Justinian. Theophanes, the Chronicler of that epoch, writing of
the famous revolt of Nika in the year A.D. 532, says:--"During the same
year a great fall of stars came from the evening till the dawn." M.
Egenitis notes another early reference to these meteors in A.D. 752,
during the reign of the Eastern Emperor, Constantine Copronymous.
Writing of that year, Nicephorus, a Patriarch of Constantinople, has as
follows:--"All the stars appeared to be detached from the sky, and to
fall upon the earth."

The Bielids, however, do not seem to have attracted particular notice
until the nineteenth century. Attention first began to be riveted upon
them on account of their suspected connection with Biela's comet. It
appeared that the same orbit was shared both by that comet and the
Bielid swarm. It will be remembered that the comet in question was not
seen after its appearance in 1852. Since that date, however, the Bielid
shower has shown an increased activity; which was further noticed to be
especially great in those years in which the comet, had it still
existed, would be due to pass near the earth.

The third of these great showers to which allusion has above been made,
namely, the _Perseids_, strikes the earth about the 10th of August; for
which reason it is known on the Continent under the name of the "tears
of St. Lawrence," the day in question being sacred to that Saint. This
shower is traceable back many centuries, even as far as the year A.D.
811. The name given to these meteors, "Perseids," arises from the fact
that their radiant point is situated in the constellation of Perseus.
This shower is, however, not by any means limited to the particular
night of August 10th, for meteors belonging to the swarm may be observed
to fall in more or less varying quantities from about July 8th to August
22nd. The Perseid meteors sometimes fall at the rate of about sixty per
hour. They are noted for their great rapidity of motion, and their
trails besides often persist for a minute or two before being
disseminated. Unlike the other well-known showers, the radiants of which
are stationary, that of the Perseids shifts each night a little in an
easterly direction.

The orbit of the Perseids cuts that of the earth almost perpendicularly.
The bodies are generally supposed to be the result of the disintegration
of an ancient comet which travelled in the same orbit. Tuttle's Comet,
which passed close to the earth in 1862, also belongs to this orbit; and
its period of revolution is calculated to be 131 years. The Perseids
appear to be disseminated all along this great orbit, for we meet them
in considerable quantities each year. The bodies in question are in
general particularly small. The swarm has, however, like most others, a
somewhat denser portion, and through this the earth passed in 1848. The
_aphelion_, or point where the far end of the orbit turns back again
towards the sun, is situated right away beyond the path of Neptune, at a
distance of forty-eight times that of the earth from the sun. The comet
of 1532 also belongs to the Perseid orbit. It revisited the
neighbourhood of the earth in 1661, and should have returned in 1789.
But we have no record of it in that year; for which omission the then
politically disturbed state of Europe may account. If not already
disintegrated, this comet is due to return in 1919.

This supposed connection between comets and meteor-swarms must be also
extended to the case of the Leonids. These meteors appear to travel
along the same track as Tempel's Comet of 1866.

It is considered that the attractions of the various bodies of the
solar system upon a meteor swarm must eventually result in breaking up
the "bunched" portion, so that in time the individual meteors should
become distributed along the whole length of the orbit. Upon this
assumption the Perseid swarm, in which the meteors are fairly well
scattered along its path, should be of greater age than the Leonid. As
to the Leonid swarm itself, Le Verrier held that it was first brought
into the solar system in A.D. 126, having been captured from outer space
by the gravitative action of the planet Uranus.

The acknowledged theory of meteor swarms has naturally given rise to an
idea, that the sunlight shining upon such a large collection of
particles ought to render a swarm visible before its collision with the
earth's atmosphere. Several attempts have therefore been made to search
for approaching swarms by photography, but, so far, it appears without
success. It has also been proposed, by Mr. W.H.S. Monck, that the stars
in those regions from which swarms are due, should be carefully watched,
to see if their light exhibits such temporary diminutions as would be
likely to arise from the momentary interposition of a cloud of moving
particles.

Between ten and fifteen years ago it happened that several well-known
observers, employed in telescopic examination of the sun and moon,
reported that from time to time they had seen small dark bodies,
sometimes singly, sometimes in numbers, in passage across the discs of
