"I am like my brother: I do not understand you, Gregg Haljan. Perhaps
you think you are clever? It seems stupidity, the fatuousness of man!"

"Perhaps," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a moment of silence. "Gregg, I said I loved you. Have you no
answer?"

"No." In truth, I did not know what sort of answer it would be best to
make. Whatever she must have read in my eyes, it stirred her to fury.
Her fingers with the strength of a man in them, dug into my shoulders.
Her gaze searched me.

"You think you love someone else? Is that it?"

That was horribly startling; but she did not mean it just that way. She
amended with caustic venom: "That little Anita Prince! You thought you
loved her! Was that it?"

"No!"

But I hardly deceived her. "Sacred to her memory! Her ratlike little
face--soft voice like a purring, sniveling cat! Is that what you're
remembering, Gregg Haljan?" she sneered.

I tried to laugh. "What nonsense!"

"Is it? Then why are you cold under my touch? Am I--a girl descended
from the Martian flame-workers--impotent now to awaken a man?"

A woman scorned! In all the Universe there could be no more dangerous an
enemy. An incredible venom shot from her eyes.

"That miserable mouselike creature! Well for her that my brother killed
her."

It struck me cold. If Anita was unmasked, beyond all the menace of
Miko's wooing, I knew that the venom of Moa's jealousy was a greater
danger.

I said sharply, "Don't be simple, Moa!" I shook off her grip. "You
imagine too much. You forget that I am a man of the Earth and you a girl
of Mars."

"Is that reason why we should not love?"

"No. But our instincts are different. Men of the Earth are born to the
chase."

       *       *       *       *       *

I was smiling. With thought of Anita's danger I could find it readily in
my heart to dupe this Amazon.

"Give me time, Moa. You attract me."

"You lie!"

"Do you think so?" I gripped her arm with all the power of my fingers.
It must have hurt her, but she gave no sign; her gaze clung to me
steadily.

"I don't know what to think, Gregg Haljan...."

I held my grip. "Think what you like. Men of Earth have been known to
kill the thing they love."

"You want me to fear you?"

"Perhaps."

She smiled scornfully. "That is absurd."

I released her. I said earnestly, "I want you to realize that if you
treat me fairly, I can be of great advantage to this venture. There will
be fighting--I am fearless."

Her venomous expression was softening. "I think that is true, Gregg."

"And you need my navigating skill. Even now I should be in the turret."

I stood up. I half expected she would stop me, but she did not. I added,
"Shall we go?"

She stood beside me. Her height brought her face level with mine.

"I think you will cause no more trouble, Gregg?"

"Of course not. I am not wholly witless."

"You have been."

"Well, that is over." I hesitated. Then I added, "A man of Earth does
not yield to love when there is work to do. This treasure--"

I think that of everything I said, this last most convinced her.

She interrupted, "That I understand." Her eyes were smoldering. "When it
is over--when we are rich--then I will claim you, Gregg."

       *       *       *       *       *

She turned from me. "Are you ready?"

"Yes. No! I must get that sheet of Hahn's last figures."

"Are they checked?"

"Yes." I picked the sheet up from my desk. "Hahn is fairly accurate,
Moa."

"A fool nevertheless. An apprehensive fool."

A comradeship seemed coming between us. It was my purpose to establish
it.

"Are we going to maroon Dr. Frank with the passengers?" I asked.

"Yes."

"But he may be of use to us." I wanted Dr. Frank kept aboard. I still
felt that there was a chance for us to recapture the ship.

But Moa shook her head decisively. "My brother has decided not. We will
be well rid of Dr. Frank. Are you ready, Gregg?"

"Yes."

She opened the door. Her gesture reassured the look-out, who was alertly
watching the stern watch-tower.

"Come, Gregg."

I stepped out, and followed her forward along the deck, which now was
bright with the radiance of the nearby asteroid.




CHAPTER XVIII

_Marooned on an Asteroid_


A fair little world. I had thought so before; and I thought so now as I
gazed at the asteroid hanging so close before our bow. A huge, thin
crescent, with the Sun off to one side behind it. A silver crescent,
tinged with red. From this near viewpoint, all of the little globe's
disc was visible. The shadowed portion lay dimly red, mysteriously; the
sunlit crescent--widening visibly is we approached--was gleaming silver.
Inky moonlike shadows in the hollows, brilliant light upon the mountain
heights. The seas lay in gray patches. The convexity of the disc was
sharply defined. So small a world! Fair and beautiful, shrouded with
clouded areas.

"Where is Miko?"

"In the lounge, Gregg."

"Can we stop there?"

Moa turned into the lounge archway. Strange, tense scene. I saw Anita at
once. Her robed figure lurked in an inconspicuous corner; her eyes were
upon me as Moa and I entered, but she did not move. The thirty-odd
passengers were huddled in a group. Solemn, white-faced men, frightened
women. Some of them were sobbing. One Earth-woman--a young widow--sat
holding her little girl, and wailing with uncontrolled hysteria. The
child knew me. As I appeared now, with my gold-laced white coat over my
shoulders, the little child seemed to see in my uniform a mark of
authority. She left her mother and ran to me.

"You, please--you will help us? My moms is crying."

I sent her gently back. But there came upon me then a compassion for
these innocent passengers, fated to have embarked upon this ill-starred
voyage. Herded here in this cabin, with brigands like pirates of old
guarding them. Waiting now to be marooned on an uninhabited asteroid
roaming in space. A sense of responsibility swept me. I swung upon Miko.
He stood with a nonchalant grace, lounging against the wall with a
cylinder dangling in his hand. He anticipated me.

"So, Haljan--she put some sense into your head? No more trouble? Then
get into the turret. Moa, stay there with him. Send Hahn here. Where is
that ass Coniston? We will be in the atmosphere shortly."

I said, "No more trouble from me, Miko. But these passengers--what
preparation are you making for them on the asteroid?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He stared in surprise. Then he laughed. "I am no murderer. The crew is
preparing food, all we can spare. And tools. They can build themselves
shelter--they will be picked up in a few weeks."

Dr. Frank was here. I caught his gaze, but he did not speak. On the
lounge couches there still lay the quarter-score bodies. Rankin, who
had been killed by Blackstone in the fight; a man passenger killed; a
woman and a man wounded.

Miko added, "Dr. Frank will take his medical supplies--he will care for
the wounded. There are other bodies among the crew." His gesture was
deprecating. "I have not buried them. We will put them ashore; easier
that way."

The passengers were all eyeing me. I said:

"You have nothing to fear. I will guarantee you the best equipment we
can spare. You will give them apparatus with which to signal?" I
demanded of Miko.

"Yes. Get to the turret."

I turned away, with Moa after me. Again the little girl ran forward.

"Come--speak to my moms! She is crying."

It was across the cabin from Miko. Coniston had appeared from the deck;
it created a slight diversion. He joined Miko.

"Wait," I said to Moa. "She is afraid of you. This is humanity."

I pushed Moa back. I followed the child. I had seen that Venza was
sitting with the child's weeping mother. This was a ruse to get word
with me.

I stood before the terrified woman while the little girl clung to my
legs.

I said gently, "Don't be so frightened. Dr. Frank will take care of you.
There is no danger--you will be safer on the asteroid than here on the
ship."

I leaned down and touched her shoulder. "There is no danger."

       *       *       *       *       *

I was between Venza and the open cabin. Venza whispered swiftly, "When
we are landing, Gregg, I want you to make a commotion--anything--just as
the women passengers go ashore."

"Why? No, of course you will have food, Mrs. Francis."

"Never mind! An instant. Just confusion. Go, Gregg--don't speak now!"

I raised the child. "You take care of mother." I kissed her.

From across the cabin Miko's sardonic voice made me turn. "Touching
sentimentality, Haljan! Get to your post in the turret!"

His rasping note of annoyance brooked no delay. I set the child down. I
said, "I will land us in an hour. Depend on it."

Hahn was at the controls when Moa and I reached the turret.

"You will land us safely, Haljan?" he demanded anxiously.

I pushed him away. "Miko wants you in the lounge."

"You take command here?"

"Of course, Hahn. I am no more anxious for a crash than you."

He sighed with relief. "That is true. I am no expert at atmospheric
entry, Haljan--nor Coniston, nor Miko."

"Have no fear. Sit down, Moa."

I waved to the look-out in the forward watch-tower, and got his routine
gesture. I rang the corridor bells, and the normal signals came promptly
back.

"It's correct, Hahn. Get away with you." I called after him. "Tell Miko
that things are all right here."

Hahn's small dark figure, lithe as a leopard in his tight fitting
trousers and jacket with his robe now discarded, went swiftly down the
spider incline and across the deck.

"Moa, where is Snap? By the infernal, if he has been injured!--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Up on the helio-room bridge the brigand guard still sat. Then I saw that
Snap was out there sitting with him. I waved from the turret window, and
Snap's cheery gesture answered me. His voice carried down through the
silver moonlight: "Land us safely, Gregg. These weird amateur
navigators!"

Within the hour I had us dropping into the asteroid's atmosphere. The
ship heated steadily. The pressure went up. It kept me busy with the
instruments and the calculations. But my signals were always promptly
answered from below. The brigand crew did its part efficiently.

At a hundred and fifty thousand feet I shifted the gravity plates to the
landing combinations, and started the electronic engines.

"All safe, Gregg?" Moa sat at my elbow; her eyes, with what seemed a
glow of admiration in them, followed my busy routine activities.

"Yes. The crew works well."

The electronic streams flowed out like a rocket tail behind us. The
_Planetara_ caught their impetus. In the rarified air, our bow lifted
slightly, like a ship riding a gentle ground swell. At a hundred
thousand feet we sailed gently forward, hull down to the asteroid's
surface, cruising to seek a landing space.

A little sea was now beneath us. A shadowed sea, deep purple in the
night down there. Occasional green-verdured islands showed, with the
lines of white surf marking them. Beyond the sea, a curving coastline
was visible. Rocky headlines, behind which mountain foothills rose in
serrated, verdured ranks. The sunlight edged the distant mountains; and
presently this rapidly turning little world brought the sunlight
forward.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was day beneath us. We slid gently downward. Thirty thousand feet
now, above a sparkling blue ocean. The coastline was just ahead: green
with a lush, tropical vegetation. Giant trees, huge-leaved. Long
dangling vines; air plants, with giant pods and vivid orchidlike
blossoms.

I sat at the turret window, staring through my glasses. A fair little
world, yet obviously uninhabited. I could fancy that all this was
newly-sprung vegetation. This asteroid had whirled in from the cold of
the interplanetary space far outside our Solar System. A few years
ago--as time might be measured astronomically, it was no more than
yesterday--this fair landscape was congealed white and bleak, with a
sweep of glacial ice. But the seeds of life miraculously were here. The
miracle of life! Under the warming, germinating sunlight, the verdure
sprung.

"Can you find landing space, Gregg?"

Moa's question brought back my wandering fancies. I saw an upland glade,
