apparatus, all unfamiliar to them. Against the draperies of the wall
to their right was one large cushioned chair, simple and beautiful in
its lines.

No living person or thing could be discerned in either the main room
or the alcove.

For several minutes the two men walked all about, examining everything
they saw with curiosity and interest; and then Clee discovered a
peculiar thing. His watch-dial, glowing very brightly now, would
perceptibly increase in brilliance every time he neared the great
chair. With sudden inspiration he took out his package of tobacco and
held it in the line his watch made with the chair--and he found that
his watch stopped glowing. He tried it again from another angle, and
the result was the same. From that chair came the electrical
disturbance that was making his watch-dial glow--yet nowhere near the
chair was any bit of electrical apparatus to be seen.

What he did see in the chair, though, almost caused his heart to stop
beating. The cushions of the seat, compressed before, began to puff
out to full volume, as if someone had just risen from them. And then,
faintly but sharply outlined in the long-napped rug in front, appeared
the print of a human shoe!

"A man!" breathed Clee. "A human being!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The two men stood frozen in their tracks. Clee's arm, with the package
of tobacco in his hand, was still outstretched toward the great chair,
but now the dial of his watch was glowing brightly again. Something
within caused him in spite of his terror to move the package between
the watch and the space above the footprint on the rug. The glowing
stopped. The man--devil--whatever it was that made the print--was the
source of the strange excitation!

This took but a second--the interval before another shoe-print formed
in the rug in their direction. Jim gasped something unintelligible and
started to back away; but no sooner did Partridge start to follow
suit, than a compulsion to stand still came over them. Caught where
they were, unable to move, they saw the shoe-prints come towards them.
Slowly, step by step, twelve inches apart, they came, and did not stop
until they were only four or five feet away.

"We'll jump him, if we get the chance!" hissed Jim, never taking his
eyes off the prints.

"Yes," came the answer; but Clee's further words were cut off in the
making by an added compulsion to keep quiet. Were their words
understood? The two men were locked, speechless, where they stood. And
by some creature with a human footprint whom they could not see!

The touch of firm flesh came out of the nothingness of space about
them, to poke and pry all over their bodies. Anger began to take the
place of their fear, as, for some time, impotent of resistance, they
had to submit to the examination given them. They were prodded and
felt like dogs at a show; their breathing and heart action were
carefully listened to; their mouths were opened and their teeth
inspected as if they were horses offered for sale. Both men were
inwardly fuming.

"Dogs!" shouted Clee in his thoughts. "Treating us like dogs, to see
how healthy we are! Does he want us for slaves?"

       *       *       *       *       *

At last the examination came to a stop, and they saw the shoe-prints
in the rug go over to the black table and remain there, heels toward
them, while various pieces of apparatus were invisibly moved across
the table top. For a moment the compelling will did not seem, to Clee,
to be constraining him as much is it had, and he began to wonder if he
might not have a little control over his body again. Tentatively he
tried to break through the oppressing blanket of foreign will; his
arms and legs moved a little; he succeeded! He caught Jim's eye and
showed him. He thrilled all over at his discovery, and his will to
move measurably increased with his growing confidence that he could.

The toes of the prints were still turned away. He was going to try and
get the man or monster who was making them.

He gestured to Jim, and with a great effort took a step in the
invisible man's direction. A thrill of gladness helped him on--for Jim
was following suit!

Again and again, with greatest mental effort, they made steps toward
the footprints, which, remaining side by side and motionless, gave
them increasing hope of stealing up unobserved. When they were only
three feet away Clee motioned to Jim, and with a tremendous effort of
will they jumped at the space where their enemy should be.

They hit him hard, and bore him heavily to the floor. By the feel, he
was a man such as they! Clee's blood leaped with the lust for
revenge, and blanking his mind against strong urges to cease his
attack he rained savage blows at the place he was holding.

But almost at once they had evidence that their opponent was not such
a man as they. A terrific pain stabbed suddenly through them, and they
doubled up on the floor, writhing in agony. It was as if every nerve
in their bodies had turned into white-hot wire, and was searing
through their flesh. Again and again came the terrible stabs of
pain--and their source seemed to be the mysterious lumps at the back
of their necks!

       *       *       *       *       *

At last they ceased coming, and Jim and Clee stretched out on the
floor all but unconscious from the terrific shocks of fiery agony.
They were completely helpless; further thoughts of resistance were
unthinkable. But they were not left lying long. There came a
telepathic compulsion to stand up; and they found themselves obeying,
in spite of the shrieking protest of their every nerve.

Twitching, stumbling, they were made to do servile things--to kneel on
the floor; get up again; turn round and round; bow low, then stretch
backwards. And out of the air around them came shocking blows which
landed on their faces, necks and chests; feet which kicked out at
their shins; and they had to stand there and take it, helpless to
resist.

Then Clee, as the nearer of the two men, was pushed over to the
work-table, where an oval head-piece of finely-woven wire was fitted
over his head. Another very large one, standing next to it, and
connected to it by wires which led to a small instrument panel nearby,
lifted into the air until it must have settled about the head of their
persecutor. A dial on the panel turned slowly. And gradually the
helmet resting in the air dissolved into nothingness before their
eyes.

A slight nausea swept over Clee as it did so, and in the midst of it
he felt a series of sharp, staccato thoughts--thoughts which did not
seem to be composed of words, and yet were clear and intelligible.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Fool of a fool!" crackled in his brain with almost a physical effort,
"do you think to resist Xantra? Do you think with your sub-human minds
to overcome one of the Tillas, Masters of the Universe? Close you were
to death--and death indeed would have come had I not other plans for
you.

"Know that henceforth you and your companion are my slaves. You will
jump at my slightest will; serve me as best you can with such
intelligence as you may possess. For faithful, willing service you
shall have food and clothing and a portion of leisure. Disobedience
and tardiness will bring you the pain you have already tasted; revolt,
or the attempt to escape--death; but only after torture such as you
have never known.

"I shall never repeat this mode of communication: it is as physically
nauseating to me as to you. And you may never expect to see me, though
I can always see you. By vibrational means I have given you the
universal atomic rhythm of all Tillian slaves; and, although in that
state your fellow-slaves will be visible to you, I, your master, will
not!

"You will now return to your place of confinement. After you have
recovered you will be taken in hand by your fellow-slaves and shown
your duties. And if your instinct for self-preservation is only
one-tenth normal, you will never again be such a stupid sub-animal
fool as to attempt to resist Xantra--to fly in the face of the
inevitable!"

The sharp, staccato voice in Clee's brain stopped; his nausea began
to leave him; his helmet was removed; and had he been looking he might
have seen the other one slowly materialize on the table. The ordeal
was over just in time, for the last remnants of his strength was
giving out--as was Jim's. The two Earth-men slumped down, and would
have fallen but for the telepathic will, stronger than theirs, that
forced them erect again. There came a very strong compulsion to return
to their cell, and bruised, stumbling, their nerves still afire from
their strange stabbing pains, they made their way back.

They fell to the floor and passed into unconsciousness--beaten,
subdued. Slaves....

       *       *       *       *       *

After a long blank interval a distinct thought crossed Clee's mind. He
was in heaven, and an angel voice had spoken. There it was again! Cool
hands were stroking his wrists and forehead. He opened his eyes and
looked, but seeing no one closed them again.

The Voice returned, and two of the words which kept repeating were
somehow familiar. "So sorry ... so sorry...." The Voice was low and
cool and feminine. And someone was bathing his battered head.... He
rolled over and got up on one elbow. He still could see no one.

The Voice said: "Oh, I'm so glad you're better! I thought you'd never
come to!"

Mechanically Clee asked: "Who are you?"

"Vivian Gray," came the quick answer; "from Boston. And you?"

Clee did not answer, but started to lie back again. Things were all
wrong: he couldn't even see anyone. He'd go back to sleep, and wake up
some other time. But the Voice wouldn't let him.

"Oh, you must listen!" it said. "I haven't much time!"

"Where are you?" he asked.

"Why--right here!" came the surprised answer. "Can't you see me?"

"No," answered Clee, still not himself. He added categorically: "I can
see Jim. I can see the door. I can see my hands, but I can't see you."

"Oh, then it must be true! Xantra _told_ me he was going to make you
one of his common slaves; but I hoped--I hoped--"

       *       *       *       *       *

This didn't mean much to Clee; but with the words came memory of all
that had happened, and with sudden concern he crept over to where Jim
was lying, to see how he was. He found him blinking and stirring,
aroused by the voices. Quickly he explained the invisible presence to
him, warning him to be on guard.

"Oh, but I'm a friend--Vivian Gray--kidnapped from Earth just like
you!" came quick explanation out of the air. "Xantra stole me from
Cape Cod, where I was vacationing, about the time he took you. Xantra
is the one whose space ship we are on. He looks much like a man; he is
some kind of a man; but he's not from Earth--"

"You've _seen_ him?" interrupted Clee, beginning to believe the Voice
a little.

"Yes," came the instant response; "not when he abducted me--he had
made himself invisible for that--but always after. Haven't you yet?"
And then, without waiting for his answer, she gave it herself. "But of
course you couldn't see him if he's already given you the universal
atomic rhythm the slaves have. You'd then be able to see only each
other, and the other slaves; not Xantra and not me.

"I think he makes his slaves that way for protection," she explained.
"They can't very well plot or rebel against him when they can't even
see him, and never know but what he's around."

"Who are these slaves you keep mentioning?" Jim broke in. "How many
of them are there on this ship: and how many like Xantra?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Xantra is the only one of his kind," came the answer. "The slaves are
a race of inferior people found on his planet--wherever that is: I
couldn't understand, from his explanation, just where. They are
creatures much like ugly human beings with a touch of the ape, and are
entirely bald, very strong and not very intelligent. There're seven or
eight on board. Normally they are good-natured: but sometimes when
they have a hard master, like Xantra, they take to hating him; and
when they do that they can be very fierce and treacherous. That's the
main reason for Xantra's stopping at Earth: to see what kind of slaves
we humans will make. He is hoping that we will be more intelligent
than those he has--and more docile, and safer to have around."

"Well," snorted Jim belligerently, "if Mr. Xantra thinks that I'm
going to be safe to have around, he's a lot dumber than _I_ am!"

"Oh, it's good to hear you talk that way," the girl's voice went on.
"We three have got to stick together, and find some way to escape!

"I've so much to say!" she went on; "but I daren't stay long, for fear
of getting caught. What you said is where my chief hope lies: Xantra
doesn't realize how intelligent we are, and how dangerous; and we
mustn't let him know! I think he believes we are much like his present
slaves: he gets away with murder with them. You've noticed the lumps
on the back of your necks? Well, they have them, too; it's something
that's attached to the spinal cord and gives him telepathic control
over them; also the power to hurt them dreadfully--as you've
unfortunately found out. His slaves don't understand these lumps; they
don't seem to know that he would lose control if they could only in
some way get rid of the things in their necks!"

       *       *       *       *       *

For the first time since the girl started talking, Clee spoke. His
voice was low and grave, and there was a tinge of suspicion in it.

"Just how does it happen," he asked, "that you know so much about
things here?"

The girl's voice broke as she gave her answer.

"I'm ashamed to tell you," she said. "Xantra--he--he admires me as a
healthy animal; one close, in species, to himself. He thinks by being
nice to me that he might be able to make me a willing companion to
share his trip!" For a moment the girl was silent; and when she spoke
again there was a hard note in her voice.

"I let him have hopes," she said, "--deliberately. I planned to make
him trust me, and give me the run of the ship, so I could find out all
I could. So far--before you came--I saw no slightest hope of ever
escaping back to Earth; but I had at least to look for a quick, sure
way to death, in case--in case--"

"You--and us too!" exclaimed Clee impulsively. "No Earth-man--no
American, at least--is ever going to submit to slavery. If the worst
comes to the worst, we'll at least die together, Vivian!"

Jim added soberly: "And perhaps, if we do, no one from Xantra's planet
will ever again come to Earth looking for 'docile' slaves...."

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment everyone was silent, affected by the thought behind what
they had said. Then the girl's voice suggested, with a touch of Earth
formality that was almost ludicrous under the circumstances: "But you
two men have not yet introduced yourselves!"

Both Clee and Jim smiled, and told her their names, and in the slight
pause that followed Clee said awkwardly, almost shyly: "Miss Gray, we
don't know what's in store for us here, and it--it's possible that we
may never know each other any better: so would you--I mean, I wonder
would you mind if I reached out and touched you. In spite of all we
have said. I--I can hardly realize that you are there, somewhere,
before me."

Out of the nothingness came an impulsive soft hand that closed over
his. There was both a smile and something deeper in Vivian's voice as
she said, "Here," and raised his hand until it touched her brow and
the thick smooth hair of her head. Then she placed it a little lower,
over her face; and gently Clee's fingers told him what his eyes could
not read.

"In case you never see me--why, I--I'd like you to know that I'm
really, not bad looking," she said; and Clee knew she was blushing as
he smiled at the eternal feminine in her.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the smile suddenly left his face. His hand had felt her give a
distinct start. Then--

"He's calling!" she gasped faintly. "Xantra's calling for me to come
to him!" Her voice, as she spoke, moved, and Clee knew she was going
towards the door.

"No!" he cried impulsively. "Don't risk it! Stay here, and we'll begin
our fight against him right now!"

"I will be safe," came Vivian's reassuring voice from the door. "I can
manage him a while yet." Her further words came with a rush. "But I
wanted to tell you--I had a faint plan. If I could get hold of the
anaesthetic--the vial of stuff that smells like cloves--"

The door was closing now, and the two men knew she was moving down the
corridor. They listened in vain for her to complete what she had been
saying. Just before the door clicked shut, Jim jammed his foot in it,
preventing it from closing.

