With no interruption in the lengthening line the third wave followed:
the virgin nurses, the frustrated mothers carrying the whitish larvae,
like babes in arms, carrying them with the indomitable determination to
preserve their lives which human nurses showed in the Second World War
as the bombs crashed into maternity wards. And then at last the heavy
rearguard: the holiest of holies, the living spirit of the hive, the
queen. Majestically she was carried on her warrior's backs; enormous as
she loomed on the visi-screen, the white of her uncouth body was hardly
visible, swarmed over as she was by her fanatical courtiers which,
licking and caressing, kept her covered as by a shield. Her consorts
trotted meekly in her trail; unhappy little men, rudely aroused from
their harem sinecure, jealously guarded and prodded on by the queen's
countless ladies in waiting and the palace guard.

       *       *       *       *       *

Things moved very fast now; Lee's quick pencil strokes could hardly
follow the events:

10:30 a.m. The foremost columns are now out of reach of the
visi-screens. But I can see them moving along the logs with the naked
eye. Interesting new fact: the crossbreeds from the most belligerent
species are far and ahead of the rest. They don't take time out to drive
tunnels. But even the tunnels of the more pacific strains are forging
ahead at an extraordinary rate; six feet across the floor already....

10:40: "_Bellicosus_" has reached the south wall; it is now moving
along the wall toward the "Lignin-Filler-Spout." There is no hesitancy
as they change direction at the angle of 90 degrees. The Queens are now
coming up at a very rapid rate from the mounds farthest to the rear.
It's fortunate we have these differences in behaviorism and temperament
because otherwise a terrific traffic jam would occur at the
"Filler-Spout"....

10:50: "_Bellicosus_" is now ascending to the "Filler-Spout." The
warriors have ringed the pipe. With their body-tremors they are giving
the "come-on" signal to the workers. The workers are piling in--an
average batch--about 65,000. It's a good thing that there is an air
space in these horizontal nerve-path pipes. That gives them a chance to
march along the ceiling and work down from there....

11:00: There are now a score of columns converging at the
"Filler-Spout." Amazing that even under such provoking conditions
"_ant-termes_" won't fight. The warriors act like the most accomplished
traffic-cops; it's marvelous how they keep their columns in order and
keep them moving side by side into The Brain....

11:10: The first million, I should say, is now well inside the
"Filler-Spout." They're marching at a rate of at least 300 yards per
hour; amazing speed; I never saw them move that fast before. Even so I
won't have time to watch the outcome of the experiment. I've put
everything I had into this thing. 500 hives--that would make it 35
million individuals of the species at a conservative estimate. It's the
biggest mass-migration I've ever seen, but will it be big enough to do
the trick?

11:20: The foremost columns must have reached the neighboring
apperception centers to the right and left of mine by now. But they
won't stop; I know that from experience in Australia. To them it's just
like any other "hollow tree"; they'll drive right on to the top; they
won't bivouak before they are completely exhausted. That won't be before
five or six hours. At the rate of 900 feet per hour that would make it
almost a mile, covering the whole "occipital region" of The Brain. And
then they are going to feast; boy, will they be ravenous....

11:30: About 3 million are safely inside now I should say. Don't think
that I could stay at my post much longer. There's a certain
extracurricular idea coming up from the subconscious like a tidal wave.
The dams of willpower don't seem able to hold back that idea; I've got
to get out before it spills across the dam and floods my consciousness.
The phone rings; for once it is a welcome sound.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Oona's voice; trembling with emotion as if she were still
suffering from this morning's shock or had suffered another:

"Semper, are you all right?"

Lee reassured her that he was and then listened astounded as she heaved
a sigh of relief.

"Listen, Semper, this is terribly important. I've got to see you
immediately. No, I cannot tell you over the phone; it's a personal
matter and it concerns you. You cannot make it? Is your business _that_
important? You're in the midst of a vital experiment? That's awful,
Semper; it really is in this case. No; I'm all right personally; it
isn't that. It's _you_ Semper, it's _you_. 5 p.m. at the earliest, is
that the best you can do? All right then. Meet me at the airport. And
take good care of yourself, do you hear me: _take good care of yourself,
Semper_, up to that time."

She hung up quickly, as if suddenly disturbed.

Lee frowned at the clock: 11:35. He could have managed to meet Oona
during her lunch hour at the hotel. But there were things he still had
to do even more important than Oona. More important to him than even
Oona. He shook his head; it wouldn't have seemed possible a few days
ago....

With the climax of the experiment now over Lee felt his mental
resistance ebbing fast.

"They're on the move," he thought. "Nothing can stop them now; it's
beyond my control, but they're marching. I'd better get out of here...."

With fevered eyes he glanced around the floor and like a victim of
delirium saw it moving, crawling as with snakes, crawling into their
hole all of them, black snakes, grey snakes, red snakes, endless their
lengthening bodies....

He carefully closed the door of the lab, locked it and then pressed the
button which opened the elevator door. Only as the cage tore down
through the "dura mater", only when he felt safe from the sensory organs
of The Brain, only when he was sure that not even a human eye would see
him in this racing little cage, only then did the dam of willpower
collapse. He put both hands before his eyes in vain attempt to stop the
tears from streaming; those tears of a soldier over the body of his
fallen chum; those tears of a greying scientist who sacrificed the
results of his life's work to some higher cause.

Lee caught the one p.m. Greyhound-Helicopter for Phoenix only a second
before the start. He panted from the run, but in his sunken eyes there
was a light and in his mind a new serenity which comes to men when they
are fortunate enough to meet with some very wonderful woman, when with
admiration and humility they stand confronted with a courage greater
than man's. Gus's wife had been that woman; the way she had taken the
terrible news was the source of Lee's new strength and confidence.

The flying commuter was almost empty.

Noting Lee's astonished glance the stewardess gave a nervous little
laugh:

"People get jumpy traveling," she volunteered.

"That so; why do they?"

"Didn't you hear the news all morning; wait...."

She flicked the radio on. On the television screen appeared an aerial
view of a big city, vaguely familiar looking, yet as foreign as Venice,
and then the voice of the announcer broke through.

"New Orleans: It is now ascertained that the break in the levees was
caused by a huge trench digging machine left unattended overnight at a
lonely spot twenty miles South of Baton Rouge. Levee engineers believe
that its engine was started possibly by saboteurs, approximately at
midnight and that it then proceeded automatically digging itself into
the levee until it was drowned by the incoming river. The initial
eight-foot breach has now been widened by the Mississippi to a width of
200 feet. Along Canal street and all over downtown New Orleans the flood
has reached a level of ten feet above the streets as evacuation
continues. The government has concentrated every available piece of
equipment to close the breach. All normal activities have come to a
standstill; property damages are estimated at 50 million dollars; the
death toll has passed the 500 mark in this most catastrophic flood in
New Orleans' history."

       *       *       *       *       *

New aerial pictures, similar to the results of a blockbuster bombing
attack flicked on the screen:

"New York: The bursting of the watermains at dawn this morning at seven
different points of Manhattan's downtown area which has already caused
the collapse of the Waldorf Astoria Hotel and seven big apartment
buildings along Park Avenue now threatens Macy's and the Public Library
on 42nd Street.

"All subway traffic has stopped. Evacuation of panicky Metropolitans
from the Central Park district proceeds in an orderly manner. In the
Harlem district, however, disorders and plunderings have been reported.
An estimated seven million people are without drinking water. Trucks
carrying water from New Jersey are severely hampered by unprecedented
traffic snarl-ups, since owners of private automobiles are fleeing the
city with their families. Due to the flooding of sub-street levels in
both Grand Central and Penn Station, evacuation by rail can proceed only
from 163rd Street for the New York Central and from New Jersey for the
Pennsylvania Railroad system. Effectiveness of railroad transport is
reduced to less than 30% of normal capacity. I. C. Moriarty, Sanitary
Commissioner of New York, declared in his press conference that the
catastrophic bursting of the watermains was caused by failure of the
remote-controlled automatic mainstem valves. For reasons which still
puzzle city engineers these valves closed suddenly and completely at 5
a.m. this morning. Because of the failure of the alarm system,
high-pressure pumps in the powerhouses continued to work and to build up
pressure in the closed system of the watermains till almost
simultaneously, and with explosive force, the breaks occurred, the first
one right under the Columbus monument. In view of the extremely grave
situation which threatens the world's biggest city, Governor Charles
declared martial law this morning at 10 a.m.

"Chicago: The city-wide calamity caused by the unprecedented breakdown
in the sewage disposal system gets more threatening with every minute.
As engineers are still unable to enter the atomic power plant and as the
sewage disposal-pumps continue to work in reverse, all Chicagoland is
rapidly turning into a cesspool as millions of toilets and kitchen sinks
spill sewage into every apartment. The Fire Department has received more
than two million calls from harassed citizens battling vainly against
the unsavory flood.

"Harrowing scenes are reported from hotels where 3,000 members of the
American Federation of Women's Clubs are taking turns in sending protest
telegrams and gallantly holding down by the weight of their own bodies
the facilities-front in the 3,000 bathrooms of the hotels. At a few
points workers have succeeded in digging up sewage mains and tons of
concrete are being poured to stop the devastating reversal of the flow.

"Even now, however, the partially closed mains and the overflow from
houses are flooding the streets. As it gradually seeps into Lake
Michigan, source of Chicago's drinking water supply, health commissioner
Segantini has already warned against the appalling dangers of epidemics
which might result from this.

"Nuclear physicists of Chicago University, called in to aid city
engineers, have declared that dangerous amounts of escaping gamma-rays
in the Atomic Powerplant were first discovered by the Geiger-counter at
two a.m. Evacuation of all employees was ordered one hour later as a
safety measure. Just why the pumps resumed operations after the shutdown
of the plant and just what caused the system to work in reverse remains
a mystery. Prof. Windeband, spokesman of the group of nuclear
physicists, confesses that he has no explanation for the phenomenon.

"Washington: Rumors are flying thick and fast in the nation's capital.
In the rapidly darkening picture of international politics the
mobilization of Mexico is the latest shadow. Official explanation given
by Mexico's ambassador Rivadivia, is that his government has ordered
mobilization as a protective measure to guard frontiers against the
illegal entry of thousands of panicky American refugees chiefly from New
Orleans. The State Department is said to be planning a protest. Even so,
the unprecedented series of catastrophes on the home-front of America
overshadows everything. Washington insiders report a growing conviction
in high government circles that the events of the past 48 hours are
proof absolute that large numbers of foreign saboteurs and agents are at
work."

"Had enough?" asked the stewardess.

Lee confessed that he had.

       *       *       *       *       *

With its helicopters feathered, the Greyhound came sliding down onto the
Bus Terminal's roof; fifteen minutes later Lee stood again at his
father's door, that door he had thought once before he would never see
again.

The old man's loose-skinned face, tanned like saddle leather, didn't
move an inch at the sight of the son: "You again, Semper? Come in then."

Lee vaguely sensed that his father was glad he had come; that there was
some unfinished business left from their last conversation and that his
father welcomed the opportunity to finish it.

"You know," he said as his stiff-jointed legs carried him back to the
table with bottle and glasses trembling on the tray in his hands, "you
know, I've named these four walls after old friends of mine--all of them
dead--but sometimes they won't answer when I talk to them. And then I'm
glad when somebody happens along. But don't take that to mean that I'm
in my dotage now or getting mad."

"No, Father; that's just loneliness."

"In any case, Son, there are lots of people lots madder than I am.
There's a woman living next door, a spinster, answers to the name of
Pimpernel. This morning she came running over crying that her
vacuum-cleaner was chasing her all over the house. And by God, Semper,
it was a fact. Never saw anything like it. One of those new-fangled
automatic contraptions which are supposed to do the job all alone by
themselves, and it banged around and chased about as if it had a
hornet's nest under its bonnet. Scared the poor woman to death."

"What did you do?"

"What could I do? I'm not a mechanic; there was no cord attached or
anything to plug out. So I got my automatic and shot the damn thing."

"Shot it?"

"Sure; bullet must have penetrated something; anyway it stopped dead on
the spot. And now she threatens to sue me for damages; there's gratitude
for you. What brought you here?"

Lee felt elated; obviously his father was in high spirits from this
morning's successful hunt; for once he was in a receptive _mood_.

Rapidly, with all the precision he could muster, Lee explained, as an
adjutant would explain a new development in a strategic situation to his
commanding general. After a while the old man started pacing the floor
in rising excitement. A spark of the old fierceness had come into his
blunted pale-blue eyes as he swung around.

"Before this morning's incident I would have considered all this as a
raving maniac's gibberish. Now as I put two and two together I can see a
distinct possibility that you've got something. Tell you what I'll
do--what I consider my duty to do--I'll call out the National Guard.
We'll encircle The Brain and present an ultimatum to the thing. If
necessary we'll take the place by storm."

The younger Lee answered with a vigorous shaking of his head.

"You cannot do that, Father. In the first place the National Guard
doesn't stand a chance against the defences of The Brain. In the second
place your action would mean civil war. No, we must go after this in a
different manner. The Secretary of War is an old friend of yours. All
right: take the next plane to Washington. Don't tell him anything he
couldn't believe. Tell him--what is strictly the truth--that some power
hostile to the United States threatens to interfere with the remote
control of automatic war equipment. Tell him to redouble guard over the
remote-control rocket launchers, to have their automatic computators
disconnected temporarily and for the commanders to accept only orders
direct from Washington. The greatest danger is not the domestic
disorders; that situation we'll have in hand if my scheme works. But let
one rocket accidentally be launched into some big foreign capital and it
will set the whole world on fire in an Atomic war. That is what The
Brain wants, that is what must be prevented at all costs. Will you do
that, Father?"

Even years after Lee never understood just what had happened or how it
could have happened that his position to his father became reversed with
such startling suddenness. In the extremity of the situation he had
addressed his father with the authority of of a commander toward one of
his aids--and the father had accepted the son's command unquestioningly.

"Semper," he had said, "I have always considered you a military
nincompoop. I was mistaken, son, I apologize. Now let me grab my hat and
coat. You kept the taxi waiting? Good: tell the man to go to the
airport, and let her rip."

       *       *       *       *       *

At 5 p.m. the Flying Greyhound dropped on Cephalon airport and there was
Oona looking very pale, but very beautiful in the gathering dusk. She
