and made a tigerish dash back along the table toward the window. And
even as the clumsy titan jumped to the side and grabbed again at him,
he hurled his tiny, heavy body against the pane, and went plunging
through a shower of glass into the cool dark night outside.

       *       *       *       *       *

He fell five feet, and the wind was jarred out of him as he crashed
through the branches of a bush under the window into the sodden earth
beneath. Unhurt, save for a few lacerations from the glass, he
staggered to his feet, gasping for his breath, and started to run
across the clearing towards the fringe of dense forest growth that
ringed the cabin.

Then he heard thunderous footsteps and, a second later, the sound of
the front door being pulled open. Garth turned in his tracks, and
stumbled back beneath the cabin, thanking heaven that it was raised on
short stilts. But the ruse did not give him much of a start, and by
the time he had painfully threaded his way between the piles of timber
left underneath the cabin, Hagendorff had discovered the trick and was
scouting back.

Then, with the strength of the hunted, Garth was out from under the
other side and sprinting for the doubtful sanctuary of the forest.

His tiny feet, carrying the weight of a normal-sized man, sank ankle
high into the muddy ground, several times almost tripping him. Even as
he got to where a trail through the bush began, and passed from the
cold starlight into spaces black with clustered shadows, he heard a
bellow from behind, and, glancing back, saw a monstrous shape come
leaping on his tracks.

He had only seconds in which to find refuge; he could not stick to the
trail. Thick bush, dank and heavy from recent rains, was on either
side, fugitive streaks of pale light from above painting it eerily.
Garth plunged into the matted growth, dropped to hands and knees and
wormed forward away from the trail. Earth-jarring footbeats sounded
close. With frantic haste he wrenched though the scratching tendrils
and came to a miniature clearing.

       *       *       *       *       *

He saw the tilted shape of a rotted tree-stump, its roots half washed
away and exposing a narrow crevice between them. Gasping, the nude,
foot-high figure tumbled down into it, and lay there, trying to hush
his labored breathing.

He was a mere twenty feet from the trail; and though to him the bush
was a jungle, to his pursuer it was only chest-high. A towering shadow
moved along the trail. The thud of heavy footbeats came more slowly to
the listening midget. Hagendorff was searching, puzzled by the vague
shadows, for where Garth had left the path.

Silence fell.

Garth's heart was pounding like a trip-hammer. He held himself alert,
ready, if need be, to struggle up from the moist crevice and dart on
further into the bush. He could not see the giant, but could picture
his huge, sullen face all too clearly. Still no sound came. Risking
all, he gripped a root and hauled himself up slightly. Then he peered
around the stump.

Hagendorff was standing in the thick of the bush. He was not ten feet
away, striving in the gloom to discern the other's tell-tale tracks.
Garth drew his head back, hardly daring to breathe. Shivering, his
naked body miserably cold, he waited, pressed down in the soggy earth.
His betraying tracks were there; the shadows alone befriended him.

The silence was drawn so fine that the faint cheep of a night-bird
sounded startlingly loud. But then came thunder that sent the bird
winging away in fright, and the night and the forest echoed with the
roar of a wrathful, impatient human voice.

"You hear me, wherever you are! And hear this: I leave you now, but in
ten minutes I have you! You little fool--you think you can get free?
It is only by minutes you delay me!"

Snarling a curse, the treacherous giant turned and crashed through the
bush and took his huge form striding back towards the cabin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Garth was thinking of many things as he scrambled back wearily from
his refuge to the trail. He was cursing the unwanted publicity which
prying reporters had given his work in Detroit, and which had led him
to lease the lonely island and build a laboratory in the wilderness.
Had it not been for that publicity, he would never have needed an
assistant, and the vision of fame would never have come to delude
Hagendorff and turn his thoughts towards murder.

His position seemed a horrible delirium from which he must presently
awake. Naked, dwarfed by each ordinary forest weed, unarmed, and
trembling from the wind-sharpened night, he hardly knew which way to
turn. His body was blotched with blood and mud, and under it the
ragged gashes made by glass and bush stung painfully; he was hungry
and stiff and tired and miserable. He remembered Hagendorff's threat
of capturing him in ten minutes, and forced a smile to his face.

"Looks kind of bad," he muttered, using his voice in an attempt to
dispel some of the lonely grip of the night, "but we'll keep moving,
anyway! He's coming back soon. Let's see: I'd better make for the
stream. It'll be hard for him to follow my tracks through that. And
then...."

Then--what? The island was small. He realized he could not stand many
hours of exposure. Inevitably--But he turned his mind from the future
and its seeming hopelessness, and concentrated on the immediate need,
which was to hide himself. Forcing the pace, he struck off on a
shambling trot down the dim trail, on into the deepening, sinister
shadows towards the island's lone stream.

       *       *       *       *       *

Obstacles that normally he would not have noticed made his path
tortuous. His great weight sank his feet ankle-high in the moist,
uneven ground. Time and time again he stumbled over some imbedded rock
that, potato-sized, was like a boulder to him. Time and time again he
fell, and when he rose his legs were plastered with soggy earth that
did not dry; and the damp, fallen leaves and twigs he pitched into
clung to his coating of mud. Each broken limb and branch, dropped from
the whispering gloom of the trees above, drained the energy from his
tiring muscles. Soon he was conscious of a vague numbness creeping
over him, a deceptive, drowsy warmth into which he longed to sink, but
which he drove back by working his arms and legs as vigorously as he
could.

On he went, with teeth clenched and eyes fixed on the half-seen trail
ahead--a fantastic, tiny creature hunted like a wild animal by a giant
of his own kind!

Presently, through the shroud of darkness traced by ghostly slivers of
starlight, came the sound of trickling water. The trail rose, dipped
down; and through that hollow crawled the stream, winding from a
hidden spring to the encompassing river below. Garth was winded when
he came to it; to his eyes it seemed a small river. His legs were so
numb they hardly felt the cold bite of the water that lapped around
them.

Some furry water animal leaped away as Garth trudged upstream, alarmed
by the strange midnight visitant and the self-encouraging mutterings
of a shrill human voice....

       *       *       *       *       *

He had waded what seemed to him a weary distance--in reality only a
few hundred yards--through the winding, icy creek, when suddenly he
halted and stood stock-still. Listening, he heard the ordinary sounds
of the wind through the fir-spires, and the slow trickle of water;
heard the beating of his own heart. Nothing else. And yet.... He took
another step.

Then he swung quickly around and peered back, senses alert. There was
no mistaking the sound that had come again. It was the crunch of heavy
feet, thudding at even intervals on damp earth. They were
Hagendorff's; and he was armed with light!

A long beam of white speared through the tangle of bush and tree
trunks far below. It came slanting down from above, prying for the
story recorded by miniature footprints in the ground. By its distance
from him, Garth could tell Hagendorff had come to where his trail led
into the stream. The ray held steady for minutes. Again it prowled
nervously around, hunting for tell-tale signs, sweeping in widening
circles. Then, it was punctuated by the crunch of a boot.

The giant was following upstream!

With the flashlight, he might even be able to trace the prints in the
bed of the creek. Stooping, Garth crept ahead, as silently as he
could, though the stir of water at his feet seemed terribly loud.
There were keen ears behind, craned for sounds like that. He knew he
would have to hide again--quickly--and at that moment he saw a place.

A cleft in the bank to his right held a small hole, dimly limned by a
wisp of starlight. On hands and feet the midget scrambled cat-like to
it. It slanted down and inwards, only inches wide, so that the earth
was close to his body when he slid feet-first inside. But it was warm
and dry, for it was shielded by a ledge from rain, and with the warmth
the hunted manikin's spirits rose somewhat. The ray of light, which he
could see sweeping back and forth downstream, was still following
slowly, as if Hagendorff were having trouble making out the
water-covered trail. Garth breathed easier, cuddled down--and then,
for some unaccountable reason, he felt uneasy.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had not noticed it at first, but now his nostrils were filled with
a queer, musky odor that electrified his nerves and tensed his
muscles. He felt the short hairs on his neck rise; felt his lips
tighten and draw back over clenched teeth. Some long-buried instinct
was warning him of danger--and suddenly he sprang from the hole and
swung around.

From it, a killer came snaking out, its bared fangs thirsty for his
life blood!

Arching and swaying its lithe-muscled body, it slid forward in its
graceful, savage way--a weasel, the deadliest pound-for-pound killer
that prowls the forest. It was as long as the naked human who faced it
was tall. Unwittingly, he had chosen its hole as a refuge.

Retreat would have been impossible, but Garth for some reason did not
even think of it. A strange new sensation poured through his tense
body, a sensation akin to fierce joy. Gone was his tiredness; his
teeth too were bared, matching the wicked fangs before him. Two primal
creatures they were, tooth to tooth and claw to claw, the man as naked
and intoxicated with the blood lust as the ten pounds of bone and
sinew that now darted suddenly for his throat.

With the lightning quickness that had come to him with small size,
Garth stepped aside. And as the weasel's head streaked by he called
on man's distinctive weapon, and put every ounce of his weight behind
a right arm swing that landed square on a cold black nose and doubled
the weasel back in midair.

Stunned, it writhed for a second on the slippery bank; and then again
it was up, mad with pain now and swaying slightly as it gathered for a
second leap against this creature that fought so strangely.

       *       *       *       *       *

But in the momentary respite Garth had reasoned out his best chance.
He did not try to fight off the second dart with his fists, but went
boldly in. Ducking through the needle claws with head lowered, his
tiny hands streaked in on the furry throat. He found it, and his
fingers thumbed into the wind-pipe; but not before the weasel smelled
the blood its claws had drawn and went utterly berserk. For a moment
there was a wild flurry of furry, tearing legs and a blood-streaked
white body between them, trying desperately to evade their slicing
strokes. They pitched down the bank together, animal and man
struggling silently to the death; and when they jarred to a stop in
the water below, Garth's strategy was achieved.

He was uppermost; his grip was steel around the throbbing throat, and
the hundred and eighty pound weight of his body was holding the legs
powerless. Not an inch from his face the weasel's fangs clashed
frantically together. Garth maintained his clutch, squeezing with
every bit of his mighty strength. The animal shuddered; then writhed
in the death convulsions; at last lay still.

Panting, his mind a welter of primate emotions roused by the kill, the
man shook it a last time, jumped to his feet and glared around--to see
the beam of a flashlight only a dozen yards away. His more deadly foe,
the human foe, was upon him. Perhaps the sounds of the fight had
reached his ears.

Garth lost not a moment. Quickly he slung the weasel's body back into
the hole and jammed himself down after it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hagendorff approached slowly, mumbling and cursing to himself in
sullen ill-humor. Things were not going as he had expected them to.
The white ray scoured the banks of the stream, searching doggedly.
Nearer he came, and with each step the watching midget's rapid
breathing grew tighter. The towering body was more than shadow now.
Another ten feet and the flashlight would find the marks of the fight.

But the titan's patience gave out. Closer than he had yet been to his
quarry, he paused, and again the thunder of his voice broke the
night's hush.

"Bah! This is foolish! In daylight I find him certainly. I have waited
long; I can wait a little more. I need sleep. To-morrow, it will be
different!"

He swung away from the stream, and in a few minutes the rip and crash
of his progress through the bush had died. In the silence, Garth
Howard considered his situation.

He faced it squarely, as was his custom. He did not brood over the
treachery of his assistant, or of how unfairly and suddenly it had
plunged him into peril and robbed him of his normal body. He accepted
his position and searched for possible angles of escape. There were
not many hours left in which to make a decisive move. The island was
small, and, as Hagendorff had said, discovery would be inevitable in
daytime.

Garth thought of the machine, and of the giant sleeping. A desperate
plan came to him, and his jaws set decisively. "I'll do it!" he
exclaimed aloud.

The lever which controlled both increase and decrease could be worked
from inside the chamber if he rigged up a system of turning it with a
wire or rope. If he pulled it to the increase only part way, he would,
he knew, have sufficient power over his muscles to pull it back off,
or slide again from the chamber, as he had done before. Whether or not
he could do this depended on Hagendorff's being asleep. Possibly he
could be locked in the living room, if he were there. Or tied. The
increase, even at half speed, would only take about forty seconds.
Once back to his size there would be a fight without odds, Garth
thought grimly.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a big risk, and there was probably only a small chance of
succeeding, but it meant getting back to six feet, back to a normal
world, back to equal terms. That was the magnet which drew him
presently toward the cabin laboratory.

He went slowly, to allow Hagendorff plenty of time to fall soundly
asleep. The giant, as he had said, needed sleep--needed it badly--for,
like Garth Howard, he had done without it for forty-eight hours under
the excitement of imminent success in their work. Garth considered
that his move would be totally unexpected, being made right into the
other's territory. There was a chance.

And so, cold and weariness banished by thoughts of the goal ahead, he
prowled back along the trail like any small creature of the forest.

It was half an hour later when he came in sight of the cabin. His
heart drummed excitedly as he stood in the shadows surveying it. He
wondered if Hagendorff was still awake; if he was, perhaps, waiting
for him. Certainly he did not seem to be: the cabin was dark and
silent, and the only door was tightly closed. Still--it might be
wiser to retreat while still free....

"No, by heaven!" Garth Howard exclaimed in his thoughts. "I'm going
through with it!" Stooping slightly, he left the shadows and ran
boldly into the starlight.

He half expected to hear a scuffle of feet and see the giant come
leaping out at him; but nothing broke the silence. He made his careful
way along the side of the cabin to the place where a trough for waste
liquids led through a small hole at the level of the floor, and with
great care wormed through.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he started to cautiously reconnoiter, he was suddenly arrested in
his tracks. He had caught the sound of deep, rhythmic breathing.
Hagendorff was asleep, not in the adjoining living room--but in the
laboratory!

For a moment, Garth did not know what to do. Caution urged him to
retreat; but that would not get him back to his size. On tip-toe, he
explored around. The boards squeaked beneath his great weight, but the
nearby breathing beyond continued in regular rhythm.

His eyes were toned to the darkness of the laboratory; he saw the
chamber of his atom-compacting machine, its outer sides ghostly in the
faint, reflected starlight, and stared at it with a pang of fierce
longing. So near, it was--so very near! Holding the stolen size of his
body; holding all that was vital to him; holding life itself--it
rested there silently, within reach of a few steps and a quick climb
up one of the table legs. So he thought, his brain whirling with
mingled emotions, his tiny body shivering and aching with cold and its
