upper part of the Bubble of the said dark blue Colour. And this Colour,
after the aforesaid manner, dilated it self downwards, until sometimes
it hath overspread the whole Bubble. In the mean while at the top, which
was of a darker blue than the bottom, and appear'd also full of many
round blue Spots, something darker than the rest, there would emerge
one or more very black Spots, and within those, other Spots of an
intenser blackness, which I mention'd in the former Observation; and
these continually dilated themselves until the Bubble broke.

If the Water was not very tenacious, the black Spots would break forth
in the white, without any sensible intervention of the blue. And
sometimes they would break forth within the precedent yellow, or red, or
perhaps within the blue of the second order, before the intermediate
Colours had time to display themselves.

By this description you may perceive how great an affinity these Colours
have with those of Air described in the fourth Observation, although set
down in a contrary order, by reason that they begin to appear when the
Bubble is thickest, and are most conveniently reckon'd from the lowest
and thickest part of the Bubble upwards.

_Obs._ 19. Viewing in several oblique Positions of my Eye the Rings of
Colours emerging on the top of the Bubble, I found that they were
sensibly dilated by increasing the obliquity, but yet not so much by far
as those made by thinn'd Air in the seventh Observation. For there they
were dilated so much as, when view'd most obliquely, to arrive at a part
of the Plate more than twelve times thicker than that where they
appear'd when viewed perpendicularly; whereas in this case the thickness
of the Water, at which they arrived when viewed most obliquely, was to
that thickness which exhibited them by perpendicular Rays, something
less than as 8 to 5. By the best of my Observations it was between 15
and 15-1/2 to 10; an increase about 24 times less than in the other
case.

Sometimes the Bubble would become of an uniform thickness all over,
except at the top of it near the black Spot, as I knew, because it would
exhibit the same appearance of Colours in all Positions of the Eye. And
then the Colours which were seen at its apparent circumference by the
obliquest Rays, would be different from those that were seen in other
places, by Rays less oblique to it. And divers Spectators might see the
same part of it of differing Colours, by viewing it at very differing
Obliquities. Now observing how much the Colours at the same places of
the Bubble, or at divers places of equal thickness, were varied by the
several Obliquities of the Rays; by the assistance of the 4th, 14th,
16th and 18th Observations, as they are hereafter explain'd, I collect
the thickness of the Water requisite to exhibit any one and the same
Colour, at several Obliquities, to be very nearly in the Proportion
expressed in this Table.

-----------------+------------------+----------------
  Incidence on   | Refraction into  | Thickness of
   the Water.    |    the Water.    |   the Water.
-----------------+------------------+----------------
   Deg.    Min.  |    Deg.    Min.  |
                 |                  |
    00     00    |     00     00    |    10
                 |                  |
    15     00    |     11     11    |    10-1/4
                 |                  |
    30     00    |     22      1    |    10-4/5
                 |                  |
    45     00    |     32      2    |    11-4/5
                 |                  |
    60     00    |     40     30    |    13
                 |                  |
    75     00    |     46     25    |    14-1/2
                 |                  |
    90     00    |     48     35    |    15-1/5
-----------------+------------------+----------------

In the two first Columns are express'd the Obliquities of the Rays to
the Superficies of the Water, that is, their Angles of Incidence and
Refraction. Where I suppose, that the Sines which measure them are in
round Numbers, as 3 to 4, though probably the Dissolution of Soap in the
Water, may a little alter its refractive Virtue. In the third Column,
the Thickness of the Bubble, at which any one Colour is exhibited in
those several Obliquities, is express'd in Parts, of which ten
constitute its Thickness when the Rays are perpendicular. And the Rule
found by the seventh Observation agrees well with these Measures, if
duly apply'd; namely, that the Thickness of a Plate of Water requisite
to exhibit one and the same Colour at several Obliquities of the Eye, is
proportional to the Secant of an Angle, whose Sine is the first of an
hundred and six arithmetical mean Proportionals between the Sines of
Incidence and Refraction counted from the lesser Sine, that is, from the
Sine of Refraction when the Refraction is made out of Air into Water,
otherwise from the Sine of Incidence.

I have sometimes observ'd, that the Colours which arise on polish'd
Steel by heating it, or on Bell-metal, and some other metalline
Substances, when melted and pour'd on the Ground, where they may cool in
the open Air, have, like the Colours of Water-bubbles, been a little
changed by viewing them at divers Obliquities, and particularly that a
deep blue, or violet, when view'd very obliquely, hath been changed to a
deep red. But the Changes of these Colours are not so great and
sensible as of those made by Water. For the Scoria, or vitrified Part of
the Metal, which most Metals when heated or melted do continually
protrude, and send out to their Surface, and which by covering the
Metals in form of a thin glassy Skin, causes these Colours, is much
denser than Water; and I find that the Change made by the Obliquation of
the Eye is least in Colours of the densest thin Substances.

_Obs._ 20. As in the ninth Observation, so here, the Bubble, by
transmitted Light, appear'd of a contrary Colour to that, which it
exhibited by Reflexion. Thus when the Bubble being look'd on by the
Light of the Clouds reflected from it, seemed red at its apparent
Circumference, if the Clouds at the same time, or immediately after,
were view'd through it, the Colour at its Circumference would be blue.
And, on the contrary, when by reflected Light it appeared blue, it would
appear red by transmitted Light.

_Obs._ 21. By wetting very thin Plates of _Muscovy_ Glass, whose
thinness made the like Colours appear, the Colours became more faint and
languid, especially by wetting the Plates on that side opposite to the
Eye: But I could not perceive any variation of their Species. So then
the thickness of a Plate requisite to produce any Colour, depends only
on the density of the Plate, and not on that of the ambient Medium. And
hence, by the 10th and 16th Observations, may be known the thickness
which Bubbles of Water, or Plates of _Muscovy_ Glass, or other
Substances, have at any Colour produced by them.

_Obs._ 22. A thin transparent Body, which is denser than its ambient
Medium, exhibits more brisk and vivid Colours than that which is so much
rarer; as I have particularly observed in the Air and Glass. For blowing
Glass very thin at a Lamp Furnace, those Plates encompassed with Air did
exhibit Colours much more vivid than those of Air made thin between two
Glasses.

_Obs._ 23. Comparing the quantity of Light reflected from the several
Rings, I found that it was most copious from the first or inmost, and in
the exterior Rings became gradually less and less. Also the whiteness of
the first Ring was stronger than that reflected from those parts of the
thin Medium or Plate which were without the Rings; as I could manifestly
perceive by viewing at a distance the Rings made by the two
Object-glasses; or by comparing two Bubbles of Water blown at distant
Times, in the first of which the Whiteness appear'd, which succeeded all
the Colours, and in the other, the Whiteness which preceded them all.

_Obs._ 24. When the two Object-glasses were lay'd upon one another, so
as to make the Rings of the Colours appear, though with my naked Eye I
could not discern above eight or nine of those Rings, yet by viewing
them through a Prism I have seen a far greater Multitude, insomuch that
I could number more than forty, besides many others, that were so very
small and close together, that I could not keep my Eye steady on them
severally so as to number them, but by their Extent I have sometimes
estimated them to be more than an hundred. And I believe the Experiment
may be improved to the Discovery of far greater Numbers. For they seem
to be really unlimited, though visible only so far as they can be
separated by the Refraction of the Prism, as I shall hereafter explain.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

But it was but one side of these Rings, namely, that towards which the
Refraction was made, which by that Refraction was render'd distinct, and
the other side became more confused than when view'd by the naked Eye,
insomuch that there I could not discern above one or two, and sometimes
none of those Rings, of which I could discern eight or nine with my
naked Eye. And their Segments or Arcs, which on the other side appear'd
so numerous, for the most part exceeded not the third Part of a Circle.
If the Refraction was very great, or the Prism very distant from the
Object-glasses, the middle Part of those Arcs became also confused, so
as to disappear and constitute an even Whiteness, whilst on either side
their Ends, as also the whole Arcs farthest from the Center, became
distincter than before, appearing in the Form as you see them design'd
in the fifth Figure.

The Arcs, where they seem'd distinctest, were only white and black
successively, without any other Colours intermix'd. But in other Places
there appeared Colours, whose Order was inverted by the refraction in
such manner, that if I first held the Prism very near the
Object-glasses, and then gradually removed it farther off towards my
Eye, the Colours of the 2d, 3d, 4th, and following Rings, shrunk towards
the white that emerged between them, until they wholly vanish'd into it
at the middle of the Arcs, and afterwards emerged again in a contrary
Order. But at the Ends of the Arcs they retain'd their Order unchanged.

I have sometimes so lay'd one Object-glass upon the other, that to the
naked Eye they have all over seem'd uniformly white, without the least
Appearance of any of the colour'd Rings; and yet by viewing them through
a Prism, great Multitudes of those Rings have discover'd themselves. And
in like manner Plates of _Muscovy_ Glass, and Bubbles of Glass blown at
a Lamp-Furnace, which were not so thin as to exhibit any Colours to the
naked Eye, have through the Prism exhibited a great Variety of them
ranged irregularly up and down in the Form of Waves. And so Bubbles of
Water, before they began to exhibit their Colours to the naked Eye of a
Bystander, have appeared through a Prism, girded about with many
parallel and horizontal Rings; to produce which Effect, it was necessary
to hold the Prism parallel, or very nearly parallel to the Horizon, and
to dispose it so that the Rays might be refracted upwards.




THE

SECOND BOOK

OF

OPTICKS


_PART II._

_Remarks upon the foregoing Observations._


Having given my Observations of these Colours, before I make use of them
to unfold the Causes of the Colours of natural Bodies, it is convenient
that by the simplest of them, such as are the 2d, 3d, 4th, 9th, 12th,
18th, 20th, and 24th, I first explain the more compounded. And first to
shew how the Colours in the fourth and eighteenth Observations are
produced, let there be taken in any Right Line from the Point Y, [in
_Fig._ 6.] the Lengths YA, YB, YC, YD, YE, YF, YG, YH, in proportion to
one another, as the Cube-Roots of the Squares of the Numbers, 1/2, 9/16,
3/5, 2/3, 3/4, 5/6, 8/9, 1, whereby the Lengths of a Musical Chord to
sound all the Notes in an eighth are represented; that is, in the
Proportion of the Numbers 6300, 6814, 7114, 7631, 8255, 8855, 9243,
10000. And at the Points A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, let Perpendiculars
A[Greek: a], B[Greek: b], &c. be erected, by whose Intervals the Extent
of the several Colours set underneath against them, is to be
represented. Then divide the Line _A[Greek: a]_ in such Proportion as
the Numbers 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, &c. set at the Points of
Division denote. And through those Divisions from Y draw Lines 1I, 2K,
3L, 5M, 6N, 7O, &c.

Now, if A2 be supposed to represent the Thickness of any thin
transparent Body, at which the outmost Violet is most copiously
reflected in the first Ring, or Series of Colours, then by the 13th
Observation, HK will represent its Thickness, at which the utmost Red is
most copiously reflected in the same Series. Also by the 5th and 16th
Observations, A6 and HN will denote the Thicknesses at which those
extreme Colours are most copiously reflected in the second Series, and
A10 and HQ the Thicknesses at which they are most copiously reflected in
the third Series, and so on. And the Thickness at which any of the
intermediate Colours are reflected most copiously, will, according to
the 14th Observation, be defined by the distance of the Line AH from the
intermediate parts of the Lines 2K, 6N, 10Q, &c. against which the Names
of those Colours are written below.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

But farther, to define the Latitude of these Colours in each Ring or
Series, let A1 design the least thickness, and A3 the greatest
thickness, at which the extreme violet in the first Series is reflected,
and let HI, and HL, design the like limits for the extreme red, and let
the intermediate Colours be limited by the intermediate parts of the
Lines 1I, and 3L, against which the Names of those Colours are written,
and so on: But yet with this caution, that the Reflexions be supposed
strongest at the intermediate Spaces, 2K, 6N, 10Q, &c. and from thence
to decrease gradually towards these limits, 1I, 3L, 5M, 7O, &c. on
either side; where you must not conceive them to be precisely limited,
but to decay indefinitely. And whereas I have assign'd the same Latitude
to every Series, I did it, because although the Colours in the first
Series seem to be a little broader than the rest, by reason of a
stronger Reflexion there, yet that inequality is so insensible as
scarcely to be determin'd by Observation.

Now according to this Description, conceiving that the Rays originally
of several Colours are by turns reflected at the Spaces 1I, L3, 5M, O7,
9PR11, &c. and transmitted at the Spaces AHI1, 3LM5, 7OP9, &c. it is
easy to know what Colour must in the open Air be exhibited at any
thickness of a transparent thin Body. For if a Ruler be applied parallel
to AH, at that distance from it by which the thickness of the Body is
represented, the alternate Spaces 1IL3, 5MO7, &c. which it crosseth will
denote the reflected original Colours, of which the Colour exhibited in
the open Air is compounded. Thus if the constitution of the green in the
third Series of Colours be desired, apply the Ruler as you see at
[Greek: prsph], and by its passing through some of the blue at [Greek:
p] and yellow at [Greek: s], as well as through the green at [Greek: r],
you may conclude that the green exhibited at that thickness of the Body
is principally constituted of original green, but not without a mixture
of some blue and yellow.

By this means you may know how the Colours from the center of the Rings
outward ought to succeed in order as they were described in the 4th and
18th Observations. For if you move the Ruler gradually from AH through
all distances, having pass'd over the first Space which denotes little
or no Reflexion to be made by thinnest Substances, it will first arrive
at 1 the violet, and then very quickly at the blue and green, which
together with that violet compound blue, and then at the yellow and red,
by whose farther addition that blue is converted into whiteness, which
whiteness continues during the transit of the edge of the Ruler from I
to 3, and after that by the successive deficience of its component
Colours, turns first to compound yellow, and then to red, and last of
all the red ceaseth at L. Then begin the Colours of the second Series,
which succeed in order during the transit of the edge of the Ruler from
5 to O, and are more lively than before, because more expanded and
severed. And for the same reason instead of the former white there
intercedes between the blue and yellow a mixture of orange, yellow,
green, blue and indigo, all which together ought to exhibit a dilute and
imperfect green. So the Colours of the third Series all succeed in
order; first, the violet, which a little interferes with the red of the
second order, and is thereby inclined to a reddish purple; then the blue
and green, which are less mix'd with other Colours, and consequently
more lively than before, especially the green: Then follows the yellow,
some of which towards the green is distinct and good, but that part of
it towards the succeeding red, as also that red is mix'd with the violet
and blue of the fourth Series, whereby various degrees of red very much
inclining to purple are compounded. This violet and blue, which should
succeed this red, being mixed with, and hidden in it, there succeeds a
green. And this at first is much inclined to blue, but soon becomes a
good green, the only unmix'd and lively Colour in this fourth Series.
For as it verges towards the yellow, it begins to interfere with the
Colours of the fifth Series, by whose mixture the succeeding yellow and
red are very much diluted and made dirty, especially the yellow, which
being the weaker Colour is scarce able to shew it self. After this the
several Series interfere more and more, and their Colours become more
and more intermix'd, till after three or four more revolutions (in which
the red and blue predominate by turns) all sorts of Colours are in all
places pretty equally blended, and compound an even whiteness.

And since by the 15th Observation the Rays endued with one Colour are
transmitted, where those of another Colour are reflected, the reason of
the Colours made by the transmitted Light in the 9th and 20th
Observations is from hence evident.

If not only the Order and Species of these Colours, but also the precise
thickness of the Plate, or thin Body at which they are exhibited, be
desired in parts of an Inch, that may be also obtained by assistance of
the 6th or 16th Observations. For according to those Observations the
thickness of the thinned Air, which between two Glasses exhibited the
most luminous parts of the first six Rings were 1/178000, 3/178000,
