Through all this incessant movement I sensed plainly purpose, knew
that it was definite activity toward a definite end, caught the clear
suggestion of drill, of maneuver.

And when the shiftings of the Metal Hordes permitted we saw that all
the flat floor of the valley was stripped and checkered, stippled and
tessellated with every color, patterned with enormous lozenges and
squares, rhomboids and parallelograms, pentagons and hexagons and
diamonds, lunettes, circles and spirals; harlequined yet harmonious;
instinct with a grotesque suggestion of a super-Futurism.

But always this patterning was ordered, always COHERENT. As though
it were a page on which was spelled some untranslatable other world
message.

Fourth Dimensional revelations by some Euclidean deity! Commandments
traced by some mathematical God!

Looping across the vale, emerging from the sparkling folds of the
southernmost curtainings and vanishing into the gleaming veils of the
easternmost, ran a broad ribbon of pale-green jade; not straightly but
with manifold convolutions and flourishes. It was like a sentence in
Arabic.

It was margined with sapphire blue. All along its twisting course two
broad bands of jet margined the cerulean shore. It was spanned by scores
of flashing crystal arches. Nor were these bridges--even from that
distance I knew they were no bridges. From them came the crystalline
murmurings.

Jade? This stream jade? If so then it must be in truth molten, for I
caught its swift and polished rushing! It was no jade. It was in truth a
river; a river running like a writing across a patterned plane.

I looked upward--up to the circling peaks. They were a stupendous
coronet thrusting miles deep into the dazzling sky. I raised my glasses,
swept them. In color they were an immense and variegated flower with
countless multiform petals of stone; in outline they were a ring of
fortresses built by fantastic unknown Gods.

Up they thrust--domed and arched, spired and horned, pyramided, fanged
and needled. Here were palisades of burning orange with barbicans of
incandescent bronze; there aiguilles of azure rising from bastions of
cinnabar red; turrets of royal purple, obelisks of indigo; titanic forts
whose walls were splashed with vermilion, with citron yellows and with
rust of rubies; watch towers of flaming scarlet.

Scattered among them were the flashing emeralds of the glaciers and the
immense pallid baroques of the snow fields.

Like a diadem the summits ringed the Pit. Below them ran the ring of
flashing amethyst with its aural mists. Between them lay the vast and
patterned flat covered with still symbol and inexplicable movement.
Under their summits brooded the blue black, metallic mass of the Seeing
City.

Within circling walls, over plain and from the City hovered a cosmic
spirit not to be understood by man. Like an emanation of stars and
space, it was yet gem fine and gem hard, crystalline and metallic,
lapidescent and--

Conscious!

Down from the ledge where we stood fell a steep ramp, similar to that by
which, in the darkness, we had descended. It dropped at an angle of at
least forty-five degrees; its surface was smooth and polished.

Through the mists at our back stole a shining block. It paused, seemed
to perk itself; spun so that in turn each of its six faces took us in.

I felt myself lifted upon it by multitudes of little invisible hands;
saw Drake whirling up beside me. I moved toward him--through the force
that held us. A block swept away from the ledge, swayed for a moment.
Under us, as though we were floating in air, the Pit lay stretched.
There was a rapid readjustment, a shifting of our two selves upon
another surface. I looked down upon a tremendous, slender pillar of the
cubes, dropping below, five hundred feet to the valley's floor a column
of which the block that held us was the top.

Gone was the whirling wheel that had crowned it, but I knew this for the
Grinding Thing from which we had fled; the questing block had been its
scout. As though curious to know more of us, the Shape had sought us out
through the mists, its messenger had caught us, delivered us to it.

The pillar leaned over--bent like that shining pillar that had bridged
for us, at Norhala's commands, the abyss. The floor of the valley arose
to meet us. Further and further leaned the pillar. Again there was a
rapid shifting of us to another surface of the crowning cube. Fast now
swept up toward us the valley floor. A dizziness clouded my sight. There
was a little shock, a rolling over the Thing that had held us--

We stood upon the floor of the Pit.

And breaking from the immense and prostrate shaft on whose top we had
ridden downward came score upon score of the cubes. They broke from it,
disintegrating it; circled about us, curiously, interestedly, twinkling
at us from their deep sparkling points of eyes.

Helplessly we gazed at those who circled around us. Then suddenly I felt
myself lifted once more, was tossed to the surface of the nearest block.
Upon it I spun while the tiny eyes searched me. Then like a human ball
it tossed me to another. I caught a glimpse of Drake's tall figure
drifting through the air.

The play became more rapid, breathtaking. It was play; I recognized
that. But it was perilous play for us. I felt myself as fragile as a
doll of glass in the hands of careless children.

I was tossed to a waiting cube. On the ground, not ten feet from me,
was Drake, swaying dizzily. Suddenly the cube that held me tightened its
grip; tightened it so that it drew me irresistibly flat down upon its
surface. Before I dropped, Drake's body leaped toward me as though drawn
by a lasso. He fell at my side.

Then pursued by scores of the Things and like some mischievous boy
bearing off the spoils, the block that held us raced away, straight for
an open portal. A blaze of incandescent blue flame blinded me; again
as the dazzlement faded I saw Drake beside me--a skeleton form. Swiftly
flesh melted back upon him, clothed him.

The cube stopped, abruptly; the hosts of little unseen hands raised
us, slid us gently over its edge, set us upright beside it. And it sped
away.

All about us stretched another of those vast halls in which on high
burned the pale-gilt suns. Between its colossal columns streamed
thousands of the Metal Folk; no longer hurriedly, but quietly,
deliberately, sedately.

We were within the City--even as Ventnor had commanded.




CHAPTER XIX. THE CITY THAT WAS ALIVE

Close beside us was one of the cyclopean columns. We crept to it;
crouched at its base opposite the drift of the Metal People; strove,
huddled there, to regain our shaken poise. Like bagatelles we felt in
that tremendous place, the weird luminaries gleaming above like garlands
of frozen suns, the enigmatic hosts of animate cubes and spheres and
pyramids trooping past.

They ranged in size from shapes yard-high to giants of thirty feet or
more. They paid no heed to us, did not stop; streaming on, engrossed in
whatever mysterious business was summoning them. And after a time their
numbers lessened; thinned down to widely separate groups, to stragglers;
then ceased. The hall was empty of them.

As far as the eye could reach the columned spaces stretched. I was
conscious once more of that unusual flow of energy through every vein
and nerve.

"Follow the crowd!" said Drake. "Do you feel just full of pep and
ginger, by the way?"

"I am aware of the most extraordinary vigor," I answered.

"Some weird joint," he mused, looking about him. "Wonder if they have
any windows? This whole place looked solid to me--what I could see of
it. Wonder if we'll get up against it for air? These Things don't need
it, that's sure. Wonder--"

He broke off staring fascinatedly at the pillar behind us.

"Look here, Goodwin!" There was a tremor in his voice. "What do you make
of THIS?"

I followed his pointing finger; looked at him inquiringly.

"The eyes!" he said impatiently. "Don't you see them? The eyes in the
column!"

And now I saw them. The pillar was a pale metallic blue, in color a
trifle darker than the Metal Folk. All within it were the myriads of
tiny crystalline points that we had grown to know were the receptors
of some strange sense of sight. But they did not sparkle as did those
others; they were dull, lifeless. I touched the surface. It was smooth,
cool--with none of that subtle, warm vitality that pulsed through all
the Things with which I had come in contact. I shook my head, realizing
as I did so what a shock the incredible possibility he had suggested had
given me.

"No," I said. "There is a resemblance, yes. But there is no force about
this--stuff; no life. Besides, such a thing is utterly incredible."

"They might be--dormant," he suggested stubbornly. "Can you see any mark
of their joining--if they ARE the cubes?"

Together we scanned the pillar minutely. The faces seemed unbroken,
continuous; there was no trace of those thin and shining lines that
marked the juncture of the cubes when they had clicked together to form
the bridge of the abyss or that had gleamed, crosslike, upon the back of
the combined four upon which we had followed Norhala.

"It's a sheer impossibility. It's madness to think such a thing, Drake!"
I exclaimed, and wondered at my own vehemence of denial.

"Maybe," he shook his head doubtfully. "Maybe--but--well--let's be on
our way."

We strode on, following the direction the Metal Folk had gone. Clearly
Drake was still doubtful; at each pillar he hesitated, scanning it
closely with troubled eyes.

But I, having determinedly dismissed the idea, was more interested
in the fantastic lights that flooded this columned hall with their
buttercup radiance. They were still and unwinking; not disks, I could
see now, but globes. Great and small, they floated motionless, their
rays extending rigidly and as still as the orb that shed them.

Yet rigid as they were there was nothing about either rays or orbs that
suggested either hardness or the metallic. They were vaporous, soft as
St. Elmo's fire, the witch lights that cling at times to the spars of
ships, weird gleaming visitors from the invisible ocean of atmospheric
electricity.

When they disappeared, as they did frequently, it was instantaneously,
completely, with a disconcerting sleight-of-hand finality. I noted,
though, that when they did vanish, immediately close to where they
had been other orbs swam forth with that same astonishing abruptness;
sometimes only one, larger it might be than that which had gone;
sometimes a cluster of smaller globes, their frozen, crocused rays
impinging.

What could they be, I wondered--how fixed, and what the source of
their light? Products of electro-magnetic currents and born of the
interpenetration of such streams flowing above us? Such a theory might
account for their disappearance, and reappearance, shiftings of the
flows that changed the light producing points of contact. Wireless
lights? If so here was an idea that human science might elaborate if
ever we returned to--

"Now which way?" Drake broke in upon my musing. The hall had ended. We
stood before a blank wall vanishing into the soft mists hiding the roof
of the chamber.

"I thought we had been going along the way They went," I said in
amazement.

"So did I," he answered. "We must have circled. They never went through
THAT unless--unless--" He hesitated.

"Unless what?" I asked sharply.

"Unless it opened and let them through," he said. "Have you forgotten
those great ovals--like cat's eyes that opened in the outer walls?" he
added quietly.

I HAD forgotten. I looked again at the wall. Certainly it was smooth,
lineless. In one unbroken, shining surface it rose, a facade of polished
metal. Within it the deep set points of light were duller even than they
had been in the pillars; almost indeed indistinguishable.

"Go on to the left," I said none too patiently. "And get that absurd
notion out of your head."

"All right." He flushed. "But you don't think I'm afraid, do you?"

"If what you're thinking were true, you'd have a right to be," I replied
tartly. "And I want to tell you I'D be afraid. Damned afraid."

For perhaps two hundred paces we skirted the base of the wall. We came
abruptly to an opening, an oblong passageway fully fifty foot wide by
twice as high. At its entrance the mellow, saffron light was cut off as
though by an invisible screen. The tunnel itself was filled with a dim
grayish blue luster. For an instant we contemplated it.

"I wouldn't care to be caught in there by any rush," I hesitated.

"There's not much good in thinking of that now," said Drake, grimly.
"A few chances more or less in a joint of this kind is nothing between
friends, Goodwin; take it from me. Come on."

We entered. Walls, floor and roof were composed of the same substance as
the great pillars, the wall of the outer chamber; filled like them with
dimmed replicas of the twinkling eye points.

"Odd that all the places in here are square," muttered Drake. "They
don't seem to have used any spherical or pyramidal ideas in their
building--if it is a building."

It was true. All was mathematically straight up and down and across. It
was strange--still we had seen little as yet.

There was a warmth about this passageway we trod; a difference in the
air of it. The warmth grew, a dry and baking heat; but stimulative
rather than oppressive. I touched the walls; the warmth did not come
from them. And there was no wind. Yet as we went on the heat increased.

The passageway turned at a right angle, continuing in a corridor
half its former dimensions. Far away shone a high bar of pale yellow
radiance, rising like a pillar of light from floor to roof. Toward it,
perforce, we trudged. Its brilliancy grew greater.

A few paces away from it we stopped. The yellow luminescence streamed
through a slit not more than a foot wide in the wall. We were in a
cul-de-sac for the opening was not wide enough for either Drake or me
to push through. Through it with the light gushed the curious heat
enveloping us.

Drake walked to the opening, peered through. I joined him.

At first all that I could see was a space filled with the saffron
lambency. Then I saw that this was splashed with tiny flashes of the
jewel fires; little lances and javelin thrusts of burning emeralds and
rubies; darting gem hard flames rose scarlet and pale sapphire; quick
flares of violet.

Into my sight through the irised, crocus mist swam the radiant body of
Norhala!

She stood naked, clad only in the veils of her hair that glowed now
like spun silk of molten copper, her strange eyes wide and smiling, the
galaxies of tiny stars sparkling through their gray depths.

And all about her swirled a countless host of the Little Things!

From them came the gem fires piercing the aureate mists. They played
and frolicked about her in scores of swiftly forming, swiftly changing,
goblin shapes. They circled her feet in shining, elfin rings; then
opening into flaming disks and stars, shot up and spun about the white
miracle of her body in great girdles of multi-colored living fires.
Mingled with disk and star were tiny crosses gleaming with sullen, deep
crimsons and smoky orange.

A flash of blue incandescence and a slender pillared shape leaped from
the floor; became a coronet, a whirling, flashing halo toward which
streamed up the flaming tendrilings of her tresses. Other halos circled
her arms and breasts; they spun like bracelets about the outstretched
arms.

Then like a swiftly rushing wave a host of the Little Things thrust
themselves up, covered her, hid her in a coruscating cloud.

I saw an exquisite arm thrust itself from their clinging, wave gaily;
saw her glorious head emerge from the incredible, the seething draperies
of living jewels. I heard her laughter, sweet and golden and far away.

Goddess of the Inexplicable! Madonna of the Metal Babes!

The Nursery of the Metal People!

Norhala was gone, blotted out from our sight! Gone too were the bar of
light and the chamber into which we had been peering. We stared at a
smooth, blank wall. With that same ensorcelled swiftness the wall had
closed even as we had stared through it; closed so quickly that we had
not seen its motion.

I gripped Drake; shrank with him into the farthest corner--for on the
other side of us the wall was opening. First it was only a crack; then
rapidly it widened. There stretched another passageway, luminous and
long; far down it we glimpsed movement. Closer that movement came,
grew plainer. Out of the mistily luminous distances, three abreast and
filling the corridor from side to side, raced upon us a company of the
great spheres!

Back we cowered from their approach--back and back; arms outstretched,
pressing against the barrier, flattening ourselves against the shock of
the destroying impact menacing.

"It's all up," muttered Drake. "No place to run. They're bound to smash
us. Stick close, Doc. Get back to Ruth. Maybe I can stop them!"

Before I could check him, he had leaped straight in the path of the
rushing globes, now a scant twoscore yards away.
