
[Sidenote: 9. The surface of the cerebrum, how marked? The gray matter of
the surface? Extent of the entire brain surface? Source of nervous power?
What further?]

9. The surface of the cerebrum is divided by a considerable number of
tortuous and irregular furrows, about an inch deep, into "convolutions," as
shown in Fig. 41. Into these furrows the gray matter of the surface is
extended, and, in this manner, its quantity is vastly increased. The extent
of the entire surface of the brain, {153} with the convolutions unfolded,
is computed to be equal to four square feet; and yet it is easily enclosed
within the narrow limits of the skull. When it is stated that the gray
matter is the true source of nervous power, it becomes evident that this
arrangement has an important bearing on the mental capacity of the
individual. And it is noticed that in children, before the mind is brought
into vigorous use, these markings or furrows on the surface are
comparatively shallow and indistinct; the same fact is true of the brain in
the less civilized races of mankind and in the lower animals. It is also
noticeable, that among animals, those are the most capable of being
educated which have the best development of the cerebrum.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--UPPER SURFACE OF THE CEREBRUM.

A, Longitudinal Fissure. B, The Hemispheres.]

[Sidenote: 10. Location of the "little brain?" How divided? Its surface and
interior? Its subdivisions? Its size?]

10. THE CEREBELLUM.--The "little brain" is placed beneath the posterior
part of the cerebrum, and, like the latter, is divided into hemispheres.
Like it, also, the surface of the cerebellum is composed of gray matter,
and its interior is chiefly white matter. It has, however, no convolutions,
but is subdivided by many crescentic, parallel ridges, which, sending down
gray matter deeply into the {154} white, central portion, gives the latter
a somewhat branched appearance. This peculiar appearance has been called
the _arbor vitae_, or the "tree of life," from the fact that when a section
of the organ is made, it bears some resemblance to the trunk and branches
of a tree (Fig. 42, F). In size, this cerebellum, or "little brain," is
less than one-eighth of the cerebrum.

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--VERTICAL SECTION OF THE BRAIN.

A, Left Hemisphere of Cerebrum. B, Corpus Callosum. C, Optic Thalamus.
D, The Pons Varolii. E, Upper extremity of the Spinal Cord. F, The Arbor
Vitae.]

[Sidenote: 11. Medulla oblongata? Cranial nerves? Their shape and
position?]

11. From the under surface of the cerebrum, and from the front margin of
the cerebellum, fibres collect together to form the _medulla oblongata_
(Fig. 43, MA), which, on issuing from the skull, enters the spinal column,
and then becomes known as the spinal cord. From the base of the brain, and
from the sides of the medulla originate, also, the _cranial nerves_, of
which there are twelve pairs. These nerves are round cords of glistening
white appearance, and, {155} like the arteries, generally lie remote from
the surface of the body, and are well protected from injury.

[Illustration: FIG. 43.--THE BASE OF THE BRAIN.]

[Sidenote: 12. The spinal cord? Of what composed? How divided? Each half?]

12. THE SPINAL CORD.--The spinal cord, or "marrow," is a cylindrical mass
of soft nervous tissue, which occupies a chamber, or tunnel, fashioned for
it in the spinal column (Fig. 44). It is composed of the same substances as
the brain; but the arrangement is exactly reversed, the white matter
encompassing or surrounding the gray matter instead of being encompassed by
it. The amount of the white substance is also greatly in excess of the
other material. A vertical fissure partly separates the cord into two
lateral halves, and each half is composed of two separate bundles of
fibres, which are named the anterior and posterior columns.

{156} [Illustration: FIG. 44.

A, Cerebrum. B, Cerebellum. D, D, Spinal Cord.]

[Sidenote: 13. Uses of these columns? Importance of this part of the
nervous system? How protected?]

13. These columns have entirely different uses, and each of them unites
with a different portion of the nerves which have their origin in the
spinal cord. The importance of this part of the nervous system is apparent
from the extreme care taken to protect it from external injury. For, while
a very slight disturbance of its structure suffices to disarm it of its
power, yet so staunch is its bony enclosure, that only by very severe
injuries is it put in peril. The three membranes that cover the brain are
continued downward so as to envelope and still further shield this delicate
organism.

[Sidenote: 14. The spinal nerves? The posterior root? The nerves, how
arranged? Their office?]

14. THE SPINAL NERVES.--The spinal nerves, thirty-one pairs in number,
spring from each side of the cord by two roots, an anterior and a posterior
root, which have the same functions as the columns bearing similar names.
The posterior root is distinguished by possessing a ganglion of gray
matter, and by a somewhat larger size. The successive points of departure,
or the off-shooting of these nerves, occur at short and nearly regular
intervals along the course of the spinal cord. Soon after leaving these
points, {157} the anterior and posterior roots unite to form the trunk of a
nerve, which is distributed, by means of branches, to the various organs of
that part of the body which this nerve is designed to serve. The spinal
nerves supply chiefly the muscles of the trunk and limbs and the external
surface of the body.

[Sidenote: 15. The nerve tissue? Its character? Course of each nerve
fibre?]

15. The tissue composing the nerves is entirely of the white variety, or,
in other words, the nerve-fibres; the same as we have observed forming a
part of the brain. But the nerves, instead of being soft and pulpy, as in
the case of the brain, are dense in structure, being hardened and
strengthened by means of a fibrous tissue which surrounds each of these
delicate fibres, and binds them together in glistening, silvery bundles.
Delicate and minutely fine as are these nerve-fibres, it is probable that
each of them pursues an unbroken, isolated course, from its origin, in the
brain or elsewhere, to that particular point which it is intended to serve.
For, although their extremities are often only a hair's breadth distant
from each other, the impression which any one of them communicates is
perfectly distinct, and is referred to the exact point whence it came.

[Sidenote: 16. How may we illustrate the fact? The fibre connecting the
brain with a point in the foot?]

16. This may be illustrated in a simple manner, thus: if two fingers be
pressed closely together, and the point of a pin be carried lightly across
from one to the other, the eyes may be closed, and yet we can easily note
the precise instant when the pin passes from one finger to the other. If
the nerve-fibres were less independent, and if it were necessary that they
should blend with and support each other, all accuracy of perception would
be lost, and all information thus afforded would be pointless and confused.
These silvery threads must, therefore, be spun out with an infinite degree
of nicety. Imagine, for instance, the fibre which {158} connects the brain
with some point on the foot,--its length cannot be less than one hundred
thousand times greater than its diameter; and yet it performs its work with
as much precision as fibres that are comparatively much stronger and less
exposed.

[Sidenote: 17. The sympathetic system of nerves? Of what does it consist?]

17. THE SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM.--The _sympathetic system_ of nerves remains to
be described. It consists of a double chain of ganglia, situated on each
side of the spinal column, and extending through the cavities of the trunk,
and along the neck into the head. These ganglia are made up for the most
part of small collections of gray nerve-cells, and are the nerve-centres of
this system. From these, numerous small nerves are derived, which connect
the ganglia together, send out branches to the cranial and spinal nerves,
and form networks in the vicinity of the stomach and other large organs. A
considerable portion of them also follows the distribution of the large and
small blood-vessels, in which the muscular tunic appears. Branches also
ascend into the head, and supply the muscles of the eye and ear, and other
organs of sense.

[Sidenote: 18. Association of the various regions of the body? If one
member suffers? Blushing?]

18. In this manner, the various regions of the body are associated with
each other by a nervous apparatus, which is only indirectly connected with
the brain and spinal cord; and thus it is arranged that the most widely
separated organs of the body are brought into close and active sympathy
with each other, so that, "if one member suffers, all the other members
suffer with it." From this fact, the name _sympathetic system_, or the
_great sympathetic nerve_, has been given to the complicated apparatus we
have briefly described. Blushing and pallor are caused by mental emotions,
as modesty and fear, which produce opposite conditions of the capillaries
of the face by means of these sympathetic nerves. {159}

[Sidenote: 19. Properties of nervous tissue? Office of the gray substance?
Of the white? The nervous centres? White fibres?]

19. THE PROPERTIES OF NERVOUS TISSUE.--We have seen that in all parts of
this system, there are only two forms of nervous tissue; namely, the gray
substance and the white substance, so called from their difference of color
as seen by the naked eye; or the nerve-cell, and the nerve-fibre, so called
from their microscopic appearance. Now these two tissues are not commonly
mingled together, but either form separate organs, or distinct parts of the
same organs. This leads us to the conclusion that their respective uses are
distinct. And this proves to be the simple fact; wherever we find the gray
substance, we must look upon it as performing an active part in the system,
that is, it originates nervous impulses; the white matter, on the contrary,
is a passive agent, and serves merely as a conductor of nervous influences.
Accordingly, the nervous centres, composed so largely of the gray cells,
are the great centres of power, and the white fibres are simply the
instruments by which the former communicate with the near and distant
regions of the body under their control.

[Sidenote: 20. What comparison is made between the brain and the nation's
capitol? The vital property, excitability? What example is given?]

20. We may compare the brain, then, to the capital, or seat of government,
while the various ganglia, including the gray matter of the cord, like so
many subordinate official posts, are invested with authority over the
outlying provinces; and the nerves, with the white matter of the cord, are
the highways over which messages go and return between these provinces and
the local or central governments. But both forms of nervous tissue possess
the same vital property, called excitability; by which term is meant, that
when a nerve-cell or fibre is stimulated by some external agent, it is
capable of receiving an impression and of being by it excited into
activity. A ray of light, for example, falling upon one extremity of a
fibre in the eye, excites it throughout its whole length; and its {160}
other extremity, within the brain, communicating with a nerve-cell, the
latter, in its turn, is excited, and the sensation of sight is produced.

[Sidenote: 21. Change in the nervous tissues? Nerve force and electricity?]

21. What sort of change takes place in the nervous tissue when its
excitability is aroused, is not known; certainly none is visible. On this
account, it has been thought by some, that the nerve-fibre acts after the
manner of a telegraph wire; that is, it transmits its messages without
undergoing any material change of form. But, though the comparison is a
convenient one, it is far from being strictly applicable; and the notion
that nerve-force is identical with electricity has been fully proved to be
incorrect.

[Sidenote: 22. Functions of the nerves? In the case of the nerve of a
living animal? Of the human body?]

22. THE FUNCTIONS OF THE NERVES.--The nerves are the instruments of the two
grand functions of the nervous system, Sensation and Motion. They are not
the true centres of either function, but they are the conductors of
influences which occasion both. If the nerve in a limb of a living animal
be laid bare, and irritated by pinching, galvanizing, or the like, two
results follow, namely: the animal experiences a sensation, that of pain,
in the part to which the nerve is distributed, and the limb is thrown into
convulsive action. When a nerve in a human body is cut by accident, or
destroyed by disease, the part in which it ramifies loses both sensation
and power of motion; or, in other words, it is paralyzed. We accordingly
say that the nerves have a twofold use, a _sensory_ and _motor_ function.

[Sidenote: 23. If an exposed nerve be divided? What is proved? The course
of the sensory set of fibres? Of the motor set? To what are they likened?]

23. If a nerve that has been exposed be divided, and the inner end, or that
still in connection with the nerve-centres, be irritated, sensation is
produced, but no movement takes place. But if the outer end, or that still
connected with the limb, be irritated, then no pain is felt, but {161}
muscular contractions are produced. Thus we prove that there are two
distinct sets of fibres in the nerves; one of which, the _sensory_ fibres,
conduct toward the brain, and another, the _motor_ fibres, conduct to the
muscles. The former may be said to begin in the skin and other organs, and
end in the brain; while the latter begin in the nervous centres and end in
the muscles. They are like a double line of telegraph wires, one for
inquiries, the other for responses.

[Sidenote: 24. The two roots of the spinal nerves? What has been found?
Difference of the two sorts of fibres? Result of their union?]

24. We have already spoken of the two roots of the spinal nerves, called
from their points of origin in the spinal cord, the anterior and posterior
roots. These have been separately cut and irritated in the living animal,
and it has been found that the posterior root contains only sensory fibres,
and the anterior root has only motor fibres. So that the nerves of a limb
may be injured in such a way that it will retain power of motion and yet
lose sensation; or the reverse condition, feeling without motion, may
exist. Between these two sorts of fibres, no difference of structure can be
found; and where they have joined to form a nerve it is impossible to
distinguish one sort from the other.

[Sidenote: 25. Transient paralysis? When such is the case with the leg?
What other fact is observed?]

25. Occasionally a nerve is so compressed as to be temporarily unable to
perform its functions: a transient paralysis then takes place. This is the
case when the leg or arm "gets asleep," as it is expressed. When such is
the condition with the leg, and the person suddenly attempts to walk, he is
liable to fall, inasmuch as the motor fibres cannot convey orders to the
muscles of the limb. Another fact is observed: there is no sensation in
this nerve at the point of its compression; but the whole limb is numb, and
tingling sensations are felt in the foot, the point from which the sensory
fibres arise.

[Sidenote: 26. What does this illustrate? Sensation? The feeling after a
limb has been amputated? Striking of the "funny bone?"]

26. This illustrates the manner in which the brain {162} interprets all
injuries of the trunk of a nerve. Sensation or pain is not felt at the
point of injury, but is referred to the outer extremities of the nerve,
where impressions are habitually received. This is the reason why, after a
limb has been amputated by the surgeon, the patient appears to suffer pain
in the member that has been severed from the body; while some form of
irritation at the end of the nerve in the wound, or stump, is the real
source of his distress. Again, when the "funny-bone"--that is, the ulnar
nerve at the elbow,--is accidentally struck, the tingling sensations thus
produced are referred to the outer side of the hand and the little finger,
the parts to which that nerve is distributed.

[Sidenote: 27. The spinal nerves, and two from the brain? Of the remainder?
Difference in the nerves? How accounted for? The rate of conduction along a
nerve? As compared with electricity?]

27. All the spinal nerves, and two from the brain, are concerned in both
sensation and motion. Of the remainder of the cranial nerves, some are
exclusively motor, others exclusively sensory; and still others convey, not
ordinary sensations, but special impressions, such as sight, hearing, and
smell, which we have yet to consider. However much the functions of the
nerves seem to vary, there is but little difference discoverable in the
nerves themselves, when examined under the microscope. Whatever difference
exists must be accounted for in consequence of the nerves communicating
with different portions of the gray matter of the brain. The rate of motion
of a message, to or from the brain along a nerve, has been measured by
experiment upon the lower animals, and estimated in the case of man at
about two hundred feet per second. As compared with that of electricity,
this is a very slow rate, but, in respect to the size of the human body, it
is practically instantaneous.

[Sidenote: 28. Functions of the anterior and posterior columns of the cord?
If the cord be divided?]

28. THE FUNCTIONS OF THE SPINAL CORD.--As the {163} anterior and posterior
roots of the spinal nerves have separate functions, so the anterior and
posterior columns of the cord are distinct in function. The former are
concerned in the production of motion, the latter in sensation. If the cord
be divided, as before in the case of the nerve, it is found that the parts
below the point of injury are deprived of sensation and of the power of
voluntary motion on both sides of the body, a form of paralysis which is
called _paraplegia_.

[Sidenote: 29. Paraplegia? Result and danger to life? When the injury
occurs in the neck?]

29. This form of disease, paraplegia, is sometimes seen among men,
generally as the result of a fall, or some other severe accident, by which
the bones of the spine are broken, and the cord is crushed, or pierced by
fragments of bone. The parts which are supplied by nerves from the cord
above the point of injury are as sensitive and mobile as before. The
results are similar, whether the division happens at a higher or lower
portion of the spinal cord; but the danger to life increases proportionally
as the injury approaches the brain. When it occurs in the neck, the muscles
of inspiration are paralyzed, since they are supplied by nerves issuing
from that region; and as a result of this paralysis, the lungs are unable
to act, and life is speedily brought to a close.

[Sidenote: 30. Experiment of cutting the spinal cord of an animal? What
inference is drawn?]

30. When the spinal cord of an animal has been cut, in experiment, it may
be irritated in a manner similar to that alluded to when considering the
nerves. If, then, the upper cut surface be excited, it is found that pain,
referable to the parts below the cut, is produced; but when the lower cut
surface is irritated, no feeling is manifested. So we conclude that in
respect to sensation, the spinal cord is not its true centre, but that it
is merely a conductor, and is therefore the great sensory nerve of the
