The sun that shone upon the forgotten planet was actually very near. It
shone on the top of the cloud-bank, and the clouds glowed with dazzling
whiteness. It shone on the mountain-peaks where they penetrated the
mist, and the peaks were warmed, and there was no snow anywhere despite
the height. There were winds, here where the sun yielded sensible heat.
The sky was very blue. At the edge of the plateau--from which the
cloud-banks were down instead of up--the mountainsides seemed to descend
into a sea of milk. Great undulations in the mist had the semblance of
waves, which moved with great deliberation toward the shores. They
seemed sometimes to break in slow-motion against the mountain-walls
where they were cliff-like, and sometimes they seemed to flow up gentler
inclinations like water flowing up a beach. But all of this was very
deliberate indeed, because the cloud-waves were sometimes twenty miles
from crest to crest.

The look of things was different on the highlands. This part of the
unnamed world, no less than the lowlands, had been seeded with life on
two separate occasions. Once the seedings was with bacteria and moulds
and lichens to break up the rocks and make soil of them, and once with
seeds and insect-eggs and such living things as might sustain themselves
immediately they were hatched. But here on the highlands the different
climatic conditions had allowed other seedlings and creatures to survive
together.

Here moulds and yeasts and rusts were stunted by the sunlight. Grasses
and weeds and trees survived, instead. This was an ideal environment for
plants that needed sunlight to form chlorophyl, with which to make use
of the soil that had been formed. So on the highlands the vegetation was
almost earthlike. And there was a remarkable side-effect on the fauna
which had been introduced in the same manner and at the same time as the
creatures down below. In coolness which amounted to a temperate climate,
there developed no such frenzy of life as made the nightmare jungles
under the clouds. Plants grow at a slower rate than fungi, and less
luxuriantly. There was no vast supply of food for large-sized
plant-eaters. Insects which were to survive, here, could not grow to be
monsters. Moreover, the nights here were chill. Very many insects grow
torpid in the cool of a temperate-zone night, but warm up to activity
soon after sunrise. But a large creature, made torpid by cold, will not
revive so quickly. If large enough, it will not become fully active
until close to dark. On the plateau, the lowland monsters would starve
in any case. But more;--they would have only a fraction of each day of
full activity.

So there was a necessary limit to the size of the creatures that lived
above the clouds. To humans from other planets, the life on the plateau
would not have seemed horrifying at all. Save for the absence of birds
to sing, and a lack of small mammals to hunt or merely to enjoy, the
untouched, sunlit plateau with its warm days and briskly chill nights
would have impressed most civilized men as an ideal habitation.

But Burl and his followers were hardly prepared to see it that way at
first glance. If told about it in advance, they would have thought of it
with despair.

But they did not know beforehand. They toiled upward, their leader moved
by such ridiculous motives of pride and vanity as have caused men to
achieve greatness throughout all history. Two great continents were
discovered back on Earth by a man trying to get spices to hide the gamey
flavor of half-spoiled meat, and the power that drives mile-long
space-craft was first discovered and tamed by men making bombs to
destroy their fellows. There were precedents for foolish motives
producing results far from foolishness.

The trudging, climbing folk crawled up the hillside. They reached a
place high above the valley Burl had led them to. That valley grew misty
in appearance. Presently it could no longer be seen at all. The mist
they had taken for granted, all their lives, hid from them everything
but the slanting stony wall up which they climbed. The stone was mostly
covered by bluish-green rock-tripe in partly overlapping sheets. Such
stuff is always close behind the bacteria which first attack a
rock-face. On a slope, it clings while soil is washed downward as fast
as it is formed. The people never ate rock-tripe, of course. It produces
frightening cramps. In time they might learn that when thoroughly dried
it can be cooked to pliability again and eaten with some satisfaction.
But so far they neither knew dryness nor fire.

Nor had they ever known such surroundings as presently enveloped them. A
slanting rocky mountainside, which stretched up frighteningly to the
very sky. Grayness overhead. Grayness also to one side,--the side away
from the mountain. And equal grayness below. The valley from which they
had come could no longer be seen even as a different shading of the
mist. And as they scrambled and trudged after Burl, his followers
gradually became aware of the utter strangeness of all about them. For
one result, they grew sick and dizzy. To them it seemed that all
solidity was slowly tilting. Had they been superstitious, they might
have thought of demons preparing to punish them for daring to come to
such a place. But--quaintly enough--Burl's followers had developed no
demonology. Your typical savage is resolved not to think, but he does
have leisure to want. He makes gods and devils out of his nightmares,
and gambles on his own speculations to the extent of offering blackmail
to demons if they will only let him alone or--preferably--give him more
of the things he wants.

But the superstitions of savages involve the payment of blackmail in
exact proportion to their prosperity. The Eskimos of Earth lived always
on the brink of starvation. They could not afford the luxury of tabus
and totem animals whose flesh must not be eaten, and forbidden areas
which might contain food.

Religion there was, among Burl's people, but superstition was not. No
humans, anywhere, can live without religion, but on Earth Eskimos did
with a minimum of superstitions,--they could afford no more--and the
humans of the forgotten planet could not afford any at all.

Therefore they climbed desperately despite the unparalleled state of
things about them. There was no horizon, but they had never seen a
horizon. Their feeling was that what had been "down" was now partly
"behind" and they feared lest a toppling universe ultimately let them
fall toward that grayness they considered the sky.

But all kept on. To lag behind would be to be abandoned in this place
where all known sensations were turned topsy-turvy. None of them could
imagine turning back. Even old Tama, whimpering in a whisper as she
struggled to keep up, merely complained bitterly of her fate. She did
not even think of revolt. If Burl had stopped, all his followers would
have squatted down miserably to wait for death. They had no thought of
adventure or any hope of safety. The only goodnesses they could imagine
were food and the nearness of other humans. They had food--nobody had
abandoned any of the dangling ant-bodies Tet and Dik had distributed
before the climb began. They would not be separated from their fellows.

Burl's motivation was hardly more distinct. He had started uphill in a
judicious mixture of fear and injured vanity and desperation. There was
nothing to be gained by going back. The terrors at hand were no greater
than those behind, so there was no reason not to go ahead.

They came to a place where the mountain-flank sank inward. There was a
flat space, and behind it a winding canyon of sorts like a vast crack in
the mountain's substance. Burl breasted the curving edge and found
flatness beyond it. He stopped short.

The mouth of the canyon was perhaps fifty yards from the lip of the
downward slope. So much space was practically level, and on it were
toadstools and milkweed--two of them--and there was food. It was a
small, isolated asylum for life such as they were used to. They
could--it was possible that they could--have found a place of safety
here.

But the possibility was not the fact. They saw the spider-web at once.
It was slung between the opposite canyon-walls by cables all of two
hundred feet long. The radiating cables reached down to anchorages on
stone. The snare-threads, winding out and out in that logarithmic spiral
whose properties men were so astonished to discover, were fully a yard
apart. The web was for giant game. It was empty now, but Burl saw the
telegraph-cord which ran from the very center of the web to the
web-maker's lurking-place. There was a rocky shelf on the canyon-wall. On
it rested the spider, almost invisible against the stone, with one furry
leg touching the cable. The slightest touch on any part of the web would
warn it instantly.

Burl's followers accumulated behind him. Old Jon's wheezing was audible.
Tama ceased her complaints to survey this spot. It might be--it could
be--a haven, and she would have to find new and different things to
complain about in consequence. The spider-web itself, of course, was no
reason for them to be alarmed. Web-spiders do not hunt. Their males do,
but they are rarely in the neighborhood of a web save at mating-time.
The web itself was no reason not to settle here. But there was a reason.

The ground before the web,--between the web and themselves--was a
charnel-house of murdered creatures. Half-inch-thick wing-cases of dead
beetles and the cleaned-out carapaces of other giants. The ovipositor of
an ichneumon-fly,--see feet of springy, slender, deadly-pointed
tube--and the abdomen-plates of bees and the draggled antennae of moths
and butterflies.

Something very terrible lived in this small place. The mountainsides
were barren of food for big flying things. Anything which did fly this
high for any reason would never land on sloping foodless stone.
It would land here. And very obviously it would die. Because
something--Something--killed things as they came. It denned back in the
canyon where they could not see it. It dined here.

The humans looked and shivered, all but Burl. He cast his eyes about for
better weapons than he possessed. He chose for himself a magnificent
lance grown by some dead thing for its own defense. He pulled it out of
the ground.

It was utterly silent, here on the heights. No sounds from the valley
rose so high. There was no noise except the small creakings made as Burl
strove to free the new, splendid weapon for himself.

That was why he heard the gasp which somebody uttered in default of a
scream that would not be uttered. It was a choked, a strangled, an
inarticulate sobbing noise.

He saw its cause.

There was a thing moving toward the folk from the recesses of the canyon.
It moved very swiftly. It moved upon stilt-like, impossibly attenuated
legs of impossible length and inconceivable number. Its body was the
thickness of Burl's own. And from it came a smell of such monstrous
foetor that any man, smelling it, would gag and flee even without fear
to urge him on. The creature was a monstrous millipede, forty feet in
length, with features of purest, unadulterated horror.

It did not appear to plan to spring. Its speed of movement did not
increase as it neared the tribesfolk. It was not rushing, like the
furious charge of the murderers Burl's tribe knew. It simply flowed
sinuously toward them with no appearance of haste, but at a rate of
speed they could not conceivably outrun.

Sticklike legs twitched upward and caught the spinning body of an ant.
The creature stopped, and turned its head about and seized the object
its side-legs had grasped. It devoured it. Burl shouted again and again.

There was a rain of missiles upon the creature. But they were not to
hurt it, but to divert its incredibly automaton-like attention. Its legs
seized the things flung to it. It was not possible to miss. Ten,
fifteen,--twenty of the items of small-game were grasped in mid-air, as
if they were creatures in flight.

Burl's shoutings took effect. His people fled to the side of the level
lip of ground. They climbed frantically past the opening of the valley.
They fled toward the heights.

Burl was the last to retreat. The monstrous millipede stood immobile,
trapped for the moment by the gratification of all its desires. It was
absorbed by the multitude of tiny tidbits with which it had been
provided.

It was a fact to Burl's honor that he debated a frantic attack upon the
monster in its insane absorption. But the strangling stench was
deterrent enough. He fled,--the last of his band of fugitives to leave
the place where the monstrous creature lived and preyed. As he left it,
it was still crunching the small meals, one by one, with which the folk
had supplied it.

They went on up the mountain-flank. It was not to be supposed, of
course, that the creature could not move above the slanting
rock-surface. Unquestionably it roamed far and wide, upon occasion. But
its own foetid reek would make impossible any idea of trailing the
humans by scent. And, climbing desperately as the humans did, it would
be unable to see them when they were past the first protuberance of the
mountain.

In twenty minutes they slackened their pace. Exhaustion prompted it.
Caution ordered it. Because here they saw another small island of
flatness in the slanting universe which was all they could see save
mist. It was simply a place where boulders had piled up, and soil had
formed, and there was a miniature haven for life other than moulds which
could grow on naked stone.

Actually, there was a space a hundred feet by fifty on which wholly
familiar mushrooms grew. It was a thicket like a detached section of the
valley itself. Well-known edible fungi grew here. There were gray
puffballs. And from it came the cheerful loud chirping of some small
beetle, arrived at this spot nobody could possibly know how, but happily
ensconsed in a separate bit of mushroom-jungle remote from the dangers
of the valley. If it was small enough, it would even be safe from the
reeking horror of the canyon just below it.

They broke off edible mushrooms here and ate. And this could have been
safety for them--save for the giant millipede no more than half a mile
below. Old Jon wheezed querulously that here was food and there was no
need for them to go further, just now. Here was food....

Burl regarded him with knitted brows. Jon's reaction was natural enough.
The tribesfolk had never tended to think for the future because it was
impossible to make use of such planning. Even Burl could easily enough
have accepted the fact that this was safety for the moment and food for
the moment. But it happened that to settle down here until driven out
would--and at this moment--have deprived him of the authority he had so
recently learned to enjoy.

"You stay," he said haughtily, to Jon. "I go on, to a better place where
nothing is to be feared at all!"

He held out his hand to Saya. He assailed the slope again, heading
upward in the mist.

His tribe followed him. Dik and Tet, of course, because they were boys
and Burl led on to high adventures in which so far nobody had been
killed. Dor followed because--he being the strongest man in the
tribe--he had thoughtfully realized that his strength was not as useful
as Burl's brains and other qualities. Cori followed because she had
children, and they were safer where Burl led than anywhere else. The
others followed to avoid being left alone.

The procession toiled on and up. Presently Burl noticed that the air
seemed clearer, here. It was not the misty, only half transparent stuff
of the valley. He could see for miles to right and left. He realized the
curvature of the mountain-face. But he could not see the valley. The
mist hid that.

Suddenly he realized that he saw the cloud-bank overhead as an object.
He had never thought of it specifically before. To him it had been
simply the sky. Now he saw an indefinite lower surface which yet
definitely hid the heights toward which he moved. He and his followers
were less than a thousand feet below it. It appeared to Burl that
presently he would run into an obstacle which would simply keep him from
going any further. The idea was disheartening. But until it happened he
obstinately climbed on.

He observed that the thing which was the sky did not stay still. It
moved, though slowly. A little higher, he could see that there were
parts of it which were actually lower than he was. They moved also, but
they moved away from him as often as they moved toward him. He had no
experience of any dangerous thing which did not leap at its victims.
Therefore he was not afraid.

In fact, presently he noticed that the whiteness which was the
cloud-layer seemed to retreat before him. He was pleased. Weak things
like humans fled from enemies. Here was something which fled at his
approach! His followers undoubtedly saw the same thing. Burl had killed
spiders. He was a remarkable person. This unknown white stuff was afraid
of him. Therefore it was wise to stay close to Burl. Burl found his
vanity inflamed by the fact that always--even at its thickest--the white
cloud-stuff never came nearer than some dozens of feet. He swaggered as
he led his people up.

And presently there was brightness about them. It was a greater
brightness than the tribesfolk had ever known. They knew daylight as a
grayness in which one could see. Here was a brightness that shone. They
were not accustomed to brightness.

They were not accustomed to silence, either. The noises of the valley
were like all the noises of the lowlands. They had been in the ears of
every one of the human beings since they could hear at all. They had
gradually diminished as the valley dropped behind them. Now, in the
radiant white mist which was the cloud-layer, there were no sounds at
all, and the fact was suddenly startling.

They blinked in the brightness. When they spoke to each other, they
spoke in whispers. The stone underfoot was not even lichen-covered,
