Sir Henry stopped to rest. "Let me," offered Herold; and went on as the
Englishman had done, holding up each spadeful for inspection. And it was
thus that we made a strange discovery.

We all saw it at the same time. Embedded in the bluish earth was a
small, egg-shaped piece of light-coloured stone. And protruding from its
upper surface was a tiny, blood-red pebble, no bigger than a good-sized
shot.

Herold thrust the point of his spade under the stone, to lift it up.
Whereupon he gave a queer exclamation.

"Well, that's funny!" holding the stone up in front of us. "That little
thing's as heavy as--as--it's HEAVIER than lead!"

Sir Henry picked the stone off the spade. Immediately the material
crumbled in his hands, as though rotting, so that it left only the
small, red pebble intact. Sir Henry weighed this thoughtfully in his
palm, then without a word handed it around.

We all wondered at the pebble. It was most astonishingly heavy. As I
say, it was no bigger than a fair-sized shot, yet it was vastly heavier.

Afterward we weighed it, upstairs, and found that the trifle weighed
over half a pound. Considering its very small bulk, this worked out to
be a specific gravity of 192.6 or almost ten times as heavy as the same
bulk of pure gold. And gold is heavy.

Inevitably we saw that there must be some connection between this
unprecedentedly heavy speck of material and that lighter-than-air gem
of mystery. For the time being we were careful to keep the two apart. As
for the unexplained footsteps, they were still slightly audible, as the
invisible creatures moved around the cellar.

At last we turned to go. I let the others lead the way. Thus I was
the last to approach the steps; and it was at that moment that I felt
something brush against my foot.

I stooped down. My hands collided with the thing that had touched me.
And I found myself clutching--

Something invisible--something which, in that brilliant light, showed
absolutely nothing to my eyes. But my hands told me I was grasping a
very real thing, as real as my fingers themselves.

I made some sort of incoherent exclamation. The others turned and peered
at me.

"What is it?" came Herold's excited voice.

"I don't know!" I gasped. "Come here."

But Sir Henry was the first to reach me. Next instant he, too, was
fingering the tiny, unseen object. And such was his iron nerve and
superior self-control, he identified it almost at once.

"By the lord!"--softly. "Why, it's a small bird! Come here."

Another second and they were all there. I was glad enough of it; for,
like a flash, with an unexpectedness that startles me even now as I
think of it--

The thing became visible. Right in my grasp, a little fluttering bird
came to life.




XXVII

SOLVED


It was a tiny thing, and most amazingly beautiful. It could not have
stood as high as a canary; and had its feathers been made of gleaming
silver they could not have been lovelier. And its black-plumed head, and
long, blossom-like tail, were such as no man on earth ever set eyes on.

Like a flash it was gone. Not more than a half a second was this
enchanting apparition visible to us. Before we could discern any more
than I have mentioned, it not only vanished but it ceased to make any
sounds whatever. And each of us drew a long breath, as one might after
being given a glimpse of an angel.

Right now, five or six hours after the events I have just described, it
is very easy for me to smile at my emotions of the time. How startled
and mystified I was! And--why not confess it?--just a trifle afraid.
Why? Because I didn't understand! Merely that.

At this moment I sit in my laboratory upstairs in that house, rejoicing
in having reached the end of the mystery. For the enigma of the Blind
Spot is no more. I have solved it!

Now twenty feet away, in another room, lies Ariadne. Already there is
a faint trace of colour in her cheeks, and her heart is beating more
strongly. Another hour, says Dr. Higgins, and she will be restored to
us!

The time is seven p.m. I didn't sleep at all last night; I haven't slept
since. For the past five hours we have been working steadily on the
mystery, ever since our finding that little, red pebble in the basement.
The last three hours of the time I have been treating Ariadne, using
means which our discoveries indicated. And in order to keep awake I have
been dictating this account to a stenographer.

This young lady, a Miss Dibble, is downstairs, where her typewriter will
not bother. Yes, put that down, too, Miss Dibble; I want people to know
everything! She has a telephone clamped to her ears, and I am talking
into a microphone which is fixed to a stand on my desk.

On that desk are four switches. All are of the four-way two-pole type;
and from them run several wires, some going to one end of the room,
where they are attached to the Holcomb gem. Others, running to the
opposite end, making contact with the tiny heavy stone we found in the
basement. Other wires run from the switches to lead bands around my
wrists. Also, between switches are several connections--one circuit
containing an amplifying apparatus. By throwing these switches in
various combinations, I can secure any given alteration of forces, and
direct them where I choose.

For there are two other wires. These run from my own lead bracelets to
another room; a pair clamped around the wrists of Ariadne.

For I, Hobart Fenton, am now a living, human transforming station. I am
converting the power of the Infinite into the Energy of Life. And I am
transmitting that power directly out of the ether, as conduced through
these two marvellous stones, back into the nervous system of the girl I
love. Another hour, and she will Exist!

It was all so very simple, now that I understand it. And yet--well, an
absolutely new thing is always very hard to put into words.

To begin with, I must acknowledge the enormous help which I have had
from my friends: Miss Clarke, Mme. Le Fabre, General Hume, Dr. Malloy,
and Herold. These people are still in the house with me; I think they
are eating supper. I've already had mine. Really, I can't take much
credit to myself for what I have found out. The others supplied most of
the facts. I merely happened to fit them together; and, because of my
relationship to the problem, am now doing the heroic end of the work.

As for Harry--he and Dr. Holcomb, Chick Watson and even the dog--I shall
have them out of the Blind Spot inside of twelve hours. All I need is
a little rest. I'll go straight to bed as soon as I finish reviving
Ariadne; and when I wake up, we'll see who's who, friend Rhamda!

I'm too exuberant to hold myself down to the job of telling what I've
discovered. But it's got to be done. Here goes!

I practically took my life in my hands when I first made connection.
However, I observed the precaution of rigging up a primary connection
direct from the ring to the pebble, running the wire along the floor
some distance away from where I sat. No ill effects when I ventured into
the line of force; so I began to experiment with the switches.

That precautionary circuit was Herold's idea. His, also, the amplifying
apparatus. The mental attitude was Miss Clarke's, modified by Dr.
Malloy. The lead bracelets were Mme. Le Fabre's suggestion; they
work fine. Sir Henry was the one who pointed out the advantage of the
microphone I am using. If my hands become paralysed I can easily call
for help to my side.

Well, the first connection I tried resulted in nothing. Perfectly blank.
Then I tried another and another, meanwhile continually adjusting the
amplifier; and as a result I am now able, at will, to do either or all
of the following:

(1) I can induct sounds from the Blind Spot; (2) I can induct light, or
visibility; or (3) any given object or person, in toto.

And now to tell how. No, I'm just sleepy, not weak.

Let's see; where was I? Oh, yes; those connections. They've got to be
done just right, with the proper tension in the coils, and the correct
mental attitude, to harmonise. I wish I wasn't so tired!

One moment! No, no; I'm all right. I--Queer! By Jove, that's a funny
thing just now! I must have got an inducted current from another wire,
mixed with these! And--I got a glimpse into the Blind Spot!

A great--No; it's a--What a terrific crowd! Wonder what they're all--By
Jove, it's--Good Lord, it's he! And Chick! No, I'm not wandering! I'm
having the experience of my life!

Now--THAT'S the boy! Don't let 'em bluff you! Good! Good! Tell 'em where
to head in! That's the boy! Rub it in! I don't know what you're up to,
but I'm with you!

Er--there's a big crowd of ugly looking chaps there, and I can't make it
out--Just a moment--a moment. What does it mean, anyway? Just--I--

DANGER, by Heaven! THAT'S what it means!

No; I'm all right. The--thing came to an end, abruptly. That's all;
everything normal again; the room just the same as it was a moment ago.
Hello! I seem to have started something! The wire down on the floor has
commenced to hum! Oh, I've got my eye on it, and if anything--

Miss Dibble! Tell Herold to come! On the run! Quick! Did you? Good!
don't stop writing! I--

There's Chick! CHICK! How did you get here? What? YOU CAN'T SEE ME!
Why--

Chick! Listen! Listen, man! I've gone into the Blind Spot! Write this
down! The connection--

That's Herold! Herold, this is Chick Watson! Listen, now, you
two! The--the--I can hardly--it's from No. 4 to--to--to the
ring--then--coil--

Both switches, Chick! Ah! I've--

NOTE BY MISS L. DIBBLE.--Just as Mr. Fenton made the concluding remark
as above, there came a loud crash, followed by the voice of Mr. Herold.
Then, there came a very loud clang from a bell; just one stroke. After
which I caught Mr. Fenton's voice:

"Herold--Chick can tell you what IT wants us to do--"

And with that, his voice trailed off into nothing, and died away. As for
Mr. Fenton himself, I am informed that he has utterly disappeared; and
in his stead there now exists a man who is known to Dr. Hansen as Chick
Watson.




XXVIII

THE MAN FROM SPACE


Before starting the conclusion of the Blind Spot mystery it may be
just as well for the two publicists who are bringing it to the press to
follow Hobart Fenton's example and go into a bit of explanation.

The two men who wrote the first two parts were participants, and
necessarily writing almost in the present tense. While they could give
an accurate and vivid account of their feelings and experiences, they
could only guess at what lay in the future, at the events that would
unravel it all.

But the present writers have the advantage of working, of seeing, of
weighing in the retrospect. They know just where they are going.

The coming of Chick Watson brought new perspective. Hitherto we had been
looking into the darkness. Whatever had been caught in the focus of the
Spot had become lost to our five senses.

Yet, facts are facts. It was no mere trickery that had caught Dr.
Holcomb in the beginning. One by one, men of the highest standards and
character had been either victims or witness to its reality and power.

So the coming of Watson may well be set down as one of the deciding
moments of history. He who had been the victim a year before was
returning through the very Spot that had engulfed him. He was the herald
of the great unknown, an ambassador of the infinite itself.

It will be remembered that of all the inmates of the house, Dr. Hansen
was the only one who had a personal acquaintance with Watson. One year
before the doctor had seen him a shadow--wasted, worn, exhausted. He had
talked with him on that memorable night in the cafe. Well he remembered
the incident, and the subject of that strange conversation--the secret
of life that had been discovered by the missing Dr. Holcomb. And Dr.
Hansen had pondered it often since.

What was the force that was pulsing through the Blind Spot? It had
reached out on the earth, and had plucked up youth as well as wisdom.
THIS was the first time it had ever given up that which it had taken!

It was Watson, sure enough; but it was not the man he had known one year
before. Except for the basic features Hansen would not have recognized
him; the shadow was gone, the pallor, the touch of death. He was hale
and radiant; his skin had the pink glow of alert fitness; except for
being dazed, he appeared perfectly natural. In the tense moment of his
arrival the little group waited in silence. What had he to tell them?

But he did not see them at first. He groped about blindly, moving slowly
and holding his hands before him. His face was calm and settled; its
lines told decision. There was not a question in any mind present but
that the man had come for a purpose.

Why could he not see? Perhaps the light was too dim. Some one thought to
turn on the extra lights.

It brought the first word from Watson. He threw up both arms before his
face; like one shutting out the lightning.

"Don't!" he begged. "Don't! Shut off the lights; you will blind me!
Please; please! Darken the room!"

Sir Henry sprang to the switch. Instantly the place went to shadow;
there was just enough light from the moon to distinguish the several
forms grouped in the middle of the room. Dr. Hansen proffered a chair.

"Thank you! Ah! Dr. Hansen! You are here--I had thought--This is much
better! I can see fairly well now. You came very near to blinding me
permanently! You didn't know. It's the transition." Then: "And yet--of
course! It's the moon! THE MOON!"

He stopped. There was a strange wistfulness in the last word. And
suddenly he rose to his feet. He turned in gladness, as though to drink
in the mellow flow of the radiance.

"The moon! Gentlemen--doctor--who are these people? This is the house
of the Blind Spot! And it is the moon--the good old earth! And San
Francisco!"

He stopped again. There was a bit of indecision and of wonder mixed
with his gladness. The stillness was only broken by the scarcely audible
voice of Mme. Le Fabre.

"Now we KNOW! It is proven. The sceptics have always asked why the
spirits work only in the half light. We know now."

Watson looked to Dr. Hansen. "Who is this lady? Who are these others?"

"Can you see them?"

"Perfectly. It is the lady in the corner; she thinks--"

"That you are a spirit!"

Watson laughed. "I a spirit? Try me and see!"

"Certainly," asserted Mme. Le Fabre. "You are out of the Blind Spot. I
know; it will prove everything!"

"Ah, yes; the Spot." Watson hesitated. Again the indecision. There was
something latent that he could not recall; though conscious, part of his
mind was still in the apparent fog that lingers back into slumber.

"I don't understand," he spoke. "Who are you?"

It was Sir Henry this time. "Mr. Watson, we are a sort of committee.
This is the house at 288 Chatterton Place. We are after the great secret
that was discovered by Dr. Holcomb. We were summoned by Hobart Fenton."

Consciousness is an enigma. Hitherto Watson had been almost inert;
his actions and manner of speech had been mechanical. That it was the
natural result of the strange force that had thrown him out, no one
doubted. The mention of Hobart Fenton jerked him into the full vigour of
wide-awake thinking; he straightened himself.

"Hobart! Hobart Fenton! Where is he?"

"That we do not know," answered Sir Henry. "He was here a moment ago. It
is almost too impossible for belief. Perhaps you can tell us."

"You mean--"

"Exactly. Into the Blind Spot. One and the other; your coming was
coincident with his going!"

Chick raised up. Even in that faint light they could appreciate the full
vigour of his splendid form. He was even more of an athlete than in his
college days, before the Blind Spot took him. And when he realised what
Sir Henry had said he held up one magnificent arm, almost in the manner
of benediction:

"Hobart has gone through? Thank Heaven for that!"

It was a puzzle. True, in that little group there was represented the
accumulated wisdom of human effort. With the possible exception of the
general, there was not a sceptic among them. They were ready to explain
almost anything--but this.

In the natural weakness of futility they had come to associate the
aspect of death or terror with the Blind Spot. Yet, here was Watson!
Watson, alive and strong; he was the reverse of what they had
subconsciously expected.

"What is this Blind Spot?" inquired Sir Henry evenly. "And what do you
mean by giving thanks that Fenton has gone into it?"

"Not now. Not one word of explanation until--What time is it?" Watson
broke off to demand.

They told him. He began to talk rapidly, with amazing force and
decision, and in a manner whose sincerity left no chance for doubt.

"Then we have five hours! Not one second to lose. Do what I say, and
answer my questions!" Then: "We must not fail; one slip, and the whole
world will be engulfed--in the unknown! Turn on the lights."

There was that in the personality and the vehemence of the man that
precluded opposition. Out of the Blind Spot had come a dynamic quality,
along with the man; a quickening influence that made Watson swift, sure,
and positive. Somehow they knew it was a moment of Destiny.

Watson went on:

"First, did Hobart Fenton open the Spot? Or was it a period? By 'period'
I mean, did it open by chance, as it did when it caught Harry and me?
Just what did Hobart do? Tell me!"

It was a singular question. How could they answer it? However, Dr.
Malloy related as much as he knew of what Hobart had done; his wires
and apparatus were now merely a tangled mass of fused metals. Nothing
remained intact but the blue gem and the red pebble.

"I see. And this pebble: you found it by digging in the cellar, I
suppose."

How did he know that? Dr. Hansen brought that curiously heavy little
stone and laid it in Watson's hand. The newcomer touched it with his
finger, and for a brief moment he studied it. Then he looked up.

"It's the small one," he stated. "And you found it in the cellar. It was
very fortunate; the opening of the Spot was perhaps a little more than
half chance. But it was wonderfully lucky. It let me out. And with the
help of God and our own courage we may open it again, long enough to
rescue Hobart, Harry, and Dr. Holcomb. Then--we must break the chain--we
must destroy the revelation; we must close the Spot forever!"

Small wonder that they couldn't understand what he meant. Dr. Hansen
thought to cut in with a practical question:

"My dear Chick, what's inside the Spot? We want to know!"

But it was not Watson who answered. It was Mme. Le Fabre.

"Spirits, of course."

Watson gave a sudden laugh. This time he answered:

"My dear lady, if you know what I know, and what Dr. Holcomb has
discovered, you would ask YOURSELF a question or so. Possibly you
yourself are a spirit!"

"What!" she gasped. "I--a spirit!"

"Exactly. But there is no time for questions. Afterwards--not now. Five
hours, and we must--"

Someone came to the door. It was Jerome. At the sight of Watson he
stopped, clutching the stub of his cigar between his teeth. His grey
eyes took in the other's form from head to shoe leather.

"Back?" he inquired. "What did you find out, Watson? They must have fed
you well over yonder!"

And Jerome pointed toward the ceiling with his thumb. It wasn't in his
dour nature to give way to enthusiasm; this was merely his manner of
welcome. Watson smiled.

"The eats were all right, Jerome, but not all the company. You're just
the man I want. We have little time; none to spare for talk. Are you in
touch with Bertha Holcomb?"

The detective nodded.

Watson took the chair that Fenton had so strangely vacated and reached
for paper and pencil. Once or twice he stopped to draw a line, but
mostly he was calculating. He referred constantly to a paper he took
from his pocket. When he was through he spread his palm over what he had
