night, so that the tips of some pointed directly to the ground, but the
basal part did not appear to be at all depressed. On the following morning
they were again flat and horizontal. the cotyledons of many other seedlings
were at the same time not in any way affected. Therefore this case seems
very different from that of ordinary sleep, and probably comes under the
head of epinasty, as is the case with the leaves of this plant according to
Kraus. The cotyledons are heliotropic, and so is the hypocotyl in a still
stronger degree.

Oxalis.--We now come to cotyledons provided with a pulvinus, all of which
are remarkable from the continuance of the nocturnal movements during
several days or even weeks, and apparently after growth has ceased. The
cotyledons of O. rosea, floribunda and articulata sink vertically down at
night and clasp the upper part of the hypocotyl. Those of O. Valdiviana and
sensitiva, on the contrary, rise vertically up, so that their upper
surfaces come into close contact; and after the young leaves are developed
these are clasped by the cotyledons. As in the daytime they stand
horizontally, or are even a little deflected beneath the horizon, they move
in the evening through an angle of at least 90o. Their complicated
circumnutating movements during the day have
[page 308]
been described in the first chapter. The experiment was a superfluous one,
but pots with seedlings of O. rosea and floribunda were turned upside down,
as soon as the cotyledons began to show any signs of sleep, and this made
no difference in their movements.

Leguminosae.--It may be seen in our list that the cotyledons of several
species in nine genera, widely distributed throughout the Family, sleep at
night; and this probably is the case with many others. The cotyledons of
all these species are provided with a pulvinus; and the movement in all is
continued during many days or weeks. In Cassia the cotyledons of the ten
species in the list rise up vertically at night and come into close contact
with one another. We observed that those of C. florida opened in the
morning rather later than those of C. glauca and pubescens. The movement is
exactly the same in C. mimosoides as in the other species, though its
subsequently developed leaves sleep in a different manner. The cotyledons
of an eleventh species, namely, C. nodosa, are thick and fleshy, and do not
rise up at night. The circumnutation of the cotyledons during the day of C.
tora has been described in the first chapter. Although the cotyledons of
Smithia sensitiva rose from a horizontal position in the middle of the day
to a vertical one at night, those of S. Pfundii, which are thick and
fleshy, did not sleep. When Mimosa pudica and albida have been kept at a
sufficiently high temperature during the day, the cotyledons come into
close contact at night; otherwise they merely rise up almost vertically.
The circumnutation of those of M. pudica has been described. The cotyledons
of a Bauhinia from St. Catharina in Brazil stood during the day at an angle
of about 50o above the horizon, and at night rose to 77o; but it is
probable that they would have closed completely, if the seedlings had been
kept in a warmer place.

Lotus.--In three species of Lotus the cotyledons were observed to sleep.
Those of L. Jacoboeus present the singular case of not rising at night in
any conspicuous manner for the first 5 or 6 days of their life, and the
pulvinus is not well developed at this period. Afterwards the sleeping
movement is well displayed, though to a variable degree, and is long
continued. We shall hereafter meet with a nearly parallel case with the
leaves of Sida rhombifolia. The cotyledons of L. Gebelii are only slightly
raised at night, and differ much in this respect from the three species in
our list.
[page 309]

Trifolium.--The germination of 21 species was observed. In most of them the
cotyledons rise hardly at all, or only slightly, at night; but those of T.
glomeratum, striatum and incarnactum rose from 45o to 55o above the
horizon. With T. subterraneum, leucanthemum and strictum, they stood up
vertically; and with T. strictum the rising movement is accompanied, as we
shall see, by another movement, which makes us believe that the rising is
truly nyctitropic. We did not carefully examine the cotyledons of all the
species for a pulvinus, but this organ was distinctly present in those of
T. subterraneum and strictum; whilst there was no trace of a pulvinus in
some species, for instance, in T. resupinatum, the cotyledons of which do
not rise at night.

Trifolium subterraneum.--The blades of the cotyledons on the first day
after germination (Nov. 21st) were not fully expanded, being inclined at
about 35o above the horizon; at night they rose to about 75o. Two days
afterwards the blades at noon were horizontal, with the petioles highly
inclined upwards; and it is remarkable that the nocturnal movement is
almost wholly confined to the blades, being effected by the pulvinus at
their bases; whilst the petioles retain day and night nearly the same
inclination. On this night (Nov. 23rd), and for some few succeeding nights,
the blades rose from a horizontal into a vertical position, and then became
bowed inwards at about an average angle of 10o; so that they had passed
through an angle of 100o. Their tips now almost touched one another, their
bases being slightly divergent. The two blades thus formed a highly
inclined roof over the axis of the seedling. This movement is the same as
that of the terminal leaflet of the tripartite leaves of many species of
Trifolium. After an interval of 8 days (Nov. 29th) the blades were
horizontal during the day, and vertical at night, and now they were no
longer bowed inwards. They continued to move in the same manner for the
following two months, by which time they had increased greatly in size,
their petioles being no less than .8 of an inch in length, and two true
leaves had by this time been developed.

Trifolium strictum.--On the first day after germination the cotyledons,
which are provided with a pulvinus, stood at noon horizontally, and at
night rose to only about 45o above the horizon. Four days afterwards the
seedlings were again observed at night, and now the blades stood vertically
and were in contact, excepting the tips, which were much deflexed, so that
they faced the zenith. At this age the petioles are curved
[page 310]
upwards, and at night, when the bases of the blades are in contact, the two
petioles together form a vertical ring surrounding the plumule. The
cotyledons continued to act in nearly the same manner for 8 or 10 days from
the period of germination; but the petioles had by this time become
straight and had increased much in length. After from 12 to 14 days the
first simple true leaf was formed, and during the ensuing fortnight a
remarkable movement was repeatedly observed. At I. (Fig. 125) we have a
sketch, made in the middle of the day, of a seedling about a fortnight old.
The two cotyledons, of which Rc is the right and Lc the left one, stand
directly opposite one another,

Fig. 125. Trifolium strictum: diurnal and nocturnal positions of the two
cotyledons and of the first leaf. I. Seedling viewed obliquely from above,
during the day: Rc, right cotyledon; Lc, left cotyledon; F, first true
leaf. II. A rather younger seedling, viewed at night: Rc, right cotyledon
raised, but its position not otherwise changed; Lc, left cotyledon raised
and laterally twisted; F, first leaf raised and twisted so as to face the
left twisted cotyledon. III. Same seedling viewed at night from the
opposite side. The back of the first leaf, F, is here shown instead of the
front, as in II.

and the first true leaf (F) projects at right angles to them. At night (see
II. and III.) the right cotyledon (Rc) is greatly raised, but is not
otherwise changed in position. The left cotyledon (Lc) is likewise raised,
but it is also twisted so that its blade, instead of exactly facing the
opposite one, now stands at nearly right angles to it. This nocturnal
twisting movement is effected not by means of the pulvinus, but by the
twisting of the whole length of the petiole, as could be seen by the curved
line of its upper concave surface. At the same time the true leaf (F) rises
up, so as to stand vertically, or it even passes the vertical and is
inclined a little inwards. It also twists a little, by which means the
upper surface of its blade fronts, and almost comes into contact with, the
upper surface of the twisted
[page 311]
left cotyledon. This seems to be the object gained by these singular
movements. Altogether 20 seedlings were examined on successive nights, and
in 19 of them it was the left cotyledon alone which became twisted, with
the true leaf always so twisted that its upper surface approached closely
and fronted that of the left cotyledon. In only one instance was the right
cotyledon twisted, with the true leaf twisted towards it; but this seedling
was in an abnormal condition, as the left cotyledon did not rise up
properly at night. This whole case is remarkable, as with the cotyledons of
no other plant have we seen any nocturnal movement except vertically
upwards or downwards. It is the more remarkable, because we shall meet with
an analogous case in the leaves of the allied genus Melilotus, in which the
terminal leaflet rotates at night so as to present one edge to the zenith
and at the same time bends to one side, so that its upper surface comes
into contact with that of one of the two now vertical lateral leaflets.]

Concluding Remarks on the Nyctitropic Movements of Cotyledons.--The sleep
of cotyledons (though this is a subject which has been little attended to),
seems to be a more common phenomenon than that of leaves. We observed the
position of the cotyledons during the day and night in 153 genera, widely
distributed throughout the dicotyledonous series, but otherwise selected
almost by hazard; and one or more species in 26 of these genera placed
their cotyledons at night so as to stand vertically or almost vertically,
having generally moved through an angle of at least 60o. If we lay on one
side the Leguminosae, the cotyledons of which are particularly liable to
sleep, 140 genera remain; and out of these, the cotyledons of at least one
species in 19 genera slept. Now if we were to select by hazard 140 genera,
excluding the Leguminosae, and observed their leaves at night, assuredly
not nearly so many as 19 would be found to include sleeping species. We
here refer exclusively to the plants observed by ourselves.
[page 312]

In our entire list of seedlings, there are 30 genera, belonging to 16
Families, the cotyledons of which in some of the species rise or sink in
the evening or early night, so as to stand at least 60o above or beneath
the horizon. In a large majority of the genera, namely, 24, the movement is
a rising one; so that the same direction prevails in these nyctitropic
movements as in the lesser periodic ones described in the second chapter.
The cotyledons move downwards during the early part of the night in only 6
of the genera; and in one of them, Cannabis, the curving down of the tip is
probably due to epinasty, as Kraus believes to be the case with the leaves.
The downward movement to the amount of 90o is very decided in Oxalis
Valdiviana and sensitiva, and in Geranium rotundifolium. It is a remarkable
fact that with Anoda Wrightii, one species of Gossypium and at least 3
species of Ipomoea, the cotyledons whilst young and light sink at night
very little or not at all; although this movement becomes well pronounced
as soon as they have grown large and heavy. Although the downward movement
cannot be attributed to the weight of the cotyledons in the several cases
which were investigated, namely, in those of the Anoda, Ipomoea purpurea
and bona-nox, nor in that of I. coccinea, yet bearing in mind that
cotyledons are continually circumnutating, a slight cause might at first
have determined whether the great nocturnal movement should be upwards or
downwards. We may therefore suspect that in some aboriginal member of the
groups in question, the weight of the cotyledons first determined the
downward direction. The fact of the cotyledons of these species not sinking
down much whilst they are young and tender, seems opposed to the belief
that the greater movement when they are
[page 313]
grown older, has been acquired for the sake of protecting them from
radiation at night; but then we should remember that there are many plants,
the leaves of which sleep, whilst the cotyledons do not; and if in some
cases the leaves are protected from cold at night whilst the cotyledons are
not protected, so in other cases it may be of more importance to the
species that the nearly full-grown cotyledons should be better protected
than the young ones.

In all the species of Oxalis observed by us, the cotyledons are provided
with pulvini; but this organ has become more or less rudimentary in O.
corniculata, and the amount of upward movement of its cotyledons at night
is very variable, but is never enough to be called sleep. We omitted to
ascertain whether the cotyledons of Geranium rotundifolium possess pulvini.
In the Leguminosae all the cotyledons which sleep, as far as we have seen,
are provided with pulvini. But with Lotus Jacobaeus, these are not fully
developed during the first few days of the life of the seedling, and the
cotyledons do not then rise much at night. With Trifolium strictum the
blades of the cotyledons rise at night by the aid of their pulvini; whilst
the petiole of one cotyledon twists half-round at the same time,
independently of its pulvinus.

As a general rule, cotyledons which are provided with pulvini continue to
rise or sink at night during a much longer period than those destitute of
this organ. In this latter case the movement no doubt depends on
alternately greater growth on the upper and lower side of the petiole, or
of the blade, or of both, preceded probably by the increased turgescence of
the growing cells. Such movements generally last for a very short period--
for instance, with Brassica and Githago for 4 or 5 nights, with Beta for 2
or 3, and with
[page 314]
Raphanus for only a single night. There are, however, some strong
exceptions to this rule, as the cotyledons of Gossypium, Anoda and Ipomoea
do not possess pulvini, yet continue to move and to grow for a long time.
We thought at first that when the movement lasted for only 2 or 3 nights,
it could hardly be of any service to the plant, and hardly deserved to be
called sleep; but as many quickly-growing leaves sleep for only a few
nights, and as cotyledons are rapidly developed and soon complete their
growth, this doubt now seems to us not well-founded, more especially as
these movements are in many instances so strongly pronounced. We may here
mention another point of similarity between sleeping leaves and cotyledons,
namely, that some of the latter (for instance, those of Cassia and Githago)
are easily affected by the absence of light; and they then either close, or
if closed do not open; whereas others (as with the cotyledons of Oxalis)
are very little affected by light. In the next chapter it will be shown
that the nyctitropic movements both of cotyledons and leaves consist of a
modified form of circumnutation.

As in the Leguminosae and Oxalidae, the leaves and the cotyledons of the
same species generally sleep, the idea at first naturally occurred to us,
that the sleep of the cotyledons was merely an early development of a habit
proper to a more advanced stage of life. But no such explanation can be
admitted, although there seems to be some connection, as might have been
expected, between the two sets of cases. For the leaves of many plants
sleep, whilst their cotyledons do not do so--of which fact Desmodium gyrans
offers a good instance, as likewise do three species of Nicotiana observed
by us; also Sida rhombifolia, Abutilon Darwinii, and Chenopodium album. On
the other
[page 315]
hand, the cotyledons of some plants sleep and not the leaves, as with the
species of Beta, Brassica, Geranium, Apium, Solanum, and Mirabilis, named
in our list. Still more striking is the fact that, in the same genus, the
leaves of several or of all the species may sleep, but the cotyledons of
only some of them, as occurs with Trifolium, Lotus, Gossypium, and
partially with Oxalis. Again, when both the cotyledons and the leaves of
the same plant sleep, their movements may be of a widely dissimilar nature:
thus with Cassia the cotyledons rise vertically up at night, whilst their
leaves sink down and twist round so as to turn their lower surfaces
outwards. With seedlings of Oxalis Valdiviana, having 2 or 3 well-developed
leaves, it was a curious spectacle to behold at night each leaflet folded
inwards and hanging perpendicularly downwards, whilst at the same time and
on the same plant the cotyledons stood vertically upwards.

These several facts, showing the independence of the nocturnal movements of
the leaves and cotyledons on the same plant, and on plants belonging to the
same genus, lead to the belief that the cotyledons have acquired their
power of movement for some special purpose. Other facts lead to the same
conclusion, such as the presence of pulvini, by the aid of which the
nocturnal movement is continued during some weeks. In Oxalis the cotyledons
of some species move vertically upwards, and of others vertically downwards
at night; but this great difference within the same natural genus is not so
surprising as it may at first appear, seeing that the cotyledons of all the
species are continually oscillating up and down during the day, so that a
small cause might determine whether they should rise or sink at night.
Again, the peculiar nocturnal movement of the left-hand coty-
[page 316]
ledon of Trifolium strictum, in combination with that of the first true
leaf. Lastly, the wide distribution in the dicotyledonous series of plants
with cotyledons which sleep. Reflecting on these several facts, our
conclusion seems justified, that the nyctitropic movements of cotyledons,
by which the blade is made to stand either vertically or almost vertically
upwards or downwards at night, has been acquired, at least in most cases,
for some special purpose; nor can we doubt that this purpose is the
protection of the upper surface of the blade, and perhaps of the central
bud or plumule, from radiation at night.
[page 317]


CHAPTER VII.

MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION: NYCTITROPIC OR SLEEP MOVEMENTS OF LEAVES.

Conditions necessary for these movements--List of Genera and Families,
which include sleeping plants--Description of the movements in the several
Genera--Oxalis: leaflets folded at night--Averrhoa: rapid movements of the
leaflets--Porlieria: leaflets close when plant kept very dry--Tropaeolum:
leaves do not sleep unless well illuminated during day--Lupinus: various
modes of sleeping--Melilotus: singular movements of terminal leaflet--
Trifolium--Desmodium: rudimentary lateral leaflets, movements of, not
developed on young plants, state of their pulvini--Cassia: complex
movements of the leaflets--Bauhinia: leaves folded at night--Mimosa pudica:
compounded movements of leaves, effect of darkness--Mimosa albida, reduced
leaflets of--Schrankia: downward movement of the pinnae--Marsilea: the only
cryptogam known to sleep--Concluding remarks and summary--Nyctitropism
consists of modified circumnutation, regulated by the alternations of light
and darkness--Shape of first true leaves.

WE now come to the nyctitropic or sleep movements of leaves. It should be
remembered that we confine this term to leaves which place their blades at
night either in a vertical position or not more than 30o from the
vertical,--that is, at least 60o above or beneath the horizon. In some few
cases this is effected by the rotation of the blade, the petiole not being
either raised or lowered to any considerable extent. The limit of 30o from
the vertical is obviously an arbitrary one, and has been selected for
reasons previously assigned, namely, that when the blade approaches the
perpendicular as nearly as this, only half as much of the surface is
exposed at night to the
[page 318]
zenith and to free radiation as when the blade is horizontal. Nevertheless,
in a few instances, leaves which seem to be prevented by their structure
from moving to so great an extent as 60o above or beneath the horizon, have
been included amongst sleeping plants.

It should be premised that the nyctitropic movements of leaves are easily
affected by the conditions to which the plants have been subjected. If the
ground is kept too dry, the movements are much delayed or fail: according
to Dassen,* even if the air is very dry the leaves of Impatiens and Malva
are rendered motionless. Carl Kraus has also lately insisted** on the great
influence which the quantity of water absorbed has on the periodic
movements of leaves; and he believes that this cause chiefly determines the
variable amount of sinking of the leaves of Polygonum convolvulus at night;
and if so, their movements are not in our sense strictly nyctitropic.
Plants in order to sleep must have been exposed to a proper temperature:
Erythrina crista-galli, out of doors and nailed against a wall, seemed in
fairly good health, but the leaflets did not sleep, whilst those on another
plant kept in a warm greenhouse were all vertically dependent at night. In
a kitchen-garden the leaflets of Phaseolus vulgaris did not sleep during
the early part of the summer. Ch. Royer says,*** referring I suppose to the
native plants in France, that they do not sleep when the temperature is
below 5o C. or 41o F. In the case of several sleeping plants, viz., species
of

* Dassen,'Tijdschrift vor. Naturlijke Gesch. en Physiologie,' 1837, vol.
iv. p. 106. See also Ch. Royer on the importance of a proper state of
turgescence of the cells, in 'Annal. des Sc. Nat. Bot.' (5th series), ix.
1868, p. 345.

** 'Beiträge zur Kentniss der Bewegungen,' etc., in 'Flora,' 1879, pp. 42,
43, 67, etc.

*** 'Annal. des Sc. Nat. Bot.' (5th Series), ix. 1868, p. 366.
[page 319]

Tropaeolum, Lupinus, Ipomoea, Abutilon, Siegesbeckia, and probably other
genera, it is indispensable that the leaves should be well illuminated
during the day in order that they may assume at night a vertical position;
and it was probably owing to this cause that seedlings of Chenopodium album
and Siegesbeckia orientalis, raised by us during the middle of the winter,
though kept at a proper temperature, did not sleep. Lastly, violent
agitation by a strong wind, during a few minutes, of the leaves of Maranta
arundinacea (which previously had not been disturbed in the hot-house),
prevented their sleeping during the two next nights.

We will now give our observations on sleeping plants, made in the manner
described in the Introduction. The stem of the plant was always secured
(when not stated to the contrary) close to the base of the leaf, the
movements of which were being observed, so as to prevent the stem from
circumnutating. As the tracings were made on a vertical glass in front of
the plant, it was obviously impossible to trace its course as soon as the
leaf became in the evening greatly inclined either upwards or downwards; it
must therefore be understood that the broken lines in the diagrams, which
represent the evening and nocturnal courses, ought always to be prolonged
to a much greater distance, either upwards or downwards, than appears in
them. The conclusions which may be deduced from our observations will be
given near the end of this chapter.

In the following list all the genera which include sleeping plants are
given, as far as known to us. The same arrangement is followed as in former
cases, and the number of the Family is appended. This list possesses some
interest, as it shows that the habit of
[page 320]
sleeping is common to some few plants throughout the whole vascular series.
The greater number of the genera in the list have been observed by
ourselves with more or less care; but several are given on the authority of
others (whose names are appended in the list), and about these we have
nothing more to say. No doubt the list is very imperfect, and several
genera might have been added from the 'Somnus Plantarum' by Linnaeus; but
we could not judge in some of his cases, whether the blades occupied at
night a nearly vertical position. He refers to some plants as sleeping, for
instance, Lathyrus odoratus and Vicia faba, in which we could observe no
movement deserving to be called sleep, and as no one can doubt the accuracy
of Linnaeus, we are left in doubt.

[List of Genera, including species the leaves of which sleep.

CLASS I. DICOTYLEDONS.

Sub-class I. ANGIOSPERMS.

Genus                      Family.

Githago                      Caryophylleae (26).
Stellaria (Batalin).                "
Portulaca (Ch.Royer).               Portulaceae (27).
Sida                        Malvaceae (36).
Abutilon.                       "
Malva (Linnaeus and Pfeffer).             "
Hibiscus (Linnaeus).                 "
Anoda.                        "
Gossypium.                      "
Ayenia (Linnaeus).                Sterculaceae (37).
Triumfetta (Linnaeus).              Tiliaceae (38).
Linum (Batalin).                 Lineae (39).
Oxalis.                      Oxalidae (41).
Averrhoa.                       "
Porlieria.                    Zygophylleae (45).
Guiacum.                        "
Impatiens (Linnaeus, Pfeffer, Batalin).           Balsamineae (48).
Tropaeolum.                    Tropaeoleae (49).
Crotolaria (Thiselton Dyer).           Leguminosae (75) Tribe II.
Lupinus.                        "       "
Cytisus.                         "       "
Trigonella.                       "     Tr. III.
Medicago.                                "
Melilotus.                        "       "
Trifolium.                        "       "
Securigera.                       "     Tr. IV.
Lotus.                          "       "
Psoralea.                       "      Tr. V.
Amorpha (Cuchartre).                   "       "
Daelea.                         "       "
Indigofera.                      "        "
Tephrosia.                      "         "
Wistaria.                       "         "
Robinia.                        "        "
Sphaerophysa.                     "        "
Colutea.                        "        "
Astragalus.                      "        "
Glycyrrhiza.                      "        "
Coronilla.                       "      Tr. VI.
Hedysarum.                       "        "
[page 321]

List of Genera (continued).

CLASS I. DICOTYLEDONS.

Sub-class I. ANGIOSPERMS.

Genus                      Family.
Onobrychis.         Leguminosae (75) Tr. VI.
Smithia.                        "        "
Arachis.                        "        "
Desmodium.                       "        "
Urania.                        "        "
Vicia.                         "      Tr. VII.
Centrosema.                      "      Tr. VIII.
Amphicarpaea.                     "        "
Glycine.                        "        "
Erythrina.                       "        "
Apios.                         "        "
Phaseolus.                       "        "
Sophora.                        "       Tr. X.
Caesalpinia.                      "       Tr. XIII.
Haematoxylon.                     "        "
Gleditschia (Duchartre).                "        "
Poinciana.                       "        "
Cassia.                        "       Tr. XIV.
Bauhinia.                       "       Tr. XV.
Tamarindus.                      "       Tr. XVI.
Adenanthera.                      "       Tr. XX.
Prosopis.                       "        "
Neptunia.                       "        "
Mimosa.                        "        "
Schrankia.                       "        "
Acacia.                        "       Tr. XXII.
Albizzia.                       "       Tr. XXIII.
Melaleuca (Bouché).           Myrtaceae (94).

Sub-class I. ANGIOSPERMS (continued).

Genus                      Family.
Aenothera (Linnaeus).          Omagrarieae (100).
Passiflora.               Passifloracea (105).
Siegesbeckia.              Compositae (122).
Ipomoea.                 Convolvulacea (151).
Nicotiana.                Solaneae (157).
Mirabilis.                Nyctagineae (177).
Polygonum (Batalin).           Polygoneae (179).
Amaranthus.               Amaranthaceae (180).
Chenopodium.               Chenopodieae (181).
Pimelia (Bouché).            Thymeteae (188).
Euphorbia.                Euphorbiaceae (202)
Phyllanthus (Pfeffer).            "

Sub-class II. GYMNOSPERMS.
Aies (Chatin).

CLASS II. MONOCOTYLEDONS.

Thalia.                   Cannaceae (21).
Maranta.                      "
Colocasia.                 Aroideae (30).
Strephium.                 Gramineae (55).

CLASS III. ACOTYLEDONS.

Marsilea.                  Marsileaceae (4).

Githago segetum (Caryophylleae).--The first leaves produced by young
seedlings, rise up and close together at night. On a rather older seedling,
two young leaves stood at noon at 55o above the horizon, and at night at
86o, so each had risen 31o. The angle, however, was less in some cases.
Similar observations were occasionally made on young leaves (for the older
ones moved very little) produced by nearly full-grown plants. Batalin says
('Flora,' Oct. 1st, 1873, p. 437) that the young leaves of Stellaria close
up so completely at night that they form together great buds.

Sida (Malvaceae).--the nyctitropic movements of the leaves in this genus
are remarkable in some respects. Batalin informs
[page 322]
us (see also 'Flora,' Oct. 1st, 1873, p. 437) that those of S. napaea fall
at night, but to what angle he cannot remember. The leaves of S.
rhombifolia and retusa, on the other hand, rise up vertically, and are
pressed against the stem. We have therefore here within the same genus,
directly opposite movements. Again, the leaves of S. rhombifolia are
furnished with a pulvinus, formed of a mass of small cells destitute of
chlorophyll, and with their longer axes perpendicular to the axis of the
petiole. As measured along this latter line, these cells are only 1/5th of
the length of those of the petiole; but instead of being abruptly separated
from them (as is usual with the pulvinus in most plants), they graduate
into the larger cells of the petiole. On the other hand, S. napaea,
according to Batalin, does not possess a pulvinus; and he informs us that a
gradation may be traced in the several species of the genus between these
two states of the petiole. Sida rhombifolia presents another peculiarity,
of which we have seen no other instance with leaves that sleep: for those
on very young plants, though they rise somewhat in the evening, do not go
to sleep, as we observed

Fig. 126. Sida rhombifolia: circumnutation and nyctitropic (or sleep)
movements of a leaf on a young plant, 9 ½ inches high; filament fixed to
midrib of nearly full-grown leaf, 2 3/8 inches in length; movement traced
under a sky-light. Apex of leaf 5 5/8 inches from the vertical glass, so
diagram not greatly enlarged.
[page 323]

on several occasions; whilst those on rather older plants sleep in a
conspicuous manner. For instance a leaf (.85 of an inch in length) on a
very young seedling 2 inches high, stood at noon 9o above the horizon, and
at 10 P.M. at 28o, so it had risen only 19o; another leaf (1.4 inch in
length) on a seedling of the same height, stood at the same two periods at
7o and 32o, and therefore had risen 25o. These leaves, which moved so
little, had a fairly well-developed pulvinus. After an interval of some
weeks, when the same seedlings were 2 ½ and 3 inches in height, some of the
young leaves stood up at night quite vertically, and others were highly
inclined; and so it was with bushes which were fully grown and were
flowering.

The movement of a leaf was traced from 9.15 A.M. on May 28th to 8.30 A.M.
on the 30th. The temperature was too low (15o - 16o C.), and the
illumination hardly sufficient; consequently the leaves did not become
quite so highly inclined at night, as they had done previously and as they
did subsequently in the hot-house: but the movements did not appear
otherwise disturbed. On the first day the leaf sank till 5.15 P.M.; it then
rose rapidly and greatly till 10.5 P.M., and only a little higher during
the rest of the night (Fig. 126). Early on the next day (29th) it fell in a
slightly zigzag line rapidly until 9 A.M., by which time it had reached
nearly the same place as on the previous morning. During the remainder of
the day it fell slowly, and zigzagged laterally. The evening rise began
after 4 P.M. in the same manner as before, and on the second morning it
again fell rapidly. The ascending and descending lines do not coincide, as
may be seen in the diagram. On the 30th a new tracing was made (not here
given) on a rather enlarged scale, as the apex of the leaf now stood 9
inches from the vertical glass. In order to observe more carefully the
course pursued at the time when the diurnal fall changes into the nocturnal
rise, dots were made every half-hour between 4 P.M. and 10.30 P.M. This
rendered the lateral zigzagging movement during the evening more
conspicuous than in the diagram given, but it was of the same nature as
there shown. The impression forced on our minds was that the leaf was
expending superfluous movement, so that the great nocturnal rise might not
occur at too early an hour.

Abutilon Darwinii (Malvaceae).--The leaves on some very young plants stood
almost horizontally during the day, and hung down vertically at night. Very
fine plants kept in a
[page 324]
large hall, lighted only from the roof, did not sleep at night for in order
to do so the leaves must be well illuminated during the day. The cotyledons
do not sleep. Linnaeus says that the leaves of his Sida abutilon sink
perpendicularly down at night, though the petioles rise. Prof. Pfeffer
informs us that the leaves of a Malva, allied to M. sylvestris, rise
greatly at night; and this genus, as well as that of Hibiscus, are included
by Linnaeus in his list of sleeping plants.

Anoda Wrightii (Malvaceae).--The leaves, produced by very young plants,
when grown to a moderate size, sink at night either almost vertically down
or to an angle of about 45o beneath the horizon; for there is a
considerable degree of variability in the amount of sinking at night, which
depends in part on the degree to which they have been illuminated during
the day. But the leaves, whilst quite young, do not sink down at night, and
this is a very unusual circumstance. The summit of the petiole, where it
joins the blade, is developed into a pulvinus, and this is present in very
young leaves which do not sleep; though it is not so well defined as in
older leaves.

Gossypium (var. Nankin cotton, Malvaceae).--Some young leaves, between 1
and 2 inches in length, borne by two seedlings 6 and 7 ½ inches in height,
stood horizontally, or were raised a little above the horizon at noon on
July 8th and 9th; but by 10 P.M. they had sunk down to between 68o and 90o
beneath the horizon. When the same plants had grown to double the above
height, their leaves stood at night almost or quite vertically dependent.
The leaves on some large plants of G. maritimum and Brazilense, which were
kept in a very badly lighted hot-house, only occasionally sank much
downwards at night, and hardly enough to be called sleep.

Oxalis (Oxalidae).--In most of the species in this large genus the three
leaflets sink vertically down at night; but as their sub-petioles are short
the blades could not assume this position from the want of space, unless
they were in some manner rendered narrower; and this is effected by their
becoming more or less folded (Fig. 127). The angle formed by the two halves
of the same leaflet was found to vary in different individuals of several
species between 92o and 150o; in three of the best folded leaflets of O.
fragrans it was 76o, 74o, and 54o. The angle is often different in the three
leaflets of the same leaf. As the leaflets sink down at night and become
folded, their lower surfaces are brought near together (see B), or even
into
[page 325]
close contact; and from this circumstance it might be thought that the
object of the folding was the protection of their lower surfaces. If this
had been the case, it would have formed a strongly marked exception to the
rule, that when there is any difference in the degree of protection from
radiation of the two surfaces of the leaves, it is always the upper surface
which is the best protected. But that the folding of the leaflets, and
consequent mutual approximation of their lower surfaces, serves merely to
allow them to sink down vertically, may be

Fig. 127. Oxalis acetosella: A, leaf seen from vertically above; B, diagram
of leaf asleep, also seen from vertically above.

inferred from the fact that when the leaflets do not radiate from the
summit of a common petiole, or, again, when there is plenty of room from
the sub-petioles not being very short, the leaflets sink down without
becoming folded. This occurs with the leaflets of O. sensitiva, Plumierii,
and bupleurifolia.

There is no use in giving a long list of the many species which sleep in
the above described manner. This holds good with species having rather
fleshy leaves, like those of O. carnosa, or large leaves like those of O.
Ortegesii, or four leaflets like those of O. variabilis. There are,
however, some species which show no signs of sleep, viz., O. pentaphylla,
enneaphylla, hirta, and rubella. We will now describe the nature of the
movements in some of the species.

Oxalis acetosella.--The movement of a leaflet, together with that of the
main petiole, are shown in the following diagram (Fig. 128), traced between
11 A.M. on October 4th and 7.45 A.M. on the 5th. After 5.30 P.M. on the 4th
the leaflet sank rapidly, and at 7 P.M. depended vertically. for some time
