The red glow increased as it grew darker outside, and, looking
through the glass sides of the palace, the boys saw that the
palace was surrounded by a great crowd of Martians, who were
watching what went on within.




CHAPTER XXIV

A MARVELOUS SUBSTANCE


"Say, that's a good way to have a building," observed Jack in a
low voice to his chum.  "Those who can't get in can see just as
well what's going on as if they were here.  But I wonder what
he's saying?"

"Probably telling his people about us," replied Mark, and this
seemed to be so, for Silex Corundum, as they later learned was
the name of the ruler of Mars, frequently motioned toward the
adventurers, who stood in a group in front of the platform.

Much interest was manifested by the throng, and even those on the
platform, who seemed to be members of a sort of council or
governing body, could not restrain their interest.

When the chief ruler had ceased speaking the Martian with the
triangle on his head--the one who had first greeted the world
travelers, stepped forward, and made an address.

"He's telling 'em how we got here," was Mark's opinion, and Jack
nodded.

When this one had finished, the guide who had conducted them to
the palace had his turn, and at greater length he described the
strangers, the curious craft in which they had arrived on the
planet, and many other details, which, of course, our friends
could not comprehend.

This done, Silex Corundum made another address, and at its close
a great blackboard was brought forward, some pieces of chalk were
handed to Mr. Roumann and to Professor Henderson, and by signs
they were invited to illustrate something of themselves and their
wonderful journey.

"What shall we draw?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"First see if you can make them understand something of the earth
where we came from," suggested Mr. Roumann; and the professor,
who was a good draughtsman, soon placed on the board a sort of
map of the universe, indicating the position of Mars, the sun,
the other planets and the earth.  To his surprise a delighted
shout told him that he was understood.  The chief ruler, with a
rapid motion, pointed to a great telescope, located in one corner
of the big audience chamber.  He motioned for the travelers to
look through it, and after it was adjusted he pointed to the
drawing of the earth on the board, and indicated that the
adventurers could see their own planet through the telescope.

Mr. Roumann looked first.  Then he uttered an exclamation.

"Can you really see our earth?" asked Jack.

"I can!  Look for yourself!  This is a marvelous telescope!  No
wonder the Martians understand something about us.  They can
clearly make out the shapes of our continents."

Jack peered through the eyepiece.  There, far off, shining in the
light of the distant sun, which was now on the other side of
Mars, he saw the earth they had left about two weeks ago.  It was
like looking at some map in a geography, and he could clearly
make out the shapes of North and South America.

"Take a look, Mark!" he cried.  "I almost thought I could make
out the place where we live, and where we built the Annihilator!"

In turn they all gazed at the earth, distant thirty five millions
of miles, but which was made very plain to them through the
powerful glass.

Silex Corundum made a motion as of some body flying through
space, and looked inquiringly at the travelers.

"He wants to know how we got here," interpreted Mark.

"I'll draw a picture of the projectile,"' said Mr. Roumann, and
he put on the board one containing many details.  So interested
was the chief ruler and his cabinet, that they all came down off
the platform to examine it more closely.  They appeared to
understand everything but the Etherium motor, but Mr. Roumann
illustrated the force by which it was worked, by pointing to the
metal boxes containing the red substance, which gave out light as
well as power, indicating that some force like that worked the
motor.

This appeared to satisfy the questioners, and after some talk
among themselves they motioned that the travelers would be given
a place to sleep.

"I'd a heap sight radder hab soffin' t' eat," said Washington,
when it was made known that they were to retire.  "I'd jest like
to git back t' mah kitchen.  I jest know mah Shanghai rooster
needs some corn, an' as for dat crazy man, maybe he's broken
loose."

"That's so," agreed Mr. Roumann.  "If we don't get back, we can't
give him anything to eat."

"Let's try to make them understand," suggested the professor,
and, accordingly, with chalk, they pictured that they had left
behind them, in the projectile, an enemy of theirs, who was bound
and helpless.  Silex Corundum appeared to understand, and he
indicated that the unfortunate man would receive attention.

The travelers were then led out of the palace.  They found
instead of being urged along by the thought power, however, that
they were now allowed to walk.  And they also noticed that they
could go very rapidly, with little exertion, due to the fact that
they only tipped the scales at about a third of their usual
weight.

"This is better," observed Jack.  "I'd rather walk than be
floating along the way we were."

"Yes, I guess they were so anxious to question us that they
couldn't wait for the ordinary forms of locomotion," said the
professor.  "Now that they know something about us they will let
us do as we please for a while."

One of the Martians, who seemed to be a minor official, led them
out into the street.  They found that it was lighted by means of
the same metal boxes that were in the palace.

Overhead were the two tiny moons of Mars, but they gave but
little light, and had it not been for the wonderful red substance
the streets would have been quite dark.

"This stuff is what makes Mars seem so I red when we look at it
with telescopes from our earth," observed Mr. Roumann.  "It is a
very marvelous chemical.  I must get some to examine."

"I wonder where they'll put us?" asked Jack, but his question was
answered a few moments later, when they were ushered into a
finely built house of generous size, and by signs their guide
indicated that they were to make this their home.  It was nicely
furnished, though in a different manner from houses in the world,
and there were many scientific books and instruments in it.

"The Martians must study all the while," observed Mr. Henderson.
"No wonder they have such big heads.  All their intellectual
faculties are wonderfully developed."

"At the expense of their arms, legs and bodies," said Jack.  "I
fancy I could fight half a dozen of their biggest men."

"But we're not going to," said Mr. Roumann.  "At least, not as
long as they treat us decently."

"And now for something to eat," added Henderson.

Their guide showed them a dining-room, where they found a table
filled with food that looked very appetizing.  The Martian
motioned for them to eat.

"I want t' find where mah kitchen is goin' t' be," declared
Washington.  "If I'm goin' t' cook heah, I want t' see how I'm
goin' t' do it."

The Martian seemed to understand what was wanted, for he led the
way to another apartment, where it was evident that cooking was
done, as there were pots, pans and what looked like a stove in
it.

"But I don't see no coal," objected the colored man.  "How I
gwine t' cook without coal t' make a fire?"

The Martian opened the square iron box that seemed to be the
stove.  Inside was a small metal box, which he also opened,
disclosing a lump of the red substance.

"They cook with it, too!" exclaimed Mr. Roumann.  "And I have no
doubt that they warm their houses with it in winter.  A wonderful
substance--most marvelous!  It exceeds my wildest dreams--light,
heat and power!  Our fortunes are made!  It is good that we came
to Mars!"

"And it's a good thing they've got something to eat!" remarked
Jack.  "Come on, I'm half starved."

"I'll wait on table fo' yo'," said Washington, as they went back
to the dining-room, and the Martian left.  They sat down, and the
colored man was about to pass the victuals, when, to the surprise
of all, the center of the table began to revolve, and the dishes
of food went with it, passing slowly in front of each one in
turn.

"Good land a' massy!" cried Washington.  "It's bewitched! Look at
de table movin'!"




CHAPTER XXV

SEEKING THE TREASURE


They all stared at the strange sight.  It was rather odd to see
the entire middle portion of the table going around, while the
outer part, at which the adventurers sat, was stationary.  But
the boys and men, with the exception of Washington, recognized it
as very convenient.

"What are you frightened at, Wash?" asked Jack.

"At dat table, dat's what!  It's a ghostest table."

"A ghost table?"

"Yep!  Spirits am workin' on it!  I ain't goin' t' stay heah.
I'se goin' back t' de ship, where I kin move t'ings fo' mahself."

"Don't be alarmed," said Mr. Henderson.  "It's all right,
Washington.  The table moves by some hidden mechanism, which
doubtless was set in motion by the Martian who were just here, or
the mere sitting down to our places may have started it."

They all got up to make an examination, and the table center at
once ceased revolving, proving that some, connection existed
between it and the chairs.  But they could not discover the
machinery.  There was a small metal box underneath the table, but
that was all.

"That must contain some of that marvelous red substance which
gives light, heat and power," declared Mr. Roumann.  "I must
certainly get a supply of it.  In fact, that is what I came to
Mars for.  That is the object of my trip, and if we can get a
sufficient quantity of it, our fortunes are made."

"Is it so valuable?" asked Mark.

"It is the most valuable treasure in the universe," replied the
German.  "Long ago I suspected some such thing must exist on
Mars, or else how, receiving only half the light and heat from
the sun that we receive, can the inhabitants exist?  And that
they do live, and live well, we have seen.  It must be due to the
red substance, and if we could only get some back to earth it
would be worth millions.  Think of simply putting a bit of it in
a stove and having heat, or hanging up some in a room and getting
light from it.  But, more than this, think of having it move
machinery,  I would not be surprised but what I could transform
it into energy that would operate the motors of the Annihilator."

"But wouldn't you need a new supply every once in a while?" asked
Jack.

"I think not.  I believe it is like radium, and will last
forever.  In fact, you notice that the metal boxes it is
contained in, except the ones in the boats, are securely sealed.
If they had to be putting in a fresh supply every so often, they
would make the boxes so they would open more easily.  We must get
some of that treasure."

"But how?" inquired Mr. Henderson.

"I don't know, but I will find out a way.  When we have been here
a few weeks we will be better acquainted with the Martians and
their language, and can make a search."

"Well, if you folks is done talkin' about treasure, I'm goin' to
eat," observed old Andy.  "I'm hungry!"

"So am I," added Jack, and as they all sat down again the table
began revolving.  They found it a convenient arrangement once the
novelty had worn off, and they were soon eagerly talking, over
the meal, of the wonders they had seen, and speculating on what
might be before them.  Washington, having nothing to do, went to
see about beds for the night, as the travelers were tired.

"Well, Wash," asked Jack, as the colored man returned, "did you
find the beds making themselves, or waltzing around the room?"

"Nope, dey seemed t' be ordinary, respectable beds.  But I ain't
goin' t' take no chances in 'em.  I'se goin' t' sleep on de flo'."

"Why?"

"'Cause I don't want t' wake up in de middle ob de night an'
find mahself squashed inter a jellyfish.  I believe de beds am
bewitched same as de table is."

"Nonsense," said Jack.  "They're all right.  This is a fine
place to live."

They found the beds good to sleep in, and nothing disturbed them.
Washington, however, stretched out on the floor, and he arose
early to prepare breakfast on the stove, which never needed to
have a fire built in it, because of the marvelous red substance.
By an arrangement of levers and valves the heat could be
increased or diminished at pleasure.

The same Martian who had conducted the travelers to the house
returned soon after breakfast, and by signs and motions indicated
to them that the crazy machinist left in the projectile had been
properly cared for.  The Martian also indicated to the world-dwellers
that they were free to go where they pleased about the city, which
they learned was called Martopolis, and was the largest city on the
planet.

"We'll take a walk," suggested Mr. Roumann, "and maybe we can
find where they keep the red stuff, or where they get it from."

They strolled about the streets of Martopolis, noting many
strange sights.  The queer little people were hurrying to and
fro, with a peculiar gliding motion, much faster than the
ordinary walk, yet it was not a run.  The peculiar lightness in
weight of everything on Mars probably accounted for this, as the
travelers themselves found they could move about very swiftly,
and with little fatigue.

Nor did the world-dwellers attract as much attention as they
expected they would.  The Martians appeared to have satisfied
their curiosity regarding the strangers the previous night, and
now gave them but passing glances.  Even the boys did not follow
them.

Every one seemed to be busy, and the travelers noted many
schools, in which the children were industriously studying,
though it was early morning.  Observatories, with great
telescopes, were numerous, and astronomers were gazing at the sun
or different parts of the heavens, even in daylight.

"They are a very learned people, and they never seem to cease
from acquiring information," commented Mr. Henderson.

"Well, I'd like to acquire some information about where that red
stuff is," said the German.  "There is one of the metal boxes
that contain some, up on that pole."

He pointed to one that evidently served as a street lamp at
night.

"And there's a policeman near it," said Jack.  "Ask him."

A Martian stood leaning against the light-pole, much as does an
officer of the law on earth.  That he was some sort of an
official was evidenced by the uniform he wore.

Mr. Roumann approached the Martian, and made signs that he would
like to see the light box.  The officer shook his head vigorously,
and said something rapidly.

"I guess they don't allow strangers to touch it," observed Jack.

"Evidently not," admitted Mr. Roumann.  "I wonder if he knows
where it comes from?"

He made more signs, asking, as well as he could, where the
substance in the box was obtained.  The officer pointed to the
