either hand; the sickly green vegetation.

"Lost on the moon!" whispered Mark, and there was not even an echo of
his voice to keep them company. Only a chill, desolate silence!




CHAPTER XXIV

DESOLATE WANDERINGS


For a moment the three stood helplessly there and stared at each other.
They could scarcely comprehend their situation at first. Then, with a
glance at the cold and quiet scene all about them, a look up at the
sun, which was the only cheerful object in the whole landscape, Jack
observed: "Oh, I say, come on now, don't let's give up this way! We
have only taken a wrong turn, and I'll wager that the projectile will
be just around the corner. Come on," and he started off.

"Yes," said Mark, "that's the trouble. There are so many corners, and
we have taken so many wrong turns, that we're all confused. I think the
best thing to do will be to stay here a while and pull ourselves
together."

"That's right," spoke old Andy. "Many a time in the woods I've got all
confused-like, and then I'd sit down and think, and I'd get on the
right path in a few minutes after."

"The trouble here is," said Jack, "that there are no woods. If there
were we might know how to get out of them. But think of it! Lost on the
moon, in the midst of a whole lot of queer mountain peaks, and big
holes that would hold half a dozen cities of the United States at the
same time, and never know it! This is a fearful place to be lost in!"

"I'm not going to admit that we're lost," declared Mark stoutly.

"Hu! You're like the Indian," spoke Jack. "The Indian who got lost in
the woods. He insisted that it wasn't he who was lost, that it was his
wigwam that couldn't be found. He knew where he himself was all the
while. That's our case, I suppose. We're here, but the projectile is
lost."

"Ha! ha!" laughed Andy Sudds. "That's a pretty good joke!"

"But not being able to find the projectile is no joke," went on Mark,
who always took matters more seriously than did his chum. "What are we
going to do?" he added. "We can't stay here like this."

"Maybe we'll have to," declared Jack. "We certainly can't get off the
moon--at least, not until we reach the projectile, and I'd like to
discover those diamonds before we go back."

"Hu! Those diamonds!" exploded Mark. "I think this whole thing is a
wild-goose chase, anyhow! If it hadn't been for those diamonds we
wouldn't have come to the moon. I don't believe there are any diamonds
here, anyhow."

"Well, I can't prove it to you now, but I will before we get back,"
asserted Jack. "We'll be wearing diamonds, as the song says."

"Diamonds aren't going to keep us warm when we're freezing," went on
Mark, who seemed bound to look on the dark side, "and we can't eat 'em
when we're hungry. A lot of good they'll do us if we do find them!"

"Oh, cheer up!" suggested Jack cheerfully. "And, speaking of eating,
what's the matter with having some lunch? What did we bring it along
for if we're not going to eat? Let's begin."

His good spirits were contagious, not that Andy needed any special
cheering up, but Mark did. In a few minutes they were seated on some
rugged rocks, and, with their life-torches stuck in cracks, so that the
perforated metal boxes of chemicals would be on a level with their
faces, they opened the baskets they had been fore-sighted enough to
bring with them.

"Why, I feel better already," asserted Jack, as he munched some
sandwiches which Washington White had made. "As soon as we've finished
we'll have another hunt for the projectile, and I'll wager that we'll
find it."

"I wouldn't finish if I were you," suggested Andy, who was eating
sparingly.

"Finish what?" asked Jack.

"All your lunch. You see," the old hunter went on, "we may find the
projectile, and, again, we may not. I'm inclined to think we're not so
very far from it, but we may be some time locating it in among all
these peaks and craters. So it will be the best plan to save some of
our lunch and drinking water until--well, until we're hungry again,"
and he carefully put back into his basket the remains of the food.

"You don't mean to say you think we'll be all day finding the
Annihilator, do you?"

Jack paused, with a sandwich half way to his mouth as he asked this
question.

"Well, it's best to be on the safe side," spoke Andy guardedly. "We may
find it, and, again, we may not. Save your powder against the time of
need, I say--by powder meaning victuals and drink. We can't drop in a
restaurant up here, and I don't see much game to shoot, and I should
hate to eat such fodder as this," and he poked with his foot some
sickly green vines, growing on the ground.

The boys' faces, which had become more cheerful, assumed a serious
look. Jack stopped eating at once and placed back in the basket his
remaining sandwiches. He also corked up the bottle of water, which was
kept from freezing by means of a fur pouch in which it was carried.

"If there's a possibility of being lost some time," spoke Mark, "we'd
better figure out just how long our food will last," and he examined
the contents of his basket.

Fortunately Washington White, with a knowledge of the appetites of the
chums, had filled the baskets with lavish hands. There was, they found,
food enough to last them three days, if they ate sparingly, and there
was enough water for half that time, providing they only took small
sips when thirsty. But they had noticed, in one or two places, little
pools of liquid, which they had not tasted, but which might prove to be
drinking water. Certainly they would need more if they were destined to
remain away from the projectile for very long.

"Well, then," observed Mark, when the food calculation was over, "it
appears that we can remain lost for about three days, at the most."

"Oh, but we'll be back home--I mean in the projectile--long before
that," declared Jack.

"I wish I was sure of that," murmured Andy with a dubious shake of his
head.

"Well, let's move on again," suggested Jack. "We feel better now, and
maybe we'll have better luck."

They started off, tramping over the rugged surface of the moon, while
the sun shone with tepid heat down on them. They had to go this way and
that to avoid the immense fissures in the ground or the yawning
craters, which loomed deep, and in awful silence, in their path.
Sometimes they climbed small mountains or crawled in and out of small
craters, slipping and stumbling.

They were not cold, for their fur garments kept them comfortably warm,
and there was no wind to make the freezing temperature search through
the crevices of their clothing. But it was the desolate silence, the
utter absence of any form of life save the pale green vegetation that
got on their nerves. It was like being in a dead world--on a planet
that seemed about to dissolve into space.

They began their further search for the projectile with hope in their
hearts, but this gradually gave way to despair as they wandered on over
the desolate surface, and saw nothing but the same rugged peaks, the
same yawning caverns and the innumerable craters, large and small.

On they wandered, looking on all sides for the missing projectile, but
they had no glimpse of it. Even climbing to one of the high peaks,
whence they had a view of the surrounding country, afforded them no
trace of the _Annihilator_, They were utterly lost.

Old Andy, who, by reason of his experience as a trapper and hunter, had
taken the lead, came to a halt. He looked around helplessly. He did not
know what to do.

"Well, boys," he remarked at length, "I don't like to say it, but I
can't seem to get anywhere. I give up."

"Give up?" murmured Jack, in blank dismay.

"Yes, for the time being," said the old man. "I'm all played out. I
guess we all are. We must have a rest. Here's a sort of cave. Let's
crawl in and have a sleep. Then maybe we can do something
to-morrow--no, not to-morrow, for they don't have that on the moon,
where the day is fourteen days long--but after we sleep we may be able
to find our way back. Anyhow, I've got to get some sleep," and without
another word the old hunter went into the cave, and, fixing his
life-torch near his head, where the fumes from it would dissipate the
poisonous gases of the moon, he closed his eyes, and was soon in
slumber.

"I--I guess we'd better do the same," said Jack, and Mark nodded. They
were both sick at heart.




CHAPTER XXV

THE PETRIFIED CITY


For a time, after they had entered the cave, which was in the side of a
rugged mountain, the boys talked in low tones of their perilous
situation. For that it was perilous they both knew. Had they been on
the earth, lost in some desolate part of it, away from civilization,
their plight, would have been bad enough with what little food they
possessed.

But on the far-off moon--the dead moon, which contained no living
creatures save themselves, as far as they could tell--with no form of
animal life that might serve to keep them from starving, with only the
scantiest of vegetation, their situation was most deplorable.

"And then there's another thing," said Mark, as if he was cataloguing a
list of their troubles.

"What is it?" asked Jack. "I guess we have all the troubles that belong
to us, and more, too."

"Well, what are we going to do when the life-torches give out, and we
can't breathe any more?" asked Mark dubiously.

"Well, I guess it'll be all up with us then, if we don't starve to
death in the meanwhile," answered Jack. "But I'm afraid we will get out
of food before the torches are exhausted. They were freshly filled
before we started out after that tool, and they'll last for two weeks.
So we don't have to worry about that.

"By Jinks! this is all my fault, anyhow, it seems. If I hadn't seen
that item in the Martian paper about the diamonds, we never would have
come here, and if I hadn't left that tool on the ground outside of the
projectile we wouldn't have had to come back after it, and we wouldn't
have become lost. So I guess it's up to me, as the boys say."

"Oh, nonsense!" exclaimed Mark, who, as soon as he heard his chum
blaming his own actions, was ready to shoulder part of the
responsibility himself. "We all wanted to come to the moon," he went
on, "and, as for leaving the tool and forgetting it, I'm as much at
fault as you are. Let's go to sleep, and maybe we'll feel better when
we wake up."

It was a new role for Mark--to be cheerful in the face of
difficulties--and Jack appreciated it. They stretched out on the hard,
rocky floor of the cavern, taking care to fix their life-torches so
that the fumes would dispel the poisonous gases. Then the two lads
joined Andy in slumberland.

Meanwhile, as may be imagined, those aboard the projectile were very
anxious about the fate of the two boys and the hunter. They could not
understand what delayed them, and, though they guessed the real cause,
after several hours had passed, there was nothing the two scientists
could do.

They could not move the projectile until it had been repaired, and this
could not be done, without the tool--at least, they did not believe so
then. Nor did Mr. Henderson and the German think it would be safe to
start out in search of the wanderers.

"For," said Mr. Henderson, "if we went we would easily get lost amid
these peaks ourselves, and they are so much alike and in such numbers
that there is no distinguishing feature about them. We had better stay
here in charge of the _Annihilator_ until the boys and Andy come back.
They can't be away much longer now."

So worn out and exhausted were the boys and the hunter that they slept
for several hours in the cave, and the rest did them good. They awoke
in better spirits, and, after a frugal meal and a sip of the
fast-dwindling water, they started off once more to locate the
projectile.

"I'm a regular amateur hunter to go and lose my compass," complained
old Andy. "I ought to have it fastened to me, like a baby does the
rattle-box. I ought to kick myself," and he accepted all the blame for
their misadventure. But the boys would not suffer him to thus accuse
himself, and they insisted that they would shortly be with the two
professors and Washington in the _Annihilator_ once more.

"Well, it can't come any too soon," said Jack, "for I am beginning to
feel the need of a square meal and a big drink of water."

"So am I," said Mark, "but let's not think of it."

All that day they wandered on, crossing the rugged mountains, climbing
towering peaks, and descending into deep valleys. At times they skirted
the lips of craters, to look shudderingly into the depths of which made
them dizzy, for the bottoms were lost to sight in the black gloom that
enshrouded the yawning holes.

Their food was getting less and less, and what there was of it was most
unpalatable, for the bread was stale and dry, though the meat kept
perfectly in that freezing temperature. How they longed for a hot cup
of coffee, such as Washington used to make! and how they would have
even exchanged their chance of filling their pockets with the moon
diamonds for a good meal, such as was so often served in the projectile!

On and on they went. Once, as they were crossing the lip of a great
crater, Mark became dizzy, and would have fallen had not Jack caught
him. Mark had forgotten, for the moment, and had lowered his
life-torch, so that his mouth and nose were not enclosed in the film of
vapor that emanated from the perforated box.

"You must be careful," Andy warned them.

"What's the use?" asked Mark despondently. "I don't believe we'll ever
find the projectile."

"Of course we will!" exclaimed Jack. "I know we can't be far from it,
only we can't see it because of the mountains. If we only had some way
of letting them know where we are, they could signal to us."

"By gum!" suddenly exclaimed Andy.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack, for the old hunter was capering about
like a boy.

"Matter? Why, the matter is that I'm a double-barrelled dunce," was the
answer. "Look here; do you see that?" and he held up his rifle.

"Sure," replied Jack, wondering if their sufferings and worry had made
the old hunter simple-minded.

"What is it?" asked Andy, shaking it in the air.

"Your rifle," answered Mark, looking at Jack in surprise.

"Of course," answered the hunter, "and a rifle is made to be fired off,
and here I've been carrying mine for nearly three days now, and I
haven't shot it once. You wanted a signal to make the folks in the
projectile hear us. Well, here it is I I guess they can hear this, and
when they do they can come and get us, for we don't seem able to reach
them. I'll just fire some signal shots."

"That's the stuff!" cried Jack, and Andy proceeded to discharge his
rifle.

The report the gun made in that quiet place was tremendous, and the
effect was curious, for, there being no air in the ordinary acceptance
of the word, there was no echo. It was as if one had hit two shingles
together. Merely a loud, sharp sound, and then an utter silence, the
vibrations being swallowed up instantly.

"Do you think they can hear that?" asked Andy.

"It sounds loud enough," answered Jack. "Shoot some more," which the
old hunter did. They wandered on still farther, firing at intervals all
that day, but there came no answering report or calls to direct them to
the projectile. They climbed once more to the tops of towering peaks,
