of his own hopes.

For in the latter days of that passionate life that lay now so far
behind him, the conception of a free and equal manhood had become a very
real thing to him. He had hoped, as indeed his age had hoped, rashly
taking it for granted, that the sacrifice of the many to the few would
some day cease, that a day was near when every child born of woman
should have a fair and assured chance of happiness. And here, after
two hundred years, the same hope, still unfulfilled, cried passionately
through the city. After two hundred years, he knew, greater than ever,
grown with the city to gigantic proportions, were poverty and helpless
labour and all the sorrows of his time.

Already he knew something of the history of the intervening years.
He had heard now of the moral decay that had followed the collapse of
supernatural religion in the minds of ignoble man, the decline of public
honour, the ascendency of wealth. For men who had lost their belief in
God had still kept their faith in property, and wealth ruled a venial
world.

His Japanese attendant, Asano, in expounding the political history of
the intervening two centuries, drew an apt image from a seed eaten by
insect parasites. First there is the original seed, ripening vigorously
enough. And then comes some insect and lays an egg under the skin, and
behold! in a little while the seed is a hollow shape with an active grub
inside that has eaten out its substance. And then comes some secondary
parasite, some ichneumon fly, and lays an egg within this grub, and
behold! that, too, is a hollow shape, and the new living thing is inside
its predecessor's skin which itself is snug within the seed coat. And
the seed coat still keeps its shape, most people think it a seed still,
and for all one knows it may still think itself a seed, vigorous and
alive. "Your Victorian kingdom," said Asano, "was like that--kingship
with the heart eaten out. The landowners--the barons and gentry--began
ages ago with King John; there were lapses, but they beheaded King
Charles, and ended practically with King George mere husk of a king...
the real power in the hands of their parliament. But the Parliament--the
organ of the land-holding tenant-ruling gentry--did not keep its
power long. The change had already come in the nineteenth century. The
franchises had been broadened until it included masses of ignorant
men, 'urban myriads,' who went in their featureless thousands to vote
together. And the natural consequence of a swarming constituency is the
rule of the party organisation. Power was passing even in the Victorian
time to the party machinery, secret, complex, and corrupt. Very speedily
power was in the hands of great men of business who financed the
machines. A time came when the real power and interest of the Empire
rested visibly between the two party councils, ruling by newspapers and
electoral organisations--two small groups of rich and able men, working
at first in opposition, then presently together."

There was a reaction of a genteel ineffectual sort. There were
numberless books in existence, Asano said, to prove that--the
publication of some of them was as early as Graham's sleep--a whole
literature of reaction in fact. The party of the reaction seems to
have locked itself into its study and rebelled with unflinching
determination--on paper. The urgent necessity of either capturing or
depriving the party councils of power is a common suggestion underlying
all the thoughtful work of the early twentieth century, both in America
and England. In most of these things America was a little earlier than
England, though both countries drove the same way.

That counter-revolution never came. It could never organise and keep
pure. There was not enough of the old sentimentality, the old faith in
righteousness, left among men. Any organisation that became big enough
to influence the polls became complex enough to be undermined, broken
up, or bought outright by capable rich men. Socialistic and Popular,
Reactionary and Purity Parties were all at last mere Stock Exchange
counters, selling their principles to pay for their electioneering. And
the great concern of the rich was naturally to keep property intact, the
board clear for the game of trade. Just as the feudal concern had
been to keep the board clear for hunting and war. The whole world was
exploited, a battle field of businesses; and financial convulsions, the
scourge of currency manipulation, tariff wars, made more human misery
during the twentieth century--because the wretchedness was dreary life
instead of speedy death--than had war, pestilence and famine, in the
darkest hours of earlier history.

His own part in the development of this time he now knew clearly enough.
Through the successive phases in the development of this mechanical
civilisation, aiding and presently directing its development, there had
grown a new power, the Council, the board of his trustees. At first it
had been a mere chance union of the millions of Isbister and Warming, a
mere property holding company, the creation of two childless testators'
whims, but the collective talent of its first constitution had speedily
guided it to a vast influence, until by title deed, loan and share,
under a hundred disguises and pseudonyms it had ramified through the
fabric of the American and English States.

Wielding an enormous influence and patronage, the Council had early
assumed a political aspect; and in its development it had continually
used its wealth to tip the beam of political decisions and its political
advantages to grasp yet more and more wealth. At last the party
organisations of two hemispheres were in its hands; it became an inner
council of political control. Its last struggle was with the tacit
alliance of the great Jewish families. But these families were linked
only by a feeble sentiment, at any time inheritance might fling a huge
fragment of their resources to a minor, a woman or a fool, marriages and
legacies alienated hundreds of thousands at one blow. The Council had no
such breach in its continuity. Steadily, steadfastly it grew.

The original Council was not simply twelve men of exceptional ability;
they fused, it was a council of genius. It struck boldly for riches,
for political influence, and the two subserved each other. With amazing
foresight it spent great sums of money on the art of flying, holding
that invention back against an hour foreseen. It used the patent laws,
and a thousand half-legal expedients, to hamper all investigators who
refused to work with it. In the old days it never missed a capable man.
It paid his price. Its policy in those days was vigorous--unerring,
and against it as it grew steadily and incessantly was only the chaotic
selfish rule of the casually rich. In a hundred years Graham had become
almost exclusive owner of Africa, of South America, of France, of
London, of England and all its influence--for all practical purposes,
that is--a power in North America--then the dominant power in America.
The Council bought and organised China, drilled Asia, crippled the Old
World empires, undermined them financially, fought and defeated them.

And this spreading usurpation of the world was so dexterously
performed--a proteus--hundreds of banks, companies, syndicates, masked
the Council's operations--that it was already far advanced before common
men suspected the tyranny that had come. The Council never hesitated,
never faltered. Means of communication, land, buildings, governments,
municipalities, the territorial companies of the tropics, every human
enterprise, it gathered greedily. And it drilled and marshalled its men,
its railway police, its roadway police, its house guards, and drain and
cable guards, its hosts of land-workers. Their unions it did not fight,
but it undermined and betrayed and bought them. It bought the world
at last. And, finally, its culminating stroke was the introduction of
flying.

When the Council, in conflict with the workers in some of its huge
monopolies, did something flagrantly illegal and that without even the
ordinary civility of bribery, the old Law, alarmed for the profits of
its complaisance, looked about it for weapons. But there were no
more armies, no fighting navies; the age of Peace had come. The
only possible war ships were the great steam vessels of the Council's
Navigation Trust. The police forces they controlled; the police of
the railways, of the ships, of their agricultural estates, their
time-keepers and order-keepers, outnumbered the neglected little forces
of the old country and municipal organisations ten to one. And they
produced flying machines. There were men alive still who could remember
the last great debate in the London House of Commons--the legal party,
the party against the Council was in a minority, but it made a desperate
fight--and how the members came crowding out upon the terrace to see
these great unfamiliar winged shapes circling quietly overhead. The
Council had soared to its power. The last sham of a democracy that had
permitted unlimited irresponsible property was at an end.

Within one hundred and fifty years of Graham's falling asleep, his
Council had thrown off its disguises and ruled openly, supreme in his
name. Elections had become a cheerful formality, a septennial folly,
an ancient unmeaning custom; a social Parliament as ineffectual as the
convocation of the Established Church in Victorian times assembled now
and then; and a legitimate King of England, disinherited, drunken
and witless, played foolishly in a second-rate music-hall. So the
magnificent dream of the nineteenth century, the noble project of
universal individual liberty and universal happiness, touched by a
disease of honour, crippled by a superstition of absolute property,
crippled by the religious feuds that had robbed the common citizens of
education, robbed men of standards of conduct, and brought the sanctions
of morality to utter contempt, had worked itself out in the face of
invention and ignoble enterprise, first to a warring plutocracy, and
finally to the rule of a supreme plutocrat. His Council at last
had ceased even to trouble to have its decrees endorsed by the
constitutional authorities, and he a motionless, sunken, yellow-skinned
figure had lain, neither dead nor living, recognisably and immediately
Master of the Earth. And awoke at last to find himself--Master of that
inheritance! Awoke to stand under the cloudless empty sky and gaze down
upon the greatness of his dominion.

To what end had he awakened? Was this city, this hive of hopeless
toilers, the final refutation of his ancient hopes? Or was the fire of
liberty, the fire that had blazed and waned in the years of his past
life, still smouldering below there? He thought of the stir and impulse
of the song of the revolution. Was that song merely the trick of a
demagogue, to be forgotten when its purpose was served? Was the hope
that still stirred within him only the memory of abandoned things,
the vestige of a creed outworn? Or had it a wider meaning, an import
interwoven with the destiny of man? To what end had he awakened, what
was there for him to do? Humanity was spread below him like a map. He
thought of the millions and millions of humanity following each other
unceasingly for ever out of the darkness of non-existence into the
darkness of death. To what end? Aim there must be, but it transcended
his power of thought. He saw for the first time clearly his own infinite
littleness, saw stark and terrible the tragic contrast of human strength
and the craving of the human heart. For that little while he knew
himself for the petty accident he was, and knew therewith the greatness
of his desire. And suddenly his littleness was intolerable, his
aspiration was intolerable, and there came to him an irresistible
impulse to pray. And he prayed. He prayed vague, incoherent,
contradictory things, his soul strained up through time and space and
all the fleeting multitudinous confusion of being, towards something--he
scarcely knew what--towards something that could comprehend his striving
and endure.

A man and a woman were far below on a roof space to the southward
enjoying the freshness of the morning air. The man had brought out a
perspective glass to spy upon the Council House and he was showing her
how to use it. Presently their curiosity was satisfied, they could see
no traces of bloodshed from their position, and after a survey of the
empty sky she came round to the crow's nest. And there she saw two
little black figures, so small it was hard to believe they were men,
one who watched and one who gesticulated with hands outstretched to the
silent emptiness of Heaven.

She handed the glass to the man. He looked and exclaimed:

"I believe it is the Master. Yes. I am sure. It is the Master!"

He lowered the glass and looked at her. "Waving his hands about almost
as if he was praying. I wonder what he is up to. Worshipping the sun?
There weren't Parses in this country in his time, were there?"

He looked again. "He's stopped it now. It was a chance attitude, I
suppose." He put down the glass and became meditative. "He won't have
anything to do but enjoy himself--just enjoy himself. Ostrog will boss
the show of course. Ostrog will have to, because of keeping all these
Labourer fools in bounds. Them and their song! And got it all by
sleeping, dear eyes--just sleeping. It's a wonderful world."



CHAPTER XV. PROMINENT PEOPLE

The state apartments of the Wind Vane Keeper would have seemed
astonishingly intricate to Graham had he entered them fresh from his
nineteenth century life, but already he was growing accustomed to the
scale of the new time. They can scarcely be described as halls and
rooms, seeing that a complicated system of arches, bridges, passages and
galleries divided and united every part of the great space. He came
out through one of the now familiar sliding panels upon a. plateau of
landing at the head of a flight of very broad and gentle steps, with
men and women far more brilliantly dressed than any he had hitherto seen
ascending and descending. From this position he looked down a vista of
intricate ornament in lustreless white and mauve and purple, spanned by
bridges that seemed wrought of porcelain and filigree, and terminating
far off in a cloudy mystery of perforated screens.

Glancing upward, he saw tier above tier of ascending galleries
with faces looking down upon him. The air was full of the babble of
innumerable voices and of a music that descended from above, a gay and
exhilarating music whose source he never discovered.

The central aisle was thick with people, but by no means uncomfortably
crowded; altogether that assembly must have numbered many thousands.
They were brilliantly, even fantastically dressed, the men as fancifully
as the women, for the sobering influence of the Puritan conception of
dignity upon masculine dress had long since passed away. The hair of
the men, too, though it was rarely worn long, was commonly curled in
a manner that suggested the barber, and baldness had vanished from
the earth. Frizzy straight-cut masses that would have charmed Rossetti
abounded, and one gentleman, who was pointed out to Graham under the
mysterious title of an "amorist", wore his hair in two becoming plaits a
la Marguerite. The pigtail was in evidence; it would seem that citizens
of Chinese extraction were no longer ashamed of their race. There was
little uniformity of fashion apparent in the forms of clothing worn. The
more shapely men displayed their symmetry in trunk hose, and here were
puffs and slashes, and there a cloak and there a robe. The fashions of
the days of Leo the Tenth were perhaps the prevailing influence, but
the aesthetic conceptions of the far east were also patent. Masculine
embonpoint, which, in Victorian times, would have been subjected to
the tightly buttoned perils, the ruthless exaggeration of tight-legged
tight-armed evening dress, now formed but the basis of a wealth of
dignity and drooping folds. Graceful slenderness abounded also. To
Graham, a typically stiff man from a typically stiff period, not only
did these men seem altogether too graceful in person, but altogether too
expressive in their vividly expressive faces. They gesticulated, they
expressed surprise, interest, amusement, above all, they expressed
the emotions excited in their minds by the ladies about them with
astonishing frankness. Even at the first glance it was evident that
women were in a great majority.

The ladies in the company of these gentlemen displayed in dress, bearing
and manner alike, less emphasis and more intricacy. Some affected a
classical simplicity of robing and subtlety of fold, after the fashion
of the First French Empire, and flashed conquering arms and shoulders as
Graham passed. Others had closely-fitting dresses without seam or belt
at the waist, sometimes with long folds falling from the shoulders. The
delightful confidences of evening dress had not been diminished by the
passage of two centuries.

Everyone's movements seemed graceful. Graham remarked to Lincoln that
he saw men as Raphael's cartoons walking, and Lincoln told him that
the attainment of an appropriate set of gestures was part of every
rich person's education. The Master's entry was greeted with a sort of
tittering applause, but these people showed their distinguished manners
by not crowding upon him nor annoying him by any persistent scrutiny, as
he descended the steps towards the floor of the aisle.

He had already learnt from Lincoln that these were the leaders of
existing London society; almost every person there that night was either
a powerful official or the immediate connexion of a powerful official.
Many had returned from the European Pleasure Cities expressly to welcome
him. The aeronautic authorities, whose defection had played a part
in the overthrow of the Council only second to Graham's were very
prominent, and so, too, was the Wind Vane Control. Amongst others there
were several of the more prominent officers of the Food Trust; the
controller of the European Piggeries had a particularly melancholy and
interesting countenance and a daintily cynical manner. A bishop in full
canonicals passed athwart Graham's vision, conversing with a gentleman
dressed exactly like the traditional Chaucer, including even the laurel
wreath.

"Who is that?" he asked almost involuntarily

"The Bishop of London," said Lincoln.

"No--the other, I mean."

"Poet Laureate."

"You still?"

"He doesn't make poetry, of course. He's a cousin of Wotton--one of
the Councillors. But he's one of the Red Rose Royalists--a delightful
club--and they keep up the tradition of these things."

"Asano told me there was a King."

"The King doesn't belong. They had to expel him. It's the Stuart blood,
I suppose; but really--"

"Too much?"

