had not given the smallest sign of life, not even when the dragon
settled. Perhaps, however, she had merely lost her senses through
fright, and was still in a dead faint.

We might have fought the creature from the air, but we had decided to
assail him on the solid ground, because we should thus be able to
scatter and take him in the flank, if not in the rear.

While Carmichael landed his car the astronomer and I kept a sharp watch
on the beast, all ready to fire at the first movement which seemed to
threaten the safety of the young girl, who was lying motionless at the
bottom of a slope or talus which led up to the mouth of the cavern.
Freed from his burden the dragon now stood erect, and a more awful
monster it would be difficult to conceive. He must have been at least
forty feet in stature, yet he gave us an impression of squat and sturdy
strength.

I have called him a dragon, but he was not at all like the dragons of
our imagination. With his great bullet head and prick ears, his beetling
brows and deep sunken eyes, his ferocious mouth and protruding tusks,
his short thick neck and massive shoulders, his large, gawky, and
misshapen trunk, coated with dingy brown fur, shading into dirty yellow
on the stomach, his stout, bandy legs armed with curving talons, and his
huge leathern wings hanging in loose folds about him, he looked more
like an imp of Satan than a dragon.

Hitherto he had not appeared to notice his pursuers; but now that he was
freer to observe, the grating of the car upon the rocks caught his
attention. He turned quickly, and stared at the apparition of the
vessel, which must have been a strange object to him; but he did not
seem to take alarm. It was the gaze of a jaguar or a tiger who sees
something curious in the jungle--vigilant and deadly if you like, but
neither scared nor fierce.

We lost no time in sallying forth, all three of us, armed with magazine
rifle, cutlass, and revolver. Mr. Carmichael in the middle, I on the
lower, and Gazen on the upper side, or that nearest to Miss Carmichael.
The rocks around were slippery with ordure, and the sickening stench of
rotting skeletons made our very gorge rise. Suddenly a loud squeaking in
the direction of the cave arrested us, and before we had recovered from
our surprise, nearly a dozen young dragons, each about the size of a
man, tumbled hastily down the slope, and rushed upon the lifeless form
of Miss Carmichael.

"Great Scott, there's the whole family," muttered Gazen between his
teeth, at the same time bringing his rifle to the shoulder, and firing
in quick succession.

The foremost of the crew, which had already flung itself upon the prey,
was seen to spring head over heels into the air, and fall back dead;
another lay writhing in agony upon the ground, and uttering strangely
human shrieks; whilst the others, terrified by the noise, turned and
fled back helter-skelter to the cave.

The old one, roused to anger by the injury done to his offspring,
snarled ferociously at his enemies and, drawing himself to his full
height, made a furious dash for Gazen.

Our rifles cracked again and again; the monster started as he felt the
shots, and halted, glaring from one to another of us like a man
irresolute. Purple streams were gushing from his head and sides; he
attempted to fly, and ran towards the brink of the ledge; but ere he
could gain sufficient impetus to launch himself into the air, he
staggered and fell heavily to the ground, with his broken wings beneath
him.

Gazen, quicker than her father, flew towards Miss Carmichael, and bent
over her.

"Is she alive?" enquired Carmichael, in breathless and trembling
accents.

"Yes, thank God," responded Gazen fervently; as he raised her hand to
his lips and kissed it.

There were tears of joy in his eyes, and I knew then what I had long
suspected, that he loved her.

Suddenly a loud croak in the distance caused us to look up, and we
beheld another dragon on the wing, coining rapidly towards us from a
pass among the mountains. There was not a moment to be lost, and Gazen,
taking Miss Carmichael in his arms, we all hurried on board the car,
eager to escape from this revolting spot.




CHAPTER XII

SUNWARD HO!


"By the way," said Gazen to me, "I've got a new theory for the rising
and sinking of the sun behind the cliffs at Womla--a theory that will
simply explode Professor Possil, and shake the Royal Astronomical
Society to its foundations."

The astronomer and I were together in the observatory, where he was
adjusting his telescope to look at the sun. After our misadventure with
the flying ape, we had returned to our former station on the summit of
the mountain, to pick up the drawing materials of Miss Carmichael; but
as Gazen was anxious to get as near the sun as possible, and being
disgusted with the infernal scenery as well as the foetid, malarial
atmosphere of Mercury, we left as soon as we had replenished our cistern
from the pools in the rock.

"Another theory?" I responded. "Thought you had settled that question."

"Alas, my friend, theories, like political treatises, are made to be
broken."

"Well, what do you think of it now?"

"You remember how we came to the conclusion that Schiaparelli was right,
and that the planet Venus, by rotating about her own axis in the same
time as she takes to revolve around the sun, always keeps the same face
turned to the sun, one hemisphere being in perpetual light and summer,
whilst the other is in perpetual darkness and winter?"

"Yes."

"You remember, too, how we explained the growing altitude of the sun in
the heavens which culminated on the great day of the Festival, by
supposing that the axis of the planet swayed to and from the sun so as
to tilt each pole towards the sun, and the other from it, alternately,
thus producing what by courtesy we may call the seasons in Womla?"

"Yes."

"Well, judging from the observations I have made, we were probably right
so far; but if you recollect, I accounted for the mysterious daily rise
and set of the sun, if I may use the words, by changes in the density of
the atmosphere bending the solar rays, and making the disk appear to
rise and sink periodically, though in reality it does nothing of the
kind. A similar effect is well-known on the earth. It produces the
'after glow' on the peaks of the Alps when the sun is far below the
horizon; it sometimes makes the sun bob up and down again after sunset,
and it has been known to make the sun show in the Arctic regions three
weeks before the proper time. I had some difficulty in understanding how
the effect could take place so regularly."

"I think you ascribed it to the interaction of the solar heat and the
evaporation from the surface."

"Quite so. I assumed that when the sun is low the vapours above the edge
of the crater and elsewhere cool and condense, thus bending the rays and
seeming to lift the sun higher; but after a time the rays heat and
rarefy the vapours, thus lowering the sun again. It seemed a plausible
hypothesis and satisfied me for a time, but still not altogether, and
now I believe I have made a discovery."

"And it is?"

"That Venus is a wobbler."

"A wobbler?"

"That she wobbles--that she doesn't keep steady--swings from side to
side. You have seen a top, how stiff and erect it is when it is spinning
fast, and how it wobbles when it is spinning slow, just before it
falls. Well, I think something of the kind is going on with Venus. The
earth may be compared to a top that is whirling fast, and Venus to one
that has slowed down. She is less able than the earth to resist the
disturbing attraction of the sun on the inequalities of her figure, and
therefore she wobbles. In addition to the slow swinging of her axis
which produces her 'seasons,' she has a quicker nodding, which gives
rise to day and night in some favoured spots like Womla."

"After all," said I, "tis a feminine trait. _Souvent femme varie._"

"Oh, she is constant to her lord the sun," rejoined Gazen. "She never
turns her back upon him, but if I have not discovered a mare's nest,
which is very likely, she becks and bows to him a good deal, and thus
maintains her 'infinite variety.'"

The cloudy surface of Mercury now lay far beneath us, and the glowing
disc of the sun, which appeared four or five times larger than it does
on the earth, had taken a bluish tinge--a proof that we had reached a
very great altitude.

"What a magnificent 'sun-spot!'" exclaimed the professor in a tone of
admiration. "Just take a peep at it."

I placed my eye to the telescope, and saw the glowing surface of the
disc resolved into a marvellous web of shining patches on a dimmer
background, and in the midst a large blotch which reminded me of a
quarry hole as delineated on the plan of a surveyor.

"Have you been able to throw any fresh light on these mysterious
'spots?'" I enquired.

"I am more than ever persuaded they are breaks in the photosphere caused
by eruptions of heated matter, chiefly gaseous from the
interior--eruptions such as might give rise to craters like that of
Womla, or those of the moon, were the sun cooler. No doubt that eminent
authority, Professor Sylvanus Pettifer Possil, regards them as aerial
hurricanes; but the more I see, the more I am constrained to regard
Sylvanus Pettifer Possil as a silly vain asteroid."

While Gazen was yet speaking we both became sensible of an unwonted
stillness in the car.

The machinery had ceased to vibrate.

Our feelings at this discovery were akin to those of passengers in an
ocean steamer when the screw stops--a welcome relief to the monotony of
the voyage, a vague apprehension of danger, and curiosity to learn what
had happened.

"Is there anything wrong, Carmichael?" asked Gazen through the speaking
tube.

There was no response.

"I say, Carmichael, is anything the matter?" he reiterated in a louder
tone.

Still no answer.

We were now thoroughly alarmed, and though it was against the rules, we
descended into the machinery room. The cause of Carmichael's silence was
only too apparent. We saw him lying on the floor beside his strange
machine, with his head leaning against the wall. There was a placid
expression on his face, and he appeared to slumber; but we soon found
that he was either in a faint or dead. Without loss of time we tried the
first simple restoratives at hand, but they proved of no avail.

Gazen went and called Miss Carmichael.

She had been resting in her cabin after her trying experience with the
dragon, and although most anxious about her father, and far from well
herself, she behaved with calm self-possession.

"I think the heat has overcome him," she said, after a quick
examination; and truly the cabin was insufferably hot, thanks to the
machinery and the fervid rays of the sun.

We could not open the scuttles and admit fresh air, for there was little
or none to admit.

"I shall try oxygen," she said on reflecting a moment.

Accordingly, while Gazen, in obedience to her directions began to work
Carmichael's arms up and down, after the method of artificial
respiration which had brought me round at the outset of our journey, she
and I administered oxygen gas from one of our steel bottles to his lungs
by means of a makeshift funnel applied to his mouth. In some fifteen or
twenty minutes he began to show signs of returning animation, and soon
afterwards, to our great relief, he opened his eyes.

At first he looked about him in a bewildered way, and then he seemed to
recollect his whereabouts. After an ineffectual attempt to speak, and
move his limbs, he fixed his eyes with a meaning expression on the
engines.

We had forgotten their stoppage. Miss Carmichael sprang to investigate
the cause.

"They are jammed," she said after a short inspection. "The essential
part is jammed with the heat. Whatever is to be done?"

We stared at each other blankly as the terrible import of her words came
home to us. Unless we could start the machines again, we must inevitably
fall back on Mercury. Perhaps we were falling now!

We endeavoured to think of a ready and practicable means of cooling the
engines, but without success. The water and oil on board was lukewarm;
none of us knew how to make a freezing mixture even if we had the
materials; our stock of liquid air had long been spent.

Miss Carmichael tried to make her father understand the difficulty in
hopes that he would suggest a remedy, but all her efforts were in vain.
Carmichael lay with his eyes closed in a kind of lethargy or paralysis.

"Perhaps, when we are falling through the planet's atmosphere," said I,
"if we open the scuttles and let the cold air blow through the room, it
will cool the engines."

"I'm afraid there will not be time," replied Gazen, shaking his head;
"we shall fall much faster than we rose. The friction of the air against
the car will generate heat. We shall drop down like a meteoric stone and
be smashed to atoms."

"We have parachutes," said Miss Carmichael, "do you think we shall be
able to save our lives?"

"I doubt it," answered Gazen sadly. "They would be torn and whirled
away."

"So far as I can see there is only one hope for us," said I. "If we
should happen to fall into a deep sea or lake, the car would rise to the
surface again."

"Yes, that is true," responded Gazen; "the car is hollow and light. It
would float. The water would also cool the machines and we might
escape."

The bare possibility cheered us with a ray of hope.

"If we only had time, my father might recover, and I believe he would
save us yet," said Miss Carmichael.

"I wonder how much time we have," muttered Gazen.

"We can't tell," said I. "It depends on the height we had reached and
the speed we were going at when the engines stopped. We shall rise like
