"They come in an' be mad. Then some no satisfy. They want have
sacrifice. I tell 'um no sacrifice of 'um white men what save my life. I
save 'um for they bring me back. People no like, but must do. Me queen!"
and she drew herself up proudly. "Them must do what Dirola say!"

"They may this time," muttered Andy, "but the next time they may not. I
think this isn't a very healthy place for us, Professor."

"I would only be too glad to get away, and back to my ship," said the
inventor. "I am satisfied I have reached and passed the north pole. I
would be glad to go back home again."

"Me take care you," spoke Dirola. "Wait few days. See! You come, me hide
you."

She looked carefully around. There was no one in sight save the party
from the _Monarch_. Then, proceeding with caution, Dirola led the way up
to and behind the big altar of ice. The mysterious fires behind it had
died out somewhat, and once in the rear of the steps the captives could
see a long icy shaft, leading down deep into the earth. There was also
an opening in the roof of the cavern, down which the sunlight and
magnetic currents came.

"Go easy so no fall," cautioned Dirola. "If fall down hole never git
up!"

The prisoners needed no bidding to warn them to be wary of the cruel
looking shaft, and they gave it a wide berth. Dirola led the way past it
to a small chamber or room, hewn out of the ice to the left and rear of
the altar.

"You stay here," she said. "They no find you here. This great
place--what you call holy place. Here all white robes stay," and she
showed where were piled many of the garments of white fur. The place was
evidently a storehouse for the ceremonial robes.

"Me go now an' come back," spoke Dirola. "Me try find ship. You keep
quiet!"

She glided away, almost like a ghost in the semi-darkness, through which
her white furs showed plainly. Left to themselves, the captives were in
no easy frame of mind. They did not know what would happen next, whether
they could depend on Dirola or whether the mob would come after them to
offer all of them up as sacrifices to the Goddess of Ice.

"What puzzles me," said Andy, "is how we both happened to fetch up in
the same cave. You boys, with Bill, Tom and Dirola, land in one place on
the ice and fall into this cave. We in the ship continue on for some
distance, are brought a good ways on sleds and yet here we are with
you."

"The ship might have been blown backward instead of forward after the
boys fell off," suggested the professor. "That would explain it. The
Esquimaux were traveling to this cave with us, and simply brought us
from where the ship had been blown, up to where the boys landed."

"I guess that must be it," admitted Andy; "but listen! some one is
coming."

Footsteps were heard approaching. In a few seconds Dirola entered the
ice chamber.

"I fix it!" she exclaimed. "You must all go 'way quick. The people want
kill you, but me save. Listen. You climb up the slide me an' boys come
down. Me bring sharp bones," and she brought out from under her jacket
several sharp bone picks. "Make um steps in ice; climb up. Go in little
cave, where boys know. There man wait for you wid sled an' dogs. He take
you to airship. But hurry, hurry! People be after you soon when find you
gone. Me keep 'um back long what I can, but not for very long, so you go
fast."

"We must lose no time," said the professor. "This may be our last
chance. How can we thank you, Dirola?"

"Never mind talk, go!" exclaimed the Esquimaux queen. "Must hurry!"

The captives were anxious enough to escape. Led by Dirola they went out
into the main cavern. It was quite dark, as the sun had moved around so
it no longer shone in the opening, and the mysterious lights had died
away. They were soon at the bottom of the slope by means of which the
boys and the helpers had fallen into the ice cave.

"Now climb up!" Dirola commanded. "Me give people big feast 'cause I
back again. They eat an' no think of you for long time, but they chase
when they find out. Hurry! Hurry!"

It was no easy task for the prisoners to make their way up the icy
slope. Each one was given a pair of short sharp-pointed heavy bones.
With these in their hands, using them much as a seal does his tusks,
they managed to scramble up the slippery incline. Soon they found
themselves able to enter the cave the boys, Bill, Tom and Dirola had
made, through the opening from which they had tumbled.

"Good-bye," called Dirola to them, as they passed out of her sight.

"Good-bye," all called back softly, from the roof of the cavern. It was
the last they were to see of their kind friend.

Outside of the little cave they found a native waiting with a large
sled, to which twenty dogs were hitched. The Esquimaux seemed to be
watching for them, for he made a sign that they were to get on a sled.
No time was lost. Dirola had evidently made her plans well and in haste.
The dog driver looked to see that his charges were safe, and then
cracked his long whip.

Off went the sled at a swift pace, the animals tugging at their
harness. Not a native was in sight save the one driving the sled. They
were all probably at the feast Dirola had prepared in celebration of her
home-coming.

"This is the first sled ride we've had when we were not tied on like so
much cordwood," observed Andy. "Now we have a chance to observe the
scenery."

Faster and faster went the sled. It was a calm clear cold day--or it
might have been night as far as time went, but the sun shone from a blue
sky. It was very cold, and the heavy furs made the adventurers none too
warm.

Suddenly, as the party sped on, there came a loud explosion. It was like
a great cannon being fired.

"What was that?" exclaimed Andy, starting in alarm.

With a cry of fear the dog driver pointed behind him.

Looking over their shoulders, the escaping ones saw a great crack in the
ice field. In it showed the black waters of the ocean. Ahead appeared an
ever-widening black line, and on either side it was the same.

A large part of the ice field had become detached and was floating out
to sea. Though they did not know it, the adventurers had driven over
the water and away from the land.

"We are adrift on the ice!" cried Andy. "We only escaped from one danger
to fall into another!"




CHAPTER XXVI

FIGHTING WILD DOGS


For a moment the realization of their horrible position struck all dumb.
Adrift on the great polar sea, they might freeze to death before they
again got near to the main land. The dogs continued to run on,
approaching nearer the ever-widening crack in front. The driver seemed
to suddenly awaken to the danger.

With a series of sharp commands he brought the team to a halt. Then,
signing to the adventurers to get off the sled, he turned it over on the
side.

Next he unhitched the dogs, and fastened them by their thongs to his
whip handle, which he stuck in a crack in the ice. The beasts were thus
secured at some distance from the sled.

This done, the Esquimaux took the fur robes that had been on the sleigh,
and, spreading them over the frame of the vehicle, made a low but fairly
large and comfortable tent. He motioned for the men and boys to crawl
inside, which they were glad enough to do, to escape the bitter wind.
Then the native sat down in the low doorway of the shelter and seemed
willing to wait for whatever turned up.

"It doesn't seem to worry him much," observed Andy.

"He certainly has made us comfortable," said Jack. "I wonder what we are
going to do?"

"Wait and see what turns up," advised the professor. "We are on a large
ice floe. It may float for many days, and, after a while, strike the
main ice again. When it does we will escape."

"Yes, an' what am we goin' to eat in dat time?" demanded Washington.

With a triumphant gesture Jack pulled from his pocket a tin can. It
contained the patent condensed food capsules.

"Hurrah!" cried the professor on seeing it. "This will keep us from
starving for many days!"

"Lucky I didn't lose this after all I've been through," said Jack.

The meagre rations were distributed, the Esquimaux driver coming in for
his share. The patent food, though a small quantity sufficed for a meal,
was fairly satisfying, and soon all felt better. It was quite warm under
the little tent, and the adventurers stretched out for a rest.

They had been dozing several hours when a series of wild yelps and
barks outside roused them. With an exclamation the driver jumped to his
feet and rushed toward where he had tied the dogs.

The professor and the others crawled from the tent to see what the
trouble was. They saw that which filled them with fear.

The Esquimaux dogs, never any too tame, had gone half mad and wild from
fear at seeing the water all around them, and from lack of food. They
were fighting among themselves, snarling, biting and barking viciously.

Just before the driver reached them they broke loose from the thongs
that held them, and started for the tent. The Esquimaux tried to stop
them, but two of the savage brutes sprang at him and soon had him down
on the ice. The other dogs rushed on toward the group of adventurers,
who stood still, awaiting the onslaught, and not knowing what to do.

"We must defend ourselves!" cried Andy. "Those beasts will tear us
apart! They are as savage as wolves! Oh, for my rifle!"

"Haven't you a revolver?" cried Jack.

"Of course! I forgot," said Andy, bringing out his two weapons.
"Washington has one, too! Hurry up with it, Washington!"

"I'll give mine to Jack!" yelled the negro, handing the boy the weapon,
and then, taking to his heels, ran away from the on-coming brutes.

The animals were now fifty feet off and advancing rapidly. Their eyes
flashed with the mad rage of hunger and fear, while foam dripped from
their jaws.

Taking careful aim, Andy fired both revolvers at the pack of animals.
They were so close together he could not help hitting some. Two fell,
killed or badly wounded.

Jack also fired and dropped one dog. But the others came on, never
halting.

"Fire as fast as you can!" cried Andy. "It is our only chance! We must
stop them!"

The old hunter and Jack pulled the triggers of their weapons rapidly.
Spurts of flame and small clouds of smoke issued from the muzzles, and
several more of the dogs were killed.

There were at least a dozen dogs left when the revolver chambers were
empty, and with wild bounds they leaped upon the adventurers. The
yelping and barking sounded loud above the hoarse shouts of the men and
boys, who, with their fists, prepared to fight the wild dogs.

"Hit 'em with chunks of ice!" called Andy.

His advice came just in time. Each one grabbed up a chunk of the frozen
water. It was as hard as a stone. One big brute leaped for the
professor's throat. In his weakened condition, caused by his exposure in
the ice chamber, it seemed as if the old inventor would be killed.

Suddenly a white object flew through the air. It struck the dog on the
head, and the brute, with a howl, fell back. Jack had launched his chunk
of ice just in time.

"Good shot!" cried Andy.

He hit another of the brutes over the skull with some of the frozen
stuff, and Washington, whose courage had returned, did likewise. Tom and
Bill disabled the two dogs nearest them.

Mark aimed at once fierce beast, but missed his shot, and, slipping on
the ice, fell right in the animal's path. In an instant the brute was
upon him.

"Lie on your back and cover your head with your arms!" shouted Andy, as
he ran toward the animal. Mark did as he was told. The dog endeavored to
bite him, but the stout furs on his back prevented much damage being
done. Then, having secured a large chunk of ice, Andy ran up behind the
beast and stretched it out with a well-directed blow. Mark was saved,
and scrambled to his feet uninjured.

Suddenly there sounded a series of sharp reports as if a rifle was
being discharged. The refugees looked up, expecting to see some armed
force coming to their aid. Instead, they beheld the Esquimaux driver
approaching on the run. He was swinging his long-lashed whip, which he
had secured from the crack in the ice where he had stuck it, and was
snapping it vigorously.

At the same time he called in his native language to the dogs to lie
down. The brutes heard the cracking of the cruel thong, whose force they
knew but too well, and they recognized their master's voice. On came the
Esquimaux, until, reaching the pack of dogs, he laid about among them
with good will, the blows of the whip bringing blood.

Sticking their tails between their legs, the remaining dogs ran away
with frightened yelps. The driver had come in the nick of time.

"That was quite a fright!" panted Andy, when the excitement was at an
end. "My, but those were fierce brutes!"

While the dogs that were left alive among the pack, including several
wounded ones, withdrew to a far end of the ice floe, the adventurers
crawled back under the tent for a much-needed rest. The Esquimaux, with
a silence worthy of an American Indian, took up his position in the
small doorway.

It was growing much colder, and the big chunk of ice that served the
refugees as a raft was moving quite rapidly over a choppy sea.

It was several hours later that the Esquimaux with a loud cry attracted
all the others to the tent opening. He pointed ahead.

"I believe we're drifting back to shore!" shouted Andy.




CHAPTER XXVII

BACK TO THE SHIP


With anxious eyes the adventurers crawled out on the floe and gazed
ahead. Across the black stretch of water could be seen a dim whiteness.
It looked like the main ice pack, but they realized that it might be
only another floe or berg. The current was setting strong in the
direction of it.

"We will soon learn our fate," said the professor. "We should be up to
it in an hour."

In less time than that they were near enough to the white mass to tell
