    General observations about trees can be made by pointing out the
    beauty and character of the individual forms and branching, their
    harmony in their relations to each other as factors of a beautiful
    composition and the wealth of shades and colors in their leaves,
    bark and flowers. Compare, for instance, the intricate ramification
    of an American elm with the simple branching of a sugar maple, the
    sturdiness of a white oak with the tenderness of a soft maple, the
    wide spread of a beech with the slender form of a Lombardy poplar,
    the upward pointing branches of a gingko with the drooping form of a
    weeping willow. At close range, each of these trees reveals itself
    as an individual with a character quite its own. At little distance
    you may see them grouped together, subordinating their individuality
    and helping to blend into a beautiful composition with a character
    all its own. There is nothing more inspiring than the variety of
    greens in the spring foliage, the diversity of color in the spring
    blossoms and the wonderful display of autumnal tints offered by the
    sweet gum, sassafras, dogwood, black gum, red maple, sugar maple,
    scarlet oak, blue beech, sorrel tree, ash and gingko. The white bark
    of the gray birch, the dark bark of the black oak, the gray of the
    beech, the golden yellow of the mulberry and the mottled bark of the
    sycamore are interesting comparisons. The smooth bark of the
    mockernut hickory contrasts greatly with the shaggy bark of the
    shagbark hickory--members of the same family and yet how different.
    A wonderful opportunity is thus offered for a comparative study of
    human nature--individuality and community life, all reflected in
    trees.

    With this preliminary study and with the addition of some remarks on
    the value of trees as health givers and moral uplifters, the child
    is interested and attracted. The lesson so far has attained its aim.

2. Specific observations with a view to training the observative powers:
    The child's training in closeness of observation and scientific
    precision may be the next consideration. His enthusiasm will now
    prompt him to lend his interest for greater detail. We can teach him
    to recognize a few of the common trees by their general
    characters--an American elm by its fan-shaped form, a gray birch by
    its white bark, a white pine by the five needles to each cluster, a
    horsechestnut by its opposite branching and big sticky bud and a
    willow by its drooping habit. After that we may introduce, if the
    age of the pupils justifies, more details extending to greater
    differences which distinguish one species from another.

    The lesson might continue by pointing out the requirements of trees
    for water and light. Find a tree on some slope where the roots are
    exposed and another which is being encroached upon by its neighbor,
    and show how in one case the roots travel in search of water and
    food and in the other the branches bend toward the light, growing
    more vigorously on that side. Compare the trees on the open lawn
    with those in the grove and show how those in the open have grown
    with branches near the ground while those in the woodland are
    slender, tall and free from branches to some distance above the
    ground. Point out the lenticels on the bark of birch and sweet
    cherry trees and explain how trees breathe. Compare this process
    with that of the human body. You may now come across an old stump
    and here you can point out the structure of the wood--the sapwood,
    cambium and bark. You can illustrate the annual rings and count the
    age of the tree. At another point you may find a tree with a wound
    or bruised bark and here you can readily make a closer study of the
    cambium layer and its manner of growth.

    The adaptation of plants to the seasonal changes opens another
    interesting field of study for beginners. If the season is the fall
    or winter, note how the trees have prepared themselves for the
    winter's cold by terminating the flow of sap, by dropping their
    leaves too tender to resist the winter's cold, and by covering their
    buds with scales lined with down on the inside. Observe how the
    insects have spun for themselves silken nests or remain preserved in
    the egg state over the winter. If the season is spring or summer the
    opposite may be noted. See how everything turns to life; how the
    buds are opening, the leaves emerging, the sap running, seeds
    germinating and flowers blooming.

    The soil conditions on the lawn and in the grove furnish another
    interesting feature of comparison and study. In the grove, you can
    demonstrate the decomposition of the fallen leaves, the formation of
    humus and its value to the tree. The importance of the forest soil
    as a conservator of water and its relation to stream flow and soil
    erosion can be brought out at this juncture. An eroded bank and a
    slope covered with trees and shrubs would provide excellent models
    for this study. A consideration of the economic value of the trees
    would also be in place.

3. Civic lessons reflected in trees: The community life of trees in the
    grove, their growth, struggles for light and food and their mutual
    aid can be brought out and compared with the community life among
    people. The trees may here be seen struggling with each other for
    light and food, forcing each other's growth upward, some winning out
    and developing into stalwart and thrifty specimens and others
    becoming suppressed or entirely killed. On the other hand they may
    be seen helping each other in their community growth by protecting
    each other from windfall and by contributing to the fertility of the
    forest soil in dropping their leaves and shading the ground so that
    these fallen leaves may decompose readily.

[Illustration: FIG. 154.--Trees also Grow in Communities.]

4. Enemies of trees: An old stump or tree may be seen crumbling away
    under the influence of fungi and here the children may be shown the
    effects of tree diseases both as destroyers of life and as
    up-builders, because fungi turn to dust the living trees and build
    up others by furnishing them with the decomposed wood matter.

    Insects too, may be invading the old dead tree, and something of
    their nature, habits and influences may be gone into. They may be
    shown as wood borers, leaf eaters, or sap suckers, all injurious to
    the tree. On the other hand they may be shown as seed disseminators
    and as parasites on other injurious insects; all benefactors.

    Forest fires as an enemy of trees might be touched upon by noting
    how easily the leaves may be ignited and a surface fire started when
    the season is dry. Top and ground fires emanating from surface fires
    can then be readily explained.

[Illustration: FIG. 155.--Trees Blend Together to Form a Beautiful
Composition.]

5. Expression: The pupils have by this time been taught to feel the
    beautiful, to observe carefully and to reason intelligently and they
    may now be trained to express themselves properly. This may be
    accomplished by asking them to remember their observations and to
    write about them in the classroom. The lesson may be supplemented
    with effective reading about trees and forests. Interesting reading
    matter of this sort can be found in abundance in children's readers,
    in special books on the subject and in Arbor Day Manuals published
    by the various State Education Departments.

6. Preparation: In order to save time looking for objects of interest
    and for the purpose of correlating the various observations so that
    all will follow in orderly sequence, it is well for the teacher or
    leader to go over the ground beforehand and note the special
    features of interest. The various topics can then be given some
    thought and a brief synopsis can be drawn up to serve as a
    memorandum and guide on the trip.

    It is also well to be provided with a hatchet to cut into some
    decayed stump, a trowel to dig up the forest soil, a knife for
    cutting off twigs and a hand reading glass for examining the
    structural parts of the various objects under observation. A camera
    is always a valuable asset because the photographs hung in the
    classroom become records of great interest to all participants.

7. Suggestions for forming tree clubs: A good way to interest children
    in trees and nature study is to form, among them, a Tree Club. The
    idea has been fully developed in Brooklyn, N.Y., Newark, N.J., and
    other cities and consists of forming clubs of children in the public
    schools and private institutions for the purpose of interesting them
    in the trees around their school and their homes. The members of
    these clubs are each given the tree warden's badge of authority and
    assigned to some special duty in the preservation of the local
    trees. A plan of study and of outdoor trips is laid out for them by
    their director and at stated periods they are given illustrated
    lectures on trees and taken to the neighboring parks or woodlands.




INDEX

Acer negundo,
-- platanoides,
-- polymorphum,
-- pseudoplatanus,
-- rubrum,
-- saccharinum,
-- saccharum,
Aesculus hippocastanum,
-- rubicunda,
Ailing tree, how to tell an,
Air, influence of,
Alternate branched trees,
American beech,
-- elm,
-- larch,
-- linden,
Annual rings,
Aphides or plant lice,
Apple rust,
Arbor-vita and red cedar, description of,
-- (northern white cedar),
Arsenate of lead,
Ash, wood,
-- black,
-- white,
Ash-leaf maple,
Aspen, large-toothed,
--, quaking,
Austrian pine,

Bald cypress,
Balm of Gilead,
Balsam, fir,
--, poplar,
Bark,
Bark, how to prevent splitting when removing branches,
-- or trunk, trees told by their,
Bass-wood,
Bean, Indian,
Beech, American,
--, blue, or hornbeam,
--, copper,
--, European,
-- tree,
Beetle, elm leaf,
Betula alba,
-- lutea,
-- lenta,
-- papyrifera,
-- populifolia,
Bhotan pine,
Bigbud hickory,
Birch, black,
--, European white,
-- fungus rot,
--, gray,
--, paper,
--, sweet,
-- tree,
--, white,
--, yellow,
Bitternut hickory,
Black ash,
-- birch,
-- locust,
-- oak,
-- or sweet birch,
-- spruce,
-- walnut,
Blotches, leaf,
Blue beech, or hornbeam,
-- spruce,
Bolting limbs,
Bordeaux mixture,
Borer, bronze-birch,
--, hickory bark,
--, linden,
--, locust,
--, sugar maple,
Boring insects,
Box-elder,
Bracing limbs, various methods of,
Bracket fungus,
Branches, dead and broken, removal of,
--, how to prevent bark splitting when removing,
Broadleaf or "hardwoods,"
Bronze-birch borer,
Brooklyn, N.Y.,
Broom hickory,
Brown hickory,
Brown-tail moth,
Buckeye,
Butternut,
Buttonball,
Buttonwood,
By-products of forests, utilization of,

Cambium layer,
Camperdown elm,
Care in selecting trees suitable for the soil,
Carolina poplar,
Carpinus caroliniana,
Castanea dentata,
Catalpa speciosa,
Caterpillars,
Caterpillars, leaf-eating,
--, spraying for,
Catkin,
Cattle grazing in forests a source of injury,
Cavities, fungous diseases attacking,
-- how caused,
--, manner of filling,
Cedar apple,
--, white,
Celtis occidentalis,
Chamaecyparis thyoides,
Character building and trees,
Chestnut,
-- and oaks,
-- disease,
Chewing insects,
Cherry,
Child training in observation and precision,
Chlorophyll,
Civic lessons reflected in trees,
Climbing trees, precautions,
Clubs, tree,
Coffee tree,
Colorado blue spruce,
Color of leaves,
Common catalpa,
-- locust,
Community life of trees,
Conifers or "softwoods,"
Coniferous trees,
Copper beech,
Cork elm,
Cornus florida,
Corrosive sublimate,
Cottonwood,
Cottony-maple scale,
Crataegus oxyacantha,
Crown,
Cucumber tree,
Cypress,
-- and larch, description of,
--, bald,
-- knees,
-- obtuse leaf, Japanese,

Dead and broken branches, removal of,
Deciduous trees,
Destroying injurious insects, methods of,
-- pupae,
Developing disease, moisture a factor in,
Diaporthe parasitica,
Diffuse-porous woods,
Disease, fungi as factors of,
-- moisture a factor in developing,
Dogwood, flowering,
Douglas fir,

Effect of heat on trees,
Elkwood,
