
Barret backed away, his face white, hands pawing the air frantically as
if he were trying to push the big cadet back.

"Get over there," said Astro. "Sit down and keep your mouth shut!"

On the control deck, Tom was strapping himself into the pilot's chair
and calling frantically into the intercom, "Give me a course, Roger!"

"One-seventy-degree turn to starboard," replied Roger, "and full ahead!
I've got the major on my scanner."

"Pour on the power, Astro!" shouted Tom, gripping the controls firmly.

As the mighty ship blasted in a long, sweeping arc, Professor
Hemmingwell sat numbly in his chair, aware only that the three cadets
were taking the vessel back into the area where the remaining
projectiles, completely out of control, were buzzing around in space
like maddened hornets.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 18


"There he is!"

Roger's voice rose to a triumphant shout on the intercom. "Put the
brakes on this wagon!"

"Check!" retorted Astro from the power deck, his fingers flying over the
switches of the control panel and bringing the ship to a sudden blasting
stop.

On the control deck, Tom turned to Professor Hemmingwell. "I'm going
outside to get Major Connel, sir," he said. "Do you think you'll be all
right?"

The old man nodded absently, still dazed by the sudden turn of events.
Tom hurried past him and met Roger coming down from the radar bridge.
"I'm going too!" the blond-haired cadet announced.

"You tell Astro?"

"Yeah. He's got Barret locked in the power-deck storeroom and he'll take
over the control deck. Wonder if they have a jet boat aboard?"

"I doubt it. Not on a test flight."

"We'll have to hurry," said Roger as they reached the air lock and began
to scramble into space suits.

"Yes," replied Tom. "He probably doesn't have much oxygen."

"There's another reason," grunted Roger.

"What?"

"Those projectiles. We're right back in the middle of them. Any one of
them could wreck the ship."

"I see what you mean," said Tom. "Guess it's up to Astro to keep dodging
them."

"Never thought I'd be out in space ducking hot projectiles to save old
Blast-off Connel's hide."

"Neither did I," said Tom. "But here we are."

Stepping into the air lock, they quickly equalized the pressure and a
moment later climbed out on the hull.

"See him, Roger?" asked Tom over the helmet intercom.

"Not yet," replied Roger.

"I see him," called Astro from the control deck. "I got him spotted on
the teleceiver. Go aft, about a thousand, maybe fifteen hundred yards.
I'll direct you from there."

"Right!" snapped Roger. "And listen, you Venusian bonehead! Make it
good. I don't like being a clay pigeon for this crazy shooting gallery
out here!"

"Aw, damp your tubes and get to work," drawled Astro. "Honestly, Tom,
did you ever hear him _not_ complain?"

Tom did not answer. He was busy fastening two oxygen tanks to the front
of his space suit and Roger's. When he had finished, he checked the
pressure and, satisfied, nodded to his unit mate.

Opening the nozzles of the bottles, they shot away from the ship into
the nothingness of space.

"You have to go about fifteen degrees to your starboard and five degrees
up on the ecliptic," called Astro from the control deck. "You'll hit
Connel right on the nose!"

"Right!" replied Tom, turning the nozzle of the oxygen bottle to the
left and immediately shooting off in the indicated direction. Roger
followed quickly and expertly.

"See him?" called Tom.

"No," replied Roger. "Are you sure, you big clunk?"

"He's right above you!" snorted Astro over the intercom. Then his voice
rose in alarm. "No! That isn't--"

"Duck, Tom!" cried Roger.

Tom opened the nozzle of his oxygen bottle wide and turned it. As he
shot away, a projectile roared through the area he had just left.

Roger had done the same thing, flipping over and shooting up and away
from the moving object.

"Whew!" exclaimed Tom. "That was close!"

"You blockhead!" roared Roger. "What are you trying to do to us? Set us
up for coffins?"

"For you, that's not a bad idea, Manning!" snorted Astro. "Just damp
your tubes. I made a mistake."

"Some mistake!" growled Roger.

Tom and Roger maneuvered back together, and locking arms so they would
not drift apart, scanned the void around them for Connel. Suddenly Tom
jerked free. "Roger!" he cried.

"What is it?" replied the cadet. "Do you see him?"

"There!" Tom pointed back to the ship. "On the stern! He's hanging on to
the cleat over the main tubes!"

[Illustration: "_He's hanging on to the cleat over the main tube!_"]

"Astro," Roger called, "we're coming back in. We've spotted him."

"I heard you!" said Astro. "Must've come back on his own steam. Go get
him, quick!"

Turning the nozzles of their oxygen tanks, the two cadets shot toward
the ship. They quickly clambered onto the stern where Connel lay
stretched out on the side of the hull, arms extended, his gloved hands
gripping the small cleat on the side of the hull.

In a matter of minutes, the two boys had the Solar Guard officer safely
inside the air-lock chamber and had removed his space helmet and suit.
His eyes were closed, and his face was deathly white. Tom immediately
clapped an oxygen mask over his mouth and nose, while Roger applied
heating units to the wrists and neck.

Astro burst into the chamber, followed by the professor. "Will he be all
right?" Hemmingwell asked anxiously.

"Think nothing of it, Professor Hummingbird," said Roger. "The old major
will come around any second, and when he does, stand back. The first
thing he'll do is yell."

"Roger, the name is Hemmingwell," hissed Tom.

"Oh, yeah, sure," nodded Roger, and then turned to Astro. "Is Barret
still locked up?"

"Yeah," replied the Venusian. "And I hid the key, so Connel can't get to
him until he cools off."

"The major is coming around," said Tom.

As they watched, Connel stirred, coughed several times, and then opened
his eyes. He stared in amazement at Tom, then turned to blink
unbelievingly at Roger and Astro. "What in the star-blazing--?"

"It's us all right, sir!" Tom assured him.

"Yeah," chimed in Roger. "And you're not in heaven or--er--any place
else either."

As Connel suddenly flushed with anger and sat up, Hemmingwell spoke
quickly. "They saved your life, Major," he said.

"They did?" Connel's face clouded in confusion. "I don't understand. How
did you three get aboard, anyway?"

"It's a long story, sir," said Tom. "Right now, maybe we'd better--"

Before the cadet could finish, there was a loud crashing and a series of
jolting bumps as the ship lurched.

"What the blue blazes!" roared Connel, jumping to his feet in alarm.

"The projectiles!" exclaimed Roger. "We've got to get out of here!"

"By the craters of Luna!" cried Astro. "I forgot all about them!"

Tom, Roger, Astro, Hemmingwell, and Connel raced out of the air lock to
their stations. Astro poured on the power without waiting for an order
from the control deck and soon they were rocketing into the safety of
space.

Watching the wildly flying missiles on the teleceiver screen, Connel
breathed a sigh of relief.

"Wow!" he snorted. "Glad we're out of that mess."

"But what are we going to do about them, sir," asked Tom, a worried
frown wrinkling his forehead as he watched the screen. "We can't just
leave those things there. Some other ship may--"

"Don't worry about it," Connel broke in brusquely. "The projectiles will
run out of fuel in a few minutes and they'll just drift. They can be
fished out any time."

"We can go back and get them ourselves," said the young cadet eagerly.
"Roger and I can--"

"We've got more important things to do now!" thundered Connel. Switching
on the intercom, he ordered Roger and Astro to report to the control
deck. They appeared within seconds of his order and he faced the three
cadets grimly.

"Well, boys," he asked, "what's the story?"

"I guess we'd better explain, sir," said Tom.

"I guess you'd better," nodded Connel.

Tom quickly ran over the chain of events, beginning with his abduction
on Mars to their appearance on the ship, including the part Barret had
played in tricking Roger and Astro into taking the scout. As he spoke,
Connel looked more and more amazed, and when Tom finally uttered the
name of the man he thought was responsible for all the sabotage, Connel
jumped out of his chair.

"I can't believe it!" he exclaimed.

"You were nearly killed a few minutes ago, sir," said Tom. "And who
sabotaged the rings? Barret! Who was around every time something
happened? Who incited the crew to keep from taking this ship into space?
Who spread the rumor that it was jinxed? The answer to every one of
those questions, sir, is Barret. And Dave Barret is working for--"

"Let me at that sniveling space pup!" interrupted Connel, snarling his
rage. "I'll tear him apart and throw him to the buzzards!"

The enraged major jumped to the hatch but Astro and Tom barred his way,
with Roger stepping quickly in back of him, a heavy wrench in his hand,
ready to assist in any manner necessary to subdue the howling officer.

"Try to kill me!" Connel howled. "Why, I'll--I'll--"

"No, Major!" shouted Tom. "He's the only one that can help us convict
Carter Devers!"

Connel stopped. He stared at Astro's bulk and then turned to see Roger
trying to hide the wrench. "Were you going to hit me with that thing,
Manning?" he growled.

Roger gulped. "Yes, sir," he said. "If it was necessary to keep you away
from Barret, sir. I'm sorry, sir."

Connel spun back to face Tom. "Corbett, you must have a plan," he said.
"Let's have it quick."

Tom grinned. "All right, sir," he began. Suddenly, out of the corner of
his eyes, he saw Professor Hemmingwell slump to the deck.

Hurriedly they picked up the old man and eased him gently to the nearby
acceleration couch. After gulping some water that Roger poured for him,
the old man smiled weakly. "I'm afraid I don't have the strength to
withstand all this excitement," he said. "But now I understand why
things were never easy for me. Carter Devers--he did this to me. He
blocked the proposals every time that they were submitted to the Solar
delegations. He--" Hemmingwell's head fell back. Roger had put a
sedative into the water and the old man was now unconscious.

"It's just fatigue," said Connel. "He'll be all right in a little
while." He turned to Tom. "All right, Corbett, carry on!"

Tom hurriedly concluded his story of the events leading up to their
startling appearance on the ship, and as he spoke, he saw the major's
frown change to a glowing grin. When Tom finished, Connel suddenly
extended his hand in a gesture of friendship.

"I have to admit it, Corbett," he said. "You've done a good job. And,"
he added with a twinkle in his eye, "by going along with you, I am an
accomplice with Captain Strong in the aiding of three fugitives from the
Solar Guard."

Tom, Astro, and Roger grinned. "Now, let's get Barret up here and ask
him a few questions," continued Connel. "And, Manning, if I can't
restrain myself, you have my permission to hit me with that wrench! But
so help me, if you belt me before the time comes, I'll bend that wrench
over your skull!"

While Astro and Roger went below to get Barret, Connel and Tom reviewed
their plan.

"Better keep the news quiet for a while," said Connel. "If we telecast
it back to the Academy, Devers might get wise."

"Good idea, sir," acknowledged Tom.

"But I can't understand Devers' motive," said Connel. "What does he
stand to gain if this project is a failure?"

"He'll lose plenty if it's a success," Tom asserted.

"Devers owns Jilolo Spaceways, the parent company of Universal Jet
Trucking and Surface Transportation! If the projectiles worked, surface
cargo delivery would be wiped out."

Before Connel could comment on Tom's startling revelation, they heard
the sound of angry voices just outside the control-deck hatch.

"That must be Astro and Roger bringing in Barret," said Tom with a grin.

The hatch clanked open and Astro appeared, carrying Roger under one arm
and Barret under the other. He dropped them both unceremoniously on the
deck, but when they jumped to their feet, Roger charged forward quickly
and landed a stinging right to Barret's jaw. The man dropped to the deck
again like a stone.

"Manning!" roared Connel. "What was the idea?"

"I wanted to make sure I got in my licks before the Solar Guard got hold
of him," replied Roger, rubbing his knuckles and looking down at
Barret's inert form.

Astro grinned sheepishly. "I tried to stop him, sir!" he said.

"I'll just bet you tried to stop him!" bellowed Connel. "Cadet Manning,
you put that man to sleep, now you wake him up!"

"Yes, sir!" said Roger, and while Connel, Astro, and Tom roared with
laughter, he poured an entire bottle of water on Barret's face.
