able to affect the body through their action upon the nerves in the skin,
and in the changes which the epidermis undergoes on exposure. The latter
function is especially marked in the lower animals, the coverings of
epidermal tissue (hair, scales, feathers, etc.) adapting each species to
the physical conditions under which it lives. In man the most striking
example of adaptation through the skin is seen in the variations in the
quantity of blood circulating through it, corresponding to the changes in
the temperature outside of the body. These variations are of great
importance, having to do with the

*Maintenance of the Normal Temperature.*--It is necessary to the
continuance of life that the temperature of the body be kept at a nearly
uniform degree, called the _normal temperature_, which is about 98.6 deg. F.
The maintenance of the normal temperature depends mainly upon four
conditions: the chemical changes at the cells, the circulation of the
blood, the nervous system, and _the skin_. The chemical changes produce
the heat, the blood in its circulation distributes the heat over the body,
and the nervous system controls the heat-producing and distributing
processes (page 320). The skin is the chief means by which the body gets
rid of an excess of heat and, by so doing, avoids overheating. (91)

*How the Skin cools the Body.*--The skin is a means of ridding the body of
an excess of heat in at least two ways:

1. _By the conduction and radiation of heat from its surface_ as from a
stove. This goes on all the time, but varies with the amount of heat
brought to the surface by the blood.

2. _By the evaporation of the perspiration._ It is a well-established and
easily demonstrated principle that liquids in evaporating use up heat.(See
Practical Work.) It is also a matter of everyday experience that the
perspiration has a cooling effect upon the body and that its flow
increases with the amount of heat to be gotten rid of. The quantity of
perspiration secreted, and of heat disposed of through its evaporation,
also varies with the amount of blood circulating through the skin.

*Temperature Regulation by the Skin.*--Variations in the quantity of blood
circulating through the skin enable this organ to throw off just the right
amount of heat for keeping the body at the normal temperature. If it is
necessary for the body to rid itself of an excess of heat, the quantity of
blood circulating in the skin is increased. This brings the blood near the
surface, where more heat can be radiated and where it may cause an
increase in the perspiration. On the other hand, if the body is in danger
of losing too much heat, the circulation diminishes in the skin and
increases in the internal organs. This stops the rapid loss of heat from
the surface. The skin in this work is of course made to cooperate with
other parts of the body. That it is not the only organ concerned in
regulating the escape of heat is seen in the results that follow
sensations either of chilliness or of heat at the surface.

*Effects of Heat and Cold Sensations.*--Sensations, or feelings, of heat
and cold are made possible through the nerves which connect the brain with
the _temperature corpuscles_, found in the skin (page 343). As the warm
blood recedes from the skin, a sensation of cold is felt, but when the
blood returns, there is again the feeling of warmth. The sensation of cold
prompts one to seek a warmer place, or to put on more clothing; while the
sensation of heat, if it be oppressive, leads to activities of an opposite
kind. Prompted in this way by the sensations from the skin, one
voluntarily supplies the external conditions, such as clothing and heat,
that affect the body temperature.

*Alcohol and the Regulation of Temperature.*--Alcohol, through its effect
upon the nervous system, interferes seriously with the regulation of the
body temperature. By dilating the capillaries, it increases the
circulation in the skin and leads to an undue loss of heat. At the same
time the excess of blood in the skin causes a _feeling of warmth_ which
has led to the erroneous belief that alcohol is a heat producer. If taken
on a cold day, it deceives one about his true condition and leads to a
wasting of heat when it should be carefully economized. Not only is
alcohol of no value in maintaining the body temperature, but if taken
during severe exposure to cold, it becomes a menace to life itself.
Arctic, explorers and others exposed to severe cold have found that they
withstand cold far better when no alcohol at all is used.(92)



HYGIENE OF THE SKIN


Much of the hygiene of the skin is included in the problems of keeping it
warm and clean. It is kept warm by clothing; bathing is the method of
keeping it clean.

*Clothing* should be warm and loose-fitting. Woolen fabrics are to be
preferred in winter to cotton because, being poorer conductors of heat,
they afford better protection from the cold. But wool fails to absorb the
perspiration rapidly from the skin and to pass it to the outside where it
is evaporated. This, together with its tendency to irritate, makes woolen
clothing somewhat objectionable for wearing next to the skin. This
objection, however, is obviated by woolen underwear which is lined by a
thin weaving of cotton.

*Bathing.*--The solid material from the perspiration, which is left on the
skin, together with the oil from the oil glands and the dirt from the
outside, tends to close up the pores and develop offensive odors. Keeping
the skin clean is, for these reasons, necessary from both a health and a
social standpoint. While one should always keep clean, the frequency of
the bath will depend upon the season, the occupation of the individual,
and the nature and amount of the perspiration. As to the kind of bath to
be taken and the precautions to be observed, no specific rules can be laid
down. These must be determined by the facilities at hand and by the health
and natural vigor of the bather. Severe chilling of the body should be
avoided, especially by those in delicate health. If a hot bath is taken,
one should dash cold water over the body on finishing. One should then
quickly dry and rub the body with a coarse towel. The dash of cold water
closes the pores of the skin and lessens the liability of taking cold.

*The Tonic Bath.*--The cold bath has been found to have a beneficial effect
upon the general health beyond its effect upon the skin. When taken with
care as to the length of time and the degree of cold, decided tonic
effects are observed on the circulation and on the nervous system. The
rapid changes of temperature vigorously exercise the non-striated muscles
of the blood vessels (page 57) and the nerves controlling them. The
irritability of the nervous system in general is also lessened. For this
reason the cold bath is one of the best means of keeping both mind and
body in good condition during the warm months. Sponging off the body with
cold or tepid water before retiring is also an excellent aid in securing
sound sleep during the hot summer nights.

Danger from the cold bath arises through the shock to the nervous system
and the loss of heat from the body. It is avoided by using water whose
temperature is not too low and by limiting the time spent in the bath. A
brisk rubbing with a coarse towel should always follow the cold bath.
People past middle age are, as a rule, not benefited by the cold bath; and
those in delicate health, especially if inclined toward rheumatism, are
likely to be affected injuriously by it.

*Care of the Complexion.*--A good complexion is a natural accompaniment of
good health and depends primarily upon two conditions--a clear skin and an
active circulation of the blood through it. Clearness of the skin depends
largely upon the elimination of waste material from the body, and where
the solid wastes are not effectively removed through the natural channels
(the liver, kidneys, and bowels), blotches, sallowness of the skin, and
skin eruptions are likely to result. In seeking to clear the complexion,
attention must be given to all those agencies that favor the elimination
of waste, and especially should there be a free and thorough evacuation of
the bowels each day. The general health should also be looked after,
attention being given to exercise, fresh air, proper food,(93) sufficient
sleep, etc.

Bathing is the chief means employed for increasing the circulation in the
skin, although exercise which is sufficiently vigorous to cause one to
perspire freely is a valuable aid. A daily bath of warm or hot water,
finished off with a dash of cold, followed by a thorough rubbing of the
entire surface, and this by a kneading of the skin with the thumbs and
fingers, will in most cases bring about the desired results. A little
olive oil, thoroughly worked into the skin during the kneading process, is
beneficial where one lacks flesh or where the skin is dry and thin. The
olive oil is also beneficial where the baths are exhausting or render one
susceptible to cold. In rubbing and kneading, the skin should not be
bruised or irritated.

The much advertised "complexion beautifiers" which are applied directly to
the face frequently have the effect of clogging the pores and of causing
eruptions of the skin. On the other hand, certain authorities state that
the cold cream preparations may be of advantage in giving the skin a
desired softness, and that when judiciously used (the face being cleansed
after each application) they do no harm. Of the different kinds of face
powder those prepared from rice are considered the least injurious.

*Treatment of Skin Wounds.*--Skin wounds which may not be serious in
themselves frequently become so through getting infected with germs. Blood
poisoning often results from such infections, one of the worst forms being
_tetanus_, or lockjaw. A wound should be kept clean, and if it shows signs
of infection, it should be washed with some antiseptic solution. Or, it
may be cleansed with pure warm water and then covered with some antiseptic
ointment,(94) of which there are a number on the market. A weak solution
of carbolic acid (one part acid to twenty-five parts of water) makes an
excellent antiseptic wash. It may be used not only for cleansing wounds,
but also in counteracting the poisonous effects that follow the bites of
insects.

A wound resulting from the bite of an animal (cat or dog), even though
slight, should receive more serious attention, and as soon as possible
after the occurrence. Such wounds should be cauterized, and for this
purpose pure carbolic, acid (undiluted with water) may be used. A wooden
toothpick is dipped into the acid and this is worked about in the wound.
The acid is then washed out with warm water. A deep wound from a rusty
nail or a thorn should be treated in the same manner and should be kept
open, not being allowed to heal at the surface first. If one has reason to
believe he has been bitten by a mad dog, the wound should be cauterized as
above, and a physician should be summoned at once. Deep wounds from
explosives, or other causes, should also receive the attention of the
physician. Many cases of lockjaw result every year from wounds inflicted
by the toy pistols, firecrackers, etc., used in our Fourth of July
celebrations. These are due to the embedding in the skin or flesh of small
solid particles on which are lockjaw germs. Wounds of this nature should,
of course, receive the attention of the physician.

*Care of the Nails.*--Relief from a blood blister under the nail is secured
by boring a small hole through the nail with the sharp point of a
sterilized penknife (page 38). This simple bit of surgery not only
relieves the pain, but is frequently the only means of saving the nail.
Ingrown toe nails are relieved by scraping a broad strip in the middle of
the nail until very thin. This relieves the pressure, preventing the sides
of the nail from being forced into the toe. While the finger nails should
be trimmed in a curve, corresponding to the end of the finger, it is
recommended that the toe nails be cut straight across (Fig. 124), as this
method diminishes the pressure from the shoe and keeps the nails from
ingrowing. Shoes that pinch the toes should, of course, not be worn (page
238).

                                [Fig. 124]


            Fig. 124--Proper method of trimming nails of toes.


*Care of the Hair.*--Occasional washing of the hair is beneficial, but too
much wetting causes decay of the hair roots, which leads to its falling
out. The worst enemy of the hair is dandruff. A method of removing
dandruff which is highly recommended is that of rubbing olive oil into the
scalp and later of removing this with a cleansing shampoo. The olive oil
is placed on the scalp with a medicine dropper and thoroughly rubbed in
with the fingers. After three or four hours the hair is washed with soap
and water (any good toilet soap will do) and rinsed with pure water. The
hair is then dried, the surplus water being removed with a coarse towel.
Where the dandruff is very troublesome, this treatment may be given once
or twice a week; but in mild cases once a month is sufficient. Massage of
the scalp, by increasing the circulation at the hair roots, is beneficial,
but irritation by a fine-tooth comb, a stiff hair brush, or by other means
should be avoided. Frequent brushing and combing, however, are necessary
both for the good appearance of the hair and for spreading the oil
secreted by the glands at the hair roots.

*Summary.*--The skin forms the external covering of the body and also
serves additional purposes. It is a most important agency in adapting the
body to its physical surroundings, as shown by the part which it plays in
the regulation of the body temperature. The skin should be kept clean and
active, and skin wounds, even though small, should be guarded against
infection.

*Exercises.*--1. Name an example of each of the protective coverings of the
body.

2. Compare the dermis and the epidermis with reference to thickness,
composition, and function.

3. To what is the color of the skin due? How is the color of the skin
affected by the sunlight?

4. What modifications of the epidermis are found on our bodies? What are
found on the body of a chicken?

5. What different kinds of protection are provided by the skin?

6. How does the perspiration cool the body?

7. What change occurs in the circulation in the skin when the body is
becoming too cold? When becoming too warm? What is the purpose of these
changes?

8. How does alcohol cause one to _feel_ warm when he may be losing too
much of his heat?

9. What precaution should be observed by one in poor health, in taking a
bath?

10. How may the cold bath be a means of improving the general health?



PRACTICAL WORK


*Observations on the Skin and its Appendages.*--Examine the palm of the
hand with a lens. Note the small ridges which correspond to the rows of
papillae beneath the cuticle. In these find small pits, which are the
openings of the sweat glands.

2. Examine the epidermis on the back of the hand and palm. At which place
is it thickest and most resisting? Is it of uniform thickness over the
palm? Try picking it with a pin at the thickest place, noting if pain is
felt. Inference?

3. Examine a finger nail. Is the free edge or the root the thickest? Trim
closely the thumb nail and the nail of the middle finger of one hand and
try to pick up a pin, or other minute object, from a smooth, hard surface.
The result indicates what use of the nails? Suggest other uses.

4. Examine with a microscope under a low power hairs from a variety of
animals, as the horse, dog, cat, etc., noting peculiarities of form and
surface.

*To illustrate Cooling Effects of Evaporation.*--1. Wet the back of the
hand and move it through the air to hasten evaporation. Observe that, as
the hand dries, a sensation of cold is felt. Repeat the experiment, using
ether, alcohol, or gasolene instead of the water, noting the differences
in results. These liquids evaporate faster than water.

2. Wet the bulb of a thermometer with alcohol or water. Move it through
the air to hasten evaporation. Note and account for the fall of the
mercury.




CHAPTER XVII - STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM


*Cooerdination and Adjustment.*--If we consider for a moment the movements
of the body, we cannot fail to note the cooeperation of organs, one with
another. In the simple act of whittling a stick one hand holds the stick
and the other the knife, while the movements of each hand are such as to
aid in the whittling process. Examples of cooeperation are also found in
the taking of food, in walking, and in the performance of different kinds
of work. Not only is cooeperation found among the external organs, but our
study of the vital processes has shown that the principle of cooeperation
is carried out by the internal organs as well. The fact that all the
activities of the body are directed toward a common purpose makes the
cooeperation of its parts a necessity. The term "cooerdination" is employed
to express this cooeperation, or working together, of the different parts
of the body.

A further study of the movements of the body shows that many of them have
particular reference to things outside of it. In going about one naturally
avoids obstructions, and if anything is in the way he walks around or
steps over it. Somewhat as a delicate instrument (the microscope for
example) is altered or adjusted, in order to adapt it to its work, the
parts of the body, and the body as a whole, have to be _adjusted_ to their
surroundings. This is seen in the attitude assumed in sitting and in
standing, in the position of the hands for different kinds of work, in the
variations of the circulation of the blood in the skin, and in the
movements for protecting the body.(95)

*Work of the Nervous System.*--How are the different activities of the body
controlled and cooerdinated? How is the body adjusted to its surroundings?
The answer is found in the study of the nervous system. Briefly speaking,
the nervous system controls, cooerdinates, and adjusts the different parts
of the body by fulfilling two conditions:

1. It provides a complete system of connections throughout the body,
thereby bringing all parts into communication.

2. It supplies a means of controlling action (the so-called impulse) which
it passes along the nervous connections from one part of the body to
another.

The present chapter deals with the first of these conditions; the chapter
following, with the second.

*The Nerve Skeleton.*--If all the other tissues are removed, leaving only
the nervous tissue, a complete skeleton outline of the body still remains.
This nerve skeleton, as it has been called, has the general form of the
framework of bones, but differs from it greatly in the fineness of its
structures and the extent to which it represents every portion of the
body. An examination of a nerve skeleton, or a diagram of one (Fig. 125),
shows the main structures of the nervous system and their connection with
the different parts of the body.

Corresponding to the skull and the spinal column is a central nervous
axis, made up of two parts, the _brain_ and the _spinal cord_. From this
central axis white, cord-like bodies emerge and pass to different parts of
the body. These are called _nerve trunks_, and the smaller branches into
which they divide are called _nerves_. The nerves also undergo division
until they terminate as fine thread-like structures in all parts of the
body. The distribution of nerve terminations, however, is not uniform, as
might be supposed, but the skin and important organs like the heart,
stomach, and muscles are the more abundantly supplied. On many of the
nerves are small rounded masses, called _ganglia_, and from many of these
small nerves also emerge. At certain places the nerves and ganglia are so
numerous as to form a kind of network, known as a _plexus_.

                                [Fig. 125]


 Fig. 125--*Diagram of nerve skeleton.* The illustration shows the extent
  and general arrangement of the nervous tissue. _A._ Brain. _B._ Spinal
            cord. _N._ Nerve trunks and nerves. _G._ Ganglia.


It is through these structures--brain and spinal cord, nerve trunks and
nerves, ganglia and nerve terminations--that connections are established
between all parts of the body, but more especially between the surface of
the body and the organs within.

*The Neurons, or Nerve Cells.*--While a hasty examination of the nerve
skeleton is sufficient to show the connection of the nervous system with
all parts of the body, no amount of study of its gross structures reveals
the nature of its connections or suggests its method of operation. Insight
into the real nature of the nervous system is obtained only through a
study of its minute structural elements. These, instead of being called
cells, as in the case of the other tissues, are called _neurons_. The use
of this term, instead of the simpler one of nerve cell, is the result of
recent advances in our knowledge of the nervous system.(96)

                                [Fig. 126]


 Fig. 126--*Diagram of a mon-axonic neuron* (greatly enlarged except as to
      length). The central thread in the axon is the axis cylinder.


The neurons are in all respects cells. They differ widely, however, from
all the other cells of the body and are, in some respects, the most
remarkable of all cells. They are characterized by minute extensions, or
prolongations, which in some instances extend to great distances. Though
the neurons in certain parts of the body differ greatly in form and size
from those in other parts of the body, most of them may be included in one
or the other of two classes, known as _mon-axonic_ neurons and _di-axonic_
neurons.

*Mon-axonic Neurons.*--Neurons of this class consist of three distinct
parts, known as the cell-body, the dendrites, and the axon (Fig. 126).

The _cell-body_ has in itself the form of a complete cell and was at one
time so described. It consists of a rounded mass of protoplasm, containing
a well-defined nucleus. The protoplasm is similar to that of other cells,
but is characterized by the presence of many small granules and has a
slightly grayish color.

The _dendrites_ are short extensions from the cell-body. They branch
somewhat as the roots of a tree and form in many instances a complex
network of tiny rootlets. Their protoplasm, like that of the cell-body, is
more or less granular. The dendrites increase greatly the surface of the
cell-body, to which they are related in function.

The _axon_, or nerve fiber, is a long, slender extension from the
cell-body, which connects with some organ or tissue. It was at one time
described as a distinct nervous element, but later study has shown it to
be an outgrowth from the cell-body. The mon-axonic neurons are so called
from their having but a single axon.

*Di-axonic Neurons.*--Neurons belonging to this class have each a
well-defined cell-body and two axons, but no parts just like the dendrites
of mon-axonic neurons. The cell-body is smooth and rounded, and its axons
extend from it in opposite directions (Fig. 127).

                                [Fig. 127]


   Fig. 127--*Diagram of a di-axonic neuron.* The diagram shows only the
            conducting portion of the axon, or axis cylinder.


*Structure of the Axon.*--The axon, or nerve fiber, has practically the
same structure in both classes of neurons, being composed in most cases of
three distinct parts. In the center, and running the entire length of the
axon, is a thread-like body, called the _axis cylinder_ (Fig. 126). The
axis cylinder is present in all axons and is the part essential to their
work. It may be considered as an extension of the protoplasm from the
cell-body. Surrounding the axis cylinder is a thick, whitish-looking
layer, known as the _medullary sheath_, and around this is a thin
covering, called the _primitive sheath_, or neurilemma. The medullary
sheath and the primitive sheath are not, strictly speaking, parts of the
nerve cell, but appear to be growths that have formed around it. Certain
of the axons have no primitive sheath and others are without a medullary
sheath.(97)

*Form and Length of Axons.*--Where the axons terminate they usually
separate into a number of small divisions, thereby increasing the number
of their connections. Certain axons are also observed to give off branches
before the place of termination is reached (Fig. 131). These collateral
branches, by distributing themselves in a manner similar to the main
fiber, greatly extend the influence of a single neuron.

In the matter of length, great variation is found among the axons in
different parts of the body. In certain parts of the brain, for example,
are fibers not more than one one-hundredth of an inch in length, while the
axons that pass all the way from the spinal cord to the toes have a length
of more than three feet. Between these extremes practically all variations
in length are found.

*Arrangements of the Neurons.*--Nowhere in the body do the neurons exist
singly, but they are everywhere connected with each other to form the
different structures observed in the nerve skeleton. Two general plans of
connection are to be observed, known as the anatomical and the
physiological, or, more simply speaking, as the "side-by-side" and
"end-to-end" plans. The side-by-side plan is seen in that disposition of
the neurons which enables them to form the nerves and the ganglia, as well
as the brain and spinal cord. The end-to-end connections are necessary to
the work which the neurons do.

*Side-by-side Connections.*--On separating the ganglia and nerves into
their finest divisions, it is found that the nerves consist of axons,
while the ganglia are made up mainly of cell-bodies and dendrites. The
axons lie side by side in the nerve, being surrounded by the same
protective coverings, while the cell-bodies form a rounded mass or
cluster, which is the ganglion (Fig. 128). But the axons, in order to
connect with the cell-bodies, must terminate within the ganglion, so that
they too form a part of it. To some extent, also, axons pass through
ganglia with which they make no connection. The neurons in the brain and
spinal cord also lie side by side, but their arrangement is more complex
than that in the nerves and ganglia.

                                [Fig. 128]


 Fig. 128--*Diagrams illustrating arrangement of neurons.* _A, B._ Ganglia
 and short segments of nerves. 1. Ganglion. 2. Nerve. In the ganglion of
 _A_ are end-to-end connections of different neurons; in the ganglion of
  _B_ are the cell-bodies of di-axonic neurons. _C._ Section of a nerve
 trunk. 1. Epineurium consisting chiefly of connective tissue. 2. Bundles
  of nerve fibers. 3. Covering of fiber bundle, or perineurium. 4. Small
                             artery and vein.


The side-by-side arrangement of the neurons shows clearly the structure of
the ganglia and nerves. The nerve is seen to be a bundle of axons, or
nerve fibers, held together by connective tissue, while the ganglion is
little more than a cluster of cell-bodies. Their connection is necessarily
very close, for the same group of neurons will form, with their axons, the
nerve, and, with their cell-bodies, the ganglion (Fig. 128).

*End-to-end Connections.*--These consist of loose end-to-end unions of the
fiber branches of certain neurons with the dendrites of other neurons. The
purpose of such connections is to provide the means of communication
between different parts of the body. There appears to be no actual uniting
of the fiber branches with the dendrites, but they come into relations
sufficiently close to establish _conduction pathways_, and these extend
throughout the body (Fig. 129). They connect all parts of the body with
the brain and spinal cord, while connections within the brain and cord
bring the parts into communication with each other.

                                [Fig. 129]


Fig. 129--*Diagram of a nerve path* starting at the skin, extending through
the spinal cord, and passing out to muscles. A division of this path also
                            reaches the brain.


*Nature of the Nervous System.*--The nervous system represents the sum
total of the neurons in the body. In some respects it may be compared to
the modern telephone system. The neurons, like the electric wires, connect
different places with a central station (the brain and spinal cord), and
through the central station connections are established between the
different places in the system. As the separate wires are massed together
to form cables, the neurons are massed to form the gross structures of the
nervous system. The nervous system, however, is so radically different
from anything found outside of the animal body that no comparison can give
an adequate idea of it. We now pass to a study of the gross structures
observed in the nerve skeleton.

*Divisions of the Nervous System.*--While all of the nervous structures are
very closely blended, forming one complete system for the entire body,
this system presents different divisions which may, for convenience, be
studied separately. As physiologists have become better acquainted with
the human nervous system, different schemes of classification have been
proposed. The following outline, based upon the location of the different
parts, presents perhaps the simplest view of the entire group of nervous
structures:

