"The missing piece," Ram replied, "the one we need
most is Sentinel's assessment on where and when
we can strike at INOR's fleet with maximum effect."

"Depends entirely on Sentinel? No other sources?"

"At this stage, none, sir."

Camari lowered his head, lost in thought. After
a moment he raised his eyes to Ram and said,
"We've got to get our thinking through to the Outer
Region, to all citizens as well as Heads of State.

"I want you to get out there, Ram. Be my emissary.
Impress on whoever will listen the disaster
that all of us face, and why we must arrive at a
peaceful solution. Concentrate on the leaders of
major nations; whichever way they go, others will
follow."

"I'll need the formal weight of our government,"
Ram said.

"Of course. I'll notify them all that you are my
Ambassador Plenipotentiary, and that you carry
a personal message from me. Use the spunnel
and send me reports as you go along."

"Narval, too?"

"Of course. And while you're in his area, learn all
you can from whatever sources; but watch yourself
with that bastard. He'd as soon cut your throat as
look at you."

 ##

"Category one message, spunnel-comm to Earth via
Guardian Station 4. Personal to President Camari
from Ram Xindral. President Gelliman, Callisto,
unchanged in his conviction that Slingshot
will benefit only the highly industrialized inner
planets. He repeated charges that the UIPS
non-renewables deficits resulted from poor control
and excessive consumption of raw materials, plus
breakdown in recycling and conservation policies.
He concluded that Slingshot is our internal problem
and that it's being forced on INOR. Demands UIPS
halt Slingshot construction, withdraw from the
Special Zone, and resolve UIPS resource crises
internally."

 ##

"Category one message, spunnel to Earth via
Guardian Station 4. Personal to President Camari
from Ram Xindral. Prime Minister Manra, Io, says he
wishes us well in building a bridge to another star.
He makes an issue that transportation, construction
and operations for all phases of Slingshot,
including ultimate storage of incoming raw matter
will be inside INOR jurisdictions; therefore, the
INOR governments have a legitimate right to
participate in apportioning Slingshot's benefits.
Refuses to negotiate this point."

 ##

"Category one message, spunnel to Earth via
Guardian Station 7. Personal to President Camari
from Ram Xindral. Foreign Ministers Roab of
Ganymede and Slega of Europa represented their
governments. At conclusion of meeting they issued
a joint communique. Quote: it is only reasonable and
proper that the governments of the Outer Region not
be excluded from an equitable share of the enormous
financial and material resources being lavished
on the Interstellar Matter Teleport System
(Slingshot). The UIPS can begin to remedy this
injustice by agreeing to pay a transshipment tax
on all materials, manufactured parts, tools and
equipment, and personnel passing through the
separate INOR jurisdictions, space-ways, and
contiguous space generally. Passage fees
for individual vessels in transit also must be
negotiated and included in the agreement. Unquote.

"It is my opinion that the positions taken by
the governments of the Jovian Federation
are orchestrated. I suspect that reports on
my discussions with Heads of State or their
representatives are being passed among them.
I am departing for Titan to meet with Chairman
Stabar. The Chiefs of Staff of the other Saturnian
governments and the governments of the Uranus
and Neptune satellite unions have notified me that
their views are consistent with those of Chairman
Straber. They state nothing is to be gained by
pressing for separate meetings with them."

 ##

"Category one message, spunnel to Earth via
Guardian Station 9. Personal to President Camari
from Ram Xindral. Chairman Staber's position is the
same as those summarized in my previous reports.
Staber openly proclaims that INOR's intent is to
control the terminal that will receive and store
incoming substance and oversee its distribution.
Insists a formal treaty be negotiated now,
otherwise, the entire Slingshot Program will
be viewed as a threat to the integrity of INOR's
legitimate jurisdictions. I am proceeding to the
Planet Pluto Special Zone and will contact Narval
from inside the Logistics Depot's protective
force field. I will insist on President Narval's
guarantee of safe conduct prior to departing
the depot for Coldfield."





 Chapter TWENTY-EIGHT


Ram entered the Log Depot's conventional
communications center and nodded to the young
operator.

"Make the contact," he said, adding, "Relay the
message through one of the transports; delete all
references that show this facility is in the loop."

Switches snapped as the operator nodded. His hands
sped across the keypad. A few moments passed and
his voice issued as an electronic whisper.

"Calling Planet Pluto Comm Center. This is the UIPS
Transport Akiba, Call Sign 943 dash 792. We have a
Priority One message for your government. Stand by
to record. Acknowledge."

A slight crackle.

"This is Planet Pluto Comm Center to Call Sign 943
dash 792. We are ready to record. Go ahead."

Ram drew a small plastic card from the breast
pocket of his tunic and handed it to the operator.
Without glancing at the card the operator slipped
it into a slot in the console. A light on the panel
blinked on and off and the card ejected. The
operator returned it to Ram with a single motion
and a smile.

"Message dispatched, sir."

 ##

Narval pushed the message aside and away. Face
flushed in anger, he stared at Drummer.

"What do you make of it?"

"The message is less than straightforward, Mr.
President," Drummer replied. "Ambassador Xindral
seemingly appeals for an audience with you to
discuss matters of interest to both his government
and ours. The suggested agenda it carries, however,
puts us on the defensive with barely room for
reasoning with his government. He asks for a
guarantee of safe conduct. As a legally constituted
government in a community of nations, and in
the absence of, shall we say, formal military
hostilities, such a request is not only
unnecessary, it is an affront. I suspect, Mr.
President, that the Ambassador's motives are to
place you at a disadvantage."

"I agree."

"His distrust of us is evident in the manner in
which the message was routed. Transmitted from
a cargo transporter off the depot's force field,
no less. His personal vessel must be somewhere in
the pack up there, but he obviously intends to keep
it hidden. Very unseemly for a formal visit by an
Ambassador."

"Your recommendations?"

Drummer paused, and spoke slowly, carefully.

"Consider the facts: his tour of the Outer Region
was preceded by a personal message from Camari
to Chiefs of State. He has had audiences with INOR
Presidents or Ministers. They have informed you of
their replies to his appeals. Those who declined to
meet with him took the course they did because
they had nothing to add to what had already been
stated by the others.

"Because of your initiatives, President Narval, you
are central among the INOR leaders in pressing the
issues between the Regions. Refusing to see him
may be interpreted by our colleagues in INOR as a lack
of conviction in our cause, or even as weakness. My
recommendation is that you see him, but manipulate
the discussions to give our rights dominance.
Insofar as 'safe conduct', I suggest we ignore the
insult, grant him permission to visit our planet,
and wish him a pleasant stay."

Narval drummed on the desk, pushed at the message
again, and shifted about. He was uncomfortable.

"I'll think about it, Drummer," he said.
"Meanwhile, extend the invitation, set up suitable
quarters for him away from our official guest
house, meet him when he arrives, and so on. Have
him stand by. When I decide on the approach to
the discussions, I'll let you know whether I'll meet
with him."

 ##

"Well, Scarf, have you finished reading that
thing?" Narval impatiently bit a fingernail.

"Yessir, Mr. President."

"Well?"

"Sir?"

"What the hell do you mean by 'sir'? I asked for
your opinion, dammit."

"Well, sir, he asks for an audience with you..."

Narval sighed. "Don't just repeat the message,
Scarf. Tell me what you know of this man."

Scarf's face lost its embarrassed flush and he
hastily pulled a reader device from his pocket.
Striking a series of keys, Scarf peered closely
at the screen. He pointed to the reader as
verification for his words.

"Ambassador Xindral is a senior Intelligence
Officer assigned to Slingshot. That's about all
we've got on him. Definitely not a run-of-the-mill
diplomatic type."

"That's what concerns me, Scarf. I'm highly
suspicious of his motives even if Camari did notify
us in advance. Intelligence officer, indeed. If he
becomes aware of our preparations and reports
back, our plans will be jeopardized. Drummer wants
me to see him. I don't want to be in the same room
with this person. Yet I can't refuse without losing
face. Now, get me out of this, Scarf."

"How far can I go, Mr. President?"

"As far as you like, just keep me out of it."

Scarf rubbed his beefy jaw reflectively, then
grinned.

"I have reason to suspect, Mr. President, that
this known UIPS intelligence officer is using an
Ambassadorial cover for purposes harmful to
Planet Pluto's internal security. How's that for
starters, sir?"

Narval's eyes gleamed with sudden craft.

"Go on," he said.

"His ostensible mission to meet with the President
of Planet Pluto is, in actuality, a guise under
which he intends to meet with dissident elements
among our people. His real mission is to subvert
and undermine the foundations of our government.
In other words, his coming here is to disrupt. He
should be dealt with according to the rules of his
own game, and not those of normal interplanetary
or interregional diplomacy."

"Explain."

"Agents that conduct a mission such as his are
expendable, Mr. President. There are no rules."

"Repercussions?"

"Whatever happens to him will be outside accepted
protocols, and will occur prior to his arrival at
the President's Official Residence. The incident
will result from initiatives taken by the UIPS
Ambassador, himself. The Government of Planet
Pluto will not be involved."

"Very well, Scarf. I leave it to you."

 ##

"Hodak," Brad motioned him forward. "I want you to
show me the new power pack for the cruiser being
overhauled in tunnel 3. Where is it?"

Hodak glanced at Brad, then away.

"It's still in the shop near the north side of the
dome. Take us a few minutes to get there."

"OK, let's go."

Leaving the cubicle that served as office they
boarded the strip. Standing close, they spoke
through unmoving lips.

"Ram's here."

"In Coldfield?"

"Not yet, but soon."

"What's up?"

"He's to see Narval. His job is to try to work out
an agreement that'll keep Slingshot construction
moving along."

"How'd you find out?"

"Drummer mentioned it to me in passing. He's
arranging a meeting between Narval and Ram."

"Has the time been set?"

"Not yet. Drummer's waiting for the go ahead from
Narval."

"You mean Narval isn't sure he wants to meet Ram?"

"Suspicious, isn't it?"

"Damn right."

Their eyes met and moved on to the passing scene.

"If there's to be an incident," Brad asked, "who'll
be setting it up?"

"Scarf, who else?"

"Soon as I hear when Ram's due and where he's to
be lodged, I'll get back to you. For as long as he's
on Planet Pluto your job is to keep him out of harm's
way."





 Chapter TWENTY-NINE


Entering the Charnel Pit, Ram scanned the tavern.
An empty table beckoned, and he folded his long
frame onto its stool and delicately leaned an elbow
on the least filthy spot of the scarred surface.
Shifting his body slightly, he observed the milling
crowd with frequent glances toward the entry.

Garbed in earth-toned street clothes, he had just
left his room at the Condor, his mind on Drummer.
Their meeting at the landing pad had been proper
and courteous, with no attempts at prying, either
way. Confining themselves to amenities, they
spoke of tedious space jumps, the quality of
accommodations in various parts of the system,
and generalities on a better life for humankind
from a benevolent Slingshot.

Drummer had taken leave following Ram's inspecting
his lodgings at the Condor and shrugging them
acceptable under the circumstances. Departing,
Drummer informed Ram that he would call for him
or send an escort as soon as a suitable time for his
meeting could be arranged with President Narval.
Ram expressed his trust that the meeting would be
soon and productive.

As his eyes accustomed to the bar-room's
smoke-diffused lighting the harsh faces of
the jostling crowd emerged. A frontier, indeed,
he mused. Satisfied that he drew no untoward
attention, he glanced once more toward the door
and signaled a robo-dispenser.

A face drifted past, paused for the briefest
moment, and moved on. It was enough. Ram gave
no outward sign, but felt less alone. Hodak ambled
to the bar, where the drinkers greeted him and
jovially made room. An hour and several drinks
slipped by. Hodak and Ram ignored each other.

A small man in a nondescript tunic sidled up Ram's
table.

"Xindral?" He wheezed.

Ram glanced at him and away. He remained silent.

"I have a message for Ram Xindral."

"Give it."

"If you're Xindral, the person you're here to see
prefers to meet with you away from his normal
place of business. I am to guide you to the meeting.
Follow me."

"Name the man who sent you?"

"Drummer."

"Why didn't he come himself?"

"He is with his superior at the meeting place."

Ram was suspicious. It could be a trap. On the
other hand, it was not unreasonable that Narval
might want to meet away from the formal seat of
government. His options were limited. If Drummer
had really sent the message, and he refused the
escort, the meeting with Narval would be off to a
bad start, perhaps canceled.

The messenger stood by, subservient, waiting.
Ram brought his hands to his forehead as if
deliberating a decision, and gently rubbed his
temple to cover a flashing glance at Hodak. Hodak
subtly acknowledged the sign.

"Be with you as soon as I finish my drink," Ram
said.

Taking a sip, he placed the goblet on the table and
began to fish about in his tunic pockets, clumsy and
time-consuming. Finally, he rose slowly, towering
over the small man.
