
It was all needed as they found when they felt the water entering the
diving chamber, for the fluid was as cold as an ocean full of icebergs
could make it. Protected however by the heavy suits, warm clothing and
the heaters the divers were fairly comfortable.

The outer door was opened and they all started back in amazement at the
sight which met their eyes. Before them lay a forest of real trees, with
bushes growing among them, while the ground, instead of being like the
usual ocean bed was covered with grass.

As Washington had said, on getting a small view of the place from the
little window, it was real land under water.

Their first surprise at the strange spectacle over, the adventurers
glanced about for a sight of the terrible sea suckers. But they need not
have feared. Lying in a huddled up mass toward the rear of the
_Porpoise_ were the dead bodies of the ugly creatures. The electricity
had finished them.




CHAPTER XXVII

ATTACKED BY AN OCTUPUS


They walked some distance away from the ship, for the land under the
water was easy to travel on. It looked exactly as if some beautiful
valley had suddenly been submerged in the middle of summer, when
everything was fresh and green.

They had gone perhaps a quarter of a mile from the _Porpoise_ when
Professor Henderson motioned to them that they had better return. On
their way back they passed what looked to be a large cave in the side of
a hill. Wondering what could be in it, Mark and Jack paused to peer into
the black opening.

The next instant two long white things, like slender serpents shot out.
With the rapidity of lightning they wrapped themselves, one about each
boy, and, before the horrified companions of the lads could do anything
the unfortunate youths were whisked out of sight into the cavern.

For a few seconds no one knew what to do. To rush in to the rescue of
the boys would have been foolhardy, as the terrible octupus, which they
knew had grabbed the lads, would have been a match for all of the
adventurers, unarmed as they were.

It would be necessary to return to the ship and come back with some of
the electric guns, which they had neglected to bring with them. In the
meanwhile the beast might, and probably would, kill Mark and Jack. But
there was nothing else to do.

The professor motioned for Andy to remain on the watch at the mouth of
the cavern, so as to be on hand in case he could help the boys, while
the others were hurrying toward the ship. Then, leading the way, the
Professor signalled for Tom and Bill to follow him.

They could not hurry much for the heavy suits and the resistance of the
water impeded their progress. But they made all the speed they could,
urged on by a terrible fear.

Meanwhile old Andy stood in front of the cave, hoping against hope that
there might be some way of aiding the boys. If it had happened above
water he would not have hesitated to rush in and give battle to the
beast, even though he was unarmed. If he had his knife now he would
venture in, at the risk of his life.

"Oh, why didn't I bring my gun along!" thought Andy regretfully.

His hand dropped to his side and his fingers came in contact with a big
knife in the belt of the diving suit. Here was a weapon he had forgotten
all about.

He drew forth the blade. It seemed a small one with which to attack so
large and terrible a creature as the octupus. Yet to remain there,
knowing the boys were being killed was more than old Andy could stand.
Grasping the handle with a firm grip he started toward the cave. His
foot caught in something, and he nearly fell.

Looking down to see what had tripped him he saw a long thin pole,
straight as a lance. It had once been a tree limb, but all the branches
were stripped off.

"Now if I only had an iron point for that," Andy thought. Then he
recollected the knife in his hand.

"The very thing," he remarked aloud, the words sounding startlingly loud
in the confinement of the copper helmet. "If I only had something to
fasten the knife on the pole I could make a spear to attack the
octupus."

Then he saw long streamers of sea weed growing up from the ocean bed.
They were very tough, a kind of wirey grass that was as strong as rope.
Andy cut several streamers and, with a hunter's skill bound the knife to
the end of the staff.

Now he had a weapon formidable enough to venture in and give battle to
the monster. He hesitated no longer, fearing that even the short delay
might have been too much and that the boys were dead. He entered the
cave. At first he could perceive nothing for it was quite dark. Then, as
his eyes became used to the gloom, which the lamp in his helmet faintly
illuminated, he saw, far back in the rear, the horrible octupus.

Two dark objects, around which were wrapped several folds of the
terrible arms, Andy guessed to be Mark and Jack, and when he was a faint
glow coming from them he was sure they were the boys, the gleams coming
from the lamps in their helmets.

Warily the hunter approached the creature. If he had hoped to take it
unawares he was disappointed, for, when he had come within ten feet,
holding his improvised lance outstretched ready for a deadly thrust, the
creature shot out two long arms toward Andy.

Now the battle began. The snake-like feelers, armed with big saucer
shaped suckers, lashed about in the water, seeking to clasp the hunter
in their deadly embrace. But Andy, who had fought many kinds of wild
animals on land, did not lose his presence of mind in confronting this
beast of the sea.

Nimbly, in spite of the handicap of the heavy diving suit, Andy dodged
the arms. Watching his chance he thrust at one, and the sharp knife
severed the end. But another arm shot out, while the wounded one was
drawn in, and the battle was as much against the old hunter as before.

Once more he thrust his lance, and this time he severed one of the arms
close to the ugly body. The creature, in its rage and pain, redoubled
its efforts to clasp Andy.

The hunter decided to try to get to closer quarters where he could use
his spear on the body of the beast. He stooped down and wiggled along on
the bottom of the cave. But the creature saw him, and darted an arm out
to pull the old man in. Andy squirmed to one side, and then, being as
close as he desired, he rose to his feet and, drawing back the pole
thrust it with all his force straight at the centre of the
whitish-yellow body that was like a horrible lump of soft fat directly
in front of him.

At the first touch of the knife the creature squirted out an inky
substance that made the water about it as black as night. Andy could not
see, but he could feel that the lance was still in the body. He pulled
it back a little and thrust again and again, turning it around to
enlarge the wound he had made.

Then, what he had feared all along happened. Two of the creatures arms
found him, and he felt the terrible pressure as they wound themselves
about him, the sucker-plates clinging fast. Yet in it all he did not
lose his presence of mind, nor did he let go of the pole.

Tighter and tighter the arms clasped him. He struggled with all his
strength but he was in a grip more powerful than that of a boa
constrictor. Suddenly the pole he was holding snapped off. He let go the
useless end and pulled the shorter part, to which the knife was bound,
toward him. Andy felt his senses beginning to leave him, but he
determined to make one more effort.

One hand was free, that holding the knife. With his last remaining
strength he cut and slashed at the arms of the creature that were
clasped about him.

Again and again he stuck the blade into the gristle like substance.
Could he win? Could he save his own life, to say nothing of that of the
two boys?

The creature was lashing about now so that the water was a mass of black
foam. The ink-color was beginning to fade away. Andy could dimly observe
the horrible front of the octupus, and see the wound his lance had made.
Then all seemed to grow dark again. He dimly remembered trying to
thrust the knife into one of the saucer-shaped eyes, and then of a
sudden his senses left him.

When Andy came to his senses he found himself lying on the ocean bed
just outside the cave. About him stood the professor, Washington, Tom
and Bill. His head buzzed and he felt weak, but he knew he was
uninjured, and that his diving suit had not been punctured in the fight
with the octupus, for he could feel the fresh air entering from the tank
at the back of his helmet.

Were the boys killed, Andy wondered. Had his fight to save them been in
vain? He managed to stand up, and then, to his relief he saw Mark and
Jack standing behind Tom and Bill. The boys seemed weak but otherwise
uninjured.

The professor motioned to know if Andy could walk and the old hunter
soon demonstrated that he could by stepping forward. Then the party
proceeded slowly to the ship.

Little time was lost by each one in divesting himself of his diving suit
as soon as they had left the water chamber. The first thing Andy asked
when his helmet was off, was:

"Did I kill the beast?"

"Indeed you did," replied the professor. "And just in time, too. You
were about done for when we came back with the guns, but they were not
needed. My! But you must have had a terrible fight!"

"I did, while it lasted," said the hunter. "But were the boys hurt?"

"They can speak for themselves," replied Mr. Henderson. "I guess not,
though."

"Having the wind almost squeezed out of us was the worst that happened,"
said Mark. "The octupus must have recently dined when it grabbed us, for
it didn't offer to eat us. And it didn't grip us as tightly as it might
have or I reckon we wouldn't have come out alive. I thought sure we were
going to be killed, however."

"So did I," put in Jack.

"I don't want any more such fights this trip," said Andy with a weak
smile.




CHAPTER XXVIII

OUT OF THE ICE


Worn out with their encounter with the octupus, Andy and the boys were
glad to take to their bunks. The others, too, who were weary from
traveling under water, felt the need of rest, and so it was decided to
let the ship remain stationary down on the bottom of the ocean for
several hours before going on further.

"When we get rested up we'll have a good meal, and then try to gain the
surface of the ocean," said the professor.

There was quiet on board the _Porpoise_ for a long time. Washington was
the first to awake and he at once set about getting a meal. When it was
ready he called the professor, and, one after another all the
adventurers rose from their bunks and refreshed themselves with hot
coffee, bacon, eggs and preserves, all prepared from condensed foods, of
which a large supply had been brought.

"Now to see if we can make our way upward through the ice," announced
Mr. Henderson.

"We ought to be far enough south to strike the open polar sea which I
believe exists."

The engine was started after the small leaks in the bow, caused by the
ramming of the boat on the rocks, had been stopped up, and the
professor, entering the conning tower, turned her due south.

The screw vibrated in the tunnel, the water rushed out in a big stream,
the engines and dynamos hummed, and the hearts of all were lightened as
they knew they were nearing the goal of their journey.

Several hours passed and the professor, who was keeping watch of the
gages noted they had covered more than one hundred miles. As the supply
of compressed air was getting low Mr. Henderson, not wanting to run any
chances, decided to make an attempt to reach the surface and refill the
tanks.

Accordingly the water tanks were emptied of their ballast, the rudder
was set to force the ship to the surface, and soon the depth gage showed
a constantly decreasing amount of water over the heads of the
adventurers.

"Now, if we don't hit the ice above us we'll be all right," spoke Mr.
Henderson. "We are within fifteen feet of the surface."

Hardly had he ceased speaking when the _Porpoise_ brought up against
something with a bump that jarred everyone. Then the submarine went
scraping along, hitting the conning tower every now and then.

"Not clear of the ice yet," said Mr. Henderson. "We must go down a
little and try again."

The tanks were filled with enough water to keep the boat about fifty
feet under the surface, and at that depth she was sent ahead at full
speed. The professor's face wore an anxious look, and when Washington
asked him if it was not time to replenish the air supply of the boat the
inventor told the colored man to be very sparing of the contents of the
compressing tanks.

"I'm afraid we are not as near the open sea as I at first thought," Mr.
Henderson finished.

On and on rushed the _Porpoise_. The engines were kept at full speed,
and after two hours of this fast run another attempt was made to reach
the surface. Once more the thick ice intervened.

"Guess we'll have to blast our way out," observed Andy. "We seem to have
lots of trouble on this trip."

"Why not try to ram your way through," suggested Jack.

"How do you mean?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"I mean to sink the boat say two hundred feet. Then start her up
obliquely and perhaps the sharp prow will cut a hole through the ice."

"Hardly through ice fifteen feet or more thick," said the captain
despondently.

"But it may be thinner now," persisted Jack.

"At any rate it will do no harm to try," the inventor admitted. "We can
not last much longer down here."

Again the tanks were filled, and by the aid of the deflecting rudder the
_Porpoise_ went down into the depths. Then the ballast tanks were
quickly emptied, and the rudder turned so as to force the craft upward
on a slant. The engine was set going at top speed.

"Hold fast everybody!" called the professor. "It is kill or cure this
trip!"

Like an arrow from a bow the _Porpoise_ shot upward. On and on it sped,
gathering momentum with every foot she traveled.

Suddenly there came a terrible crash, a grinding sound and a rending and
tearing. The ship trembled from end to end. Every one was knocked from
his feet. There were bumpings and scrapings all along the sides of the
submarine. Then, with one final spurt of speed, the little ship tore her
way through the ice and emerged, with a splash and shower of foam into
the open sea!

Quickly the man hole was opened and, half dead from lack of fresh air,
the adventurers crawled out on deck. It was night and the stars
glittered in the sky above. They were just beyond the edge of the ice
field, and all about them was a wide open sea.

"I was right after all," said the professor, "but I miscalculated the
distance. Had we gone on a few feet farther it would not have been
necessary to break through the ice."

"I guess it's a lucky thing we didn't try it before either," remarked
Andy. "We never could have bored through fifteen feet of the frozen
stuff. Where we plowed up it is less than two feet," and he pointed to
where the immense floe came to an end.

It was decided to go no farther that night, however, as the professor
wanted to take some observations by daylight and ascertain his position.
So filling their lungs with the air, cold and piercing though it was,
the adventurers descended to their cabin, and lots were drawn to see who
would stand the two night watches. It fell to Mr. Henderson to take the
first, and Washington the second. The captain accordingly took up his
position in the conning tower and prepared to pass several hours.

He was busy thinking over the exciting times he and his companions had
passed through, and planning new trips to see more wonders of the world,
when his attention was attracted by slight noise near the man hole
leading to the amidship companionway.

The professor looked up, and was startled to see a tall white object,
with outstretched arms advancing toward him with slow and stealthy
tread.

"The ghost again!" exclaimed the inventor softly. "I must catch it now,
and see what foolishness it is," for the professor did not believe in
spirits.

He got down on his hands and knees the better to escape observation,
should the white thing prove to be a bodily substance, and started to
crawl toward it. He came within ten feet of the thing, and could make
out that it was a man, or at least the semblance of one, all clothed in
white.

Nearer and nearer the inventor crawled to the thing. It turned to face
him now and Mr. Henderson could not help feeling startled as he saw the
object had no head. The neck ended in a white stump.

In spite of a little feeling of qualmishness, which even his boasted
disbelief in ghosts did not save him from, Mr. Henderson was about to
spring upon the thing and solve the mystery.
