
"I ... I ...", he struggled to go on, then realizing that something was
holding him back, changed the subject slightly. "I hope, gentlemen, you
will forgive me. I don't know what has come over me these past years.
I think you know, Hawarden, that I was always heartily in favor of
the Federation, and did all I could to make it a force for peace
throughout the System. I know only too well how inter-planetary war
would wreck all our economies, and I do not want that. But I seem to
have ... changed ... these last years ... and I didn't want to!" It was
almost a sob.

The admiral, as man to man, went quickly around the desk and laid his
hand comfortingly on the imperial shoulder. "We all felt that, Sire. You
were far too great a ruler to have changed so radically. It puzzled and
saddened us all, but now I believe we can begin to see the reason--and
it doesn't harm you in our estimation now that we realize you couldn't
help it."

The emperor raised puzzled eyes. "What do you mean by that?"

"May I answer that, Sire?" Hanlon stepped forward. "We know now that
Gorth Bohr wasn't human--he was an alien from ..."

"An ... alien?" the emperor quavered.

"Yes, Sire, definitely. We do not yet know where he came from
originally, but we do know he had considerable more--or
different--mental powers in some ways, than most humans. You are under
some sort of a compulsion or hypnosis that prevents your speaking out.
The fact that your health failed and your body deteriorated so rapidly
proves it was against your desires."

The emperor was startled by that, and his body shook as with a palsy. He
repeated his query, dully, "An alien?"

Hanlon and Hawarden nodded silently. After a moment Hanlon took a deep
breath and dared the question: "May we have permission to search Bohr's
quarters and offices to see what evidence we can find that will perhaps
tell us more about his projects?"

His Majesty straightened with decision, and years seemed to drop from
his face and figure. "You certainly may, I'll give orders at once, and
you can send in as many of your experts as you desire. I can sense the
need for speed."

Hanlon bowed his thanks, and the admiral voiced his. "That is very
gracious, Sire. The Corps thanks you."

The emperor was gaining strength and his old shrewdness by the moment.
"What about that fleet you say is being built on ... on some other
planet?"

Hanlon noticed that hesitation and guessed the reason. But for the
moment he let it lie, and answered the question. "It is not yet a
serious menace, Sire, but will be shortly if not taken into the Corps'
hands."

Admiral Hawarden explained further that the grand fleet was being
assembled, and would cope with the problem within days.

"Good. Good. Call on us for whatever assistance we can give."

They talked over many details for some time, then the admiral rose as
though to take his leave.

But Hanlon wasn't yet ready. He wanted to pick up that matter he had let
lie some minutes ago. He stepped up to the desk and looked straight into
the imperial eyes.

"Sire, please think hard with all your will. I believe you know more
about Bohr's plans, but that the knowledge was hypnotically sealed in
your sub-conscious. Bohr had that power, we know. Please try to break
that seal. Bohr is dead now--his _compulsion_ can no longer bind you!"

The emperor seemed doubtful, but at Hanlon's continued, assured
insistence, finally agreed to try. He concentrated for long, long,
agonizing minutes. Great beads of sweat stood out on his white, strained
face, and his hands clenched into tight balls.

Hanlon almost repented, and thought of breaking the spell and telling
the suffering ruler it didn't matter that much, that they could get the
knowledge elsewhere. But he _had_ to have those facts--and if he could
suffer as he had done, so could others.

But just then the emperor suddenly relaxed. His features became more
composed and natural, and he smiled in relief.

"It is coming now," he wiped his face with his silk kerchief. "Bohr did
boast to me that he would one day rule the galaxy. But then he told me I
must forget what he said, and I did."

That speech seemed to release him still further from the awful tension
that had held him for so many years. He was weary but happy. "He didn't
tell me much in detail, as nearly as I can remember. Merely that plans
were being made to gain control first of this planet, then the
Federation, and after that the whole Galaxy."

"Did he say who was with him in this outrageous undertaking?" Hawarden
gasped, and Hanlon added, "We mean, was he alone in it, or was some
other planet or system backing him?"

The emperor thought steadily for some time, then shook his head. "I
don't seem to remember," he sighed sadly. Nor could he, after half an
hour's more concentration. "I am sorry I cannot give you that
information, gentlemen. But you will soon, we trust, have reason to
believe that we are once more desirous of doing everything possible for
the peace and well-being of the Federation."

There were tears in Admiral Hawarden's eyes and he impulsively stepped
forward and grasped the emperor's hand.

"Welcome back, Sire," he said sincerely.

Back at Base, there were messages awaiting, that had come in while they
were gone. The admiral handed one of them to Hanlon. It was terse, but
brought a happy smile to his face.

_"Coming immediately, with full crew. Congratulations. NEWTON."_

       *       *       *       *       *

Others were from Grand Fleet, regarding the measures being taken for the
fleet rendezvous, and the part the Simonidean sector was to play.
Another was from the planetographers, giving the spatial location of
Algon, with the note that they had finally found it on a star map, and
that a survey ship was being sent there at once.

Hanlon punched a stud. "Stay away from Algon," he rapped out when the
scientist's face appeared on the screen. "Don't send that ship until you
get permission. Just forget all about even having heard of Algon!"

The elder looked questioningly at the youthful civilian giving him such
orders. "I don't know ..."

"Hawarden speaking," the admiral pushed Hanlon aside and glared into the
screen. "That's an order! Forget it, as you were told!"

"Yes, sir. It's forgotten."

Hanlon turned wearily to the admiral. "I'm minus on sleep and strength
right now, sir. Think I'll go get some rest. In the morning I'll come
back and we'll start searching Bohr's stuff."

"Right, I could use some caulking-off myself. A couple more orders, then
I'm going home. Do you want to bunk here at Base?"

"No, guess I'd better go back to the hotel. I can't appear here too
much, you know--might be recognized by some Terran officer. And that
brings up a problem. What will be my apparent status before the crews
doing the searching?"

"Civilian specialist, called in by the Corps," Hawarden was used to
quick decisions. "We often use such. I'll sign a pass for you. Better
use a disguise and different name, hadn't you?"

Hanlon nodded. "False mustache, skin darkened, contact lenses to color
my eyes. And I'll call myself Spencer Newton."

Hawarden looked surprised. "You pick a name fast."

The SS man grinned back. "It's the one I was born with,"--and then the
admiral really was surprised, but asked no questions. He filled in the
pass with that name. "Better come directly into this private office."

       *       *       *       *       *

When they met in the morning Hawarden complimented Hanlon on his
disguise, then quickly reported he had already assembled crews and one
was working at the imperial palace and the other at the ex-Prime
Minister's own residence.

"Good," Hanlon was well-rested and his voice was crisp. "I think I'll
start at Bohr's place."

The two officers left Base, a staff car rushing them to the ministerial
residence. They entered and Hawarden led the way down a hall towards
Bohr's private office.

But just as they reached the door and were turning to go in, Hanlon
suddenly pushed the admiral past it, then jumped across the opening
himself. Hawarden turned in puzzlement, but Hanlon signalled quiet and
led him into a small reception room adjoining.

"There's one man in there you'll have to get rid of before I can go in,"
he explained in a swift whisper. "Young junior lieutenant named Dick
Trowbridge. He'd recognize me even in this disguise. How'd he ever get
here to Sime?"

"Trowbridge? Oh, yes, he was sent here from Terra when we asked Prime
for a code-expert."

"Umm, that's right, Dick was a code-specialist," Hanlon nodded. "He was
my roommate all through cadet school," he explained. "It would give the
whole works away if he saw me here."

"He's our only good decoder," Admiral Hawarden frowned. "We lost our
best man. We'll have to use him if any code shows up."

"I realize that, but send him away for now. If we get code we can send
it to him at Base."

"Right, sir, I'll fake an excuse."

Some five minutes later Hawarden returned. "All clear now, sir."

They started out, then Hanlon stopped the admiral with a hand on his
arm. "Please, sir," his face was flaming, his eyes miserable, but his
voice was fairly steady. "Please don't call me 'Sir' all the time. It
may be that my position as an SS man carries that distinction, but it
makes me nervous. A youngster like me has no business being called 'Sir'
by a top brass like you who has worked nearly half a century to achieve
the honor."

Admiral Hawarden grinned suddenly, and hugged Hanlon with a fatherly
gesture. "You're all right, Son, and I'm for you. From now on you're
simply 'Newton'. Anything to make you ... hey, 'Newton'? Are you...?"

Hanlon nodded. "His son."

The admiral's eyes glowed. "Wonderful man, your dad. One of the Corps'
greatest."

The young man swallowed hard. "I think so, too."

They had been working nearly a quarter of an hour, sorting through the
voluminous papers in the minister's desk and files, when another Corps
lieutenant came in, his hand bandaged.

"What happened to you, Patrick?" Hawarden asked in surprise.

"That blasted toogan bit me, and I had to get my hand dressed."

"What toogan?"

"One that must have been Bohr's pet. It was flying all about the room
yelling and cussing us out. I was crossing to the corner of the room,
there, when it screamed and bulleted over, slashing my hand when I threw
it up to protect my face."

Another of the men spoke up. "Took three of us to capture it, and I
wanted to wring its neck, but Captain Banister wouldn't let me, so we
stuffed it into its cage and sent it to the Zoo."

Hanlon was intensely interested in this, but one thing puzzled him. He
signalled Hawarden to one side, and asked in a whisper, "What's a
toogan?"

"A native bird here much like your Terran parrots, but with even more
beautiful plumage, and they can talk much better than parrots. They seem
to have quite a lot of intelligence."

Hanlon was instantly alert. "Get it back here for me."

Puzzled but unquestioning, the admiral went to the visiphone and dialed
the zoo. "Admiral Hawarden, Curator. I believe the Prime Minister's
toogan was just delivered to you. There was a mistake. Please send it
back ... never mind, sir, what the 'why' is, just return it
immediately."

He flipped off the switch impatiently, and looked at the young Secret
Serviceman with wondering eyes. A toogan? What on earth did the fellow
want with ... this was the most amazing man he'd ever seen. But he sure
did get results.

He turned back to his men. "Anything yet?"

"Nothing but ordinary state papers so far, sir," was the consensus.

"Keep looking. Remember, we especially want any mention of any planets
whose names you do not recognize; anything about ship-building, or about
mining or other planets."

Hanlon handed Hawarden a note, and the admiral sent a couple of marines
off on a run. Half an hour later a truck pulled up in front, and the
marines carried in another desk. It was the one from that back room in
the Bacchus Tavern.

Hanlon himself went through this, but was quickly disappointed. There
wasn't a thing he wanted in any of the drawers. He turned the desk
upside down, looking for secret compartments. Finding none, he ordered
the marines to take it to pieces. At a nod from the admiral they
dismantled the desk.

But it was perfectly innocuous.

Hanlon was just turning away, disgustedly, when a man came from the zoo
with the caged toogan. At sight of the familiar room the bird perked up.

"Hey, Boss!" it called out in a clear but whistling sort of voice, "I'm
home again." Hanlon had no trouble understanding its words, spoken in
Simonidean, of course, but was busy examining its mind. He walked over
to the messenger and held out his hand. "I'll take the bird."

The zoo attendant looked at him doubtfully. "It's a vicious thing, sir,"
he said. "Be careful--it's already injured one man. They say no one but
the Prime Minister can handle it."

"It's all right," the admiral spoke. "Thank you for bringing it. That
will be all."

Hanlon took the cage and, giving the admiral a meaning look, walked out
of the room with it.




Chapter 23


In the next room George Hanlon sank into a comfortable chair, then
opened the cage door and the toogan fluttered out and perched on the
chair arm. The young man fitted his mind more closely to the bird's
brain and began probing. Carefully he studied its every line and
channel, utterly oblivious to everything else.

His first brief examination brought a slight sound of pleased surprise
to his lips. This bird had a real mind, far better than any he had
previously discovered in any animal or bird, even better than a dog's.
And he could read everything in it.

Best of all, the toogan had a pictorial type of mind--it remembered in
scenes as well as words. It transmitted an almost perfect likeness of
the being Hanlon had first known as The Leader and later as His Highness
Gorth Bohr--any slight discrepancies being caused by the difference
between a bird's ability to see and that of humans.

Like a swiftly unreeling three-dimensional film, Hanlon saw the Minister
working at his desk, walking about the room, receiving callers, playing
with the bird, eating--and sharing his food with it--talking to it
confidentially as he might have done to a well-trusted aide.

For over an hour Hanlon sat there, and the bird, seemingly asleep, sat
on the chair arm without making a move. Finally Hanlon rose, and the
toogan flew onto his outheld arm much as a falcon might ride. In that
manner they returned to the main office where the others were still
working.

They were all amazed at this peculiar situation, but only Admiral
Hawarden came even close to guessing what was going on. The memory of
that astounding performance of the pigeon made him think perhaps this
surprising young man had actually been reading the bird's mind--or
something equally fantastic.

Hanlon set the toogan down on a corner of the big desk, then started
walking toward a corner closet. As he neared it the bird seemed to come
to life. It began screaming, "No need looking there! There's nothing in
there. Nobody's ever to look into that closet! Sic 'em, Pet!"

It dove straight at Hanlon, beak open and screaming in rage. But the
man's hand and mind were quicker. Taking possession of the bird's mind
again, he silenced it and grabbed it by the neck, holding it gently but
firmly under his arm.

"Open that closet and search it thoroughly," Hawarden snapped.

Several of the Corpsmen jumped forward, and again the toogan struggled,
but Hanlon was holding it firmly by force, as well as tightening his
mental control, which the powerful compulsion Bohr had implanted in the
bird's mind had momentarily broken through.

In minutes everything was out of the closet, and while some of the
officers were examining every bit of the contents, others, with
powerful, portable glo-lights, were going over the walls and shelves.
There was a three-foot ladder-stool in the closet, and one of them
started to mount it to search the ceiling.

But the moment the man touched the stool the bird's mind gave Hanlon a
clear picture of a procedure it had witnessed many times. He gasped, and
called out to the Corpsmen, "That stool! Never mind looking at the
closet itself or that other stuff. Bring the stool out here!"

The surprised lieutenant jumped down, and carried the little ladder over
to where Hanlon was standing with the bird.

"Unscrew the left rear leg--about the middle, I believe."

The officer up-ended the stool, and after a moment's work found out how
to unscrew the leg--it had a reverse thread. In a few more instants he
had it off, and they all gasped.

The leg was hollow, and in it were a number of tightly-rolled sheets of
very thin, tough paper.

The Corpsman started to unroll the papers, but at a quick signal from
Hanlon, Admiral Hawarden stepped forward.

"I'll take those, Lieutenant. I think, for the time being, at least, we
need search no further. Since most of the papers we have found here are
purely planetary matters, they're not for us to meddle with, even though
we have permission to do so. Back to Base--if these are not what we want
we can start again later."

As the men filed out, Hawarden activated the visiphone, and got the
minister's office at the imperial palace. "Find anything we want there,
Captain?" he asked the man who answered.

"Not yet, sir."

"Report back to Base, then. I think we've got it here."

He disconnected and handed the papers to Hanlon who had, in the
meantime, returned the toogan to its cage, and now sat down. He saw the
young man's face fall at first glance at those dozens of rolled sheets.

"What's wrong?"

"It's in code," came the explanation reply as Hanlon swiftly examined
each page. "In code--or in Bohr's native language, whatever that may
be."

"Ouch! If it's that, we're sunk. Better get Trowbridge on it anyway,
hadn't we?"

"Yes," slowly, "that's all we can do now." After some moments, "Guess
I'll keep out of sight for a while. I'll go back to the hotel. You can
get in touch with me there. I'm still sort of shaky from that beating I
got, and need a lot of rest."

"Want the doctor to look you over again?"

"No, I don't think I need that now. He said to have the dressings
renewed in two days, so I'll see him tomorrow."

"Right, Newton. If anything comes up, I'll get in touch."

"Oh, be sure and let me know about that freighter. You've had no word
yet, I suppose."

"Only that it's still there, being loaded. The scouts are watching it
closely, ready to blast at first sign of departure."

"Warn them that we want _all_ of the crew and passengers."

