
The crystal appeared across the sun line and moved toward him. He met it,
slowed his speed, put the end of the tube into the hole and shoved. Kemp
had allowed enough clearance. The tube slid into place. Rip turned and
angled off as fast as he could glide. When he was far enough away from the
blast line he called, "Fire!"

                    [Illustration: "Fire!" Called Rip]

                            "Fire!" Called Rip


Koa squeezed the dynamo handle. The machine whined and current shot
through the wire. A column of orange fire spurted from the crystal.

Rip watched the stars instead of the exhaust. He kept running as it burned
soundlessly. In air, the noise would have deafened him. In airless space,
there was nothing to carry the sound.

The apparent motion of the stars was definitely slowing. The spinning
wouldn't cease entirely, but it would slow down enough to give them more
time to work.

The tube reached brennschluss and Rip called orders. "Same process. Get
ready to repeat. Dominico, bring one of your tubes."

While Koa was connecting another exploder to the wire, Rip took a tube
from Dominico. "Take your space knife and saw through the tube you have
left. We'll need about three-fifths of it. Keep both pieces."

Dominico pulled his knife, pressed the release, and the gas capsule shot
the blade out. He got to work.

Koa called that he was ready. Rip took the wired exploder from him and
thrust it into the tube Dominico had given him.

As the crystal came around again, the process was repeated. The hole was
undamaged.

There was more time to get clear because of the asteroid's slower speed.
The second tube slowed the rock even more, so that they had to wait long
minutes while the crystal came around again.

Rip did some estimating. He wanted to be sure the next charge would do
nothing more than slow the asteroid to a stop. If the charge were too
heavy, it would reverse the spin. He didn't want to make a career of
running on the asteroid. He was tired and he knew his men were getting
weary, too. He could see it in their strides--they were less sure oL foot.

He decided it would be best to use a little less fuel rather than a little
more. If the asteroid failed to stop its spin completely, they could
always set off a small charge or two.

"Hold it," he ordered. "We'll use the small end of Dominico's tube and
save the big one."

The fuel was a solid mass, so cutting the tube in two sections caused no
difficulty. Rip pushed the exploder into the small section, seated it in
the hole, and hurried to cover. As he watched the fuel burn, he wondered
why the last nuclear charge had started the spin. He had made a mistake
somewhere. The earlier blasts had been set so they wouldn't cause a spin.
He made a mental note to look at the place where the charge had exploded
when things were more quiet.

The rocket fuel slowed the asteroid down to a point where it was barely
turning, and Rip was glad he had been cautious. The heavier charge would
have reversed it a little. He directed the placing of a very small charge
and was moving away from it so Koa could set it off when Santos suddenly
yelled, "Sir! The Connie is coming!"

Rip called, "Fire the charge, Koa," then looked up. The Consops cruiser
was moving slowly toward them. The canny Connie had been waiting for
something to happen on the asteroid, Rip guessed. When the spinning slowed
and then stopped, the Connie probably had decided that now was the time
for a final try.

"Where is the communicator?" Rip asked Koa.

"One of the Connies has it."

"Get it. I'll notify Terra base of what happened."

Koa found the Connie with the communicator, tested it to be sure the
prisoner hadn't sabotaged it, and brought it to Rip.

"This is Foster to Terra base. Over."

"Come in, Foster."

Rip explained briefly what had happened and asked, "How is our orbit? I
haven't had time to take sightings."

"You're free of the sun," Terra base answered. "Your orbit will have to be
corrected sometime within the next few hours. The last blast pushed you
off course."

"That's a small matter," Rip stated. "Unless we can think of something
fast, this will be a Connie asteroid by then. The Consops cruiser is
moving in on us. He's careful, because he isn't sure of the situation. But
even at his present speed he'll be here in ten minutes."

"Stand by." Terra base was silent for a few moments, then the voice
replied. "I think we have an answer for you, Foster. Terra base off. Go
ahead, MacFife."

A Scottish burr thick enough to saw boards came out of the communicator.
"Foster, this is MacFife, commander of the _Aquila_. Y'can't see me on
account of I'm on yer sunny side. But, lad, I'm closer to ye than the
Connie. We did it this way to keep the asteroid between us and him. Also,
lad, if ye'll take a look up at Gemini, ye'll see somethin' ye'll like.
Look at Alhena, in the Twins' feet. Then, lad, if ye'll be patient the
while, ye'll have a grandstand seat for a real big show."

Rip tilted his bubble back and stared upward at the constellation of the
twins. He said softly, "By Gemini!" For there, a half degree south of the
star Alhena, was the clean line of a nuclear cruiser's exhaust. The
_Sagittarius_, out of Mercury, had arrived.

He cut the communicator off for a moment and spoke exultantly to his men.
"Stand easy, you hairy Planeteers. Forget the Connie. He doesn't know it,
but he's caught. He's caught between the Archer and the Eagle!"





CHAPTER EIGHTEEN - COURTESY - WITH CLAWS


_Sagittarius_, constellation of the Archer, and _Aquila_, constellation of
the Eagle, had given the two Federation patrol cruisers their names. The
Eagle was commanded by a tough Scotsman, and the Archer by a Frenchman.

Commander MacFife spoke through the communicator. "Switch bands to
universal, lad. Me'n Galliene are goin' to talk this Connie into a braw
mess. MacFife off."

Rip guessed that the two cruiser commanders had been in communication
while enroute to the asteroid and had cooked up some kind of plan. He
turned the band switch to the universal frequency with which all
long-range communicators were equipped. Each of the earth groups had its
own frequency, and so did the Martians and Jovians. But all could meet and
talk on the universal band.

Special scrambling devices prevented eavesdropping on regular frequencies,
so there was no danger that the Connie had overheard the plan. Rip
wondered what it was. He knew the cruisers had to be careful not to cross
the thin line that might lead to war.

The _Sagittarius_ loomed closer, decelerating with a tremendous exhaust.
The Connie couldn't have failed to see it, Rip knew. He was right. The
Consops cruiser suddenly blasted more heavily, rushing in the direction
away from the Federation ship. The direction was toward the asteroid.

And at the same moment, the _Aquila_ flashed above the horizon, also
decelerating. The Connie was caught squarely.

A suave voice spoke on the universal band. "This is Federation _SCN
Sagittarius_, calling the Consolidation cruiser near the asteroid. Please
reply."

Rip waited anxiously. The Connie would hear, because every control room
monitored the universal band.

A heavy, reluctant voice replied after a pause of over a minute.

"This is Consolidation cruiser Sixteen. You are breaking the law,
_Sagittarius_. Your missile ports are open and they are pointing at me.
Close them at once or I will report this."

The suave voice with its hint of French accent replied, "Ah, my friend! Do
not be alarmed. We have had a slight accident to our control circuit and
the ports are jammed open. We are trying to repair the situation. But I
assure you, we have only the friendliest of intentions."

Rip grinned. This was about the same as a man holding a cocked pistol at
another man's head and assuring him it was nothing but a nervous arm that
kept the gun so steady.

The Connie demanded, "What do you want?"

The two friendly cruisers were within a few miles of the Connie now and
their blasts were just strong enough to keep them edging closer, while
counteracting the sun's pull.

The French spaceman spoke reassuringly. "My friend, we want only the
courtesy of space to which the law entitles us. We have had an unfortunate
accident to our astrogation instruments, and we wish to come aboard to
compare them with yours."

Rip laughed outright. Every cruiser carried at least four full sets of
instruments. There was as much chance of all of them being knocked off
scale at once as there was of his biting a cruiser in half with bare
teeth.

MacFife's voice came on the air. "Foster. Switch to Federation frequency."

Rip did so. "This is Foster, Commander."

"Lad, it's a pity for ye to miss the show. I'm sending a boat for ye."

"The sun will get it!" Rip exclaimed.

"Never fear, lad. It won't get this one. Now switch back to universal and
listen in."

Rip did so in time to catch the Connie commander's voice. "... and I
refuse to believe such a story! Great Cosmos, do you think I am a fool?"

"Of course not," the Frenchman replied. "You are not such a fool as to
refuse a simple request to check our instruments."

The _Sagittarius_ commander was right. Rip understood the strategy.
Equipment sometimes did go out of operation in space, and Connies had no
hesitation in asking Federation cruisers for help, or the other way
around. Such help was always given, because no commander could be sure
when he might need help himself.

"I agree," the Connie commander said with obvious reluctance. "You may
send a boat."

MacFife's Scotch burr broke in. "Federation _SCN Aquila_ to Consolidation
Sixteen. Mister, my instruments are off scale, too. I'll just send them
along to ye and ye can check them while ye're doing the _Sagittarius_!"

"I object!" the Connie bellowed.

"Come now," MacFife burred soothingly. "Checking a few instruments won't
hurt ye."

A small rocket exhaust appeared, leaving the _Aquila_. The exhaust grew
rapidly, more rapidly than that of any snapper-boat. Rip watched it, while
keeping his ears tuned to the space conversation.

Koa tugged his arm. "See that, sir?"

Rip nodded.

"Surely sending boats is too much of a nuisance," the French commander
said winningly. "We will come alongside."

"It's a trick," the Connie growled. "You want me to open my valves, then
your men will board us and try to take over my ship!"

"My friend, you have a suspicious mind," Galliene replied smoothly. "If
you wish, arm your men. Ours will have no weapons. Train launchers on the
valves so our men will be annihilated before they can board, if you see a
single weapon."

This was going a little far, Rip thought, but it was not his affair and he
didn't know exactly what MacFife and Galliene had in mind.

The _Aquila's_ boat arrived with astonishing speed. Rip saw it flash in
the sunlight and knew he had never seen one like it before. It was a
perfect globe, about 20 feet in diameter. Blast holes covered the globe at
intervals of six feet.

The boat settled to the asteroid and a new voice called over the helmet
circuit, "Where's Foster? Show an exhaust! We're in a rush."

Rip ordered, "Take over, Koa. I'll be back."

"Yessir."

He hurried to the boat and stood there, bewildered. He didn't know how to
get in.

"Up here," the voice called. He looked up and saw a hatch. He jumped and a
space-clad figure pulled him inside. The door shut and the boat blasted
off. Acceleration shoved him backward, but the spaceman snapped a line to
his belt, then motioned him to a seat. Rip pulled himself up the line and
got into the seat, snapping the harness in place.

"I'm Hawkins, senior space officer," the spaceman said. "Welcome, Foster.
We've been losing weight wondering if we'd get here in time."

"I was never so glad to see spacemen in my life," Rip said truthfully.
"What kind of craft is this, sir?"

"Experimental," the space officer answered. "It has a number, but we call
it the ball-bat because it's shaped like a ball and goes like a bat. We
were about to take off for some test runs around the space platform when
we got a hurry call to come here. The _Aquila_ has two of these. If they
prove out, they'll replace the snapper-boats. More power, greater
maneuverability, heavier weapons, and they carry more men."

There was only the officer and a pilot, but Rip saw positions for several
others.

He looked out through the port and saw the two Federation cruisers closing
in on the Connie. Apparently the Connie commander had agreed to let the
cruisers come alongside.

The ball-bat blasted to the _Aquila_, paused at an open port, then slid
inside. The valve was shut before Rip could unbuckle his harness. Air
flooded into the chamber and the lights flicked on. The space officer gave
Rip a hand out of the harness, and the young Planeteer went through the
hatch to the deck.

The inner valve opened and a lean, sandy-haired officer in space blue with
the insignia of a commander stepped through. Grinning, he hurried to Rip's
side and twisted his bubble, lifting it off.

"Hurry, lad," he greeted Rip. "I'm MacFife. Get out of that suit quick,
because ye don't want to miss what's aboot to happen." With his own hands
he unlocked the complicated belt with its gadgets and equipment,
disconnected the communicator and ventilator, and then unfastened the lock
clips that held top and bottom of the suit together.

Rip slipped the upper part over his head and stepped out of the bottom.
"Thanks, Commander. I'm one grateful Planeteer, believe me!"

"Come on. We'll hurry right across ship to the opposite valve. Lad, I've a
son in the Planeteers and he's just about your own age. He's on Ganymede.
He and the others will be proud of what ye've done."

MacFife was pulling himself along rapidly by the convenient handholds. Rip
followed, his breathing a little rapid in the heavier air of the ship. He
followed the Scottish commander through the maze of passages that crossed
the ship and stopped at a valve where spacemen were waiting. With them was
an officer who carried a big case.

"The instruments," MacFife said, pointing. "We've tinkered with them a bit
just to make it look real."

"But why do you want to board the Connie?" Rip asked curiously.

MacFife's eye closed in a wink. "Ye'll see."

There was a slight bump as the cruiser touched the Connie. The waiting
group recovered balance and faced the valve. Rip knew that spacemen in the
inner lock were making fast to the Connie cruiser, setting up the airtight
seal.

It wasn't long before a bell sounded and a spaceman opened the inner
valve. Two men in space suits were waiting, and beyond them the outer
valve was joined by a tube to the outer valve of the Connie ship. Rip
stared at the Connie spacemen in their red tunics and gray trousers. One,
a scowling officer with two pistols in his belt, stepped forward.

Rip noted that the other Connies were heavy with weapons, too. None of his
group had any.

"I'm the commander," the scowling Connie said. "Bring your instruments in
quickly. We will check them, then you get out."

"Ye're no verra friendly," MacFife said, his burr even more pronounced. He
led Rip and the officer with the instruments into the Connie ship.

A handsome Federation spaceman with a mustache, the first Rip had ever
seen, stepped into the room from a passageway on the opposite side. The
spaceman bowed with exquisite grace. "I have the honor of making myself
known," he proclaimed. "Commander Remy Galliene of the _Sagittarius_."

