"Hu-u-u-uh!" Garlock's huge sigh held much more of relief than of
triumph.

"They did it! We're home!" Lola shrieked; and, breaking into unashamed
and unrestrained tears, went into her husband's extended arms.

"Cry ahead, sweet. I'd bawl myself if Garlock wasn't looking. Maybe I
will, anyway," James said. Then, extending his right arm to Garlock and
to Belle, "I was scared to death you couldn't make it except by back
tracking. Good going, you two Primes," but his thoughts said vastly more
than his words.

Belle's eyes, too, were wet; Garlock's own were not quite dry.

"You weren't as sure as you looked, then, that we could do it the hard
way," Belle said. "All inside, I was one quivering mass of jelly."

"Afterward, you mean. You were solid as Gibraltar when I fired the
charge. You're the kind of woman a man wants with him when the going's
tough. Slide around here a little, so I can get hold of you."

Garlock released Belle--finally--and turned to the pilot, who was just
pulling a data-sheet from Compy the Computer. "How far did we miss
target, Jim?"

        *           *           *

James held up his right hand, thumb and forefinger forming a circle.
"You're one point eight seven inches high, and off center point five
three inches to the north northeast by east. I hereby award each of you
the bronze medal of Marksman First. Shall I take her down now or do you
want to check in from here first?"

"Neither ... I think. What do you think, Belle?"

"Right. Not until you-know-what."

"Check. Until we decide whether or not to let them know just yet that we
can handle the ship. If we do, how many of our taped reports we turn in
and how many we toss down the chute."

"I get it!" James exclaimed, with a spreading grin. "_That_, my dear
people, is something I never expected to live long enough to see--our
straight-laced Doctor Garlock applying the Bugger Factor to a research
problem!"

"I prefer the term 'Monk's Coefficient,' myself," Garlock said, "from
the standpoint of mathematical rigor."

"At Polytech we called it 'Finagle's Formula'," Belle commented. "The
most widely applicable operator known."

"Have you three lost your minds?" Lola demanded. "That's nothing to joke
about--you wouldn't destroy official reports! All that astronomy and
anthropology that nobody ever even dreamed of before? You _couldn't_!
Not _possibly_!"

"Each of us knows just as well as you do how much data we have, exactly
how new and startling it is; but we've thought ahead farther than you
have. None of us likes the idea of destroying it a bit better than you
do. We won't, either, without your full, unreserved, wholehearted
consent, nor without your fixed, iron-clad, unshakable determination
never to reveal any least bit of it."

"That language is far too strong for me. I'd like to be able to go along
with you, but on those terms, I simply can't."

"I think you can, when you've thought it through. You've met Alonzo P.
Ferber, haven't you? Read him?"

"One glimpse; that was all I could stand. He pawed me mentally and
wanted to paw me physically, the first time I ever saw him."

"Check. So I'm going to ask you two questions, which you may answer as
an anthropologist, as Lola Montandon, as Mrs. James James James the
Ninth, as a member of our team, or as any other character you choose to
assume. Remembering that Ferber's a Gunther First--and pretends to be an
Operator whenever he can get away with it--should he, or anyone like
him, _ever_ be allowed to visit Hodell? Second question: if there is any
possible way for him to get there, can he be made to stay away?"

"Oh ... Grand Lady Neldine and that perfectly stunning Grand Lady Lemphi
they picked out for Jim ... they're such _nice_ people ... and the
Gunther genes...." As Lola thought on, her expressive face showed a
variety of conflicting emotions before it hardened into decision. "The
answer to both questions--the only possible answer--is no. I subscribe;
on the exact terms you stipulated. And you don't believe, Clee, that my
thesis had anything to do with my holding out at first?"

"Certainly I don't. Besides...."

"What thesis?" Belle asked.

        *           *           *

"For my Ph.D. in anthropology. I thought I had it made, but it just went
down the chute. And I don't know if any of you realize just how nearly
impossible it is to make a really worthwhile original contribution to
science in that field."

"As I started to tell you, Brownie," Garlock said, "I don't think you've
lost a thing. There's a bigger and better one coming up."

"_What_?"

"Sh-h-h-h," Belle stage-whispered. "He's got a theory--such a weirdie
that he won't talk about it to anybody."

"It isn't a theory yet--at least, not ripe enough to pick--but it's
something more than a hunch," Garlock said.

"But what could _possibly_ make as good a thesis as those extra-galactic
tapes?" Lola wailed. "They would have made my thesis a summer breeze."

"More like a hurricane--the hottest thing since doctorate disputations
first started," Garlock said. "However, as I started to say twice
before, it still will be. Intra-galactic tapes will be just as good. In
this case, better."

"W-e-l-l ... possibly. But we haven't any."

"That is what this conference is about. We can't destroy the stuff we
have unless we can replace it with something better. My idea is that we
should visit a few--say fifty--Tellus-type planets in this galaxy; the
ones closest to Tellus. I'm pretty sure they'll be inhabited by _Homo
Sapiens_. There's a chance, of course, that they'll be like Hodell and
the others we've seen; in which case I don't see how we can keep Gunther
genes confined to Earth. However, I'm pretty sure in my own mind that
we'll find them all very much like Tellus, Gunther and all. What would
you think of _that_ for a thesis, Lola?"

"Oh, wonderful!"

"Okay. Now to get back to whether we want to check in or not. I don't
like to duck out without letting them know we can handle this
heap--after a fashion, that is; they don't need to know we can really
handle it--but we've got nothing we can report and Fatso will blow his
stack--Oh-oh! Should've remembered Tellus isn't Hodell; the tri-di's
setting up! Belle, you take it. She'd give me Fatso, because he wants to
chew me out, but she won't put him on for you. Cut her throat, but good!
Brownie, hide somewhere! Jim, set up for Beta Centauri--not Alpha, but
Beta--and fast! Give her hell, Belle!" Garlock sent this last thought
from behind a davenport, from which hiding-place he could see the tri-di
screen and both Belle and James; but anyone on the screen could not see
him.

        *           *           *

Miss Foster's likeness appeared upon the screen. Chancellor Ferber's
secretary was a big woman, but not fat; middle-aged, gray-haired,
wearing consciously the aura and the domineering, overbearing expression
of a woman who has great power and an even greater drive to exert her
authority.

"Why haven't you reported in?" Miss Foster snapped, with a glare that
was pure frost. "You arrived thirteen minutes ago. Such delay is
inexcusable. Get Garlock."

"Captain Garlock is off-watch; asleep. I, Commander Bellamy, am in
command." Standing stiffly at attention, Belle paused to exchange glares
with the woman across the big desk. If Miss Foster's was frost,
Commander Bellamy's was helium ice.

"Ready to go, Jim?" Belle flashed the thought.

"Half a minute yet."

"Any time after I sign off. Pick your own spot." Then aloud into the
screen: "I will report to Chancellor Ferber. I will not report to
Chancellor Ferber's secretary."

"Doctor James!" Miss Foster's voice was neither as cold nor as steady as
it had been. "Bring that ship down at once!"

James made no sign that he had heard the order. Belle stood changelessly
stiff. She had not for an instant taken her coldly competent eyes from
those of the woman on the ground. Her emotionless, ultra-refrigerated
voice went, as ever, directly into the screen.

"I trust that this conversation is being recorded?"

"It certainly is!"

"Good. I want it on record that we, the personnel of the starship
_Pleiades_, are not subject to the verbal orders of the Chancellor's
secretary. You will now connect me with Chancellor Ferber, please."

"The Chancellor is in conference and is not to be disturbed. I _have_
authority to act for him. You will report to me, and do it right now."
Foster's voice rose almost to a scream.

"That ground has been covered. Since you have taken it upon yourself to
exceed your authority to such an extent as to refuse to connect the
officer in command of the _Pleiades_ with the Chancellor, I cannot
report to him either the reasons why we are not landing at this time or
when we expect to return to Tellus. You are advised that we may leave at
any instant, just like that!" Belle snapped her finger under the imaged
nose. "You may inform the Chancellor, or not inform him if you prefer,
that our control of the starship _Pleiades_ is something less than
perfect. I do not know exactly how many seconds longer we will be here.
Commander Bellamy signing off. Over and out."

"_Commander_ Bellamy, indeed! Commander my left foot!" Miss Foster was
screaming now, in thwarted fury. "You're no more a commander than my
lowest office-girl is! Just wait 'till you get down here, you
green-haired hussy, you shameless notor...." The set went
instantaneously from full volume to zero sound as James drove the red
button home.

"Belle, you honey!" Garlock scrambled out from behind the davenport,
seized her around the waist, and swung her, feet high in air, through
four full circles before he let her down and kissed her vigorously. "You
little _sweetheart_! You're the first living human being ever to really
pull Foster's cork!"

"_What_ a goat-getting!" James applauded. "That will go down in history
as the star-spangled act of the century."

        *           *           *

Belle was, however, unusually diffident. "I stuck my neck out a
mile--worse, Clee's. I'm sorry, Clee. I had to have some weight to throw
around, and I had only a second to think, and that was the first thing I
thought of, and after half a minute she made me so _damn_ mad that I
went entirely too far."

"Uh-uh. Just far enough. That was a _perfect_ job."

"But she'll never forget that, and she'll crucify you, as well as me,
when we land. She knows I'm not a commander."

"She just thinks you ain't. The official log will show, though, that
after only one day out I discovered that we should all be officers--one
captain and three commanders--with pay and perquisites of rank. I'll
think up good and sufficient reasons for it between now and when I make
up the log."

"But you can't! Or can you, really?"

"Well, nobody told me I couldn't, so I assumed the right. Besides, you
didn't tell her commander of what, so I'll make it stick, too--see if I
don't. Or else I'll tear two or three offices apart finding out why I
can't. You can be sure of that."

"All that may not be necessary," Lola said. "That tape will never be
heard. I'll bet she's erased it already."

"Perhaps; but ours isn't going to be erased--it will be heard exactly
where it will do the most good."

"I'm awfully glad you don't think we're on the hook. All that's left,
then, is that second-in-command business. Both of you know, of course,
that that was just window-dressing."

"You were telling the truth and didn't know it," James said, cheerfully.
"You have actually been second-in-command ever since the drive tests."

"I haven't, and I won't. Surely you don't think I'm enough of a heel,
Jim, to step on your toes like that?"

"Nothing like that involved. You tell her, Clee."

"Gunther ability is what counts. You're a Prime, Jim's an Operator; so,
now that we can handle the heap, you'll have to be second-in-command
whether you like it or not. Any time you can out-Gunther me we'll trade
places. And you won't have to take the job away from me--I'll give it to
you."

"But ... no hard feelings, Jim? No reservations? Screens down?"

"None whatever. In fact, I'm relieved. I'm Gunthered for this board
here--for that one I'm not. Come in and look; and shake on it."

        *           *           *

Belle looked; and while they were shaking hands, she flashed a thought
at Lola. "Do you know that we've got two of the finest men that ever
lived?"

"I've known that for a long time," Lola flashed back, "but you've hardly
started to realize what they _really_ are."

"Well, shall we start earning our pay and perquisites by getting to work
on this planet, that we haven't even looked--wait a minute! We're just
about to open up the galaxy, aren't we?"

They were.

"Then there'll have to be some kind of a unifying and correlating
authority--a Galactic Council or something--and the quicker it's set up
the better; the less confusion and turmoil and jockeying-for-position
there will be. Question: should this authority be political?"

"It should _not_!" James declared. "It takes United Worlds seven solid
days of debate to decide whether or not to buy one lead pencil."

"Military--or naval, I suppose it'd be--that's what Clee's driving at,"
Belle said. "You're wonderful, Clee--simply priceless! We're officers of
the brand-new Galactic Navy. Subject to civilian control, of course, but
the civilians will be the United Galaxian Societies of the Galaxy, and
nobody else. _Beautiful_, Clee! There are ten Operators, Jim. Right?"

        *           *           *

"Check. Brownie and I are here; the other eight are running the Galaxian
Society under Clee. And the whole Society eats out of his hand."

"I don't know about that, but Belle and I together could swing it, I
think."

"I'll say we could," Belle breathed. "And I simply can't wait to see you
kick Fatso's teeth in with _this_ one!"
