A dozen and a half of them were gathered in the room that had become
their meeting-place, after dinner. They were all too tired to start
the cutting that night, and at the same time excited and anxious. They
talked in disconnected snatches, and then somebody put on one of the
telecast screens. A music program was just ending; there was a brief
silence, and then a commentator appeared, identifying his
news-service. He spoke rapidly and breathlessly, his professional
gravity cracking all over.

"The hypership _City of Asgard_, from Aton, has just come into
telecast range," he began. "We have received an exclusive Interworld
News Service story, recently brought to Aton on the Pan-Federation
Spacelines ship _Magellanic_, from Terra.

"News of revived interest in the Third Force computer, Merlin, having
reached Terra by way of Odin, representatives of Interworld News, to
which this service subscribes, interviewed retired Force-General Foxx
Travis, now living, at the advanced age of a hundred and fourteen, on
Luna. General Travis, who commanded the Third Fleet-Army Force here
during the War, categorically denied that there had ever existed any
super-computer of the sort.

"We bring you, now, a recorded interview with General Travis, made on
Luna...."

For an instant, Conn felt the room around him whirling dizzily, and
then he caught hold of himself. Everybody else was shouting in sudden
consternation, and then everybody was hushing everybody else and
making twice as much noise. The screen flickered; the commentator
vanished, and instead, seated in the deep-cushioned chair, was the
thin and frail old man with whom Conn had talked two years before, and
through an open segment of the dome-roof behind him the full Earth
shone, the continents of the Western Hemisphere plainly
distinguishable. A young woman in starchy nurse's white bent forward
solicitously from beside the chair, handing him a small beaker from
which he sipped some stimulant. He looked much as he had when Conn had
talked to him. But there was something missing....

Oh, yes. The comparative youngster of seventy-some--"Mike Shanlee ...
my _aide-de-camp_ on Poictesme ... now he thinks he's my keeper...."
He wasn't in evidence, and he should be. Then Conn knew where and when
he had seen the man who claimed to be a preacher named Carl Leibert.

"There is absolutely no truth in it, gentlemen," Travis was saying.
"There never was any such computer. I only wish there had been; it
would have shortened the War by years. We did, of course, use
computers of all sorts, but they were all the conventional types used
by business organizations...."

The rest was lost in a new outburst of shouting: General Travis, in
the screen, continued in dumb-show. The only thing Conn could
distinguish was Leibert's--Shanlee's--voice, screaming: "Can it be a
lie? Is there no Great Computer?" Then Kurt Fawzi was pounding on the
top of the desk and bellowing, "Shut up! Listen!"

"Frankly, I'm surprised," Travis was continuing. "Young Maxwell talked
to me, here in this room, a couple of years ago; I told him then that
nothing of the sort existed. If he's back on Poictesme telling people
there is, he's lying to them and taking advantage of their credulity.
There never was anything called Project Merlin...."

"Hah, who's a liar now?" Klem Zareff shouted. "Dolf, what did your
people find in the Library?"

"Why, that's right!" Professor Kellton exclaimed. "My students did
find a dozen references to Project Merlin. He couldn't be ignorant of
anything like that."

"This youth has been lying to us all along!" the old man with the
beard cried, pointing an accusing finger at Conn. "He has created
false hopes; he has given us faith in a delusion. Why, he is the
wickedest monster in human history!"

"Well, thank you, General Travis," another voice, from the
screen-speaker, was saying. The only calm voice in the room. "That was
a most excellent statement, sir. It should...."

"Conn, you didn't tell us you'd talked to General Travis," Morgan
Gatworth was saying. "Why didn't you?"

"Because I never believed anything he told me. You were in Kurt
Fawzi's office the day I came home; you know how shocked everybody was
when I told you I hadn't been able to learn anything positive. Why
should I repeat his lies and discourage everybody that much more? Why,
he'd deny there was a Merlin if he was sitting on top of it," Conn
declared. "He wants the credit for winning the War, not for letting
Merlin win it for him."

"I don't blame Conn," Klem Zareff said. "If he'd told us that then,
some of us might have believed it."

"And look what we found," Kurt Fawzi added, pointing at the ceiling.
"Is that Merlin up there, or isn't it?"

"That little thing!" Shanlee cried scornfully. "How could that be
Merlin? I am going to my chamber, to pray for forgiveness for this
wretch."

He turned and started for the door.

"Stop him, Tom!" Conn said, and Tom Brangwyn put himself in front of
the older man, gripping his right arm. Shanlee tried, briefly, to
resist.

"Seems to me you lost faith in Merlin awfully quick," the former town
marshal of Litchfield said. "You knew there was a Merlin all along,
and you never wanted us to find it."

Franz Veltrin, who had been "Leibert's" most enthusiastic adherent,
had also lost faith suddenly; he was shouting vituperation at the
Prophet of Merlin.

"Knock it off, Franz; he was only doing his duty," Conn said. "Weren't
you, General Shanlee?"

It took almost a minute before they stopped yelling for an explanation
and allowed him to make one. He caught Klem Zareff's comment: "Must be
pretty hot, if they have to send a general to handle it."

"I talked to Travis, yes. He gave me the same story he just repeated
on that interview," Conn said, picking his way carefully between fact
and fiction. "After I went back to Montevideo, he and this aide of his
must have been afraid I didn't believe it, which I didn't. When I was
ready to graduate, I got this offer of an instructorship; that was a
bribe to keep me on Terra and off Poictesme. When I turned it down and
took the _Mizar_ home, Travis sent Shanlee after me. He must have
grown that beard and that pageboy bob on the way out. I suppose he
contacted Murchison as soon as he landed. Wait a minute."

He went to the communication screen and punched out a combination. A
girl appeared and singsonged: "Barton-Massarra, Investigation and
Protection."

"Conn Maxwell here. We gave you some audiovisuals of a man with a
white beard, alias Carl Leibert," he began.

"Just a sec, Mr. Maxwell." She spoke quickly into a handphone. The
screen flickered, and she was replaced by a hard-faced young man in
dark clothes.

"Hello, Mr. Maxwell; Joe Massarra. We haven't anything on Leibert
yet."

"Are any of the officers of the _Andromeda_ where you can contact
them? Let them see those audiovisual. I'll bet that beard was grown
aboard ship coming out from Terra."

Bedlam broke out suddenly. Shanlee, who had been standing passively,
his right arm loosely grasped by Tom Brangwyn, came down on Brangwyn's
instep with the heel of his left foot and hit Brangwyn under the chin
with the heel of his left palm. Wrenching his arm free, he started for
the door. Sylvie Jacquemont snatched a chair and threw it along the
floor; it hit the fleeing man's ankles and brought him down. Half a
dozen men piled on top of him, and Brangwyn was yelling to them not to
choke him to death till he could answer some questions.

"Hey, what's going on?" the detective-agency man in the screen was
asking. "Need help? We'll start a car right away."

"Everything's under control, thank you."

Massarra hesitated for a moment. "What's the dope on this statement
that was on telecast a few minutes ago?" he asked.

"Travis doesn't want us to find Merlin. What you just heard was one of
his people, planted here at Force Command. We're going to question him
when we have time. But there isn't a word of truth in that statement
you just heard on the _Herald-Guardian_ newscast. Merlin exists, and
we've found it. We'll have it opened inside of thirty hours at most."

That was the line he was going to take with everybody. As soon as he
had Massarra off the screen, he was punching the combination of his
father's private screen at Interplanetary Building. It took five
interminable minutes before Rodney Maxwell came on. He could hear Klem
Zareff shouting orders into one of the inside communication
screens--general turnout, everything on combat-ready; guards to come
at once to the office.

"How close are you to digging that thing out?" his father asked as
soon as he appeared.

"We're down to it; we can start cutting the collapsium any time now."

"Start cutting it ten minutes ago," his father told him. "And don't
leave Force Command till you have it open. How many men and vehicles
does Klem have for defense? You'll need all of them in a couple of
hours. Everybody here is stunned, now; they'll come out of it inside
an hour, and they'll come out fighting."

"You'd better come out here." He turned, saw Jerry Rivas helping hold
Shanlee in a chair, and shouted to him: "Jerry! Turn out the workmen.
Start cutting the can open right away." He turned back to his father.
"Klem's just ordered all his force out. Are you coming here?"

"I can't. In about an hour, everything's going up with a bang. I have
to be here to grab a few of the pieces."

"You'll do a lot of good in jail, or on the end of a rope."

"Chance I have to take," his father replied. "I think I'll have a
couple of hours. If anybody from the press calls you, what are you
going to tell them?"

Conn repeated the line he had taken already. His father nodded.

"All right. I'll call you later. If I can. Just keep things going at
your end."

A dozen of Klem Zareff's men were crowding into the room.

"This man's under close arrest," the old soldier was telling them. "He
is very important and very dangerous. Take him out somewhere, search
him to the skin, take his clothes away from him and give him a robe.
He's to be watched every second; make sure he hasn't poison or other
suicide means. He's to be questioned later."

As soon as Rodney Maxwell was off the screen, there was a call-signal.
It was one of the news-services, wanting a statement.

"I'll take it," Gatworth said, and then began talking:

"This statement of General Travis's is completely false. There is a
Merlin, and we've found it...."

They found something that might be good-enough Merlin for the next
thirty hours. That superstructure was just big enough for the manually
operated parts of a computer like Merlin; the input and output, and
the programming machines.




XX


Klem Zareff's guardsmen were mercenaries. A little over a year ago
they had, at best, been homeless drifters, and not a few had been
outlaws. Now they were soldiers, well fed, clothed, quartered and
equipped, and well and regularly paid. They had a good thing; they
were willing to fight to keep it, Merlin or no Merlin. Conn left them
to their commander. He did gather the workmen for a short harangue,
but that wasn't really necessary. They had a good thing, too, and most
of them realized that they were working toward a better thing. They
could be depended upon, too.

They came crowding out and manned lifters; they got the heavy
collapsium-cutter maneuvered into place and the shielding down around
the cutting-head. After that, there were only four men who could work,
each in his own heavily shielded cabin. In spite of the shielding that
covered the actual work, there was an awesome display of multicolored
light; it was like being in the middle of an aurora borealis. What was
going on where that tiny rotating beam of cosmic rays was grinding at
the collapsium simply couldn't have been imagined.

Conn would have liked to stay outside; he could not. Too many things
were happening in too many places, and it was all coming in by screen.
Rioting had broken out in Storisende and in a dozen other places. He
saw, on a news-screen, a mob raging in front of the Executive Palace;
yellow-shirted Cybernarchists were battling with city police and
Planetary troops, Armageddonists and Human Supremacy Leaguers were
fighting both and one another. Above all the confused noise of
shouting and shooting, an amplifier was braying: "_It's a lie! It's a
lie! Merlin has been found!_" Newsmen began arriving--Zareff's men
had orders to pass them through the cordon that had been put up around
Force Command--and they took up his time. It was worth it, though.
They could tell him what was going on.

J. Fitzwilliam Sterber called. Rodney Maxwell had been arrested, on a
farrago of fraud charges--"I don't know who he's supposed to have
defrauded; the Planetary Government is the sole complainant"--and bail
was being illegally denied. Sterber's lawyerly soul was outraged, but
he was grimly elated. "You wait till things quiet down a little. We're
going to start a false-arrest suit--"

"If you're alive to." Apparently Sterber hadn't thought of that. "What
do you think's going to happen when the Stock Exchange opens?"

"It's going to be bad. But don't worry; your father must have foreseen
something like this. He gave me instructions, and instructed a few
more people." He named some of the Trisystem Investments people and
some of the bankers. "We're going to try to brace the market as long
as we can. Nobody who keeps his head is going to lose anything in the
long run."

Luther Chen-Wong called from Port Carpenter, on Koshchei. He and Clyde
Nichols and a young mathematics professor named Simon Macquarte had
been running the colony, in Conn's absence and since Yves Jacquemont
had gone to space in the _Ouroboros II_.

"Well, they caught up with you," he said. Evidently he had figured out
what the search for Merlin was all about, too. "What do we do about
it?"

"Well, we are just before finding Merlin, here. I hope we find it
before things get too bad." He told Luther the situation of the
moment. "Have you people started on another hypership yet?"

"We're getting organized to. I don't suppose it's advisable to send
any more ships in to Storisende for a while? And are you sure this
thing you've found is Merlin?"

"I don't know what it is. It's only big enough for the apparatus
they'd need to operate a thing like Merlin--Yes, Luther. I am sure we
have found Merlin."

Chen-Wong looked at him curiously. "I hope so. I can't think of
anything else that can stop this business."

Tom Brangwyn was in the room when he turned from the screen.

"We searched Leibert's--Shanlee's--rooms," he said. "We found a bomb."

"What kind of a bomb?"

"Vest-pocket thermonuclear. He seems to have gotten the fissionables
by taking apart a couple of light tactical missiles; the whole thing's
packed inside a hundred-pound power-cartridge case. It was in a
traveling-bag under his bed. And you know how it was to be fired? With
a regular 40-mm flare-pistol, welded into the end of the bomb. The
flare-powder had been taken out of the cartridge, and it had been
reloaded with a big charge of rifle-powder. I suppose it would blow
one subcritical mass into another. But the only way he could have
fired the bomb would have been by pulling the trigger."

And blowing himself up along with it. He must have wanted Merlin
destroyed pretty badly.

"Have you questioned him yet?"

"Not yet. I wanted to tell you about it first."

He looked at his watch. Only four hours had passed since the newscast;
why, that seemed like months, ago, now.

"All right, Tom; we'll go talk to him. Where's the Colonel?"

Zareff was surrounded by a dozen screens, keeping in touch with the
_Lester Dawes_ and the gunboats and combat cars, and the gun positions
with which he had ringed Force Command. It was only a little army,
maybe, but he was a busy commander-in-chief.

"You take care of it. Tell me what you get from him. I can't leave
now. There's a report of a number of aircraft approaching from the
west now...."

They found Judge Ledue, and Kurt Fawzi and Dolf Kellton, who were just
sitting around wishing there was something to do to help. They gave
Franz Veltrin and Sylvie Jacquemont the job of keeping the
representatives of the press amused. Then they went down to the room
in which General Mike Shanlee was held under guard.

Shanlee, wearing a bathrobe and nothing else, was lying on a cot,
sleeping peacefully; three of Zareff's men were sitting on chairs,
watching him narrowly.

"All right; you can go," Conn told them. "We'll take care of him."

Shanlee woke instantly; he sat up and swung his legs over the edge of
the cot.

"You have my name and rank," he said, and his voice no longer
quavered. "My serial number is--" He recited a string of figures. "And
that's all you're getting out of me."

"We'll get anything we want out of you," Conn told him. "You know what
a mind-probe is? You should; your accomplices used one on my father's
secretary. She's a hopeless imbecile now. You'll be, too, when we're
through with you. But before then, you'll have given us everything you
know."

Kellton began to protest. "Conn, you can't do a thing like that!"

"A mind-probe is utterly illegal; why, it's a capital offense!" Ledue
exclaimed. "Conn I forbid you...."

"Judge, don't make me call those guards and have you removed," Conn
said.

"You can stop bluffing," Shanlee told him. "Where would you get a
mind-probe?"

"Out of the Chief of Intelligence's office, here in his headquarters.
I should imagine it was to be used in interrogating Alliance
prisoners, during the War. I think Colonel Zareff would enjoy helping
to use it on you. He used to be an Alliance officer."

Shanlee was silent. Conn sat down in one of the chairs, at the small
table.

"General Shanlee, would you describe General Foxx Travis as a man of
honor and integrity? And would you so describe yourself?" Shanlee said
nothing. "Yet both of you have lied, deliberately and repeatedly, to
conceal the existence of Merlin. And we found that bomb in your room.
You were willing to blow up this headquarters and everybody, yourself
included, in it, to keep us from getting at Merlin. Well, you know
that we can make you tell us the truth, maybe when it's too late, and
you know that we are going to get Merlin. We're cutting the collapsium
off that thing above now."

Shanlee laughed. "You're supposed to be a computerman. You think that
little thing could be Merlin?"

"The controls and programming machine for Merlin." He turned to Kurt
Fawzi. "You always claimed that Merlin was here in Force Command. You
had it backward. Force Command is inside Merlin."

"What do you mean, Conn?"

"The walls; the fifty-foot walls, shielded inside and out. Merlin--the
circuitry, the memory-bank, the relays, everything--was installed
inside them. What's up above is only what was needed to operate the
computer. Isn't that true, General?"

Shanlee had stopped his derisive laughter. He sat on the edge of the
cot, tensing as though for a leap at Conn's throat.

