
Ringg laughed and gave him a rough, affectionate shove. "You're Bartol,
all right!"

Even his sense of defeat vanished in wonder as they came out into the
great spaceport. He saw, now, that the Lhari spaceports in human worlds
were built to create, for the spacemen so far from their native worlds,
some feeling of home. But everything here was so vast as to stagger the
imagination. There were miles and miles of the great ships, lying strewn
like pebbles on this monster beachhead into space, bearing the
strangeness of a million far-flung stars. He gaped like a child.

Above them, the burning brilliance of a star gave strange glow and color
to the crystal pylons. What color was the star? He turned to Meta,
irritated at his inability to be sure.

"Meta, what color is this sun? I've been all around the spectrum, and
it's not red, blue, green, orange, violet--" He broke off, realizing
what he had said and what he had seen. "An eighth color," he finished,
anticlimatically.

"You and your talk of colors," Ringg grumbled, "I wish I knew what you
Mentorians see! It's like trying to imagine seeing a smell or hearing
light!"

Meta laughed. "As far as I know, no one's named it. Sometimes we
Mentorians call it _catalyst color_. I think only Mentorians can see it
as separate color."

"So what?" Ringg said impatiently, "What are we going to do, chatter
about light waves or see the city?"

Bart acquiesced, trying to sound eager, but a wild excitement was
gusting up in him. He dutifully pretended fascination with the towers,
the many-leveled roads, the giant dams and pylons, but his thoughts were
racing.

_The eighth color!_ There can't be too many suns of this color, or
they'd have named it and known it! And telescopes can find it.

Could success be salvaged, then, at the very edge of failure? Maybe he
need not go empty-handed, empty-eyed, from the Lhari worlds! They had
dismissed him, scornfully, stolen cookie in hand--but maybe it would be
a bigger cookie than they dreamed!

The exhilaration lasted through the tour of the port, through the heavy
surge of acceleration which brought them up, out and way from Council
Planet. Bart, confined in Rugel's cabin, hardly felt like a prisoner,
his mind busy with schemes.

_I'll study star-maps, and spectroscope reports...._

It lasted almost two days of shiptime, and they were readying for
Acceleration Two, before he came, figuratively, down to earth. To pick
one star out of trillions--and not even in his own galaxy? It would take
a lifetime and he didn't even know which of the four or five spiral
nebulae in the skies of the human worlds was the Lhari Galaxy. A
lifetime? A hundred lifetimes wouldn't do it!

He might have known. If there had been one chance in the odd billion of
his making any such discovery, the Lhari would never have given Vorongil
permission for the intruder to visit the planet at all. He would have
been returned to the _Swiftwing_ as he had been taken from it, by closed
car, and imprisoned, maybe even drugged, until he was safely back in the
human worlds again.

He was under parole not to enter the drive chamber (and sure he would be
stopped if he attempted it anyhow), but when Acceleration One was
completed, he went to the viewport in the Recreation Lounge, and nobody
threw him out. He stood long, looking at the unfamiliar galaxy of the
Lhari stars; the unknown, forever unknowable constellations with their
strange shapes. Stars green, gold, topaz, burning blue, sullen red, and
the great strangely colored receding sun of the Lhari people, known to
them by the melodious name of the Ke Lhiro--which meant, simply, _The
Sun_: it was their first home.

Where had he seen that color? In that stolen glimpse of the Lhari ship
landing, long ago? Of all the colors of space, this one he would never
know.

He turned away from the unsolvable riddle of the strange constellations;
and went to his cabin, to dream of the green star Meristem where he had
first plotted known coordinates for a previously unknown world, and to
wander in baffling nightmares where he fed jagged, star-colored pieces
of hail into the ship's computer and watched them come out as tiny
paperdoll spaceships with the letterhead of Eight Colors printed neatly
across their sides.

After the warp-drive shift, Vorongil came to his cabin, this time crisp
and businesslike.

"We're back in your galaxy," he said, "among the stars you know. We have
no passenger space on the _Swiftwing_; we had to ship out without
replacing Rugel, which means we're short two men. I've no authority to
ask this of you, but--would you like your old job back for the rest of
the voyage?"

Bart glanced at his human hands.

Vorongil shrugged. "We've carried Mentorians as full-ranking
Astrogators. There don't happen to be any on the _Swiftwing_. But
there's no law about it."

Bart looked the old Lhari in the eye. "I won't accept Mentorian terms,
Vorongil."

"I wouldn't ask it. You worked your way outward on this run, and the
High Council didn't see fit to erase those memories or inhibit them. Why
should I? Do you want it or not?"

Did he want it? Until this moment Bart had not identified the worst of
his pain and defeat--to travel as a passenger, a supercargo, when he had
once been part of the _Swiftwing_. Literally he ached to be back with it
again. "I do, _rieko mori_."

"Very well," Vorongil rapped, "see that you turn out next watch!" He
spun round and walked out. His tone was no longer gently indulgent, but
sharp and distant. Bart, at first surprised, suddenly understood.

Not now a prisoner, a passenger, a guest on the _Swiftwing_. He was part
of the crew again--and Vorongil was his captain.

The Lhari crew were oddly constrained at first. But Ringg was the same
as always, and before long they were almost on the old terms. With every
watch, it seemed, he was building a bridge between man and Lhari. They
accepted him.

But for what? Something might come, in the far future, of his
acceptance, but he wouldn't get the benefit of it. This would be his
only voyage; after this he'd be chained again, crawling from planet to
planet of a single sun. And as warp-shift followed warp-shift, the
_Swiftwing_ retracing the path of her outward cruise star by star, Bart
said farewell to them.

One day, at last, he stood at the viewport, watching Procyon Alpha
nearing. A year ago, frightened, terribly alone, still unsteady on his
new Lhari muscles and terrified by the monsters that were his shipmates,
he had watched these planets spinning away. Poor old Rugel, poor old
Baldy!

Behind him, Meta came into the lounge.

"Bart--"

He turned to face her. "It won't be much longer, Meta. Tomorrow I'll
find out what the Federation is going to do to me. _Conspiracy
unlawfully to board_--and all the rest of it. Even if I don't go to a
prison planet, I'll spend the rest of my life chained down to Vega."

"It doesn't have to be that way."

"What other choice is there?" he demanded.

"You're half Mentorian," she said, raising her eager face. "Oh, Bart,
you love it so, you know you can't bear to give it up. Stay with
us--please stay!"

Before answering, he looked out the viewport a last time. The clouds of
cosmic dust swirled and foamed around the familiar jewels of his own
sky. Blue, beloved Vega, burning in the heart of the Lyre--_home--when
would he go home? He had no home now._ Yet his father had left him Vega
Interplanet, as well as Eight Colors and a quest to the stars.

He searched for the topaz of Sol, where he had learned astrogation;
Procyon, where he had become a Lhari; the ruby of Aldebaran (_hail and
farewell, David Briscoe!_); the bloodstone of Antares, where he had
learned fear and the shape of integrity. The colors, the unknowable
colors of space. And others. Nameless stars where he and his Lhari
shipmates had worked and played. And stars he had never seen and would
never see, all the endless worlds beyond worlds and stars beyond
stars....

He took a last, longing look at the colors of space, then turned his
back on them, deliberately giving them up. He could not pay the price
the Mentorians paid.

"No, Meta," he said huskily. "The Mentorian way is one way, but--I've
had a taste of being one of the masters of space. It's more than most
men ever have, maybe it's more than I deserve. But I can't settle for
anything less. Not even if it means losing you."

He shut his eyes and stood, head bowed. When he looked up again, he was
alone with the stars beyond the viewport, and the lounge was empty.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN


The low rainbow building of Eight Colors, near the spaceport of Procyon
Alpha, had not changed; and when Bart went in, as he had done a year
ago, it seemed that the same varnished girl was sitting before the same
glass desk, neon-edged and brittle, with the same chrome-tinged hair and
blue fingernails. She looked at Bart in his Lhari clothing, at Meta in
her Mentorian robe and cloak, at Ringg, and her unruffled dignity did
not turn a hair.

"May I help you?" she inquired, still not caring.

"I want to see Raynor One."

"On what business, please?"

"Tell him," said Bart, with immense satisfaction, "that his boss is
here--Bart Steele--and wants to see him right away."

It had a sort of disrupting effect. She seemed to go blurred at the
edges. After a minute, blinking carefully, she spoke into the
vision-screen, and reported, numbly, "Go on up, Mr. Steele."

He wasn't expecting a welcome. He said so as the elevator rose. "After
all, if I'd never come back, he'd doubtless have inherited the whole
Eight Colors line, unencumbered. I don't expect he'll be happy to see
me. But he's the only one I can turn to."

The elevator stopped, opened. They stepped out, and a man stepped
nervously toward them. For a moment, expecting Raynor One, Bart was
deceived; then as the man's face spread in a smile of welcome, he
stopped in incredulous delight.

"Raynor Three!"

In overflowing gladness, Bart hugged him. It was like a meeting with the
dead. He felt as if he had really come home. "But--but you remember me!"
he exclaimed, backing away, in amazement.

Slowly, the man nodded. His eyes were grave. "Yes. I decided it wasn't
worth it, Bart, to go on losing everything that meant anything to me.
Even if it meant I had to give up the stars, never travel again except
as a passenger, I couldn't go on being afraid to remember, never knowing
the consequences or responsibilities of what I'd done." His sad smile
was strangely beautiful. "The _Multiphase_ sailed without me. I've been
here, hoping against hope that someday I'd know the rest."

Associations clicked into place in Bart's mind. The _Multiphase_. So
Raynor Three was the Mentorian who had smuggled David Briscoe off the
ship, and whose memories, wrung out by the Lhari captain of that ship,
had touched off so many deaths. But he had paid for that--paid many
times over. And now must he pay for this, too?

Raynor One strode toward them. "So it's really you. I thought it might
be a trap, but Three wouldn't listen. Word came from Antares that
Montano had been arrested and his ship confiscated for illegal landing
on Lharillis. I thought you were probably dead."

"We sent a boy to do a man's job," Raynor Three said, "and he came back
a man. But tell me--" He looked curiously at Ringg and Meta.

Bart introduced them, adding, "I came for help, really. I'm facing
charges, and I'm afraid you are, too."

Raynor One said harshly, "A trap, after all, Three! He trapped you, and
he's led the Lhari to you!"

"No," Raynor Three said, "or he wouldn't be walking around free and
unguarded and with all his memories intact. Tell me about it, Bart." And
when Bart had given a quick narration of the Lhari judgment, he nodded,
slowly.

"That's all we ever wanted. Don't think you failed, Bart. The horrible
part was only the way they were trying to keep it secret."

Ringg interrupted, "Do not judge the Lhari by them, Raynor Three," and
Raynor Three said in good Lhari, "I don't, feathertop. Raynors have been
working with Lhari since the days of Rhazon of Nedrus. But I wanted an
open, official statement of Lhari policy--not secret murders by
fanatics. I had confidence in the Lhari as a people, but not in
individuals. What good did it do to know that the Lhari council in
another galaxy would have condemned the murders and manhunts, when they
were going on in this one, day after day?

"Don't you see, Bart?" he continued, "you didn't fail--not if we're
going to have the publicity of a test case, publicly heard. That means
the Lhari are prepared to admit, before our whole galaxy, that humans
_can_ survive warp-drive without cold-sleep. That's all David Briscoe
was trying to prove, or your father either--may they rest in peace. So,
whatever happens, we've won."

"If you two idealists will give me a minute for cold realities," Raynor
One said, "there's this. Among other things. Bart's not yet of legal
age. You may not know this, Bart, but your father appointed me your
legal guardian. When I turned you over to Three, I'm afraid, I assumed
legal responsibility for all the consequences. I ought to have kept you
under my own supervision."

Bart smiled at Raynor One's stern face. "I crossed two galaxies, and
faced the Lhari High Council, without you to hold my hand. I can face
the Trade Federation."

"Naturally I will be responsible for your defense," Raynor One said
stiffly.

"But I don't need a defense," Bart said, turning to Raynor Three and
meeting his eyes. "I'm going to tell the truth, and let it stand. Don't
worry, I'll make sure they don't hold you responsible for my actions."

"Another thing. Some lunatic from Capella arrived here and all but
accused me of having you murdered. Do you know a Tommy Kendron?"

"Do I _know_ him!" Bart interrupted with a joyful yell. "Tommy's _here_?
Quick--where do I get in touch with him?"

An hour later they were all gathered at Raynor Three's country house.
The talk went on far into the night. Tommy wanted to know everything,
and both Raynors wanted to know every detail of Bart's year among the
Lhari, while Meta and Ringg were both curious about how it had begun.
