like a blot; but ... ah!"

The moment had arrived, before the touch of any revealing ray. He
trained the key-tube, the entrance opened, and through that opening in
the instant of its appearance there shot a brittle bulb of glass, whose
breaking meant death. It crashed into fragments against a metallic wall
and Costigan, entering the vessel, consigned its erstwhile crew one by
one to the already crowded waters of the lagoon. He then leaped to the
controls and drove the captured speedster through the air, to plunge it
down upon the surface of the lagoon beside the door of the isolated
structure which had for so long been his prison. Carefully he
transferred to the vessel the motley assortment of containers of
Vee-Two, and after a quick check-up to make sure that he had overlooked
nothing, he shot his craft straight up into the air. Then only did he
close his ultra-wave circuits and speak.

"Clio, Bradley--I got away clean, without a bit of trouble. Now I'm
coming after you, Clio."

"Oh, it's wonderful that you got away, Conway!" the girl exclaimed. "But
hadn't you better get Captain Bradley first? Then, if anything should
happen, he would be of some use, while I...."

"I'll knock him into an outside loop if he does!" the captain snorted,
and Costigan went on:

"You won't need to. You come first, Clio, of course. But you're too far
away for me to see you with my spy, and I don't want to use the
high-powered beam of this boat for fear of detection; so you'd better
keep on talking, so that I can trace you."

"That's one thing I _am_ good at!" Clio laughed in sheer relief. "If
talking were music, I'd be a full brass band!" and she kept up a flow of
inconsequential chatter, until Costigan told her that it was no longer
necessary; that he had established the line.

"Any excitement around there yet?" he asked her then.

"Nothing unusual that I can see," she replied. "Why? Should there be
some?"

"I hope not, but when I made my get-away I couldn't kill them all, of
course, and I thought maybe they might connect things up with my
jail-break and tell the other cities to take steps about you two. But I
guess they're pretty well disorganized back there yet, since they can't
know who hit them, or what with, or why. I must have got about everybody
that wasn't sealed up somewhere, and it doesn't stand to reason that
those who are left can check up very closely for a while yet. But
they're nobody's fools--they'll certainly get conscious when I snatch
you, maybe before ... there, I see your city, I think."

"What are you going to do?"

"Same as I did back there, if I can. Poison their primary air and all
the water I can reach...."

"Oh, Conway!" Her voice rose to a scream. "They must know--they're all
getting out of the water and are rushing inside the buildings as fast as
they possibly can!"

"I see they are," grimly. "I'm right over you now, 'way up. Been
locating their primary intake. They've got a dozen ships around it, and
have guards posted all along the corridors leading to it; and _those
guards are wearing masks!_ They're clever birds, all right, those
amphibians--they know what they got back there and how they got it. That
changes things, girl! If we use gas here we won't stand a chance in the
world of getting old Bradley. Stand by to jump when I open that door!"

"Hurry, dear! They are coming out here after me!"

"Sure they are." Costigan had already seen the two Nevians swimming out
toward Clio's cage, and had hurled his vessel downward in a screaming
power dive. "You're too valuable a specimen for them to let you be
gassed, but if they can get there before I do they're traveling fast!"

He miscalculated slightly, so that instead of coming to a halt at the
surface of the liquid medium the speedster struck with a crash that
hurled solid masses of water for hundreds of yards. But no ordinary
crash could harm that vessel's structure, her gravity controls were not
overloaded, and she shot back to the surface; gallant ship and reckless
pilot alike unharmed. Costigan trained his key-tube upon the doorway of
Clio's cell, then tossed it aside.

"Different combinations over here!" he barked. "Got to cut you out--lie
down in that far corner!"

His hands flashed over the panel, and as Clio fell prone without
hesitation or question a heavy beam literally blasted away a large
portion of the roof of the structure. The speedster shot into the air
and dropped down until she rested upon the tops of opposite walls; walls
still glowing, semi-molten. The girl piled a stool upon the table and
stood upon it, reached upward, and seized the mailed hands extended
downward toward her. Costigan heaved her up into the vessel with a
powerful jerk, slammed the door shut, leaped to the controls, and the
speedster darted away.

"Your armor's in that bundle there. Better put it on, and check your
Lewistons and pistols--no telling what kind of jams we'll get into," he
snapped, without turning. "Bradley, start talking ... all right, I've
got your line. Better get your wet rags ready and get organized
generally--every second will count by the time we get there. We're
coming so fast that our outer plating's white hot, but it may not be
fast enough, at that."

"It isn't fast enough, quite," Bradley announced, calmly. "They're
coming out after me now."

"Don't fight them and probably they won't paralyze you. Keep on talking,
so that I can find out where they take you."

"No good, Costigan." The voice of the old space-flea did not reveal a
sign of emotion as he made his dread announcement. "They have it all
figured out. They're not taking any chances at all--they're going to
paral...." His voice broke off in the middle of the word.

With a bitter imprecation Costigan flashed on the powerful ultra-beam
projector of the speedster and focused the plate upon Bradley's prison;
careless now of detection, since the Nevians were already warned. Upon
that plate he watched the Nevians carry the helpless body of the captain
into a small boat, and continued to watch as they bore it into one of
the largest buildings of the city. Up a series of ramps they took the
still form, placing it finally upon a soft couch in an enormous and
heavily guarded central hall. Costigan turned to his companion, Clio,
and even through the helmets she could see plainly the white agony of
his expression. He moistened his lips and tried twice to speak--tried
and failed: but he made no move either to cut off their power or to
change their direction.

"Of course," she approved, steadily. "We are going through. I know that
you _want_ to run with me, but if you actually did it, I would never
want to see you or hear of you again, and you would hate me forever."

"Hardly that." The anguish did not leave his eyes and his voice was
hoarse and strained, but his hands did not vary the course of the
speedster by so much as a hair's breadth. "You're the finest little
fellow that ever waved a plume, and I would love you no matter what
happened. I'd trade my immortal soul to the devil if it would get you
out of this mess, but we're both in it up to our necks and we can't dog
it now. If they kill him we beat it--he and I both knew that it was on
the chance of that happening that I took you first--but as long as all
three of us are alive it's all three or none."

"Of course," she said again, as steadily, thrilled this time to the
depths of her being by the sheer manhood of him who had thus simply
voiced his Code; a man of such fiber that neither love of life, nor the
infinitely more powerful love of her which she knew he bore, could make
him lower its high standard.

"We are going through. Forget that I am a woman. We are three human
beings, fighting a world full of monsters. I am simply one of us three.
I will steer your ship, fire your projectors, or throw your bombs. What
can I do best?"

"Throw bombs," he directed, briefly. He knew what must be done were they
to have even the slightest chance of winning clear. "I'm going to blast
a hole down into the auditorium, and when I do you stand by that port
and start dropping bottles of perfume. Throw a couple of big ones right
down the shaft I make, and the rest of them most anywhere, after I cut
the wall open. They'll do good wherever they hit, land or water."

"But Captain Bradley--he'll be gassed, too." Her fine eyes were
troubled.

"Can't be helped. I've got the antidote, and it'll work any time under
an hour. That'll be lots of time--if we aren't gone in less than ten
minutes we'll be staying here. They're bringing in platoons of militia
in full armor, and if we don't beat those boys to it we're in for plenty
of grief. All right--start throwing!"

The speedster had come to a halt directly over the imposing edifice
within which Bradley was incarcerated, and a mighty beam had flared
downward, digging a fiery well through floor after floor of stubborn
metal. The ceiling of the amphitheater pierced, the beam expired; and
down into that assembly hall there dropped two canisters of Vee-Two; to
crash and to fill its atmosphere with imperceptible death. Then the beam
flashed on again, this time at maximum power, and with it Costigan
burned away half of the gigantic building. Burned it away until room
above room gaped open, shelf-like, to outer atmosphere; the great hall
now resembling an over-size pigeon-hole surrounded by smaller ones. Into
that largest pigeon-hole the speedster darted, and cushioned desks and
benches crashed down, crushed flat under its enormous weight as it came
to rest upon the floor.

Every available guard had been thrown into that room, regardless of
customary occupation or of equipment. Most of them had been ordinary
watchmen, not even wearing masks, and all such were already down. Many,
however, were protected by masks, and a few were dressed in full armor.
But no portable armor could mount defenses of sufficient power to
withstand the awful force of the speedster's weapons, and one flashing
swing of a projector swept the hall almost clear of life.

"Can't shoot very close to Bradley with this big beam, but I'll mop up
on the rest of them by hand. Stay here and cover me, Clio!" Costigan
ordered, and went to open the door.

"I can't--I won't!" Clio replied instantly. "I don't know the controls
well enough. I'd kill you or Captain Bradley, sure; but I _can_ shoot,
and I'm going to!" and she leaped out, close upon his heels.

Thus, flaming Lewiston in one hand and barking automatic in the other,
the two mailed figures advanced toward Bradley; now doubly helpless:
paralyzed by his enemies and gassed by his friends. For a time the
Nevians melted away before them, but as they approached more nearly the
couch, upon which the captain was, they encountered six figures encased
in armor fully as capable as their own. The beams of the Lewistons
rebounded from that armor in futile pyrotechnics, the bullets of the
automatics spattered and exploded impotently against it. And behind that
single line of armored guards were massed perhaps twenty unarmored, but
masked, soldiers; and scuttling up the ramps leading into the hall were
coming the platoons of heavily-armored figures which Costigan had
previously seen.

Decision instantly made, Costigan ran back toward the speedster, but he
was not deserting his companions.

"Keep the good work up!" he instructed the girl as he ran. "I'll pick
those jaspers off with a pencil ray and then stand off the bunch that's
coming while you rub out the rest of that crew there and drag Bradley
back here."

Back at the control panel, he trained a narrow, but intensely dense
pencil of livid flame, and one by one the six armored figures fell.
Then, knowing that Clio could handle the remaining opposition, he
devoted his attention to the reenforcements so rapidly approaching from
the sides. Again and again the heavy beam lashed out, now upon this
side, now upon that, and in its flaming path Nevians disappeared. And
not only Nevians--in the incredible energy of that beam's blast, floor,
walls, ramps, and every material thing vanished in clouds of thick and
brilliant vapor. The room temporarily clear of foes, he sprang again to
Clio's assistance, but her task was nearly done. She had "rubbed out"
all opposition and, tugging lustily at Bradley's feet, had already
dragged him almost to the side of the speedster.

"'At-a-girl, Clio!" cheered Costigan, as he picked up the burly captain
and tossed him through the doorway. "Highly useful, girl of my dreams,
as well as ornamental. In with you, and we'll start out to go places!"

But getting the speedster out of the now completely ruined hall proved
to be much more of a task than driving it in had been, for scarcely had
the Terrestrials closed their locks than a section of the building
collapsed behind them, cutting off their retreat. Nevian submarines and
airships were beginning to arrive upon the scene, and were raying the
building viciously in an attempt to entrap or to crush the Terrestrials
in its ruins. Costigan managed finally to blast his way out, but the
Nevians had had time to assemble in force and he was met by a
concentrated storm of beams and of metal from every inimical weapon
within range.

But not for nothing had Conway Costigan selected for his dash for
liberty the craft which, save only for the two immense interstellar
cruisers, was the most powerful vessel ever built upon red Nevia. And
not for nothing had he studied minutely and to the last, least detail
every item of its controls and of its armament during wearily long days
and nights of solitary imprisonment. He had studied it under test, in
action, and at rest; studied it until he knew thoroughly its every
possibility--and what a ship it was! The iron-driven generators of his
shielding screens handled with ease the terrific load of the Nevians'
assault, his polycyclic screens were proof against any material
projectile, and the machines supplying his offensive beams with power
were more than equal to their tasks. Driven now at full rating those
frightful weapons lashed out against the Nevian blocking the way, and
under their impacts her screens flared brilliantly through the spectrum
and went down. And in the instant of their failure the enemy vessel was
literally blown into nothingness--no unprotected metal, however
resistant, could exist for a moment in the pathway of those iron-driven
tornadoes of pure energy.

Ship after ship of the Nevians plunged toward the speedster in
desperately suicidal attempts to ram her down, but each met the same
flaming fate before its mass could collide with the ship of the
Terrestrials. Then, from the grouped submarines far below, there reached
up red rods of force, which seized the space-ship and began relentlessly
to draw her down.

"What are they doing that for, Conway? _They_ can't fight us!"

"They don't want to fight us. They want to hold us, but I know what to
do about that, too," and the powerful tractor rods snapped as a plane of
lurid light drove through them. Upward now at the highest permissible
velocity the speedster leaped, and past the few ships remaining above
her she dodged; there was nothing now between her and the freedom of
boundless space.

"You did it, Conway; you did it!" Clio exulted. "Oh, Conway, you're just
simply wonderful!"

"I haven't done it yet," Costigan cautioned her. "The worst is yet to
come. Nerado. He's why they wanted to hold us back, and why I was in
such a hurry to get away. That boat of his is bad medicine, girl, and we
want to put plenty of kilometers behind us before he gets started."

"But do you think he will chase us?"

"_Think_ so? I _know_ so! The mere facts, that we are rare specimens and
that he told us that we were going to stay there all the rest of our
lives, would make him chase us clear to Dustheimer's Nebula. Besides
that, we stepped on their toes pretty heavily before we left. We know
altogether too much now to be let get back to Tellus; and finally,
they'd all die of acute enlargement of the spleen if we get away with
this prize ship of theirs. I hope to tell you they'll chase us!"

He fell silent, devoting his whole attention to his piloting, driving
his craft onward at such velocity that its outer plating held steadily
at the highest point of temperature compatible with safety. Soon they
were out in open space, hurtling toward the sun under the drive of every
possible iota of power, and Costigan took off his armor and turned
toward the helpless body of the captain.

"He looks so ... so ... so _dead_, Conway! Are you really sure that you
can bring him to?"

"Absolutely. Lots of time yet. Just three simple squirts in the right
places will do the trick." He took from a locked compartment of his
armor a small steel box, which housed a surgeon's hypodermic and three
vials. One, two, three, he injected small, but precisely measured
amounts of the fluids into the three vital localities, then placed the
inert form upon a deeply cushioned couch.

"There! That'll take care of the gas in five or six hours. The paralysis
will wear off before that, so he'll be all right when he wakes up; and
we're going away from here with every watt of power we can put out. We
have done everything I know how to do, for the present."

Then only did Costigan turn and look down, directly into Clio's eyes.
Wide, eloquent blue eyes that gazed back up into his, tender and
unafraid; eyes freighted with the oldest message of woman to chosen man.
His hard young face softened wonderfully as he stared at her; there were
two quick steps and they were in each other's arms. Clio's lithely
rounded form nestled against Costigan's powerful body as his mighty arms
tightened around her; his neck and shoulder were no less
enthusiastically clasped, and less strongly only because of her woman's
slighter musculature. Lips upon eager lips, blue eyes to gray,
