"Broke free----" Shann pounced upon that. "From disk control?"

"But surely." Her reply held something of wonder. "Why do you ask, star
voyager? Did you not also break free from the power of the disk when I
led you by the underground ways, awaking in the river? Do you then rate
this other one as less than your own breed that you think him incapable
of the same action?"

"Of Throgs I know as much as this...." He held up his hand, measuring
off a fraction of space between thumb and forefinger.

"Yet you knew them before you came to this world."

"My people have known them for long. We have met and fought many times
among the stars."

"And never have you talked mind to mind?"

"Never. We have sought for that, but there has been no communication
between us, neither of mind nor of voice."

"This one you name Throg is truly not as you," she assented. "And we are
not as you, being alien and female. Yet, star man, you and I have shared
a dream."

Shann stared at her, startled, not so much by what she said as the human
shading of those words in his mind. Or had that also been illusion?

"In the veil ...that creature which came to you on wings when you
remembered that. A good dream, though it came out of the past and so was
false in the present. But I have gathered it into my own store: such a
fine dream, one that you have cherished."

"Trav was to be cherished," he agreed soberly. "I found her in a broken
sleep cage at a spaceport when I was a child. We were both cold and
hungry, alone and hurt. So I stole and was glad that I stole Trav. For a
little space we both were very happy...." Forcibly he stifled memory.

"So, though we are unlike in body and in mind, yet we find beauty
together if only in a dream. Therefore, between your people and mine
there can _be_ a common speech. And I may show you my dream store for
your enjoyment, star voyager."

A flickering of pictures, some weird, some beautiful, all a little
distorted--not only by haste, but also by the haze of alienness which
was a part of her memory pattern--crossed Shann's mind.

"Such a sharing would be a rich feast," he agreed.

"All right!" Those crisp words in his own tongue brought Shann away from
the window to Thorvald. The Survey officer was no longer locked hand to
hand with the Wyvern witch, but his features were alive with a new
eagerness.

"We are going to try your idea, Lantee. They'll provide me with a new,
unmarked disk, show me how to use it. And I'll do what I can to back you
with it. But they insist that you go today."

"What do they really want me to do? Just rout out that Throg? Or try to
talk him into being a go-between with his people? That _does_ come under
the heading of dreaming!"

"They want him out of there, back with his own kind if possible.
Apparently he's a disruptive influence for them; he causes some kind of
a mental foul up which interferes drastically with their 'power.' They
haven't been able to get him to make any contact with them. This Elder
One is firm about your being the one ordained for the job, and that
you'll know what action to take when you get there."

"Must have thrown the sticks for me again," Shann commented.

"Well, they've definitely picked you to smoke out the Throg, and they
can't be talked into changing their minds about that."

"I'll be the smoked one if he has a blaster."

"They say he's unarmed----"

"What do they know about our weapons or a Throg's?"

"The other one has no arms." Wyvern words in his mind again. "This fact
gives him great fear. That which he has depended upon is broken. And
since he has no weapon, he is shut into a prison of his own terrors."

But an adult Throg, even unarmed, was not to be considered easy meat,
Shann thought. Armored with horny skin, armed with claws and those
crushing mandibles of the beetle mouth ... a third again as tall as he
himself was. No, even unarmed, the Throg had to be considered a menace.

Shann was still thinking along that line as he splashed through the surf
which broke about the lower jaw of the skull island, climbed up one of
the pointed rocks which masqueraded as a tooth, and reached for a higher
hold to lead him to the nose slit, the gateway to the alien's hiding
place.

The clak-claks screamed and dived about him, highly resentful of his
intrusion. And when they grew so bold as to buffet him with their wings,
threaten him with their tearing beaks, he was glad to reach the broken
rock edging his chosen door and duck inside. Once there, Shann looked
back. There was no sighting the cliff window where Thorvald stood, nor
was he aware in any way of mental contact with the Survey officer; their
hope of such a linkage might be futile.

Shann was reluctant to venture farther. His eyes had sufficiently
adjusted to the limited supply of light, and now the Terran brought out
the one aid the Wyverns had granted him, a green crystal such as those
which had played the role of stars on the cavern roof. He clipped its
simple loop setting to the front of his belt, leaving his hands free.
Then, having filled his lungs for the last time with clean, sea-washed
air, he started into the dome of the skull.

There was a fetid thickness to this air only a few feet away from the
outer world. The odor of clak-clak droppings and refuse from their nests
was strong, but there was an added staleness, as if no breeze ever
scooped out the old atmosphere to replace it with new. Fragile bones
crunched under Shann's boots, but as he drew away from the entrance, the
pale glow of the crystal increased its radiance, emitting a light not
unlike that of the phosphorescent bushes, so that he was not swallowed
up by dark.

The cave behind the nose hole narrowed quickly into a cleft, a narrow
cleft which pierced into the bowl of the skull. Shann proceeded with
caution, pausing every few steps. There came a murmur rising now and
again to a shriek, issuing, he guessed, from the clak-clak rookery
above. And the pound of sea waves was also a vibration carrying through
the rock. He was listening for something else, at the same time testing
the ill-smelling air for that betraying muskiness which spelled Throg.

When a twist in the narrow passage cut off the splotch of daylight,
Shann drew his stunner. The strongest bolt from that could not jolt a
Throg into complete paralysis, but it would slow up any attack.

Red--pinpoints of red--were edging a break in the rock wall. They were
gone in a flash. Eyes? Perhaps of the rock dwellers which the Wyverns
hated? More red dots, farther ahead. Shann listened for a sound he could
identify.

But smell came before sound. That trace of effluvia which in force could
sicken a Terran, was his guide. The cleft ended in a space to which the
limited gleam of the crystal could not provide a far wall. But that
faint light did show him his quarry.

The Throg was not on his feet, ready for trouble, but hunched close to
the wall. And the alien did not move at Shann's coming. Did the
beetle-head sight him? Shann wondered. He moved cautiously. And the
round head, with its bulbous eyes, turned a fraction; the mandibles
about the the ugly mouth opening quivered. Yes, the Throg could see him.

But still the alien made no move to rise out of his crouch, to come at
the Terran. Then Shann saw the fall of rock, the stone which pinned a
double-kneed leg to the floor. And in a circle about the prisoner were
the small, crushed, furred things which had come to prey on the helpless
to be slain themselves by the well-aimed stones which were the Throg's
only weapons of defense.

Shann sheathed his stunner. It was plain the Throg was helpless and
could not reach him. He tried to concentrate mentally on a picture of
the scene before him, hoping that Thorvald or one of the Wyverns could
pick it up. There was no answer, no direction. Choice of action remained
solely his.

The Terran made the oldest friendly gesture of his kind; his empty hands
held up, palm out. There was no answering move from the Throg. Neither
of the other's upper limbs stirred, their claws still gripping the small
rocks in readiness for throwing. All Shann's knowledge of the alien's
history argued against an unarmed advance. The Throg's marksmanship, as
borne out by the circle of small bodies, was excellent. And one of those
rocks might well thud against his own head, with fatal results. Yet he
had been sent there to get the Throg free and out of Wyvern territory.

So rank was the beetle smell of the other that Shann coughed. What he
needed now was the aid of the wolverines, a diversion to keep the alien
busy. But this time there was no disk working to produce Taggi and Togi
out of thin air. And he could not continue to just stand there staring
at the Throg. There remained the stunner. Life on the Dumps tended to
make a man a fast draw, a matter of survival for the fastest and most
accurate marksman. And now one of Shann's hands swept down with a speed
which, learned early, was never really to be forgotten.

He had the rod out and was spraying on tight beam straight at the
Throg's head before the first stone struck his shoulder and his weapon
fell from a numbed hand. But a second stone tumbled out of the Throg's
claw. The alien tried to reach for it, his movements slow, uncertain.

Shann, his arm dangling, went in fast, bracing his good shoulder against
the boulder which pinned the Throg. The alien aimed a blow at the
Terran's head, but again so slowly Shann had no difficulty in evading
it. The boulder gave, rolled, and Shann cleared out of range, back to
the opening of the cleft, pausing only to scoop up his stunner.

For a long moment the Throg made no move; his dazed wits must have been
working at very slow speed. Then the alien heaved up his body to stand
erect, favoring the leg which had been trapped. Shann tensed, waiting
for a rush. What now? Would the Throg refuse to move? If so, what could
he do about it?

With the impact of a blow, the message Shann had hoped for struck into
his mind. But his initial joy at that contact was wiped out with the
same speed.

"Throg ship ... overhead."

The Throg stood away from the wall, limped out, heading for Shann, or
perhaps only the cleft in which he stood. Swinging the stunner awkwardly
in his left hand, the Terran retreated, mentally trying to contact
Thorvald once more. There was no answer. He was well up into the cleft,
moving crabwise, unwilling to turn his back on the Throg. The alien was
coming as steadily as his injured limb would allow, trying for the exit
to the outer world.

A Throg ship overhead.... Had the castaway somehow managed to call his
own kind? And what if he, Shann Lantee, were to be trapped between the
alien and a landing party from the flyer? He did not expect any
assistance from the Wyverns, and what could Thorvald possibly do? From
behind him, at the entrance of the nose slit, he heard a sound--a sound
which was neither the scolding of a clak-clak nor the eternal growl of
the sea.




17. THROG JUSTICE


The musty stench was so strong that Shann could no longer fight the
demands of his outraged stomach. He rolled on his side, retching
violently until the sour smell of his illness battled the foul odor of
the ship. His memories of how he had come into this place were vague;
his body was a mass of dull pain, as if he had been scorched. Scorched!
Had the Throgs used one of their energy whips to subdue him? The last
clear thing he could recall was that slow withdrawal down the cleft
inside the skull rock, the Throg not too far away--the sound from the
entrance.

A Throg prisoner! Through the pain and the sickness the horror of that
bit doubly deep. Terrans did not fall alive into Throg hands, not if
they had the means of ending their existence within reach. But his hands
and arms were caught behind him in an unbreakable lock, some gadget not
unlike the Terran force bar used to restrain criminals, he decided
groggily.

The cubby in which he lay was black-dark. But the quivering of the deck
and the bulkheads about him told Shann that the ship was in flight. And
there could be but two destinations, either the camp where the Throg
force had taken over the Terran installations or the mother ship of the
raiders. If Thorvald's earlier surmise was true and the aliens were
hunting a Terran to talk in the transport, then they were heading for
the camp.

And because a man who still lives and who is not yet broken can also
hope, Shann began to think ahead to the camp--the camp and a faint,
thin chance of escape. For on the surface of Warlock there was a thin
chance; in the mother ship of the Throgs none at all.

Thorvald--and the Wyverns! Could he hope for any help from them? Shann
closed his eyes against the thick darkness and tried to reach out to
touch, somewhere, Thorvald with his disk--or perhaps the Wyvern who had
talked of Trav and shared dreams. Shann focused his thoughts on the
young Wyvern witch, visualizing with all the detail he could summon out
of memory the brilliant patterns about her slender arms, her thin,
fragile wrists, those other designs overlaying her features. He could
see her in his mind, but she was only a puppet, without life, certainly
without power.

Thorvald.... Now Shann fought to build a mental picture of the Survey
officer, making his stand at that window, grasping his disk, with the
sun bringing gold to his hair and showing the bronze of his skin. Those
gray eyes which could be ice, that jaw with the tight set of a trap upon
occasion....

And Shann made contact! He touched something, a flickering like a badly
tuned tri-dee--far more fuzzy than the mind pictures the Wyvern had
paraded for him. But he had touched! And Thorvald, too, had been aware
of his contact.

Shann fought to find that thread of awareness again. Patiently he once
more created his vision of Thorvald, adding every detail he could
recall, small things about the other which he had not known that he had
noticed--the tiny arrow-shaped scar near the base of the officer's
throat, the way his growing hair curled at the ends, the look of one
eyebrow slanting abruptly toward his hairline when he was dubious about
something. Shann strove to make a figure as vividly as Logally and Trav
had been in the mist of the illusion.

"... where?"

This time Shann was prepared; he did not let that mind image dissolve in
his excitement at recapturing the link. "Throg ship," he said the words
aloud, over and over, but still he held to his picture of Thorvald.

"... will...."

Only that one word! The thread between them snapped again. Only then did
Shann become conscious of a change in the ship's vibration. Were they
setting down? And where? Let it be at the camp! It must be the camp!

There was no jar at that landing, just that one second the vibration
told him the ship was alive and air-borne, and the next a dead quiet
testified that they had landed. Shann, his sore body stiff with tension,
waited for the next move on the part of his captors.

He continued to lie in the dark, still queasy from the stench of the
cell, too keyed up to try to reach Thorvald. There was a dull grating
over his head, and he looked up eagerly--to be blinded by a strong beam
of light. Claws hooked painfully under his arms and he was manhandled up
and out, dragged along a short passage and pitched free of the ship,
falling hard upon trodden earth and rolling over gasping as the seared
skin of his body was rasped and abraded.

The Terran lay face up now, and as his eyes adjusted to the light, he
saw a ring of Throg heads blotting out the sky as they inspected their
catch impassively. The mouth mandibles of one moved with a faint
clicking. Again claws fastened in his armpits, brought Shann to his
feet, holding him erect.

Then the Throg who had given that order moved closer. His hand-claws
clasped a small metal plate surmounted by a hoop of thin wire over which
was stretched a web of threads glistening in the sun. Holding that hoop
on a level with his mouth, the alien clicked his mandibles, and those
sounds became barely distinguishable basic galactic words.

"You Throg meat!"

For a moment Shann wondered if the alien meant that statement literally.
Or was it a conventional expression for a prisoner among their land.

"Do as told!"

That was clear enough, and for the moment the Terran did not see that he
had any choice in the matter. But Shann refused to make any sign of
agreement to either of those two limited statements. Perhaps the
beetle-heads did not expect any. The alien who had pulled him to his
feet continued to hold him erect, but the attention of the Throg with
the translator switched elsewhere.

From the alien ship emerged a second party. The Throg in their midst was
unarmed and limping. Although to Terran eyes one alien was the exact
counterpart of the other, Shann thought that this one was the prisoner
in the skull cave. Yet the indications now suggested that he had only
changed one captivity for another and was in disgrace among his kind.
Why?

The Throg limped up to front the leader with the translator, and his
guards fell back. Again mandibles clicked, were answered, though the
sense of that exchange eluded Shann. At one point in the report--if
report it was--he himself appeared to be under discussion, for the
injured Throg waved a hand-claw in the Terran's direction. But the end
to the conference came quickly enough and in a manner which Shann found
shocking.

Two of the guards stepped forward, caught at the injured Throg's arms
and drew him away, leading him out into a space beyond the grounded
ship. They dropped their hold on him, returning at a trot. The officer
clicked an order. Blasters were unholstered, and the Throg in the field
shriveled under a vicious concentration of cross bolts. Shann gasped. He
certainly had no liking for Throgs, but this execution carried overtones
of a cold-blooded ferocity which transcended anything he had known, even
in the callous brutality of the Dumps.

Limp, and more than a little sick again, he watched the Throg officer
turn away. And a moment later he was forced along in the other's wake to
the domes of the once Terran camp. Not just to the camp in general, he
discovered a minute later, but to that structure which had housed the
com unit linking them with ships cruising the solar lanes and with the
patrol. So Thorvald had been right; they needed a Terran to
broadcast--to cover their tracks here and lay a trap for the transport.
