wore now a sardonic smile. He stood erect with head thrown back and arms
folded across his breast, calmly facing the men and women who were to
judge him.

The Very Young Man gripped the Chemist by the arm. "Who is that?" he
whispered.

The Chemist's lips were pressed together; he seemed deeply affected. "I
did not know they caught him," he answered softly. "It must have been
just this morning."

The Very Young Man looked at Lylda. Her face was placid, but her breast
was rising and falling more rapidly than normal, and her hands in her
lap were tightly clenched.

The judge began speaking quietly, amid a deathlike silence. For over
five minutes he spoke; once he was interrupted by a cheer, instantly
stifled, and once by a murmur of dissent from several spectators on the
balcony that called forth instant rebuke from the attendant stationed
there.

The judge finished his speech, and raised his golden scepter slowly
before him. As his voice died away, Lylda rose to her feet and facing
the judge bowed low, with hands to her forehead. Then she spoke a few
words, evidently addressing the women before her. Each of them raised
her hands and answered in a monosyllable, as though affirming an oath.
This performance was repeated by the men.

The accused still stood silent, smiling sardonically. Suddenly his voice
rasped out with a short, ugly intonation and he threw his arms straight
out before him. A murmur rose from the spectators, and several
attendants leaned forward towards the platform. But the man only looked
around at them contemptuously and again folded his arms.

From one of the enclosures a woman came, and mounted the platform beside
the man. The Chemist whispered, "His wife; she is going to speak for
him." But with a muttered exclamation and wave of his arm, the man swept
her back, and without a word she descended the steps and reentered the
railed enclosure.

Then the man turned and raising his arms spoke angrily to those seated
in the enclosure. Then he appealed to the judge.

The Chemist whispered in explanation: "He refuses any witnesses."

At a sign from the judge the enclosure was opened and its occupants left
the floor, most of them taking seats upon the balcony.

"Who is he?" the Very Young Man wanted to know, but the Chemist ignored
his question.

For perhaps ten minutes the man spoke, obviously in his own defence. His
voice was deep and powerful, yet he spoke now seemingly without anger;
and without an air of pleading. In fact his whole attitude seemed one of
irony and defiance. Abruptly he stopped speaking and silence again fell
over the room. A man and a woman left the other enclosure and mounted
the platform beside the accused. They seemed very small and fragile, as
he towered over them, looking down at them sneeringly.

The man and woman conferred a moment in whispers. Then the woman spoke.
She talked only a few minutes, interrupted twice by the judge, once by a
question from Lylda, and once by the accused himself.

Then for perhaps ten minutes more her companion addressed the court. He
was a man considerably over middle age, and evidently, from his dress
and bearing, a man of prominence in the nation. At one point in his
speech it became obvious that his meaning was not clearly understood by
the jury. Several of the women whispered together, and one rose and
spoke to Lylda. She interrupted the witness with a quiet question. Later
the accused himself questioned the speaker until silenced by the judge.

Following this witness came two others. Then the judge rose, and looking
up to the balcony where the Chemist and his companions were sitting,
motioned to the Chemist to descend to the floor below.

The Very Young Man tried once again with his whispered question "What is
it?" but the Chemist only smiled, and rising quietly left them.

There was a stir in the court-room as the Chemist crossed the main
floor. He did not ascend the platform with the prisoner, but stood
beside it. He spoke to the jury quietly, yet with a suppressed power in
his voice that must have been convincing. He spoke only a moment, more
with the impartial attitude of one who gives advice than as a witness.
When he finished, he bowed to the court and left the floor, returning at
once to his friends upon the balcony.

Following the Chemist, after a moment of silence, the judge briefly
addressed the prisoner, who stolidly maintained his attitude of ironic
defiance.

"He is going to ask the jury to give its verdict now," said the Chemist
in a low voice.

Lylda and her companion leader rose and faced their subordinates, and
with a verbal monosyllable from each member of the jury the verdict was
unhesitatingly given. As the last juryman's voice died away, there came
a cry from the back of the room, a woman tore herself loose from the
attendants holding her, and running swiftly across the room leaped upon
the platform. She was a slight little woman, almost a child in
appearance beside the man's gigantic stature. She stood looking at him a
moment with heaving breast and great sorrowful eyes from which the tears
were welling out and flowing down her cheeks unheeded.

The man's face softened. He put his hands gently upon the sides of her
neck. Then, as she began sobbing, he folded her in his great arms. For
an instant she clung to him. Then he pushed her away. Still crying
softly, she descended from the platform, and walked slowly back across
the room.

Hardly had she disappeared when there arose from the street outside a
faint, confused murmur, as of an angry crowd gathering. The judge had
left his seat now and the jury was filing out of the room.

The Chemist turned to his friends. "Shall we go?" he asked.

"This trial--" began the Big Business Man. "You haven't told us its
significance. This man--good God what a figure of power and hate and
evil. Who is he?"

"It must have been evident to you, gentlemen," the Chemist said quietly,
"that you have been witnessing an event of the utmost importance to us
all. I have to tell you of the crisis facing us; this trial is its
latest development. That man--"

The insistent murmur from the street grew louder. Shouts arose and then
a loud pounding from the side of the building.

The Chemist broke off abruptly and rose to his feet. "Come outside," he
said.

They followed him through a doorway on to a balcony, overlooking the
street. Gathered before the court-house was a crowd of several hundred
men and women. They surged up against its entrance angrily, and were
held in check there by the armed attendants on guard. A smaller crowd
was pounding violently upon a side door of the building. Several people
ran shouting down the street, spreading the excitement through the city.

The Chemist and his companions stood in the doorway of the balcony an
instant, silently regarding this ominous scene. The Chemist was just
about to step forward, when, upon another balcony, nearer the corner of
the building a woman appeared. She stepped close to the edge of the
parapet and raised her arms commandingly.

It was Lylda. She had laid aside her court robe and stood now in her
glistening silver tunic. Her hair was uncoiled, and fell in dark masses
over her white shoulders, blowing out behind her in the wind.

The crowd hesitated at the sight of her, and quieted a little. She stood
rigid as a statue for a moment, holding her arms outstretched. Then,
dropping them with a gesture of appeal she began to speak.

At the sound of her voice, clear and vibrant, yet soft, gentle and
womanly, there came silence from below, and after a moment every face
was upturned to hers. Gradually her voice rose in pitch. Its gentle tone
was gone now--it became forceful, commanding. Then again she flung out
her arms with a dramatic gesture and stood rigid, every line of her body
denoting power--almost imperious command. Abruptly she ceased speaking,
and, as she stood motionless, slowly at first, the crowd silently
dispersed.

The street below was soon clear. Even those onlookers at a distance
turned the corner and disappeared. Another moment passed, and then Lylda
swayed and sank upon the floor of the balcony, with her head on her arms
against its low stone railing--just a tired, gentle, frightened little
woman.

"She did it--how wonderfully she did it," the Very Young Man murmured in
admiration.

"We can handle them now," answered the Chemist. "But each time--it is
harder. Let us get Lylda and go home, gentlemen. I want to tell you all
about it." He turned to leave the balcony.

"Who was the man? What was he tried for?" the Very Young Man demanded.

"That trial was the first of its kind ever held," the Chemist answered.
"The man was condemned to death. It was a new crime--the gravest we have
ever had to face--the crime of treason."




CHAPTER XXIII

LYLDA'S PLAN


Back home, comfortably seated upon the broad balcony overlooking the
lake, the three men sat waiting to hear their host's explanation of the
strange events they had witnessed. Lylda busied herself preparing a
light noonday meal, which she served charmingly on the balcony while
they talked.

"My friends," the Chemist began. "I tried to give you this morning, a
picture of this world and the life I have been leading here. I think you
understand, although I did not specifically say so, that all I said
related to the time when I first came here. That you would call this
life Utopia, because of the way I outlined it, I do not doubt; or at
least you would call it a state of affairs as near Utopian as any human
beings can approach.

"All that is true; it was Utopia. But gentlemen, it is so no longer.
Things have been changing of recent years, until now--well you saw what
happened this morning.

"I cannot account for the first cause of this trouble. Perhaps the
Malite war, with its disillusionment to our people--I do not know. Faith
in human kindness was broken: the Oroids could no longer trust
implicitly in each other. A gradual distrust arose--a growing unrest--a
dissatisfaction, which made no demands at first, nor seemed indeed to
have any definite grievances of any sort. From it there sprang leaders,
who by their greater intelligence created desires that fed and nourished
their dissatisfaction--gave it a seemingly tangible goal that made it
far more dangerous than it ever had been before.

"About a year ago there first came into prominence the man whom you saw
this morning condemned to death. His name is Targo--he is a
Malite--full-blooded I believe, although he says not. For twenty years
or more he has lived in Orlog, a city some fifty miles from Arite. His
wife is an Oroid.

"Targo, by his eloquence, and the power and force of his personality,
won a large following in Orlog, and to a lesser degree in many other
cities. Twice, some months ago, he was arrested and reprimanded; the
last time with a warning that a third offence would mean his death."

"What is he after?" asked the Very Young Man.

"The Targos, as they are called, demand principally a different division
of the land. Under the present system, approximately one-third of all
the land is in the hands of the government. Of that, generally more than
half lies idle most of the time. The Targos wish to have this land
divided among the citizens. They claim also that most of the city
organizations do not produce as large a dividend as the Targos could
show under their own management. They have many other grievances that
there is no reason for me to detail."

"Why not let them try out their theories in some city?" suggested the
Big Business Man.

"They are trying them," the Chemist answered. "There was a revolution in
Orlog about six months ago. Several of its officials were
assassinated--almost the first murders we have ever had. The Targos took
possession of the government--a brother of this man you saw this morning
became leader of the city. Orlog withdrew from the Oroid government and
is now handling its affairs as a separate nation."

"I wonder----" began the Big Business Man thoughtfully. "Well, why not
let them run it that way, if they want to?"

"No reason, if they were sincere. But they are not sincere nor honest
fundamentally. Their leaders are for the most part Malites, or Oroids
with Malite blood. And they are fooling the people. Their followers are
all the more unintelligent, more gullible individuals, or those in whom
there lies a latent criminal streak.

"The thing doesn't work. Sexual license is growing in Orlog. Crimes
against women are becoming more and more frequent. Offences committed by
those prominent, or in authority, go unpunished. Women's testimony is
discredited, often by concerted lying on the part of men witnesses.

"Many families are leaving Orlog--leaving their land and their homes
deserted. In other cities where the Targos threaten to gain control the
same thing is happening. Most of these refugees come to Arite. We cannot
take care of them; there is not enough land here."

"Why not take your army and clean them up?" suggested the Very Young
Man.

They were seated around a little table, at which Lylda was serving
lunch. At the question she stopped in the act of pouring a steaming
liquid from a little metal kettle into their dainty golden drinking cups
and looked at the Very Young Man gravely.

"Very easy it would be to do that perhaps," she said quietly. "But these
Targos, except a few--they are our own people. And they too are armed.
We cannot fight them; we cannot kill them--our own people."

"We may have to," said the Chemist. "But you see, I did not realize, I
could not believe the extent to which this Targo could sway the people.
Nor did I at first realize what evils would result if his ideas were
carried out. He has many followers right here in Arite. You saw that
this morning."

"How did you catch him?" interrupted the Very Young Man.

"Yesterday he came to Arite," said Lylda. "He came to speak. With him
came fifty others. With them too came his wife to speak here, to our
women. He thought we would do nothing; he defied us. There was a
fight--this morning--and many were killed. And we brought him to the
court--you saw."

"It is a serious situation," said the Doctor. "I had no idea----"

"We can handle it--we must handle it," said the Chemist. "But as Lylda
says, we cannot kill our own people--only as a last desperate measure."

"Suppose you wait too long," suggested the Big Business Man. "You say
these Targos are gaining strength every day. You might have a very bad
civil war."

"That was the problem," answered the Chemist.

"But now you come," said Lylda. "You change it all when you come down to
us out of the great beyond. Our people, they call you genii of the
Master, they----"

"Oh gee, I never thought of that," murmured the Very Young Man. "What
_do_ you think of us?"

"They think you are supernatural beings of course," the Chemist said
smiling. "Yet they accept you without fear and they look to you and to
me for help."

"This morning, there at the court," said Lylda, "I heard them say that
Targo spoke against you. Devils, he said, from the Great Blue Star, come
here with evil for us all. And they believe him, some of them. It was
for that perhaps they acted as they did before the court. In Arite now,
many believe in Targo. And it is bad, very bad."

"The truth is," added the Chemist, "your coming, while it gives us
unlimited possibilities for commanding the course of events, at the same
time has precipitated the crisis. Naturally no one can understand who or
what you are. And as Lylda says, the Targos undoubtedly are telling the
people you come to ally yourself with me for evil. There will be
thousands who will listen to them and fear and hate you--especially in
some of the other cities."

"What does the king say?" asked the Doctor.

"We will see him to-morrow. He has been anxiously waiting for you. But
you must not forget," the Chemist added with a smile, "the king has had
little experience facing strife or evil-doing of any kind. It was almost
unknown until recently. It is I, and you, gentlemen, who are facing the
problem of saving this nation."

The Very Young Man's face was flushed, and his eyes sparkled with
excitement. "We can do anything we like," he said. "We have the power."

"Ay, that is it," said Lylda. "The power we have. But my friend, we
cannot use it. Not for strife, for death; we cannot."

"The execution of Targo will cause more trouble," said the Chemist
thoughtfully. "It is bound to make----"

"When will you put him to death?" asked the Big Business Man.

"To-morrow he dies," Lylda answered. "To-morrow, before the time of
sleep."

"There will be trouble," said the Chemist again. "We are in no personal
danger of course, but, for the people who now believe in Targo, I am
afraid----"

"A plan I have made," said Lylda. She sat forward tensely in her chair,
brushing her hair back from her face with a swift gesture. "A plan I
have made. It is the only way--I now think--that may be there comes no
harm to our people. It is that we want to do, if we can." She spoke
eagerly, and without waiting for them to answer, went swiftly on.

"This drug that you have brought, I shall take it. And I shall get big.
Oh, not so very big, but big enough to be the height of a man it may be
ten times. Then shall I talk to the people--I, Lylda--woman of the
Master, and then shall I tell them that this power, this magic, is for
good, not for evil, if only they will give up Targo and all who are with
him."

"I will take it with you," said the Chemist. "Together we----"

"No, no, my husband. Alone I must do this. Ah, do you not know they say
these stranger devils with their magic come for evil? And you too, must
you not forget, once were a stranger just as they. That the people
know--that they remember.

"But I--I--Lylda--a woman of the Oroids I am--full-blooded Oroid, no
stranger. And they will believe me--a woman--for they know I cannot lie.

"I shall tell them I am for good, for kindness, for all we had, that
time before the Malite war, when every one was happy. And if they will
not believe, if as I say they will not do, then shall my power be indeed
for evil, and all who will obey me not shall die. But they will
believe--no need will there be to threaten.

"To many cities I will go. And in them, all of those who want to live by
Targo's law will I send to Orlog. And all in Orlog who believe him not,
will I tell to leave, and to the other cities go to make their homes.
Then Orlog shall be Targo's city. And to-morrow he will not die, but go
there into Orlog and become their king. For I shall say it may be there
are some who like his rule of evil. Or it may be he is good in different
fashion, and in time can make us see that his law too, is just and kind.

"Then shall live in Orlog all who wish to stay, and we shall watch their
rule, but never shall we let them pass beyond their borders. For if they
do, then shall we kill them.

"All this I can do, my husband, if you but will let me try. For me they
will believe, a woman, Oroid all of blood--for they know women do not
lie." She stopped and the fire in her eyes changed to a look of gentle
pleading. "If you will but let me try," she finished. "My
husband--please."

