constituents together.  It is then poured so as to form thin sticks.

The aluminium is carefully cleaned by rubbing with a cuttle bone, or
fine sand, and strong warm potash.  It is then washed in water and
dried with a clean cloth.  The aluminium is now held over a clean
flame and heated till it will melt the solder which is rubbed against
it.  The solder sticks at once, especially if rubbed with another bit
of aluminium (an aluminium soldering bit) similarly coated.  To solder
two bits of aluminium together it is only necessary to tin the bits by
this process and then sweat them together.

The same process applies perfectly to aluminium caused to adhere to
glass by the previously mentioned process, and enables strong soldered
contacts to be made to glass.  In one case, while I was testing the
method, the adhesion was so strong that the solder on contracting
while cooling actually chipped the surface clean off the glass.  In
order to get over this I have endeavoured to soften the solder by
mixing in a little of the fusible metal mercury amalgam;  and though
this prevents the glass from being so much strained, it reduces the
adherence of the solder.  It is a comfort to be able to solder
aluminium after working for so many years by way of electroplating, or
filing under solder.  An alternative method of soldering aluminium
will be described when the electroplating of aluminium is discussed, Sec.
138.

Gilding Glass.  In looking over some volumes of the Journal fuer
praktische Chemie, I came across a method of gilding glass due to
Boettger (Journ.  f.  prakt.  Chem. 103, p.  414).  After many trials
I believe I am in a position to give definite instructions as to the
best way of carrying out this rather troublesome operation.  The films
of gold obtained by the process are very thick, and the appearance of
the gold exceedingly fine.  The difficulty lies in the exact
apportionment of the reducing solution.  If too much of the reducing
solution be added, the gold deposits in a fine mud, and no coating is
obtained.  If, on the other hand, too little of the reducing solution
be added, little or no gold is deposited.  The secret of success turns
on exactly hitting the proper proportions.

The reducing solution consists of a mixture of aldehyde and glucose,
and the difficulty I have had in following Boettger's instructions
arose from his specifying "commercial aldehyde" of a certain specific
gravity which it was impossible to reproduce.  I did not wish to
specify pure aldehyde, which is not very easily got or stored, and
consequently I have had to determine a criterion as to when the
proportion of reducing solution is properly adjusted.

The aldehyde is best made as required.  I employed the ordinary
process as described in Thorpe's Dictionary of Applied Chemistry, by
distilling alcohol, water, sulphuric acid, and manganese dioxide
together.  The crude product is mixed with a large quantity of calcium
chloride (dry--not fused), and is rectified once.  The process is
stopped when the specific gravity of the product reaches 0.832 at 60 deg.
F.  The specific gravity of pure aldehyde is 0.79 nearly.

The following is a modification of Boettger's formula:-

Solution I

1 gram of pure gold is converted into chloride--got acid free--i.e.
to the state represented by AuCl3, and dissolved in 120 cc.  of water.

This solution is the equivalent of one containing 6.5 grains of
trichloride to the ounce of water.

Solution II.

  6     grams sodium hydrate.

100     grams water.

Solution III.

 0.2     grams glucose (bought as pure).

12.6    cubic centimetres 95 per cent alcohol.

12.6    cubic centimetres water.

 2.0     cubic centimetres aldehyde, sp. gr. 0.832.

To gild glass these solutions are used in the following proportions by
volume:-

16     parts of     No.  I.

 4    parts of    No.  II.

 0.8    parts of    No.  III.

The glass is first cleaned well with acid and washed with water:  it
is then rinsed with Solution No.  III.  If it is desired to gild the
inside of a glass vessel, Solution No.  III.  may be placed in the
vessel first, and the walls of the vessel rinsed round carefully.
Solutions I.  and II.  are mixed separately and then added
to III.--after about two minutes the whole is well shaken up.

If it be desired to gild a mirror of glass, the glass-plate is
suspended face downwards in a dish of the mixed solutions--care being
taken to rinse the glass with Solution III.  first.

If the mixture darkens in from 7' to 10' in diffuse daylight and at
60 deg.F.  it will gild well, and it generally pays to make a few trials
in a test tube to arrive at this.  If too much reducing solution is
present the liquid will get dark more rapidly, and vice versa.  The
gilding will require several hours--as much as twelve hours may be
needed.

The reaction is one of great chemical interest, being one of that
class of reactions which is greatly affected by capillarity.  Thus it
occasionally happens that when the reducing solution is not in the
right proportion, gold will be deposited at the surface of the liquid
(so as to form a gilt ring on the inside of a test tube), the
remainder of the gold going down as mud.  The gold deposited is at
first transparent to transmitted light and is deeply blue.  I thought
this might be due to a trace of copper or silver, but on carefully
purifying the gold no change of colour was noted.  If the reducing
solution is present in slightly greater proportions than that given in
the formula, the gold comes down with a richer colour, and has a
tendency to form a mat surface and to separate from the glass.  The
gold which is deposited more slowly has a less rich colour but a
brighter surface.  The operation should be interrupted when a
sufficient deposit has been obtained, because it is found that the
thicker the deposit, the more lightly is it held to the glass surface.

Sec. 75.  The Use of the Diamond-cutting Wheel.

A matter which is not very well known outside geological circles is
the manipulation of the diamond-cutting wheel, and as this is often of
great use in the physical laboratory, the following notes may not be
out of place.  I first became acquainted with the art in connection
with the necessity which arose for me to make galvanometer mirrors out
of fused quartz, and it was then that I discovered with surprise how
difficult it is to obtain information on the point.  I desire to
express my indebtedness to my colleagues, Professor David and Mr.
Smeeth, for the instruction they have given me.  In what follows I
propose to describe their practice rather than my own, which has been
of a makeshift description.  I will therefore select the process of
cutting a slice of rock for microscopical investigation.

Sec. 76.  Arming a Wheel.

Fig. 63.

A convenient wheel is made out of tin-plate, i.e.  mild steel sheet,
about one-thirtieth of an inch thick and seven inches in diameter.
This wheel must be quite flat and true, as well as round;  too much
pains cannot be taken in securing these qualities.  After the wheel is
mounted, it is better to turn it quite true by means of a
watch-maker's "graver" or other suitable tool.  The general design of
a rock-cutting machine will be clear from the illustration (Fig.  63).

The wheel being set up correctly, the next step is to arm it with
diamond dust.  For this purpose it is before all things necessary that
real diamond dust should be obtained.  The best plan is to procure a
bit of "bort" which has been used in a diamond drill, and whose
properties have therefore been tested to some extent.  This is ground
in a diamond mortar--or rather hammered in one--and passed through a
sieve having at least 80 threads to the inch.  The dust may be
conveniently kept in oil.

To arm the wheel, a little dust and oil is taken on the finger, and
laid on round the periphery of the wheel.  A bit of flint or agate is
then held firmly against the edge of the wheel and the latter is
rotated two or three times by hand.  The rotation must be quite
slow--say one turn in half a minute--and the flint must be held firmly
and steadily against the wheel.  Some operators prefer to hammer the
diamond dust into the wheel with a lump of flint, or agate, but there
is a risk of deforming the wheel in the process.  When a new wheel is
set up, it may be necessary to repeat the above process once every
half hour or so till the cutting is satisfactory, but when once a
wheel is well armed it will work for a long time without further
attention.

Sec. 77.  Cutting a Section.

A wheel 7 inches in diameter may be rotated about 500 times per
minute, and will give good results at that speed.  The work, as will
be seen from the diagram, is pressed against the edge of the wheel by
a force, which in the case quoted was about the weight of eleven
ounces.  This was distributed along a cutting arc of three-quarters of
an inch.

A convenient cutting lubricant is a solution of Castile soap in water,
and this must be freely supplied;  if the wheel gets dry it is almost
immediately spoiled owing to the diamond dust being scraped off.  In
the figure the lubricant is supplied by a wick running into the
reservoir.  I have used both clock oil and ordinary gas-engine oil as
lubricants, with equally satisfactory results.  As to the speed of
cutting, in the experiment quoted a bit of rather friable "gabbro,"
measuring three-quarters of an inch on the face by five-eighths of an
inch thick, was cut clean through in six minutes, or by 3000 turns of
the wheel.  The travel of the edge was thus between 5000 and 6000
feet, or say 9000 feet, nearly 2 miles, per inch cut.

A good solid rock, like basalt, can be cut into slices of about 3/32
inch thick.  A very loose rock is best boiled in Canada balsam, hard
enough to set, before it is put against the wheel.

Instead of a grinding machine a lathe may be employed.  The disc is,
of course, mounted on the mandrel, and the work on the slide-rest.
The latter must be disconnected from its feed screws, and a weight
arranged over a pulley so as to keep the work pressed against the
wheel by a constant force.

It may, perhaps, occur to the reader to inquire whether any clearance
in the cut is necessary.  The answer is that in all probability, and
in spite of every care, the wheel will wobble enough to give
clearance.  If it does not, a little diamond dust rubbed into the side
of the wheel, as well as the edge, will do all that is required.  The
edge also, after two or three armings, "burrs" a little, and thus
provides a clearance naturally.  It is not unlikely that in the near
future the electric furnace will furnish us with a number of products
capable of replacing the diamond as abrading agents.  The cost of the
small amount of diamond dust; required in a laboratory is so small,
however, that it; is doubtful whether any appreciable economy will be,
effected.

Sec. 78.  Grinding Rock Sections, or Thin Slips of any Hard Material.

A note on this is, perhaps, worth making, for the same reasons as were
given for note, Sec. 75, which it naturally follows.  Just as
trout-fishing; is described by Mr. Francis as the "art of fine and far
off," [Footnote: In the Badminton Library, volume on Fishing.]
section grinding may be called "the art of Canada balsam cooking," as
follows.  A section of rock having been cut from the lump as just
described, it becomes; necessary to grind it down for purposes of
microscopical investigation.  For this purpose it is placed on a slip
of glass, and cemented in position by Canada, balsam. Success in the
operation of grinding the mounted section depends almost entirely on
the way in which the mounting is done, and this in its turn depends on
the condition to which the Canada has been brought.

To illustrate the operations, I will describe a specific case, viz.
that of grinding the section of "gabbro"' above described, for
microscopical purposes.  One side of the section is probably
sufficiently smooth and plane from the operation of the diamond wheel;
if not, it must be ground by the finger on a slab of iron or gun-metal
with emery and water, the emery passing a sieve of 80 threads to the
inch.  The glass base on which the section is to be mounted for
grinding is placed on a bit of iron or copper plate over a Bunsen
burner, and three or four drops of natural Canada balsam are placed
upon it.  The section is placed on the plate to heat at the same time.

The temperature must not rise so high as to cause any visible change
in the Canada balsam, except a slight formation of bubbles, which rise
to the surface, and can be blown off.  The heating may require to be
continued, say, up to twenty minutes.  The progress of the operation
is tested by examining the balsam as to its viscous properties.

An exceedingly simple and accurate way of testing is to dip a pair of
ordinary forceps in the balsam, which may be stirred a little to
secure uniformity.  The forceps are introduced with the jaws in
contact, and, as soon as withdrawn, the jaws are allowed to spring
apart, thus drawing out a balsam thread.  In a few moments the thread
is cold, and if the forceps be compressed, this thread will bend.

The Canada must be heated until it is just in such a state that on
bringing the jaws together the thread breaks.  The forceps may open to
about three-quarters of an inch.  If the Canada is more viscous, so
that the thread does not break, the section when cemented by it will
most probably slip on the slide.  On the other hand, if the balsam is
more brittle, it will crumble away during the grinding.

Assuming that the proper point has been reached, the section is
mounted with the usual precautions to avoid air bubbles, i.e.  by
dropping one edge on the balsam first.  When all is cold, the surface
of the section may be ground on an iron plate with emery passing the
80 sieve, till it is about 1/40 inch thick.  From this point it must
be reduced on ground glass by flours of emery and water;  the rough
particles of the former may be washed out for fine work.

The process of grinding should not take more than half an hour if the
section is properly cut, etc.  Beyond this point the allowable
thickness must depend on the nature of the rock; a good general rule
is to get the section just so thin that felspars show the yellow of
the first order in a polarising, microscope.  The section is then
finished with, say, two minutes emery or water of Ayr-stone dust.  It
is better not to have the surface too smooth.

To transfer the section, the hard Canada round the sides is scraped
away, and the section itself covered with some fresh Canada from the
bottle.  It is then warmed till it will slip off when a pin, or the
invaluable dentist's chisel, is pressed against one side.  If the
section be very delicate, the cover slip should be placed over it
before it is moved to the proper slide.  The Canada used for mounting
is not quite so hard as that employed in grinding, but it should be
hard when cold, i.e. not sticky.

The art of preparing Canada balsam appears to consist in heating it
under such conditions as will ensure its being exposed in thin layers.
I have wasted a good deal of time in trying to bake Canada in
evaporating basins, with the invariable result that it was either over
or under-baked, and got dark in colour during the process.

On reviewing the process of rock section-cutting and mounting as just
described, I cannot help thinking that, if properly systematised, it
could be made much more rapid by the introduction of proper automatic
grinding machinery.  It also seems not improbable that a proper
overhaul of available gums and cements would be found to lead to a
cementing material less troublesome than Canada balsam.

Sec. 79.  Cutting Sections of Soft Substances.

Though this art is fully treated of in books on practical biology, it
is occasionally of use to the physicist, and the following note treats
of that part of the subject which is not distinctly biological.

Soft materials, of which thin sections may be required, generally
require to be strengthened before they are cut.  For this purpose a
variety of materials are available.  The one most generally used is
hard paraffin.  The only point requiring attention is the embedding.
The material must be dry.

This is accomplished by soaking in absolute alcohol, i.e.  really
absolute alcohol made by shaking up rectified spirit with potassium
carbonate, previously dried, and then digesting for a day with large
excess of quick-lime, making use of an inverted condenser and finally
distilling off the alcohol without allowing it to come in contact with
undried air.  After soaking for some time in absolute alcohol, the
material may be transferred to oil of bergamot, or oil of cloves, or
almost any essential oil.  After soaking in this long enough to allow
the alcohol to diffuse out, the material may be lifted into a bath of
melted paraffin (melting at, say, 51 deg. C.).  The process of soaking is
in some cases made to go more rapidly by exhausting, and, if the
material will stand it, by raising the temperature over 100 deg. C.  The
soaking process may require minutes, hours, or days, according to the
size and density of the material;  but a few hours are usually
sufficient.

When cold, the sections may be cut in any of the ordinary forms of
microtome.

Another way of embedding is to soak in collodion, and then precipitate
the latter in the material and around it by plunging into nearly
absolute alcohol.  The collodion yields a harder matrix than the
paraffin.

Whatever form of cutting machine is employed, the art of sharpening
the knife is the only one requiring any particular notice.  The
easiest way of obtaining a knife hard enough to sharpen, is to use a
razor of good quality.  If it has to be ground, it is best to do this
on a fine Turkey stone which is conveniently rested on two bits of
rubber tubing, to avoid jarring the blade.  Many stones are slightly
cracked, but on no account must the razor be dragged across a crack,
or the edge will suffer.

The necessary and sufficient condition is that the razor must be
worked in little sweeps over the stone, and pressed against the latter
by little more than its own weight, and the grinding must be regular.
The edge may be inspected under a microscope, and it must be perfectly
smooth and even before it will cut sections.  A finishing touch may be
