
Instead of hanging up his suit in the locker provided, he had bunched it
under his arm--except for the helmet--and now he headed toward
maintenance.

He met Ensign Vaneski just coming out, and gave him a broad smile.
"Mister Vaneski, I got troubles."

Vaneski smiled back worriedly. "Yes, sir. I guess we all do. What is it,
sir?"

Mike gestured at the bundle under his arm. "I abraded the sleeve of my
suit while I was working today. I wish you'd take a look at it. I'm
afraid it'll need a patch."

For a moment, Vaneski looked as though he'd suddenly developed a
headache.

"I know you're supposed to be off duty now," Mike said soothingly, "but
I don't want to get myself killed wearing a leaky suit tomorrow. I'll
help you work on it if--"

Vaneski grinned quickly. "Oh no, sir. That'll be all right. I'll give it
a test, anyway, to check leaks. If it needs repair, it shouldn't take
too long. Bring it in, and we'll take a look at it."

They went back into the Maintenance Section, and Vaneski spread the suit
out on the worktable. There was an obvious rough spot on the right
sleeve. "Looks bad," said Vaneski. "I'll run a test right away."

"Okay," said Mike. "I'll leave it to you. Can I pick it up in the
morning?"

"I think so. If it needs a patch, we'll have to test the patch, of
course, but we should be able to finish it pretty quickly." He shrugged.
"If we can't, sir, you'll just have to wait. Unless you want us to start
altering a suit to your measurements."

"Which would take longer?"

"Altering a suit."

"Okay. Just patch this one, then. What can I do?"

"I'll get it out as fast as possible, sir," said Vaneski with a smile.

"Fine. I'll see you later, then." Mike, like Cleopatra, was not prone to
argue. He left maintenance and headed toward the wardroom for a game of
_Uma ni to_. But when he met Leda Crannon going up the stairway,
all thoughts of card games flitted from his mind with the careless
nonchalance of a summer butterfly.

"Hullo," he said, pulling himself up a little straighter. He was tired,
but not _that_ tired.

Her smile brushed the cobwebs from his mind. But a second look told him
that there was worry behind the smile.

"Hi, Mike," she said softly. "You look beat."

"I am," admitted Mike. "To a frazzle. Have I told you that I love you?"

"Once, I think. Maybe twice." Her eyes seemed to light up somewhere from
far back in her head. "But enough of this mad passion," she said. "I
want an invitation to have a drink--a stiff one."

"I'll steal Jeffers' bottle," Mike offered. "What's the trouble?"

Her smile faded, and her eyes became grave. "I'm scared, Mike; I want to
talk to you."

"Come along, then," Mike said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mike the Angel poured two healthy slugs of Pete Jeffers' brandy into a
pair of glasses, added ice and water, and handed one to Leda Crannon
with a flourish. And all the time, he kept up a steady line of gentle
patter.

"It may interest you to know," he said chattily, "that the learned
Mister Treadmore has been furnishing me with the most fascinating
information." He lifted up his own glass and looked into its amber
depths.

They were in his stateroom, and this time the door was closed--at her
insistence. She had explained that she didn't want to be overheard, even
by passing crew members.

He swizzled the ice around in his glass, still holding it up to the
light. "Indeed," he rambled on, "Treadmore babbled for Heaven knows how
long on the relative occurrence of parahydrogen and orthohydrogen on
Eisberg." He took his eyes from the glass and looked down at the girl
who was seated demurely on the edge of his bunk. Her smile was
encouraging.

"He said--and I quote"--Mike's voice assumed a gloomy, but stilted
tone--"normal hydrogen gas consists of diatomic molecules. The nuclear,
or proton, spin of these atoms--ah--that is, of the two atoms that
compose the molecule--may be oriented in the same direction or in
opposite directions."

He held a finger in the air as if to make a deep philosophical point.
"If," he said pontifically, "they are oriented in the same direction, we
refer to the substance as _orthohydrogen_. If they are oriented in
opposite directions, it is _parahydrogen_. The _ortho_ molecules rotate
with _odd_ rotational quantum numbers, while the _para_ molecules rotate
with _even_ quantum numbers.

"Since conversion does not normally occur between the two states, normal
hydrogen may be considered--"

Leda Crannon, snickering, waved her hand in the air. "Please!" she
interrupted. "He can't be that bad! You make him sound like a dirge
player at a Hindu funeral. What did he tell you? What did you find out?"

"_Hah!_" said Mike. "What did I find out?" His hand moved in an airy
circle as he inscribed a flowing cipher with a graceful Delsarte wave.
"Nothing. In the first place, I already knew it, and in the second, it
wasn't practical information. There's a slight difference in diffusion
between the two forms, but it's nothing to rave about." His expression
became suddenly serious. "I hope your information is a bit more
revealing."

She glanced at her glass, nodded, and drained it. Mike had extracted a
promise from her that she would drink one drink before she talked. He
could see that she was a trifle tense, and he thought the liquor would
relax her somewhat. Now he was ready to listen.

She handed him her empty, and while he refilled it, she said: "It's
about Snookums again."

Mike gave her her glass, grabbed the nearby chair, turned it around, sat
down, and regarded her over its back.

"I've lived with him so long," she said after a minute. "So long. It
almost seems as though I've grown up with him. Eight years. I've been a
mother to him, and a big sister at the same time--and maybe a maiden
aunt. He's been a career and a family all rolled in together." She still
watched her writhing hands, not raising her eyes to Mike's.

"And--and, I suppose, a husband, too," she continued. "That is, he's
sort of the stand-in for a--well, a somebody to teach--to correct--to
reform. I guess every woman wants to--to _remake_ the man she meets--the
man she wants."

And then her eyes were suddenly on his. "But I don't. Not any more. I've
had enough of it." Then she looked back down at her hands.

Mike the Angel neither accepted nor rejected the statement. He merely
waited.

"He was mine," she said after a little while. "He was mine to mold, to
teach, to form. The others--the roboticists, the neucleonicists, the
sub-electronicists, all of them--were his instructors. All they did was
give him facts. It was I who gave him a personality.

"I made him. Not his body, not his brain, but his mind.

"I made him.

"I knew him.

"And I--I--"

Still staring at her hands, she clasped them together suddenly and
squeezed.

"And I loved him," she finished.

She looked up at Mike then. "Can you see that?" she asked tensely. "Can
you understand?"

"Yes," said Mike the Angel quietly. "Yes, I can understand that. Under
the same circumstances, I might have done the same thing." He paused.
"And now?"

She lowered her head again and began massaging her forehead with the
finger tips of both hands, concealing her face with her palms.

"And now," she said dully, "I know he's a machine. Snookums isn't a _he_
any more--he's an _it_. He has no personality of his own, he only has
what I fed into him. Even his voice is mine. He's not even a psychic
mirror, because he doesn't reflect _my_ personality, but a puppet
imitation of it, distorted and warped by the thousands upon thousands of
cold facts and mathematical relationships and logical postulates. And
none of these _added_ anything to him, as a personality. How could they?
He never had a _person_ality--only a set of behavior patterns that I
drilled into him over a period of eight years."

She dropped her hands into her lap and tilted her head back, looking at
the blank white shimmer of the glow plates.

"And now, suddenly, I see him for what he is--for what _it_ is. A
machine.

"It was never anything _but_ a machine. It is still a machine. It will
never be anything else.

"Personality is something that no machine can ever have. Idiosyncrasies,
yes. No two machines are identical. But any personality that an
individual sees in a machine has been projected there by the individual
himself; it exists only in the human mind.

"A machine can only do what it is built to do, and teaching a robot is
only a building process." She gave a short, hard laugh. "I couldn't even
build a monster, like Dr. Frankenstein did, unless I purposely built it
to turn on me. And in that case I would have done nothing more than the
suicide who turns a gun on himself."

Her head tilted forward again, and her eyes sought those of Mike the
Angel. A rather lopsided grin came over her face.

"I guess I'm disenchanted, huh, Mike?" she asked.

Mike grinned back, but his lips were firm. "I think so, yes. And I think
you're glad of it." His grin changed to a smile.

"Remember," he asked, "the story of the Sleeping Beauty? Did you want to
stay asleep all your life?"

"God forbid and thank you for the compliment, sir," she said, managing a
smile of her own. "And are you the Prince Charming who woke me up?"

"Prince Charming, I may be," said Mike the Angel carefully, "but I'm not
the one who woke you up. You did that yourself."

Her smile became more natural. "Thanks, Mike. I really think I might
have seen it, sooner or later. But, without you, I doubt...." She
hesitated. "I doubt that I'd want to wake up."

"You said you were scared," Mike said. "What are you scared of?"

"I'm scared to death of that damned machine."

    _Great love, chameleon-like, hath turned to fear,
    And on the heels of fear there follows hate._

Mike quoted to himself--he didn't say it aloud.

"The only reason anyone would have to fear Snookums," he said, "would be
that he was uncontrollable. Is he?"

"Not yet. Not completely. But I'm afraid that knowing that he's been
filled with Catholic theology isn't going to help us much."

"Why not?"

"Because he has it so inextricably bound up with the Three Laws of
Robotics that we can't nullify one without nullifying the other. He's
convinced that the laws were promulgated by God Himself."

"Holy St. Isaac," Mike said softly. "I'm surprised he hasn't carried it
to its logical conclusion and asked for baptism."

She smiled and shook her head. "I'm afraid your logic isn't as rigorous
as Snookums' logic. Only angels and human beings have free will;
Snookums is neither, therefore he does not have free will. Whatever he
does, therefore, must be according to the will of God. Therefore
Snookums cannot sin. Therefore, for him, baptism is both unnecessary and
undesirable."

"Why 'undesirable'?" Mike asked.

"Since he is free from sin--either original or actual--he is therefore
filled with the plenitude of God's grace. The purpose of a sacrament is
to give grace to the recipient; it follows that it would be useless to
give the Sacrament to Snookums. To perform a sacrament or to receive it
when one knows that it will be useless is sacrilege. And sacrilege is
undesirable."

"Brother! But I still don't see how that makes him dangerous."

"The operation of the First Law," Leda said. "For a man to sin involves
endangering his immortal soul. Snookums, therefore, must prevent men
from sinning. But sin includes thought--intention. Snookums is trying to
figure that one out now; if he ever does, he's going to be a thought
policeman, and a strict one."

"You mean he's working on _telepathy_?"

She laughed humorlessly. "No. But he's trying to dope out a system
whereby he can tell what a man is going to do a few seconds before he
does it--muscular and nervous preparation, that sort of thing. He hasn't
enough data yet, but he will have it soon enough.

"There's another thing: Snookums is fouling up the Second Law's
operation. He won't take orders that interfere in any way with his
religious beliefs--since that automatically conflicts with the First
Law. He, himself, cannot sin. But neither can he do anything which would
make him the tool of an intent to sin. He refuses to do anything at all
on Sunday, for instance, and he won't let either Fitz or I do anything
that even vaguely resembles menial labor. Slowly, he's coming to the
notion that human beings aren't human--that only God is human, in
relation to the First and Second Laws. There's nothing we can do with
him."

"What will you do if he becomes completely uncontrollable?"

She sighed. "We'll have to shut him off, drain his memory banks, and
start all over again."

Mike closed his eyes. "Eighteen billions down the drain just because a
robot was taught theology. What price glory?"




22


Captain Sir Henry Quill scowled and rubbed his finger tips over the top
of his shiny pink pate. "Your evidence isn't enough to convict, Golden
Wings."

"I know it isn't, Captain," admitted Mike the Angel. "That's why I want
to round everybody up and do it this way. If he can be convinced that we
_do_ have the evidence, he may crack and give us a confession."

"What about Lieutenant Mellon's peculiar actions? How does that tie in?"

"Did you ever hear of Lysodine, Captain?"

Captain Quill leaned back in his chair and looked up at Mike. "No. What
is it?"

"That's the trade name for a very powerful drug--a derivative of
lysurgic acid. It's used in treating certain mental ailments. A bottle
of it was missing from Mellon's kit, according to the inventory Chief
Pasteur took after Mellon's death.

"The symptoms of an overdose of the drug--administered orally--are
hallucinations and delusions amounting to acute paranoia. The final
result of the drug's effect on the brain is death. It wasn't my blow to
the solar plexus, or the sedative that Pasteur gave him, or Vaneski's
shot with a stun gun that killed Mellon. It was an overdose of
Lysodine."

"Can the presence of this drug be detected after death?"

"Pasteur says it can. He won't even have to perform an autopsy. He can
do it from a blood sample."

Captain Quill sighed. "As I said, Mister Gabriel, your evidence is not
quite enough to convict--but it is certainly enough to convince.
Therefore, if Chief Pasteur's analysis shows Lysodine in Lieutenant
Mellon's body, I'll permit this theatrical denouement." Then his eyes
hardened. "Mike, you've done a fine job so far. I want you to bring me
that son of a bitch's head on a platter."

"I will," promised Mike the Angel.




23


Captain Sir Henry Quill, Bart., stood at the head of the long table in
the officers' wardroom and looked everyone over. The way he did it was
quite impressive. His eyes were narrowed, and his heavy, thick, black
brows dominated his face. Beneath the glow plates in the overhead, his
pink scalp gleamed with the soft, burnished shininess of a well-polished
apple.

To his left, in order down the table, were Mike the Angel, Lieutenant
Keku, and Leda Crannon. On his right were Commander Jeffers, Ensign
Vaneski, Lieutenant Commander von Liegnitz, and Dr. Morris Fitzhugh.
Lieutenant Mellon's seat was empty.

Black Bart cleared his throat. "It's been quite a trip, hasn't it? Well,
it's almost over. Mister Gabriel finished the conversion of the power
plant yesterday; Treadmore's men can finish up. We will leave on the
