
The sisters placed the litter upon rests at the side of the grave, and
clasping hands with their mother, formed a semicircle about it. They
were all so closely veiled that their features could not be seen, and no
emotion was visible. The procession of young girls formed a circle
inclosing the grave and the mourners, and began chanting a slow and
sorrowful dirge. No words can paint the pathos and beauty of such a
scene. My eye took in every detail that displayed that taste for the
beautiful that compels the Mizora mind to mingle it with every incident
of life. The melody sounded like a chorus of birds chanting, in perfect
unison, a weird requiem over some dead companion.


                           DIRGE

     She came like the Spring in its gladness
     We received her with joy--we rejoiced in her promise
     Sweet was her song as the bird's,
     Her smile was as dew to the thirsty rose.
     But the end came ere morning awakened,
     While Dawn yet blushed in its bridal veil,
     The leafy music of the woods was hushed in snowy shrouds.
     Spring withered with the perfume in her hands;
     A winter sleet has fallen upon the buds of June;
     The ice-winds blow where yesterday zephyrs disported:
     Life is not consummated
     The rose has not blossomed, the fruit has perished in the flower,
     The bird lies frozen under its mother's breast
     Youth sleeps in round loveliness when age should lie withered and
       weary, and full of honor.
     Then the grave would be welcome, and our tears would fall not.
     The grave is not for the roses of youth;
     We mourn the early departed.
     Youth sleeps without dreams--
     Without an awakening.


At the close of the chant, the mother first and then each sister took
from her bosom the white rosebud and dropped it into the grave. Then
followed her schoolmates and companions who each dropped in the bud she
carried. A carpet of white rosebuds was thus formed, on which the body,
still reclining upon its pillow of flowers, was gently lowered.

The body was dressed in white, and over all fell a veil of fine white
tulle. A more beautiful sight I can never see than that young, lovely
girl in her last sleep with the emblems of youth, purity and swift decay
forming her pillow, and winding-sheet. Over this was placed a film of
glass that rested upon the bottom and sides of the thin lining that
covered the bottom and lower sides of the grave. The remainder of the
procession of young girls then came forward and dropped their rosebuds
upon it, completely hiding from view the young and beautiful dead.

The eldest sister then took a handful of dust and casting it into the
grave, said in a voice broken, yet audible: "Mingle ashes with ashes,
and dust with its original dust. To the earth whence it was taken,
consign we the body of our sister." Each sister then threw in a handful
of dust, and then with their mother entered their carriage, which
immediately drove them home.

A beautiful silver spade was sticking in the soft earth that had been
taken from the grave. The most intimate of the dead girls friends took a
spadeful of earth and threw it into the open grave. Her example was
followed by each one of the remaining companions until the grave was
filled. Then clasping hands, they chanted a farewell to their departed
companion and playmate. After which they strewed the grave with flowers
until it looked like a bed of beauty, and departed.

I was profoundly impressed by the scene. Its solemnity, its beauty, and
the universal expression of sorrow it had called forth. A whole city
mourned the premature death of gifted and lovely youth. Alas! In my own
unhappy country such an event would have elicited but a passing phrase
of regret from all except the immediate family of the victim; for
_there_ sorrow is a guest at every heart, and leaves little room for
sympathy with strangers.

The next day the mother was at her post in the National College; the
daughters were at their studies, all seemingly calm and thoughtful, but
showing no outward signs of grief excepting to the close observer. The
mother was performing her accustomed duties with seeming cheerfulness,
but now and then her mind would drop for a moment in sorrowful
abstraction to be recalled with resolute effort and be fastened once
more upon the necessary duty of life.

The sisters I often saw in those abstracted moods, and frequently saw
them wiping away silent but unobtrusive tears. I asked Wauna for the
meaning of such stoical reserve, and the explanation was as curious as
were all the other things that I met with in Mizora.

"If you notice the custom of different grades of civilization in your
own country," said Wauna, "you will observe that the lower the
civilization the louder and more ostentatious is the mourning. True
refinement is unobtrusive in everything, and while we do not desire to
repress a natural and inevitable feeling of sorrow, we do desire to
conceal and conquer it, for the reason that death is a law of nature
that we cannot evade. And, although the death of a young person has not
occurred in Mizora in the memory of any living before this, yet it is
not without precedent. We are very prudent, but we cannot guard entirely
against accident. It has cast a gloom over the whole city, yet we
refrain from speaking of it, and strive to forget it because it cannot
be helped."

"And can you see so young, so fair a creature perish without wanting to
meet her again?"

"Whatever sorrow we feel," replied Wauna, solemnly, "we deeply realize
how useless it is to repine. We place implicit faith in the revelations
of Nature, and in no circumstances does she bid us expect a life beyond
that of the body. That is a life of individual consciousness."

"How much more consoling is the belief of my people," I replied,
triumphantly. "Their belief in a future reunion would sustain them
through the sorrow of parting in this. It has been claimed that some
have lived pure lives solely in the hope of meeting some one whom they
loved, and who had died in youth and innocence."

Wauna smiled.

"You do not all have then the same fate in anticipation for your future
life?" she asked.

"Oh, no!" I answered. "The good and the wicked are divided."

"Tell me some incident in your own land that you have witnessed, and
which illustrates the religious belief of your country."

"The belief that we have in a future life has often furnished a theme
for the poets of my own and other countries. And sometimes a quaint and
pretty sentiment is introduced into poetry to express it."

"I should like to hear some such poetry. Can you recite any?"

"I remember an incident that gave birth to a poem that was much admired
at the time, although I can recall but the two last stanzas of it. A
rowing party, of which I was a member, once went out upon a lake to view
the sunset. After we had returned to shore, and night had fallen upon
the water in impenetrable darkness, it was discovered that one of the
young men who had rowed out in a boat by himself was not with us. A
storm was approaching, and we all knew that his safety lay in getting
ashore before it broke. We lighted a fire, but the blaze could not be
seen far in such inky darkness. We hallooed, but received no answer, and
finally ceased our efforts. Then one of the young ladies who possessed a
very high and clear soprano voice, began singing at the very top of her
power. It reached the wanderer in the darkness, and he rowed straight
toward it. From that time on he became infatuated with the singer,
declaring that her voice had come to him in his despair like an angel's
straight from heaven.

"She died in less than a year, and her last words to him were: 'Meet me
in heaven.' He had always been recklessly inclined, but after that he
became a model of rectitude and goodness. He wrote a poem that was
dedicated to her memory. In it he described himself as a lone wanderer
on a strange sea in the darkness of a gathering storm and no beacon to
guide him, when suddenly he hears a voice singing which guides him safe
to shore. He speaks of the beauty of the singer and how dear she became
to him, but he still hears the song calling him across the ocean of
death."

"Repeat what you remember of it," urged Wauna.


     "That face and form, have long since gone
       Beyond where the day was lifted:
     But the beckoning song still lingers on,
       An angels earthward drifted.

     And when death's waters, around me roar
       And cares, like the birds, are winging:
     If I steer my bark to Heaven's shore
       'Twill be by an angel's singing."


"Poor child of superstition," said Wauna, sadly. "Your belief has
something pretty in it, but for your own welfare, and that of your
people, you must get rid of it as we have got rid of the offspring of
Lust. Our children come to us as welcome guests through portals of the
holiest and purest affection. That love which you speak of, I know
nothing about. I would not know. It is a degradation which mars your
young life and embitters the memories of age. We have advanced beyond
it. There is a cruelty in life," she added, compassionately, "which we
must accept with stoicism as the inevitable. Justice to your posterity
demands of you the highest and noblest effort of which your intellect is
capable."




CHAPTER VIII.


The conversation that I had with Wauna gave me so much uneasiness that I
sought her mother. I cannot express the shock I felt at hearing such
youthful and innocent lips speak of the absurdity of religious forms,
ceremonies, and creeds. She regarded my belief in them as a species of
barbarism. But she had not convinced me. _I was resolved not to be
convinced._ I believed she was in error.

Surely, I thought, a country so far advanced in civilization, and
practicing such unexampled rectitude, must, according to my religious
teaching, have been primarily actuated by religious principles which
they had since abandoned. My only surprise was that they had not
relapsed into immorality, after destroying church and creed, and I began
to feel anxious to convince them of the danger I felt they were
incurring in neglecting prayer and supplication at the throne to
continue them in their progress toward perfection of mental and moral
culture.

I explained my feelings to the Preceptress with great earnestness and
anxiety for their future, intimating that I believed their immunity from
disaster had been owing to Divine sufferance. "For no nation," I added,
quoting from my memory of religious precepts, "can prosper without
acknowledging the Christian religion."

She listened to me with great attention, and when I had finished, asked:

"How do you account for our long continuance in prosperity and progress,
for it is more than a thousand years since we rooted out the last
vestige of what you term religion, from the mind. We have had a long
immunity from punishment. To what do you attribute it?"

I hesitated to explain what had been in my mind, but finally faltered
out something about the absence of the male sex. I then had to explain
that the prisons and penitentiaries of my own land, and of all other
civilized lands that I knew of, were almost exclusively occupied by the
male sex. Out of eight hundred penitentiary prisoners, not more than
twenty or thirty would be women; and the majority of them could trace
_their_ crimes to man's infidelity.

"And what do you do to reform them?" inquired the Preceptress.

"We offer them the teachings of Christianity. All countries, however,
differ widely in this respect. The government of my country is not as
generous to prisoners as that of some others. In the United States every
penitentiary is supplied with a minister who expounds the Gospel to the
prisoners every Sunday; that is once every seven days."

"And what do they do the rest of the time?"

"They work."

"Are they ignorant?"

"Oh, yes, indeed;" I replied, earnestly. "You could not find one scholar
in ten thousand of them. Their education is either very limited, or
altogether deficient."

"Do the buildings they are confined in cost a great deal?"

"Vast sums of money are represented by them; and it often costs a
community a great deal of money to send a criminal to the penitentiary.
In some States the power to pardon rests entirely with the governor, and
it frequently occurs that a desperate criminal, who has cost a county a
great deal of money to get rid of him, will be pardoned by the governor,
to please a relative, or, as it is sometimes believed, for a bribe."

"And do the people never think of educating their criminals instead of
working them?

"That would be an expense to the government," I replied.

"If they would divide the time, and compel them to study half a day as
rigorously as they make them work, it would soon make a vast change in
their morals. Nothing so ennobles the mind as a broad and thorough
education."

"They are all compelled to listen to religious instruction once a week,"
I answered. "That surely ought to make some improvement in them. I
remember hearing an American lady relate her attendance at chapel
service in a State penitentiary one Sunday. The minister's education was
quite limited, as she could perceive from the ungrammatical language he
used, but he preached sound orthodox doctrine. The text selected had a
special application to his audience: 'Depart from me ye accursed, into
everlasting torment prepared for the Devil and his angels.' There were
eight hundred prisoners, and the minister assured them, in plain
language, that such would surely be their sentence unless they
repented."

"And that is what you call the consolations of religion, is it?" asked
the Preceptress with an expression that rather disconcerted me; as
though my zeal and earnestness entirely lacked the light of knowledge
with which she viewed it.

"That is religious instruction;" I answered. "The minister exhorted the
prisoners to pray and be purged of their sins. And it was good advice."

"But they might aver," persisted the Preceptress, "that they had prayed
to be restrained from crime, and their prayers had not been answered."

"They didn't pray with enough faith, then;" I assured her in the
confidence of my own belief. "That is wherein I think my own church is
so superior to the other religions of the world," I added, proudly. "We
can get the priest to absolve us from sin, and then we know we are rid
of it, when he tells us so."

"But what assurance have you that the priest can do so?" asked the
Preceptress.

"Because it is his duty to do so."

"Education will root out more sin than all your creeds can," gravely
answered the Preceptress. "Educate your convicts and train them into
controlling and subduing their criminal tendencies by _their own will_,
and it will have more effect on their morals than all the prayers ever
uttered. Educate them up to that point where they can perceive for
themselves the happiness of moral lives, and then you may trust them to
temptation without fear. The ideas you have expressed about dogmas,
creeds and ceremonies are not new to us, though, as a nation, we do not
make a study of them. They are very, very ancient. They go back to the
first records of the traditionary history of man. And the farther you go
back the deeper you plunge into ignorance and superstition.
