"Yes!  The mussels of certain streams in Scotland, Wales, Ireland,
Saxony, Bohemia, and France."

"Good!" the Canadian replied.  "From now on we'll pay closer
attention to 'em."

"But," I went on, "for secreting pearls, the ideal mollusk is the pearl
oyster Meleagrina margaritifera, that valuable shellfish.  Pearls result
simply from mother-of-pearl solidifying into a globular shape.
Either they stick to the oyster's shell, or they become embedded
in the creature's folds.  On the valves a pearl sticks fast;
on the flesh it lies loose.  But its nucleus is always some small,
hard object, say a sterile egg or a grain of sand, around which
the mother-of-pearl is deposited in thin, concentric layers over
several years in succession."

"Can one find several pearls in the same oyster?"  Conseil asked.

"Yes, my boy.  There are some shellfish that turn into real
jewel coffers.  They even mention one oyster, about which I
remain dubious, that supposedly contained at least 150 sharks."

"150 sharks!"  Ned Land yelped.

"Did I say sharks?"  I exclaimed hastily.  "I meant 150 pearls.
Sharks wouldn't make sense."

"Indeed," Conseil said.  "But will master now tell us how one goes
about extracting these pearls?"

"One proceeds in several ways, and often when pearls stick
to the valves, fishermen even pull them loose with pliers.
But usually the shellfish are spread out on mats made from the esparto
grass that covers the beaches.  Thus they die in the open air,
and by the end of ten days they've rotted sufficiently.  Next they're
immersed in huge tanks of salt water, then they're opened up and washed.
At this point the sorters begin their twofold task.  First they
remove the layers of mother-of-pearl, which are known in the industry
by the names legitimate silver, bastard white, or bastard black,
and these are shipped out in cases weighing 125 to 150 kilograms.
Then they remove the oyster's meaty tissue, boil it, and finally
strain it, in order to extract even the smallest pearls."

"Do the prices of these pearls differ depending on their size?"
Conseil asked.

"Not only on their size," I replied, "but also according to their shape,
their water--in other words, their color--and their orient--
in other words, that dappled, shimmering glow that makes them so
delightful to the eye.  The finest pearls are called virgin pearls,
or paragons; they form in isolation within the mollusk's tissue.
They're white, often opaque but sometimes of opalescent transparency,
and usually spherical or pear-shaped. The spherical ones
are made into bracelets; the pear-shaped ones into earrings,
and since they're the most valuable, they're priced individually.
The other pearls that stick to the oyster's shell are more erratically
shaped and are priced by weight.  Finally, classed in the lowest order,
the smallest pearls are known by the name seed pearls; they're priced
by the measuring cup and are used mainly in the creation of embroidery
for church vestments."

"But it must be a long, hard job, sorting out these pearls by size,"
the Canadian said.

"No, my friend.  That task is performed with eleven strainers,
or sieves, that are pierced with different numbers of holes.
Those pearls staying in the strainers with twenty to eighty holes
are in the first order.  Those not slipping through the sieves pierced
with 100 to 800 holes are in the second order.  Finally, those pearls
for which one uses strainers pierced with 900 to 1,000 holes make
up the seed pearls."

"How ingenious," Conseil said, "to reduce dividing and classifying
pearls to a mechanical operation.  And could master tell us the profits
brought in by harvesting these banks of pearl oysters?"

"According to Sirr's book," I replied, "these Ceylon fisheries
are farmed annually for a total profit of 3,000,000 man-eaters."

"Francs!"  Conseil rebuked.

"Yes, francs! 3,000,000 francs!"  I went on.  "But I don't
think these fisheries bring in the returns they once did.
Similarly, the Central American fisheries used to make an annual
profit of 4,000,000 francs during the reign of King Charles V,
but now they bring in only two-thirds of that amount.  All in all,
it's estimated that 9,000,000 francs is the current yearly return
for the whole pearl-harvesting industry."

"But," Conseil asked, "haven't certain famous pearls been quoted
at extremely high prices?"

"Yes, my boy.  They say Julius Caesar gave Servilia a pearl worth
120,000 francs in our currency."

"I've even heard stories," the Canadian said, "about some lady
in ancient times who drank pearls in vinegar."

"Cleopatra," Conseil shot back.

"It must have tasted pretty bad," Ned Land added.

"Abominable, Ned my friend," Conseil replied.  "But when a little
glass of vinegar is worth 1,500,000 francs, its taste is a small
price to pay."

"I'm sorry I didn't marry the gal," the Canadian said, throwing up
his hands with an air of discouragement.

"Ned Land married to Cleopatra?"  Conseil exclaimed.

"But I was all set to tie the knot, Conseil," the Canadian replied in
all seriousness, "and it wasn't my fault the whole business fell through.
I even bought a pearl necklace for my fiancée, Kate Tender,
but she married somebody else instead.  Well, that necklace cost
me only $1.50, but you can absolutely trust me on this, professor,
its pearls were so big, they wouldn't have gone through that strainer
with twenty holes."

"My gallant Ned," I replied, laughing, "those were artificial pearls,
ordinary glass beads whose insides were coated with Essence of Orient."

"Wow!" the Canadian replied.  "That Essence of Orient must sell
for quite a large sum."

"As little as zero!  It comes from the scales of a European carp,
it's nothing more than a silver substance that collects in the water
and is preserved in ammonia.  It's worthless."

"Maybe that's why Kate Tender married somebody else,"
replied Mr. Land philosophically.

"But," I said, "getting back to pearls of great value, I don't
think any sovereign ever possessed one superior to the pearl owned
by Captain Nemo."

"This one?"  Conseil said, pointing to a magnificent jewel in
its glass case.

"Exactly.  And I'm certainly not far off when I estimate its value
at 2,000,000 . . . uh . . ."

"Francs!"  Conseil said quickly.

"Yes," I said, "2,000,000 francs, and no doubt all it cost our
captain was the effort to pick it up."

"Ha!"  Ned Land exclaimed.  "During our stroll tomorrow, who says
we won't run into one just like it?"

"Bah!"  Conseil put in.

"And why not?"

"What good would a pearl worth millions do us here on the Nautilus?"

"Here, no," Ned Land said.  "But elsewhere. . . ."

"Oh!  Elsewhere!"  Conseil put in, shaking his head.

"In fact," I said, "Mr. Land is right.  And if we ever brought back
to Europe or America a pearl worth millions, it would make the story
of our adventures more authentic--and much more rewarding."

"That's how I see it," the Canadian said.

"But," said Conseil, who perpetually returned to the didactic side
of things, "is this pearl fishing ever dangerous?"

"No," I replied quickly, "especially if one takes certain precautions."

"What risks would you run in a job like that?"  Ned Land said.
"Swallowing a few gulps of salt water?"

"Whatever you say, Ned."  Then, trying to imitate Captain Nemo's
carefree tone, I asked, "By the way, gallant Ned, are you
afraid of sharks?"

"Me?" the Canadian replied.  "I'm a professional harpooner!
It's my job to make a mockery of them!"

"It isn't an issue," I said, "of fishing for them with a swivel hook,
hoisting them onto the deck of a ship, chopping off the tail
with a sweep of the ax, opening the belly, ripping out the heart,
and tossing it into the sea."

"So it's an issue of . . . ?"

"Yes, precisely."

"In the water?"

"In the water."

"Ye gods, just give me a good harpoon!  You see, sir, these sharks
are badly designed.  They have to roll their bellies over to snap
you up, and in the meantime . . ."

Ned Land had a way of pronouncing the word "snap" that sent chills
down the spine.

"Well, how about you, Conseil?  What are your feelings
about these man-eaters?"

"Me?"  Conseil said.  "I'm afraid I must be frank with master."

Good for you, I thought.

"If master faces these sharks," Conseil said, "I think his loyal
manservant should face them with him!"







CHAPTER 3

A Pearl Worth Ten Million



NIGHT FELL.  I went to bed.  I slept pretty poorly.  Man-eaters played
a major role in my dreams.  And I found it more or less appropriate
that the French word for shark, requin, has its linguistic roots
in the word requiem.

The next day at four o'clock in the morning, I was awakened by
the steward whom Captain Nemo had placed expressly at my service.
I got up quickly, dressed, and went into the lounge.

Captain Nemo was waiting for me.

"Professor Aronnax," he said to me, "are you ready to start?"

"I'm ready."

"Kindly follow me."

"What about my companions, captain?"

"They've been alerted and are waiting for us."

"Aren't we going to put on our diving suits?"  I asked.

"Not yet.  I haven't let the Nautilus pull too near the coast,
and we're fairly well out from the Mannar oysterbank.
But I have the skiff ready, and it will take us to the exact spot
where we'll disembark, which will save us a pretty long trek.
It's carrying our diving equipment, and we'll suit up just before we
begin our underwater exploring."

Captain Nemo took me to the central companionway whose steps led
to the platform.  Ned and Conseil were there, enraptured with
the "pleasure trip" getting under way.  Oars in position,
five of the Nautilus's sailors were waiting for us aboard the skiff,
which was moored alongside.  The night was still dark.
Layers of clouds cloaked the sky and left only a few stars in view.
My eyes flew to the side where land lay, but I saw only a blurred line
covering three-quarters of the horizon from southwest to northwest.
Going up Ceylon's west coast during the night, the Nautilus lay
west of the bay, or rather that gulf formed by the mainland
and Mannar Island.  Under these dark waters there stretched
the bank of shellfish, an inexhaustible field of pearls more than
twenty miles long.

Captain Nemo, Conseil, Ned Land, and I found seats in the stern
of the skiff.  The longboat's coxswain took the tiller; his four
companions leaned into their oars; the moorings were cast off
and we pulled clear.

The skiff headed southward.  The oarsmen took their time.
I watched their strokes vigorously catch the water, and they
always waited ten seconds before rowing again, following the
practice used in most navies.  While the longboat coasted,
drops of liquid flicked from the oars and hit the dark troughs
of the waves, pitter-pattering like splashes of molten lead.
Coming from well out, a mild swell made the skiff roll gently,
and a few cresting billows lapped at its bow.

We were silent.  What was Captain Nemo thinking?  Perhaps that
this approaching shore was too close for comfort, contrary to
the Canadian's views in which it still seemed too far away.
As for Conseil, he had come along out of simple curiosity.

Near 5:30 the first glimmers of light on the horizon defined
the upper lines of the coast with greater distinctness.
Fairly flat to the east, it swelled a little toward the south.
Five miles still separated it from us, and its beach merged with
the misty waters.  Between us and the shore, the sea was deserted.
Not a boat, not a diver.  Profound solitude reigned over this
gathering place of pearl fishermen.  As Captain Nemo had commented,
we were arriving in these waterways a month too soon.

At six o'clock the day broke suddenly, with that speed unique
to tropical regions, which experience no real dawn or dusk.
The sun's rays pierced the cloud curtain gathered on the easterly horizon,
and the radiant orb rose swiftly.

I could clearly see the shore, which featured a few sparse trees
here and there.

The skiff advanced toward Mannar Island, which curved to the south.
Captain Nemo stood up from his thwart and studied the sea.

At his signal the anchor was lowered, but its chain barely ran
because the bottom lay no more than a meter down, and this locality
was one of the shallowest spots near the bank of shellfish.
Instantly the skiff wheeled around under the ebb tide's outbound thrust.

"Here we are, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo then said.
"You observe this confined bay?  A month from now in this very place,
the numerous fishing boats of the harvesters will gather,
and these are the waters their divers will ransack so daringly.
This bay is felicitously laid out for their type of fishing.
It's sheltered from the strongest winds, and the sea is never
very turbulent here, highly favorable conditions for diving work.
Now let's put on our underwater suits, and we'll begin our stroll."

I didn't reply, and while staring at these suspicious waves, I began
to put on my heavy aquatic clothes, helped by the longboat's sailors.
Captain Nemo and my two companions suited up as well.
None of the Nautilus's men were to go with us on this new excursion.

Soon we were imprisoned up to the neck in india-rubber clothing,
and straps fastened the air devices onto our backs.
As for the Ruhmkorff device, it didn't seem to be in the picture.
Before inserting my head into its copper capsule, I commented
on this to the captain.

"Our lighting equipment would be useless to us," the captain answered me.
"We won't be going very deep, and the sun's rays will be sufficient
to light our way.  Besides, it's unwise to carry electric lanterns
under these waves.  Their brightness might unexpectedly attract
certain dangerous occupants of these waterways."

As Captain Nemo pronounced these words, I turned to Conseil and
Ned Land.  But my two friends had already encased their craniums
in their metal headgear, and they could neither hear nor reply.

I had one question left to address to Captain Nemo.

"What about our weapons?"  I asked him.  "Our rifles?"

"Rifles!  What for?  Don't your mountaineers attack bears dagger in hand?
And isn't steel surer than lead?  Here's a sturdy blade.
Slip it under your belt and let's be off."

I stared at my companions.  They were armed in the same fashion,
and Ned Land was also brandishing an enormous harpoon he had stowed
in the skiff before leaving the Nautilus.

Then, following the captain's example, I let myself be crowned with my
heavy copper sphere, and our air tanks immediately went into action.

An instant later, the longboat's sailors helped us overboard one after
the other, and we set foot on level sand in a meter and a half of water.
Captain Nemo gave us a hand signal.  We followed him down a gentle
slope and disappeared under the waves.

There the obsessive fears in my brain left me.  I became surprisingly
calm again.  The ease with which I could move increased my confidence,
and the many strange sights captivated my imagination.

The sun was already sending sufficient light under these waves.
The tiniest objects remained visible.  After ten minutes of walking,
we were in five meters of water, and the terrain had become almost flat.

Like a covey of snipe over a marsh, there rose underfoot schools
of unusual fish from the genus Monopterus, whose members have no fin
but their tail.  I recognized the Javanese eel, a genuine eight-decimeter
serpent with a bluish gray belly, which, without the gold lines
over its flanks, could easily be confused with the conger eel.
From the butterfish genus, whose oval bodies are very flat,
I observed several adorned in brilliant colors and sporting a dorsal
fin like a sickle, edible fish that, when dried and marinated, make an
excellent dish known by the name "karawade"; then some sea poachers,
fish belonging to the genus Aspidophoroides, whose bodies are covered
with scaly armor divided into eight lengthwise sections.

Meanwhile, as the sun got progressively higher, it lit up the watery
mass more and more.  The seafloor changed little by little.
Its fine-grained sand was followed by a genuine causeway
of smooth crags covered by a carpet of mollusks and zoophytes.
Among other specimens in these two branches, I noted some windowpane
oysters with thin valves of unequal size, a type of ostracod unique
to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, then orange-hued lucina with
circular shells, awl-shaped auger shells, some of those Persian
murex snails that supply the Nautilus with such wonderful dye,
spiky periwinkles fifteen centimeters long that rose under the waves
like hands ready to grab you, turban snails with shells made of horn
and bristling all over with spines, lamp shells, edible duck clams
that feed the Hindu marketplace, subtly luminous jellyfish of the species
Pelagia panopyra, and finally some wonderful Oculina flabelliforma,
magnificent sea fans that fashion one of the most luxuriant tree
forms in this ocean.

In the midst of this moving vegetation, under arbors of water plants,
there raced legions of clumsy articulates, in particular some fanged
frog crabs whose carapaces form a slightly rounded triangle,
robber crabs exclusive to these waterways, and horrible
parthenope crabs whose appearance was repulsive to the eye.
One animal no less hideous, which I encountered several times,
was the enormous crab that Mr. Darwin observed, to which nature
has given the instinct and requisite strength to eat coconuts;
it scrambles up trees on the beach and sends the coconuts tumbling;
they fracture in their fall and are opened by its powerful pincers.
Here, under these clear waves, this crab raced around with
matchless agility, while green turtles from the species frequenting
the Malabar coast moved sluggishly among the crumbling rocks.

Near seven o'clock we finally surveyed the bank of shellfish,
where pearl oysters reproduce by the millions.  These valuable
mollusks stick to rocks, where they're strongly attached
by a mass of brown filaments that forbids their moving about.
In this respect oysters are inferior even to mussels, to whom nature
has not denied all talent for locomotion.

The shellfish Meleagrina, that womb for pearls whose valves are
nearly equal in size, has the shape of a round shell with thick
walls and a very rough exterior.  Some of these shells were furrowed
with flaky, greenish bands that radiated down from the top.
These were the young oysters.  The others had rugged black surfaces,
measured up to fifteen centimeters in width, and were ten or
more years old.

Captain Nemo pointed to this prodigious heap of shellfish, and I
saw that these mines were genuinely inexhaustible, since nature's
creative powers are greater than man's destructive instincts.
True to those instincts, Ned Land greedily stuffed the finest
of these mollusks into a net he carried at his side.

But we couldn't stop.  We had to follow the captain,
who headed down trails seemingly known only to himself.
The seafloor rose noticeably, and when I lifted my arms,
sometimes they would pass above the surface of the sea.
Then the level of the oysterbank would lower unpredictably.
Often we went around tall, pointed rocks rising like pyramids.
In their dark crevices huge crustaceans, aiming their long legs
like heavy artillery, watched us with unblinking eyes, while underfoot
there crept millipedes, bloodworms, aricia worms, and annelid worms,
whose antennas and tubular tentacles were incredibly long.

Just then a huge cave opened up in our path, hollowed from a
picturesque pile of rocks whose smooth heights were completely
hung with underwater flora.  At first this cave looked pitch-black
to me.  Inside, the sun's rays seemed to diminish by degrees.
Their hazy transparency was nothing more than drowned light.

Captain Nemo went in.  We followed him.  My eyes soon grew accustomed
to this comparative gloom.  I distinguished the unpredictably contoured
springings of a vault, supported by natural pillars firmly based on
a granite foundation, like the weighty columns of Tuscan architecture.
Why had our incomprehensible guide taken us into the depths of this
underwater crypt?  I would soon find out.

After going down a fairly steep slope, our feet trod the floor
of a sort of circular pit.  There Captain Nemo stopped, and his hand
indicated an object that I hadn't yet noticed.

It was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions, a titanic giant clam,
a holy-water font that could have held a whole lake, a basin
more than two meters wide, hence even bigger than the one adorning
the Nautilus's lounge.

I approached this phenomenal mollusk.  Its mass of filaments attached
it to a table of granite, and there it grew by itself in the midst
of the cave's calm waters.  I estimated the weight of this giant clam
at 300 kilograms.  Hence such an oyster held fifteen kilos of meat,
and you'd need the stomach of King Gargantua to eat a couple dozen.

Captain Nemo was obviously familiar with this bivalve's existence.
This wasn't the first time he'd paid it a visit, and I thought
his sole reason for leading us to this locality was to show
us a natural curiosity.  I was mistaken.  Captain Nemo had an
explicit personal interest in checking on the current condition
of this giant clam.

The mollusk's two valves were partly open.  The captain approached
and stuck his dagger vertically between the shells to discourage
any ideas about closing; then with his hands he raised the fringed,
membrane-filled tunic that made up the animal's mantle.

There, between its leaflike folds, I saw a loose pearl as big as
a coconut.  Its globular shape, perfect clarity, and wonderful orient
made it a jewel of incalculable value.  Carried away by curiosity,
I stretched out my hand to take it, weigh it, fondle it!
But the captain stopped me, signaled no, removed his dagger in one
swift motion, and let the two valves snap shut.

I then understood Captain Nemo's intent.  By leaving the pearl buried
beneath the giant clam's mantle, he allowed it to grow imperceptibly.
With each passing year the mollusk's secretions added new
concentric layers.  The captain alone was familiar with the cave
where this wonderful fruit of nature was "ripening"; he alone
reared it, so to speak, in order to transfer it one day to his
dearly beloved museum.  Perhaps, following the examples of oyster
farmers in China and India, he had even predetermined the creation
of this pearl by sticking under the mollusk's folds some piece
of glass or metal that was gradually covered with mother-of-pearl.
In any case, comparing this pearl to others I already knew about,
and to those shimmering in the captain's collection, I estimated
that it was worth at least 10,000,000 francs.  It was a superb
natural curiosity rather than a luxurious piece of jewelry,
because I don't know of any female ear that could handle it.

Our visit to this opulent giant clam came to an end.
Captain Nemo left the cave, and we climbed back up the bank
of shellfish in the midst of these clear waters not yet disturbed
by divers at work.

We walked by ourselves, genuine loiterers stopping or straying
as our fancies dictated.  For my part, I was no longer worried
about those dangers my imagination had so ridiculously exaggerated.
The shallows drew noticeably closer to the surface of the sea,
and soon, walking in only a meter of water, my head passed well above
the level of the ocean.  Conseil rejoined me, and gluing his huge
copper capsule to mine, his eyes gave me a friendly greeting.
But this lofty plateau measured only a few fathoms, and soon we
reentered Our Element.  I think I've now earned the right to
dub it that.

Ten minutes later, Captain Nemo stopped suddenly.  I thought he'd
called a halt so that we could turn and start back.  No. With a gesture
he ordered us to crouch beside him at the foot of a wide crevice.
His hand motioned toward a spot within the liquid mass,
and I looked carefully.

Five meters away a shadow appeared and dropped to the seafloor.
The alarming idea of sharks crossed my mind.  But I was mistaken,
and once again we didn't have to deal with monsters of the deep.

It was a man, a living man, a black Indian fisherman, a poor devil
who no doubt had come to gather what he could before harvest time.
I saw the bottom of his dinghy, moored a few feet above his head.
He would dive and go back up in quick succession.  A stone cut
in the shape of a sugar loaf, which he gripped between his feet
while a rope connected it to his boat, served to lower him more
quickly to the ocean floor.  This was the extent of his equipment.
Arriving on the seafloor at a depth of about five meters, he fell
to his knees and stuffed his sack with shellfish gathered at random.
Then he went back up, emptied his sack, pulled up his stone, and started
all over again, the whole process lasting only thirty seconds.

This diver didn't see us.  A shadow cast by our crag hid us from
his view.  And besides, how could this poor Indian ever have guessed
that human beings, creatures like himself, were near him under
the waters, eavesdropping on his movements, not missing a single
detail of his fishing!

So he went up and down several times.  He gathered only about
ten shellfish per dive, because he had to tear them from
the banks where each clung with its tough mass of filaments.
And how many of these oysters for which he risked his life would
have no pearl in them!

I observed him with great care.  His movements were systematically
executed, and for half an hour no danger seemed to threaten him.
So I had gotten used to the sight of this fascinating fishing
when all at once, just as the Indian was kneeling on the seafloor,
I saw him make a frightened gesture, stand, and gather himself
to spring back to the surface of the waves.

I understood his fear.  A gigantic shadow appeared above the poor diver.
It was a shark of huge size, moving in diagonally, eyes ablaze,
jaws wide open!

I was speechless with horror, unable to make a single movement.

With one vigorous stroke of its fins, the voracious animal shot
toward the Indian, who jumped aside and avoided the shark's bite
but not the thrashing of its tail, because that tail struck him
across the chest and stretched him out on the seafloor.

This scene lasted barely a few seconds.  The shark returned,
rolled over on its back, and was getting ready to cut the Indian in half,
when Captain Nemo, who was stationed beside me, suddenly stood up.
Then he strode right toward the monster, dagger in hand, ready to
fight it at close quarters.

Just as it was about to snap up the poor fisherman, the man-eater
saw its new adversary, repositioned itself on its belly, and headed
swiftly toward him.

I can see Captain Nemo's bearing to this day.  Bracing himself,
he waited for the fearsome man-eater with wonderful composure,
and when the latter rushed at him, the captain leaped aside
with prodigious quickness, avoided a collision, and sank his
dagger into its belly.  But that wasn't the end of the story.
A dreadful battle was joined.

The shark bellowed, so to speak.  Blood was pouring into the waves
from its wounds.  The sea was dyed red, and through this opaque
liquid I could see nothing else.

Nothing else until the moment when, through a rift in the clouds,
I saw the daring captain clinging to one of the animal's fins,
fighting the monster at close quarters, belaboring his
enemy's belly with stabs of the dagger yet unable to deliver
the deciding thrust, in other words, a direct hit to the heart.
In its struggles the man-eater churned the watery mass so furiously,
its eddies threatened to knock me over.

I wanted to run to the captain's rescue.  But I was transfixed
with horror, unable to move.

I stared, wild-eyed. I saw the fight enter a new phase.
The captain fell to the seafloor, toppled by the enormous mass
weighing him down.  Then the shark's jaws opened astoundingly wide,
like a pair of industrial shears, and that would have been
the finish of Captain Nemo had not Ned Land, quick as thought,
rushed forward with his harpoon and driven its dreadful point
into the shark's underside.

The waves were saturated with masses of blood.  The waters
shook with the movements of the man-eater, which thrashed about
with indescribable fury.  Ned Land hadn't missed his target.
This was the monster's death rattle.  Pierced to the heart,
it was struggling with dreadful spasms whose aftershocks knocked
Conseil off his feet.

Meanwhile Ned Land pulled the captain clear.  Uninjured, the latter
stood up, went right to the Indian, quickly cut the rope binding
the man to his stone, took the fellow in his arms, and with a vigorous
kick of the heel, rose to the surface of the sea.

The three of us followed him, and a few moments later, miraculously safe,
we reached the fisherman's longboat.

Captain Nemo's first concern was to revive this unfortunate man.
I wasn't sure he would succeed.  I hoped so, since the poor devil
hadn't been under very long.  But that stroke from the shark's tail
could have been his deathblow.

Fortunately, after vigorous massaging by Conseil and the captain,
I saw the nearly drowned man regain consciousness little by little.
He opened his eyes.  How startled he must have felt, how frightened even,
at seeing four huge, copper craniums leaning over him!

And above all, what must he have thought when Captain Nemo pulled
a bag of pearls from a pocket in his diving suit and placed it
in the fisherman's hands?  This magnificent benefaction from
the Man of the Waters to the poor Indian from Ceylon was accepted
by the latter with trembling hands.  His bewildered eyes indicated
that he didn't know to what superhuman creatures he owed both his
life and his fortune.

At the captain's signal we returned to the bank of shellfish,
