conjoin with it a determination of the total weight of manure produced;
for though, weight for weight, box manure may be better than ordinary
farm-yard manure, the total quantity obtained by the latter method, from
a given number of cattle, may be so much greater, that the deficiency in
quality may be compensated for. At the present time our knowledge is too
limited to admit of a definite opinion on this subject, but it is highly
deserving of the combined investigation of the farmer and the chemist.

Supposing the conditions which produce the manure containing the largest
quantity of nitrogen to have been fulfilled, we have now to consider
those which affect its evolution in the form of ammonia. This change is
effected by _fermentation_. When a quantity of manure is left to itself
it becomes hot, and gradually diminishes in bulk, and if it be turned
over after some time, the smell of ammonia may be more or less
distinctly observed. This ammonia is produced, in the first instance,
from the urine, the nitrogenous constituents of which are rapidly
decomposed, and the fermentation thus set up in the mass of manure
extends first to the solid dung, and then to the straw of the litter,
and gradually proceeds until a large quantity of ammonia is produced.

When fresh manure is deposited in the soil, the same changes occur, but
they then proceed more slowly, and experience has shown that a much
smaller effect is produced on the crop to which it has been applied than
when it has been well fermented in the heap. This effect is consistent
with theory, which would further indicate that well-fermented dung must
be especially advantageous when applied to quick-growing crops, and less
necessary to those which come slowly to maturity. As a rule, well
fermented manure is to be preferred, provided it has been well managed
and carefully prepared; but when this has not been done, and the manure
has been exposed to the weather, or made in open courts or hammels, the
economic advantages are all on the side of the fresh dung. It may be
questioned also whether, now that there are so many other available
sources of ammonia, it may not in many instances be advantageous to use
the dung fresh, conjoined with a sufficient quantity of some salt of
ammonia, or other substance fitted to supply the quantity of that
element necessary for the requirements of the crop.

After the farm-yard manure has been prepared at the homestead, it is
often necessary to cart it out to the field some time before it is to be
applied, and it is a question of some importance to determine how it may
be best preserved there. The general practice is to store it in heaps in
the corners of the fields, but some difference of opinion exists as to
whether it should be lightly thrown up so as to leave it in a porous
state, and so promote its further fermentation, or whether it should be
consolidated as much as possible by driving the carts on to the top of
the heap during its construction. Considering the risks to which the
manure is exposed on the field, the latter plan would appear to be the
best. It is advisable also to interstratify the dung with dry soil, so
as to absorb any liquid which may tend to escape from it, and it should
also be covered with a well-beaten layer of earth, in order to exclude
the rain. Although these precautions must not be omitted if the manure
is to be stored in heaps, it will probably be often found quite as
advantageous to spread it at once, and leave it lying on the surface
until it is convenient to plough it. The loss of ammonia by
volatilization will, under such circumstances, especially in the cold
season of the year, be very trifling, and the rain which falls will only
serve to incorporate the soluble matters with the soil, where they will
be retained by its absorptive power.

In the actual application of the manure to the crop, several points
require consideration. It is especially important to determine whether
it ought to be uniformly distributed through the soil, or be kept near
the roots of the plants. Both systems have their advocates, and each has
advantages in particular cases. The choice between the two must greatly
depend upon the nature of the crop and the soil. When the former is of a
kind which spreads its roots wide and deep through the soil, the more
uniformly the manure can be distributed the better; but when it is used
with plants whose roots do not travel far, it is more advantageous to
accumulate it near the seeds. Obvious advantages also attend this
practice in soils which are either too heavy or too light. When, for
example, it is necessary to cultivate turnips in a heavy clay, the
manure put into the drills produces a kind of artificial soil in the
neighbourhood of the plants, in which the bulbs expand more readily than
in the clay itself. On the other hand, when a large quantity of dung, in
a state of active fermentation, comes into immediate contact with the
roots, its effect is not unfrequently injurious. These and many other
points, which will readily suggest themselves to any one who studies the
composition and properties of farm-yard manure, belong more strictly to
the subject of practical agriculture, and need not be enlarged on here.

In the present state of agriculture, a proper estimate of the money
value of farm-yard manure is of much importance in an economic point of
view, and many matters connected with the profitable management of a
farm must hinge upon it. If an estimate be made upon the principle which
will be explained when we come to treat of artificial manures, it
appears that fresh farm-yard manure of good quality is worth from 12s.
to 15s. per ton, and well-rotted dung rather more. It is questionable,
however, whether the system of valuation which is accurate in the case
of a guano or other rapidly acting substance, is applicable to farm-yard
manure, the effects of which extend over some years. A deduction must be
made for the years during which the manure remains unproductive, and
also for the additional expense incurred in carting and distributing a
substance so much more bulky than the so-called portable manures, and it
would not be safe to estimate its value at more than 7s. or 8s. per ton.

_Liquid Manure._--This term is applied to the urine of the animals fed
on the farm, and to the drainings from the manure-heap, which, in place
of being returned to it, are allowed to flow away, and collected in
tanks, from which they are distributed by a watering-cart, or according
to the method recently introduced in Ayrshire, and since adopted in
other places, by pipes laid under-ground in the fields, and through
which the manure is either pumped by steam-power, or, where the
necessary inclination can be obtained, is distributed by gravitation.
That liquid manure must necessarily be valuable, is an inference which
maybe at once drawn from the analyses of the urine of different animals
already given, and of which it chiefly consists. In addition to the
urine, however, it contains also the soluble organic and mineral matters
of the dung, as well as a quantity of solid matters in suspension, among
which phosphates are found, and thus it possesses a supply of an
element which would be almost entirely deficient if it were composed of
urine alone. In the following analyses by Professor Johnston, No. 1 is
the drainings of the manure-heap when exposed to rain; and No. 2 the
same, when moistened with cows' urine pumped over it, the results being
expressed in grains per gallon:--

                                   No. 1.   No. 2.
Ammonia                              9.6    21.5
Organic matter                     200.8    77.6
Ash                                268.8   518.4
                                   -----   -----
Total solids in a gallon           479.2   617.5

The ash contained--

Alkaline salts                     207.8   420.4
Phosphates                          25.1    44.5
Carbonate of lime                   18.2    31.1
Carbonate of magnesia, and loss      4.3     3.4
Silica and alumina                  13.4    19.0
                                   -----   -----
                                   268.8   518.4

More elaborate analyses of the same fluid have since been made by Dr.
Voelcker, with the subjoined results per gallon:--

                                          1.      2.      3.
Organic matters and ammoniacal }       263.80   250.63   70.121
    salts                      }
Silica                                   2.49     9.98    1.154
Oxide of iron                            0.70     0.68      ...
Lime                                     5.34    25.18   13.011
Magnesia                                 2.96    15.33    1.660
Potash                                 103.23   112.26   13.411
Chloride of potassium                   72.00    77.38    7.712
Chloride of sodium                      17.18    46.03   17.258
Phosphoric acid                          2.70     9.51    2.304
Sulphuric acid                          22.31    37.60    3.408
Carbonic acid, and loss                 33.90    27.95   14.025
                                       ------   ------  -------
    Total solids                       526.61   612.53  144.064
Ammonia                                114.16    22.31   26.647

The differences are here very remarkable, especially in the quantity of
ammonia, which is exceedingly large in the first sample. All of them are
particularly rich in potash, and contain but a small proportion of
phosphoric acid. The general inference to be deduced from them is, that
liquid manure is a most important source of the alkalis and ammonia, and
must be peculiarly valuable on soils in which these substances are
deficient.

The system of liquid manuring, originally introduced by Mr. Kennedy of
Myremill, Ayrshire, and which has since been adopted in some other
places, differs from liquid manuring in its _strict_ sense, for not only
are the drainings of the manure-heap employed, but the whole solid
excrements are mixed with water in a tank, and rape-dust and other
substances occasionally added, and distributed through the pipes.

It has been abandoned on Mr. Kennedy's farm, but is in use at Tiptree
Hall, and on the farm of Mr. Ralston, Lagg, where the fluid is
distributed by gravitation.

The arrangements employed by Mr. Mechi are identical with those formerly
in use at Myremill. The greater part of the stock is kept on boards, and
the liquid and solid excrements are collected together in the tank, and
largely diluted before distribution. The liquid from the tanks has been
recently examined by Dr. Voelcker, who found it to contain per gallon--

Organic matter and ammoniacal salts       53.03
Soluble silica                             6.47
Insoluble siliceous matter (clay)         15.17
Oxide of iron and alumina                  2.36
Lime                                       6.60
Magnesia                                   1.73
                                          -----
Potash                                     0.35
Chloride of potassium                      1.95
Chloride of sodium                         4.81
Phosphoric acid                            3.72
Sulphuric acid                             1.94
Carbonic acid, and loss                    0.47
                                          -----
     Total solids                         96.60
Ammonia                                    8.10

The quantity of this liquid distributed per acre is about 50,000
gallons, at a cost of 2d. per gallon. As this quantity contains about 39
lbs. of ammonia, it must be nearly equivalent to 2 cwt. of Peruvian
guano, which costs, with the expense of spreading, from 28s. to 30s. per
acre, while the cost of distributing the liquid exceeds L1: 17s. per
acre. On the other hand, the rapidity with which liquid manure produces
its effect must be taken into account. It is on this that its chief
value depends, and especially when applied to grass land in early
spring, it produces an abundant crop just when turnips and other winter
food are exhausted. Mr. Telfer, Cunning Park, who has used this system
for a good many years, has come to the conclusion that it is only in
this way that it can be made profitable; and though pipes are laid all
over his farm, he has latterly restricted the use of the liquid manure
entirely to Italian ryegrass. Its effect on the cereals is much less
marked, and it can scarcely be considered as capable of advantageous
application to the general operations of the farm. Neither can liquid
manure be applied to all soils. It fails entirely on heavy clays, but is
peculiarly adapted to light sandy soils; and even barren sand may by its
repeated application, be made to yield luxuriant crops. It is not likely
that the system of liquid manuring will extend, except in localities
where it is possible to distribute it by gravitation; and even then, it
will probably be found most economical to restrict its use to one
portion of the farm; and for that purpose, the poorest and most sandy
soil ought to be selected.

_Sewage Manure._--The use of the sewage of towns as a manure is closely
connected with that of the liquid manure produced on the farm. Its
application must take place in a similar manner, and be governed by the
same principles. Although numerous attempts have been made to convert it
into a solid form, or to precipitate its valuable matter, none of them
have succeeded; nor can it be expected that any plan can be devised for
the purpose, because the most important manurial constituents are
chiefly soluble, and cannot be converted into an insoluble state, or
precipitated from their solution. In its liquid form, however, sewage
manure has been employed with the best possible effect in the
cultivation of meadows. The most important instance of its application
is in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, where 325 acres receive the sewage
of nearly half the town, and have been converted from barren sand into
land which yields from L20 to L30 per acre. The contents of the sewer,
taken just before it flows into the first irrigated meadow, near
Lochend, were found to contain per gallon--

Soluble organic matter              21.90
Insoluble organic matter            21.70
Peroxide of iron and alumina         2.01
Lime                                10.50
Magnesia                             2.00
Sulphuric acid                       6.09
Phosphoric acid                      6.14
                                    -----
Chlorine                            12.20
Potash                               2.89
Soda                                13.27
Silica                               6.50
                                   ------
                                   105.20
Ammonia                             14.90

It is interesting to notice that this sewage is superior in every
respect to the liquid manure used at Tiptree Hall; and the good effects
obtained from its application, in the large quantities in which it is
used in the Craigentinny meadows, may be well imagined. It operates, not
merely by the substances which it holds in solution, but also by
depositing a large quantity of matters carried along in suspension, and
is in reality warping with a substance greatly superior to river-mud. A
deposit collected in a tank, where the sewage passes through a farm, is
used as a manure, and contains--

Peroxide of iron and alumina             4.45
Lime                                     1.74
Magnesia                                 0.39
Potash                                   0.10
Soda                                     0.06
Phosphoric acid                          1.08
Sulphuric acid                           0.16
Organic matter                          17.95
Sand                                    20.51
Water                                   53.56
                                       ------
                                       100.00
Ammonia                                  0.93

And even, though containing more than half its weight of water and 20
per cent of sand, this substance has considerable value as a manure.

The growing evils of the existing system of sewage, and the enormous
waste of a manurial matter, which the experience of the Craigentinny
meadows has shewn to be productive of the most important effects, has
recently directed much attention to the conversion of the contents of
our sewers into a useful manure. Numerous plans for its precipitation
and conversion into a solid manure have been proposed, but most of these
have shewn an entire ignorance of the fundamental principles of
chemistry, and the best only succeed in precipitating a very small
proportion of its valuable matters, and leave almost the whole of the
ammonia, as well as the greater part of the fixed alkalies, in solution.
Nor is it to be expected that any process will be discovered by which
these substances can be precipitated, because solubility is the special
characteristic of their compounds, and no means is known by which it is
possible to convert them into an insoluble form. If sewage is to be used
at all, there seems little doubt that it must be by applying it entire,
and in the liquid state. But here again, the expense of conveying it on
to the land becomes an obstacle which it must frequently be impossible
to overcome. When it can be conveyed by gravitation, as is the case in
the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, it may undoubtedly be used with the
utmost advantage, and with the very best economic results. But when it
requires to be carried to a great distance through pipes, and raised to
a high level by pumping, all these advantages disappear. If the cost of
application amounts to 2d. a gallon, as in Mr. Mechi's case, or even to
half that sum, it may be fairly concluded that it cannot be used with
any great prospect of large economic results, and that, unless under
very exceptional cases, it must be unprofitable.

The chances of success must also greatly depend upon the kind of soil on
which it is used. Experience has shewn that its effects are most
beneficial on light and deep sandy soils, but that on heavy retentive
clays it is without effect, or even absolutely injurious. In clay soils
it is important to use every means of getting rid of moisture, and any
plan which adds 200 or 300 tons of water to them, only aggravates their
natural defects to an extent which more than counterbalances the
benefits derived from the manurial matter it contains. Whatever the
ultimate result of the use of town sewage in the liquid form may be, it
is unlikely that it will be employed in general agricultural practice.
It is more probable that it will be found necessary to set apart a
certain breadth of land to be treated by it exclusively. Many plans have
been proposed for conveying it through considerable districts, and
selling to the surrounding farmers the quantities which they require,
but wherever large sewage-works are established, it will be impossible
to depend on a precarious demand, and the promoters of such schemes will
be compelled, as part of their speculation, to supply not only the
manure, but the land on which it is to be used. Indeed, the difficulties
attending the whole question are so formidable, that even those who are
most anxious to see a stop put to the waste of manurial matter must
admit that the prospect of a successful economic result is not
encouraging. Nor is it likely that anything will be done until the whole
system of managing town refuse is changed, and in place of deluging it
with water, some plan can be contrived which, while fulfilling sanatory
requirements, shall preserve it in a concentrated form, or convert it
into a dry and inodorous substance.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote L: Report on the economic uses of peat. Highland Society's
Transactions, N.S., vol. iv. p. 549.]




CHAPTER IX.

COMPOSITION AND PROPERTIES OF VEGETABLE MANURES.


Many vegetable substances have been employed as manures, either alone or
as auxiliaries to farm-yard manure. Like that substance, they are
general manures, and contain all the constituents of ordinary crops;
but, owing to the absence of animal matter, they in general undergo
decomposition and fermentation much more slowly, although some of them
contain a so largely preponderating proportion of nitrogen, that they
may in some respects be compared to the strictly nitrogenous manures.

_Rape-dust, Mustard, Cotton and Castor Cake._--Rape-dust has long been
employed as a manure, and the success which has attended its use has led
to the introduction of the refuse cake from some other oil seeds, such
as those of mustard and castor-oil, which cannot be employed for
feeding. Like the seeds of all plants, these substances are rich in
nitrogen, and their ash, containing of course all the constituents of
the plant, supplies the necessary inorganic elements. The following are
analyses of these substances, which, in addition to the amount of
nitrogen and phosphates, shew also that of water and oil, to which
reference will be made in a future chapter, in relation to the feeding
value of some of them. The detailed composition of their ash may be
judged of from that of the seeds from which they are made, and which
have been given under that head.

+--------------------+------------+-------------+-------------+---------+
|                    | Rape-Cake. | Poppy-Cake. | Cotton-seed | Castor- |
|                    |            |             |   Cake.     | Cake.   |
|                    +------------+-------------+-------------+---------+
| Water              |  10.68     |   11.63     |   11.19     |   12.31 |
| Oil                |  11.10     |    5.95     |    9.08     |   24.32 |
| Albuminious      } |  29.53     |   31.16     |   25.16     |   21.91 |
|    compounds     } |            |             |             |         |
| Ash                |   7.79     |   12.98     |    5.64     |    6.08 |
| Other constituents |  40.90     |   38.18     |   48.93     |   35.38 |
|                    +------------+-------------+-------------+---------+
|                    | 100.00     |  100.00     |  100.00     |  100.00 |
| Nitrogen           |   4.38     |    4.94     |    3.95     |    3.20 |
| Silica             |   1.18     |    3.36     |    1.32     |    1.96 |
| Phosphates         |   3.87     |   69.3      |    2.19     |    2.81 |
| Phosphoric acid  } |            |             |             |         |
|  in combination  } |   0.39     |    3.27     |    0.15     |    0.64 |
|  with alkalies   } |            |             |             |         |
+--------------------+------------+-------------+-------------+---------+

A general similarity may be observed in the composition of all these
substances; they are rich in nitrogen, and contain as much of that
