
Cooper said, "If you still feel bad, just think about what they'd do to
your wife and kids if they got in here."

Frank put a hand on the floor and pushed himself to his feet. "Yes, as
long as I think about my family I'll be able to shoot." There was a
bitterness in his voice, and Nicole felt she knew what he was thinking.
How cruel the irony, that love for his family could make him into a
killer.

"Here they come again!" a woman down the line shouted.

Again and again Nicole heard the rapping of bullets into the log wall
near Frank's head as he fired steadily at Indians charging from the
trading post buildings they had captured.

Frank turned from the rifle port to hand Nicole an empty rifle and take
a loaded one. An arrow flashed through the narrow opening, missing his
head by inches.

_Thank you, God!_

The defenders kept up a steady fire until the Indians withdrew again
into the captured buildings. Nicole and Frank took turns watching
through the rifle port. What was happening to their home at this moment?

The lull stretched on. Nicole went downstairs to look for her children,
began picking her way through the crowd sitting on the floor of the
blockhouse hall.

Stretched out on a bench was a woman whose name she didn't know, a
newcomer to the settlement. The right side of her checkered dress was
soaked with blood from shoulder to waist. Moaning faintly, the woman
seemed half conscious.

"Arrow," said Ellen Slattery, who was pressing a folded cloth against
the woman's shoulder.

Nicole shuddered and patted Ellen's back and went on. She saw Tom and
Ben manning ground-floor gunports. Abigail, Martha and John were playing
around the cannon, pretending to shoot it at the Indians. The three
youngest, Rachel, Betsy and Patrick, were with a group gathered in the
stone-walled rear room Raoul used as his office. They were singing
hymns. Pamela Russell, she saw, was also with the hymn singers, tears
running down her face. As Nicole went over to the fireplace to join the
women molding bullets, she heard:

    "My God, how many are my fears,
    How fast my foes increase!
    Their number how it multiplies!
    How fatal to my peace."

_That must be the first time_ those _walls have ever heard a hymn._

Nicole took a turn at bullet making, ladling the silvery molten lead
from a kettle over the fire into the tiny hole in the hollowed-out mold,
opening the mold with its scissor handles and dropping the still-warm
ball into a big basket. Another woman took each ball and filed away the
bit of waste metal formed in the hole through which the lead was poured.

"Injuns!" a man yelled. The women and children crouched down on the
floor, and Nicole hurried upstairs to help Frank.

After rifle fire from both levels drove back the latest assault, Frank
said, "We get a few each time they attack, but it's not enough. I'm sure
I saw over a hundred of them when I was on the parapet."

"We've no food and very little water," said Nicole. "They could just
wait us out and we wouldn't last very long." The only water they had was
in buckets the townspeople had brought into the blockhouse with them.

David Cooper said, "We've got to be ready for them to make one big rush
for the blockhouse. They'll try to set the place on fire, so we better
save as much water as we can. Ration it out."

Nicole's body broke out in a cold sweat at the thought of fire; she
remembered all the gunpowder they'd relayed into the blockhouse.

_Enough to blow us all up._

And then she remembered too, what had happened to Helene twenty years
ago at Fort Dearborn.

_Maybe being blown to bits would be a better way to go._

"And here's just the man to take charge of rationing the water," said
Cooper.

Nicole turned to see her father climbing up the stairs, pulling himself
along on the banister and leaning on his walking stick. As he reached
the top of the stairs Frank took his arm and helped him over to sit on a
wooden box near the rifle port.

Elysee said, "One of the women, Mrs. Russell, insisted on taking my
rifle and standing guard in my place. I will be just as happy not to
have to fire at any red men for a while. I keep thinking I might shoot
Auguste."

Nicole gasped. "Auguste! Papa, he would never be out there."

"Perhaps not. Have you spoken to anyone who had news of my
grandchildren?" Elysee asked her.

Nicole was about to say "They're all here" when she realized whom he
meant.

"Raoul and Clarissa's children?" She shook her head sadly. "No, Papa.
Anyone from Victoire who isn't here--we don't know what happened to
them."

Elysee sighed. "Poor little things. In all the years since they were
born, I got to speak to them only once or twice."

The cry of "Here the Injuns come!" broke in on them again.

David Cooper gave Elysee brief instructions on rationing water, and the
old man limped downstairs as the firing began again.

Nicole, loading and reloading Frank's rifles with numb arms and mind,
heard firing from all around her. The Indians were coming from every
direction. Arrows and an occasional bullet whistled in through the
ports, but no one was hit. Smoke drifted through the second story of the
blockhouse, making her eyes water.

The Indians withdrew again. As the firing died down, Nicole was thankful
to see that the powder smoke that had filled the second floor blew up
toward the roof and vanished. Looking up, she saw that there was a space
nearly a foot high between the top of the log wall and the roof. The
roof rested on big vertical timbers, its overhang covering the opening.
Men could climb up there, she supposed, and shoot down; the attackers
would have to be standing directly below them to shoot back.

There was a heap she didn't know about this fort. In the years since
Raoul had built it she'd hardly ever had reason to set foot inside--the
last time was when she and Frank had appealed to him to leave men behind
to protect the town. Now her life depended on how well Raoul had built
it, and it was bitter medicine to swallow.

David Cooper left his rifle port to talk to Frank.

"It's only a few hours till sunset," Cooper said in a low voice, "and I
have a hunch they'll try one big attack to take this place before dark.
If they come all at once, we don't have enough rifles to stop them."

His tone was matter-of-fact, but his words struck terror into Nicole's
heart. She took Frank's hand and squeezed it. It felt cold as a dead
man's.

Cooper went on. "I keep thinking about that cannon downstairs. You know,
whatever we might say about Raoul de Marion, he did set this place up to
be defended. I figure that cannon must be in working order."

"Do you know how to fire a cannon?" Frank asked.

Cooper shrugged. "I've stood near the artillerymen a time or two and
watched them, but never thought to memorize what I saw. I couldn't even
say how much gunpowder to use. If we put in too little, we'll waste our
chance. If we put in too much, we could blow ourselves all to hell."

Nicole said, "I'd rather that than face whatever hell the Indians have
in store for us."

Cooper looked at her with his hard eyes and nodded. "Indians won't get
you, Miz Hopkins. I promise you that. Let's go take a look at that
thing."

Frank, Cooper and Nicole, chilled but grimly reassured by Cooper's
remark, cleared away the children who were straddling the cannon's
four-foot-long black barrel, and the women who were sitting against its
wooden carriage. Cooper stood frowning at the gun.

He sighed, and it sounded to Nicole like the sigh of a man about to step
off a high cliff.

"Well, let's load 'er up."

He went over to the side of the room where the flannel bags of gunpowder
were piled up, and he picked one up, holding it at arm's length as if it
were a rattlesnake. He carried it back to the cannon and slid it into
the muzzle. From the carriage he unstrapped the ramrod, a pole with a
wad of cloth wrapped around its end, and used that to push the gunpowder
down.

"Let's add another bag of powder," he said to Frank.

Women and children formed a circle to watch. Nicole pictured what the
cannon would do to all the people in this room if it blew up, and shut
her eyes.

After pushing a second bag of gunpowder down the muzzle, Cooper said,
"What we need now is canister shot that'd spread all over the place and
puncture a lot of Indians. I remember there was canister shot in the
powder magazine, but it didn't seem all that important this morning, and
we didn't have time to move it over here. Now we'll have to make do with
what we've got. Give me a load of rifle bullets."

Someone handed him a basket full of lead balls, and he poured them into
the cannon's throat and pushed them down with the ramrod.

"I don't want to use up all our rifle shot, but seems to me there's room
inside this thing for a lot more." He turned to the onlookers.
"Everybody spread out and bring me anything made of metal that'll fit in
here."

Into the cannon's maw went two chains, a padlock, a handful of knives
and forks. And a dozen lead soldiers, sent to war by the small boys who
owned them.

"Here, Mr. Cooper, use these." Pamela Russell pushed her way through the
crowd holding out a canvas bag. Her eyes were bloodshot, the lids
swollen and red.

Cooper frowned. "What's that?"

"A bag of pieces of eight from Raoul de Marion's safe. When Burke knew
he was going to be in the fighting, he gave me the trading post keys to
hold for him." She stopped, red-faced and choking, then continued.
"Burke didn't know anything about fighting Indians. My husband is dead
because de Marion left us almost defenseless. He doesn't deserve to have
this silver."

Feeling Pamela's agony, Nicole went over to her and put an arm around
her back and hugged her. Pamela's body was stiff, unresponsive.

Cooper's gaze traveled over the people gathered around the cannon. "Any
of you folks see anything wrong with us doing this?"

"We always use Spanish dollars out here on the frontier," said Elysee
with a smile. "The U.S. Government simply didn't mint enough coins. I'm
sure the Indians will accept them."

"Well, that defense will do for now," said Cooper, grinning as he slit
the bag with his hunting knife and poured the glittering silver disks
into the cannon. "Going to make some Indians rich today," he said. "Now,
we need something to touch it off with. I don't see any linstock around
here."

"A candle?" Frank found a long white candle that would burn for about an
hour and lit it from another one mounted on a wall.

"Should work," said Cooper. "Keep a lighted candle by the cannon at all
times. We have no way of knowing when they'll decide to make their big
attack."

Pamela Russell pulled free of Nicole and gripped Cooper's arm.

"Let me touch off the cannon," she said.

There was something frightening, Nicole thought, in the avid light in
her eyes.

_Is that how I'd be if Frank were killed?_ Nicole wondered. _So utterly
vengeful?_

Cooper said, "Sure you can do it?"

Pamela whispered through tight lips, "Oh, yes. Yes, I am!"

"All right," said Cooper. "You can touch it off. But look out the
Indians don't shoot you when we swing the door open."

Frank, Cooper and two more men kicked the chocks out from under the
cannon's four wooden wheels. The men strained against the gun, and for a
moment Nicole was afraid they wouldn't be able to move it. Then,
grudgingly, it rumbled over the puncheon floor until Cooper set the four
chocks back under the wheels. The cannon rested just a few feet back
from the front door.

Looking through a port on the west side of the hall, Nicole saw the sun
still high in the west. This was the month when days were longest.

_And this has been the longest day of my life_, she thought.

As the afternoon passed with agonizing slowness, Pamela Russell had to
light yet a second candle, and then a third. She sat rigid in a chair
beside the cannon, holding her candle upright, saying nothing, staring
fixedly at the blockhouse door.

Nicole noticed a beam of sunlight from a west-facing rifle port lighting
up the smoke and dust that drifted through the main hall of the
blockhouse. The shaft of light looked like a solid bar of gold. She
looked through the rifle port and was almost blinded by the sun just
above the humped silhouettes of hills across the Mississippi.

She heard the Indians screaming, and her stomach turned over.

"Fire arrows!" someone yelled.

Nicole's heart stopped. If the Indians managed to set fire to the
blockhouse, the hundreds of people who had taken shelter here would be
driven out to be slaughtered.

She ran to the slot in the stone wall where Tom was standing with his
rifle ready. Looking past her son's head, she saw an arrow with a
cloth-wrapped, burning tip arc up from the courtyard. It disappeared,
and she thought it must have hit the second-story log wall somewhere
above her.

"Upstairs!" Cooper shouted. "Fill your buckets from the water barrels
and come on." His sweeping finger included a bunch of excited smaller
boys, who followed him up the stairs. Nicole hurried after them.

Cooper and the other men boosted boys with buckets to the top of the log
walls. The boys pulled themselves up to the open space Nicole had
noticed before under the overhang of the roof. Leaning out, sheltered,
the boys were able to see where the fire arrows had stuck, and dumped
water on them.

Cooper grinned. "De Marion built well. The ground floor's stone and the
roof is covered with sheet lead. Injuns'll soon tire of this game."

The fire arrows became fewer. They stopped coming, and there was a
breathless silence in which time did not seem to pass. Then Cooper led
the way back down to the ground floor.

High-pitched Indians whoops sent a new chill through Nicole.

A rifle went off--Tom, at the gunport to the left of the front door.

"Hold your fire, boy!" Cooper called, watching from the other side of
the doorway. "Let them come."

Nicole went to stand beside her oldest son again and look out. The front
gate of the palisade was open and Indians were streaming in. Brown
bodies painted with yellow and red and black slashes, arms waving
knives, clubs, tomahawks, bows and arrows, rifles. More were tumbling
out the front door of the inn. A flicker of red light caught her eye.
Flames shot out the open front door of the fur shop. They were burning
all those valuable pelts. Raoul would lose a lot today.

And not just money, she thought, recalling burning Victoire. Money would
be the least of Raoul's loss. To her surprise she felt a moment's sorrow
for the brother she had come to despise.

Twenty or more Indians came through the gate carrying a huge black log,
its front end afire. The rest of the Indians gathered around them. All
together they ran at the blockhouse door, the glowing, smoking tip of
the log in the forefront.

"Everybody get as far away from this damned cannon as you can!" Frank
shouted. People scrambled away, leaving an empty space around the
six-pounder in the center of the floor. Some ran into the strong room
and some scurried upstairs. Only Cooper, Frank and Pamela Russell stood
by the cannon. Nicole stayed where she was, moving her body so that she
was between Tom and the cannon.

_Whatever happens will be what God wants to happen._

"Open the door!" Cooper ordered.

Tom Slattery, the blacksmith, swung the door open, and Nicole saw some
of the Indians hesitate, then rush forward. She wondered if they could
see the cannon in the shadowy interior of the blockhouse.

"Shoot!" yelled Cooper.

Carefully, deliberately, Pamela Russell lowered her candle to the
cannon's touchhole.

"Fire in the hole!" Cooper called out.

Nicole heard the sizzle of gunpowder from where she stood.

The boom of the cannon hit Nicole's skull like a mallet. A huge white
cloud belched out through the open door, and the sharp reek of burnt
powder filled the air. The gun jumped right over the chocks set behind
its wheels and flew back about six feet.

In the aftermath of the cannon's roar came whoops of delight from nearly
a hundred small boys in the blockhouse.

Then Nicole heard the Indians screaming again, but now they were screams
of agony, not war cries. A fierce joy rose in her as she stood in the
open doorway and saw the yard of the trading post transformed into a
vision of Hell. Through the haze she saw dark bodies sprawling on the
ground. Some of the Indians writhed in the dust of the yard, some were
motionless. Others were frantically pulling the fallen back, dragging
them by the arms or legs. The log they were going to use to batter down
the door lay smouldering, abandoned in the yard of the trading post.

As she took in more of the sight of blood and torn bodies and severed
limbs, Nicole felt ashamed that she had rejoiced at first. Sickened, she
turned away.

"Fire your rifles!" David Cooper yelled. "Shoot, shoot, shoot! Keep them
on the run. And shut that damned door."

"Let me at the port, Maw," Tom demanded.

The rifles banged away, sounding puny in Nicole's ears after the roar of
the cannon. Finally Cooper ordered an end to the shooting.

"If we let 'em drag their dead out of here, they may be in a mood to
leave."

Nicole waited in dread, wondering whether the Indians would come again.
The sunset rays pouring through the ports on the west side of the
blockhouse slowly faded, leaving the main room dark. People lit more
candles. David Cooper directed the reloading of the cannon.

The group in Raoul's office were singing hymns again, and many people
sitting around the hall joined them. Nicole sat beside Pamela Russell on
a bench and took her hand, and soon Pamela began to talk quietly. She
told Nicole things about Burke, the books he enjoyed reading, his
favorite dishes, jokes he used to tell her.

"I always envied you, Nicole, with so many children. We wanted children
so much, and we never got any. And now we'll never--"

Nicole tried to think of something to say, but everything that came to
her sounded foolish to her mind's ear. Looking at Frank standing by a
port, she thought, _I have been blessed, and Pamela hasn't been. But
why?_ That had to mean something. She couldn't think what.

"It helps me, when life is hard, to believe that God has a plan," she
said, patting Pamela's hand. "His plan is like a painting that's so big
we can only see dark spots or bright spots without knowing what it all
means. But I think one day he'll take us up with him, where we can see
the whole picture and understand it."

"Nicole," Frank called. She gave Pamela's hand a squeeze and went to see
what Frank was looking at through the rifle port.

Even at this distance she could hear the roaring of the flames. Sparks
shot up past the palisade, and a red glow filled the sky.

"They're burning the town," he said. "Our home is gone. Our shop."

She turned back to see Pamela, sitting on the bench, a lost look on her
pale face. She thought of the people who had not managed to reach the
shelter of the trading post. She put her arm around Frank's waist and
pressed herself against him.

"You and I are alive and all of our children are alive," she said. "God
has blessed us."




16

Yellow Hair


"Wolf Paw has come back!"

White Bear felt a hollow in his stomach as the cry ran through the camp.
Wolf Paw had vowed to bring death and destruction to the pale eyes such
as they had never known before.

Before he left, Wolf Paw had held a ritual dog feast to insure success.
He had hung one of his own dogs from a painted pole by its hind legs and
disemboweled it alive, asking Earthmaker's blessing on the war party.
Then his wives, Running Deer and Burning Pine, had cooked the dog and
served bits of the meat to the braves and warriors who would follow Wolf
Paw on this raid. If he would choose one of his cherished dogs to be
sacrificed, what would he do to the people of Victor?

For days White Bear had held himself rigid, hardly able to eat, lying
awake at night, waiting for Wolf Paw's war party to come back. What
horrors would he have to face now?

Women and children ran to surround the returning braves and warriors.
White Bear saw Iron Knife on horseback towering above the crowd, his
huge arms lifted triumphantly. From each fist dangled a scalp. Beside
him was Wolf Paw, a blue cloth, stained red with blood, wrapped around
his left shoulder. Wolf Paw's right hand was raised high, gripping three
long hanks of hair with disks of white flesh hanging from them. More
braves rode behind them, also holding up scalps. Scalps, scalps, scalps.

White Bear staggered. He could not take his eyes from them. The hair was
of many different colors--light brown, gray, dark brown, black. Some of
the locks were very long, and must have been taken from women's heads.

Could Wolf Paw be holding Nicole's hair, or Frank's? Could it be
Grandpapa's?

Heart pounding, White Bear forced himself to push through the crowd. He
heard cattle lowing and horses neighing in the distance. Questioning
shouts and cries of greeting.

A scream of agony froze him. A woman's voice. And then another, from
another part of the crowd, piercing his eardrums. And still more
screams. He realized what was happening. Women were learning that their
men had not come back.

Scalps and screams. Wolf Paw's gifts to the British Band. White Bear
worked his way past women calling out anxious questions.

He suddenly came upon his mother leading a wailing pregnant woman out of
the crowd.

"She heard that her husband was killed, and she has gone into labor,"
Sun Woman said, her face hollow with her own pain. White Bear squeezed
her arm briefly as she passed him.

When he got close to Wolf Paw he saw a bound woman's body draped face
down across the back of the brave's gray pony.

She wore a ragged blue dress. Her feet were bare, dirty and covered with
scratches. She did not stir. From this side of the pony White Bear could
not see her face. A sickening suspicion gripped him, and he hesitated,
not wanting his fear confirmed.

Wolf Paw, frowning down at him angrily, was still wearing his yellow and
red war paint, faded by the ride of several days.

"I raided the town where you lived, White Bear. I took forty head of
cattle and twenty horses from your pale eyes relatives."

"I am glad to hear of the cattle," said White Bear. "Our people are
starving."

Wanting, and not wanting, to know who Wolf Paw's captive was, he walked
around the brave's horse for a better look at the bound woman.

"We killed many pale eyes," Wolf Paw said. "They will never forget Wolf
Paw's raid. Tonight we will have a scalp dance for the warriors who have
become braves."

White Bear stopped walking. People he knew and loved on both sides had
died; he had to learn which ones.

After a moment he collected himself. "And will you dance for the braves
and warriors you did not bring back?" It was a cruel thing to say, but
Wolf Paw deserved it. Wolf Paw did not answer.

White Bear had to fight himself to keep from crying aloud in anguish. He
no longer had any doubt who the captive woman was who hung head down
over the spotted pony.

One yellow braid was still tied with a blue bow. The other had come
undone, and loose locks of blond hair hung down, almost brushing the
ground.

He bent to see Nancy's unconscious face.

Coming up beside him Redbird asked quietly, "Do you know this woman?"

"Yes," he said. It all came back to him--last summer at Victoire, the
meetings on the prairie, that night in the cornfield beside her father's
house when she had begged him to "know" her. Had he missed her? Yes; he
had to admit that. Did he love her? He was not sure, but, happy as he
had been with Redbird, he often thought of Nancy and wondered if she
still longed for him as she had when he left her.

How, without hurting Redbird, who stood next to him watching as he
stared down at Nancy, could he explain what this white woman meant to
him?

He reached out to untie the rope looped around Nancy's back that held
her to Wolf Paw's horse.

"Do not touch her," Wolf Paw growled. "She is for me, and only for me."

No, White Bear thought, he could not let Nancy be kidnapped and raped by
this man. Whatever bloody things had been done at Victor, this he must
prevent. He readied himself to fight Wolf Paw if he had to.

And how would he explain _that_ to Redbird?

Wolf Paw slid down from his horse and, one-handed, untied Nancy. Fresh
blood was soaking through the cloth around his shoulder--a strip of blue
gingham torn from Nancy's dress, White Bear now saw.

Weak from his wound, Wolf Paw could not lift Nancy and carry her.
Regardless of Wolf Paw's warning, White Bear would not let her fall. He
took her from Wolf Paw and eased her to the ground. Her eyelids were
fluttering. Redbird, bending awkwardly with her swollen belly, helped
him. Their eyes met, and she looked searchingly into his.

A woman's voice cried, "The pale eyes squaw is _not_ for you, Wolf Paw.
I will not have her in my wickiup." Running Deer, the older of Wolf
Paw's two wives, strode up to Wolf Paw, thrusting her face into his.
Behind her came Burning Pine, the younger wife, a papoose strapped to
her back, looking equally determined.

"My wives will do as I say," Wolf Paw grumbled, but there was no
strength in his voice.

Burning Pine said, "Your wives and children are hungry. We are eating
roots and bark. We have no food for any pale eyes."

For now, Black Hawk's band was hidden away on an island of dry ground in
the heart of a great marsh north of the headwaters of the Rock River,
well into the Michigan Territory. But there was scarcely any game or
fish here, and they could not stay in this place much longer.

Wolf Paw said, "I have brought cattle."

"Then the people will eat well because of my husband," Running Deer
said. "But the pale eyes woman will not need to eat." Running Deer
turned to the crowd. "Many women lost their husbands in Wolf Paw's raid.
It is right that the women avenge themselves on this pale eyes."

White Bear's back crawled with gooseflesh. Running Deer meant for the
women of the band to torture Nancy to death.

For as long as they could make her pain last, it would take their minds
off their hunger and sickness and sorrow. And their own fear of death.

It must not happen. But how could he prevent it?

Feeling like a drowning man being swept away on rapids, White Bear
watched Running Deer and Burning Pine lift Nancy from the ground and
carry her off, with her feet dragging. Wolf Paw and most of the braves
who had returned with him followed.

Wolf Paw's wives pulled Nancy through the band's collection of hastily
built wickiups and lean-tos. They brought her to a tall elm tree growing
up in the center of the camp. The tree was dying. Its bark had been
stripped to cover a wickiup.

By the time White Bear caught up with the crowd around Nancy, her eyes
were wide open, but unfocused. Running Deer pushed her against the trunk
of the elm tree and drew a knife. With swift, angry slashes, Wolf Paw's
senior wife stripped away Nancy's dress and the chemise under it. Nancy
stood naked before the tribe. Her eyes were still open and unseeing.
She made no attempt to cover herself. She did not seem to know what was
happening to her. White Bear's skin crawled with shame at the sight of
her degradation.

Women laughed. "Her skin is like a frog's belly!"

Men stared greedily.

Running Deer took a coil of rawhide rope and lashed Nancy to the tree,
and White Bear felt the muscles of his neck and shoulders knotting till
they ached. He could scarcely bear to look at Nancy, who hung in her
bonds, her eyes closed again.

He did not care if they killed him. He would not let them do this. He
would not allow it to go on a moment longer.

He put his hand over the five claw scars on his chest and spoke to his
spirit self. _O Bear spirit, give me the power to move the people to
mercy._

He felt strength surge into his chest and arms, and raising his medicine
stick, he strode forward.

When he was only a foot away from Nancy, her eyes opened suddenly, huge
and turquoise, staring into his.

"Auguste!" Her voice and face were full of terror.

It came to him with a shock that he must look frightful to her. The man
she had loved was transformed into a vision of savagery--painted face, a
shoulder-length mane of hair, silver earrings, shell necklace, his
scarred chest bare, holding high a painted stick adorned with feathers
and beads. And what would she make of his right ear, torn in two by Eli
Greenglove's rifle ball? After what she had already gone through, the
sight of him must be yet another impossible shock.

"I'm going to help you," he said in English. "Try not to show that
you're frightened." Useless advice, he thought. Still, it would be
better for them both if the people respected her. There was nothing a
Sauk despised more than a show of fear.

He pointed his medicine stick at Running Deer and said sternly, "Stand
aside." She glowered at him but stepped back.

Last winter Wolf Paw had snatched this stick from his hand. But that was
before White Bear had nearly been killed carrying Black Hawk's message
of peace to the pale eyes. That was before they had begun to see for
themselves that White Bear had spoken truly when he warned that Black
Hawk's hope of a great alliance to defeat the long knives was an
illusion. And that was before many of the people had felt his healing
touch. He knew how to do things, because of his training with pale eyes
doctors, that Owl Carver and Sun Woman did not.

Now White Bear's medicine stick had much more power than a few moons
ago. Even at this moment when anxiety for Nancy gnawed at him, he felt
pride in his power.

He turned to face the crowd, standing protectively in front of Nancy.

The braves and warriors stared at him, puzzled and angry.

"Is this how you show your strength and courage, by torturing a helpless
woman?" he demanded.

Wolf Paw said, "She is a trophy honorably taken in battle."

White Bear pointed to Running Deer. "Wolf Paw meant to take the pale
eyes woman into his wickiup for his pleasure. But his wife will not let
him. So he pretends that it is his pleasure to let the women torture
her."

Feeling stronger than ever, White Bear watched Wolf Paw's face darken.
He might be able to outfight any man in the tribe barehanded or with
weapons, but not with words. This moment, thought White Bear, began to
repay Wolf Paw for shaming him last winter before the council.

_And he will have to let me tend his wound. That, too, will repay him._

Wolf Paw stood glowering at White Bear, his eyes glazing, his breath
coming in gasps. He must be on the verge of fainting from the pain,
White Bear thought.

"I captured the pale eyes woman," Wolf Paw said. "I give her to the
tribe."

"Are we fighting the pale eyes so we can steal their women?" White Bear
demanded. "As long as we torture and kill their people, the long knives
will think of us as wild animals that must be destroyed. I have lived
among the pale eyes, and I tell you that we must show them that we are
worthy of their respect."

Wolf Paw grumbled, "We will win their respect by killing them. I have
killed many."

_Many at Victor, no doubt_, White Bear thought, feeling as sick as Wolf
Paw looked, hating him for his ignorance.

He addressed the whole gathering. "Since Wolf Paw has given this woman
to the tribe, let the tribe treat her honorably," White Bear said. "The
day will come when we will have to sit down with the long knives and
talk."

"Not if we win!" cried Wolf Paw.

"Win?" White Bear laughed scornfully. "Does Wolf Paw still imagine that
thousands of long knives are going to surrender to our few hundred Sauk
and Fox warriors? We can win only if they decide to stop fighting us. If
we make them hate us, they will never stop fighting until all of us are
dead."

_It is probably already too late for talking with the long knives, but
if I hold out the hope of peace, it may save Nancy's life._

He let his gaze travel over the people who stood in a ring around him.
The dark eyes looking at him were mostly sullen and suspicious, because
their shaman was telling them what they did not want to hear. No one
seemed ready to challenge him, but he knew that if three or four braves
were to overpower him and kill Nancy, the crowd would let it happen. His
belly muscles knotted with tension.

But, as Wolf Paw had said, they needed all their luck, and it would be
best not to tempt the wrath of the spirits by defying their shaman.

_Redbird, you must not fail me._ He gave his wife a look of appeal
before he spoke further. Behind Redbird Iron Knife stood like a great
oak tree. At least there was no threat to him in Iron Knife's face.

White Bear took a deep breath and his heart fluttered. His life and
Nancy's depended on what happened next.

"I take the pale eyes woman under my protection," he said. "Redbird,
untie her."

Redbird hesitated for just a moment, her eyes wide, and White Bear held
his breath. If, moved by jealousy, she refused to obey him and sided
with Running Deer, there was no hope for Nancy.

At that thought a resolve arose in him, dark and powerful as a storm on
the Great River, and he filled his lungs and squared his shoulders.

_If they try to kill her, they will have to kill me first. If she is
doomed, so am I._

If he stood by and let the people torture Nancy to death, he would hate
himself forever.

Redbird lowered her eyes and began to undo the rope around Nancy. Iron
Knife helped his sister. Relief brightened in White Bear, like sunlight
on the river after a storm. Relief, and a surge of love for his wife.
With Iron Knife siding with him and Wolf Paw weakened by his wound, no
brave would dare to challenge him.

Eagle Feather was standing in front of the crowd, and White Bear felt
proud that his son was seeing the people treat him with respect. That
might balance out the memory of that shameful night of the woman's
dress.

"Eagle Feather, run and get one of our blankets."

Nancy looked at White Bear with huge, frightened eyes, saying nothing.
Terror must have struck her dumb. But he was relieved to see she was
able to stand on her own. Redbird put a hand on her shoulder to steady
her.

"You're going to be all right," White Bear said in English. "We will
take you to my wickiup."

He turned to Wolf Paw. "Come with me. I will see to your wound." Wolf
Paw's brown skin looked clammy and bloodless. He had ridden for four
days with a bullet in his shoulder. It must come out at once, or it
would kill him. But White Bear took pleasure in giving orders to Wolf
Paw.

Eagle Feather came with a blanket, and Redbird wrapped it around Nancy.

Most of the people scattered, many to mourn their dead, others to hear
the stories of the braves and warriors who had come back with the war
party, still others to see the horses and to butcher some of the cattle
they had brought back. A small crowd followed White Bear, the
yellow-haired prisoner and Wolf Paw.

As Redbird and Iron Knife helped Nancy, now softly sobbing, into the low
structure of branches and bark, Owl Carver came up to White Bear.

"I was ready to terrify the people if they turned against you, but you
did not need my help. You spoke to them, and against their will they
heeded you."

Owl Carver's praise delighted White Bear. But as he saw once again how
the old shaman had declined, it took some of the edge from his pleasure.

Owl Carver's eyes were watery and his cheeks were sunken. His arms and
legs were thin as spear shafts. The trek up the Rock River had not been
good for him. White Bear and Sun Woman had taken over most of the work
of caring for the wounded and sick, though Owl Carver did as much as he
could.

"You are a Great Shaman, as I predicted you would be," Owl Carver said.
"You foretold exactly what would happen if Black Hawk led the British
Band across the Great River. But I am sad that your greatness must be
proved by the suffering of our people."

White Bear felt his chest expand and a warmth spread through his limbs
at these words of his teacher.

"I may need your help yet," he said. "The people do not like me
protecting this pale eyes woman."

Owl Carver nodded. "But they respect you. And they will respect you more
when you show them you have magical powers."

"I have no magical powers."

"You do. It was not I who put the mark of the Bear on your chest."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that the White Bear is your spirit self. And he can act in this
world. The mark of his claws is the mark of his favor."

As White Bear let this sink in, Wolf Paw approached with a stumbling
walk. Running Deer and Burning Pine followed him.
