
No. 13. A homogeneous sphere attracts as if its mass were concentrated
at its centre. For any other figure, such as an oblate spheroid, this is
not exactly true. A hollow concentric spherical shell exerts no force on
small bodies inside it.

A sphere composed of uniform material, or of materials arranged in
concentric strata, can be shown to attract external bodies as if its
mass were concentrated at its centre. A hollow sphere, similarly
composed, does the same, but on internal bodies it exerts no force at
all.

Hence, at all distances above the surface of the earth, gravity
decreases in inverse proportion as the square of the distance from the
centre of the earth increases; but, if you descend a mine, gravity
decreases in this case also as you leave the surface, though not at the
same rate as when you went up. For as you penetrate the crust you get
inside a concentric shell, which is thus powerless to act upon you, and
the earth you are now outside is a smaller one. At what rate the force
decreases depends on the distribution of density; if the density were
uniform all through, the law of variation would be the direct distance,
otherwise it would be more complicated. Anyhow, the intensity of gravity
is a maximum at the surface of the earth, and decreases as you travel
from the surface either up or down.

No. 14. The earth's equatorial protuberance, being acted on by the
attraction of the sun and moon, must disturb its axis of rotation in a
calculated manner; and thus is produced the precession of the equinoxes.

Here we come to a truly awful piece of reasoning. A sphere attracts as
if its mass were concentrated at its centre (No. 12), but a spheroid
does not. The earth is a spheroid, and hence it pulls and is pulled by
the moon with a slightly uncentric attraction. In other words, the line
of pull does not pass through its precise centre. Now when we have a
spinning body, say a top, overloaded on one side so that gravity acts on
it unsymmetrically, what happens? The axis of rotation begins to rotate
cone-wise, at a pace which depends on the rate of spin, and on the shape
and mass of the top, as well as on the amount and leverage of the
overloading.

Newton calculated out the rapidity of this conical motion of the axis of
the earth, produced by the slightly unsymmetrical pull of the moon, and
found that it would complete a revolution in 26,000 years--precisely
what was wanted to explain the precession of the equinoxes. In fact he
had discovered the physical cause of that precession.

Observe that there were three stages in this discovery of precession:--

First, the observation by Hipparchus, that the nodes, or intersections
of the earth's orbit (the sun's apparent orbit) with the plane of the
equator, were not stationary, but slowly moved.

Second, the description of this motion by Copernicus, by the statement
that it was due to a conical motion of the earth's axis of rotation
about its centre as a fixed point.

Third, the explanation of this motion by Newton as due to the pull of
the moon on the equatorial protuberance of the earth.

The explanation _could_ not have been previously suspected, for the
shape of the earth, on which the whole theory depends, was entirely
unknown till Newton calculated it.

Another and smaller motion of a somewhat similar kind has been worked
out since: it is due to the unsymmetrical attraction of the other
planets for this same equatorial protuberance. It shows itself as a
periodic change in the obliquity of the ecliptic, or so-called recession
of the apses, rather than as a motion of the nodes.[21]

No. 15. The waters of the ocean are attracted towards the sun and moon
on one side, and whirled a little farther away than the solid earth on
the other side: hence Newton explained all the main phenomena of the
tides.

And now comes another tremendous generalization. The tides had long been
an utter mystery. Kepler likens the earth to an animal, and the tides to
his breathings and inbreathings, and says they follow the moon.

Galileo chaffs him for this, and says that it is mere superstition to
connect the moon with the tides.

Descartes said the moon pressed down upon the waters by the centrifugal
force of its vortex, and so produced a low tide under it.

Everything was fog and darkness on the subject. The legend goes that an
astronomer threw himself into the sea in despair of ever being able to
explain the flux and reflux of its waters.

Newton now with consummate skill applied his theory to the effect of
the moon upon the ocean, and all the main details of tidal action
gradually revealed themselves to him.

He treated the water, rotating with the earth once a day, somewhat as if
it were a satellite acted on by perturbing forces. The moon as it
revolves round the earth is perturbed by the sun. The ocean as it
revolves round the earth (being held on by gravitation just as the moon
is) is perturbed by both sun and moon.

The perturbing effect of a body varies directly as its mass, and
inversely as the cube of its distance. (The simple law of inverse square
does not apply, because a perturbation is a differential effect: the
satellite or ocean when nearer to the perturbing body than the rest of
the earth, is attracted more, and when further off it is attracted less
than is the main body of the earth; and it is these differences alone
which constitute the perturbation.) The moon is the more powerful of the
two perturbing bodies, hence the main tides are due to the moon; and its
chief action is to cause a pair of low waves or oceanic humps, of
gigantic area, to travel round the earth once in a lunar day, _i.e._ in
about 24 hours and 50 minutes. The sun makes a similar but still lower
pair of low elevations to travel round once in a solar day of 24 hours.
And the combination of the two pairs of humps, thus periodically
overtaking each other, accounts for the well-known spring and neap
tides,--spring tides when their maxima agree, neap tides when the
maximum of one coincides with the minimum of the other: each of which
events happens regularly once a fortnight.

These are the main effects, but besides these there are the effects of
varying distances and obliquity to be taken into account; and so we have
a whole series of minor disturbances, very like those discussed in No.
7, under the lunar theory, but more complex still, because there are two
perturbing bodies instead of only one.

The subject of the tides is, therefore, very recondite; and though one
may give some elementary account of its main features, it will be best
to defer this to a separate lecture (Lecture XVII).

I had better, however, here say that Newton did not limit himself to the
consideration of the primary oceanic humps: he pursued the subject into
geographical detail. He pointed out that, although the rise and fall of
the tide at mid-ocean islands would be but small, yet on stretches of
coast the wave would fling itself, and by its momentum would propel the
waters, to a much greater height--for instance, 20 or 30 feet;
especially in some funnel-shaped openings like the Bristol Channel and
the Bay of Fundy, where the concentrated impetus of the water is
enormous.

He also showed how the tidal waves reached different stations in
successive regular order each day; and how some places might be fed with
tide by two distinct channels; and that if the time of these channels
happened to differ by six hours, a high tide might be arriving by one
channel and a low tide by the other, so that the place would only feel
the difference, and so have a very small observed rise and fall;
instancing a port in China (in the Gulf of Tonquin) where that
approximately occurs.

In fact, although his theory was not, as we now know, complete or final,
yet it satisfactorily explained a mass of intricate detail as well as
the main features of the tides.

No. 16. The sun's mass being known, he calculated the height of the
solar tide.

No. 17. From the observed heights of spring and neap tides he determined
the lunar tide, and thence made an estimate of the mass of the moon.

Knowing the sun's mass and distance, it was not difficult for Newton to
calculate the height of the protuberance caused by it in a pasty ocean
covering the whole earth. I say pasty, because, if there was any
tendency for impulses to accumulate, as timely pushes given to a
pendulum accumulate, the amount of disturbance might become excessive,
and its calculation would involve a multitude of data. The Newtonian
tide ignored this, thus practically treating the motion as either
dead-beat, or else the impulses as very inadequately timed. With this
reservation the mid-ocean tide due to the action of the sun alone comes
out about one foot, or let us say one foot for simplicity. Now the
actual tide observed in mid-Atlantic is at the springs about four feet,
at the neaps about two. The spring tide is lunar plus solar; the neap
tide is lunar minus solar. Hence it appears that the tide caused by the
moon alone must be about three feet, when unaffected by momentum. From
this datum Newton made the first attempt to approximately estimate the
mass of the moon. I said that the masses of satellites must be
estimated, if at all, by the perturbation they are able to cause. The
lunar tide is a perturbation in the diurnal motion of the sea, and its
amount is therefore a legitimate mode of calculating the moon's mass.
The available data were not at all good, however; nor are they even now
very perfect; and so the estimate was a good way out. It is now
considered that the mass of the moon is about one-eightieth that of the
earth.

*      *      *      *      *

Such are some of the gems extracted from their setting in the
_Principia_, and presented as clearly as I am able before you.

Do you realize the tremendous stride in knowledge--not a stride, as
Whewell says, nor yet a leap, but a flight--which has occurred between
the dim gropings of Kepler, the elementary truths of Galileo, the
fascinating but wild speculations of Descartes, and this magnificent and
comprehensive system of ordered knowledge. To some his genius seemed
almost divine. "Does Mr. Newton eat, drink, sleep, like other men?" said
the Marquis de l'Hopital, a French mathematician of no mean eminence; "I
picture him to myself as a celestial genius, entirely removed from the
restrictions of ordinary matter." To many it seemed as if there was
nothing more to be discovered, as if the universe were now explored, and
only a few fragments of truth remained for the gleaner. This is the
attitude of mind expressed in Pope's famous epigram:--

  "Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in Night,
  God said, Let Newton be, and all was light."

This feeling of hopelessness and impotence was very natural after the
advent of so overpowering a genius, and it prevailed in England for
fully a century. It was very natural, but it was very mischievous; for,
as a consequence, nothing of great moment was done by England in
science, and no Englishman of the first magnitude appeared, till some
who are either living now or who have lived within the present century.

It appeared to his contemporaries as if he had almost exhausted the
possibility of discovery; but did it so appear to Newton? Did it seem to
him as if he had seen far and deep into the truths of this great and
infinite universe? It did not. When quite an old man, full of honour and
renown, venerated, almost worshipped, by his contemporaries, these were
his words:--

"I know not what the world will think of my labours, but to myself it
seems that I have been but as a child playing on the sea-shore; now
finding some pebble rather more polished, and now some shell rather more
agreeably variegated than another, while the immense ocean of truth
extended itself unexplored before me."

And so it must ever seem to the wisest and greatest of men when brought
into contact with the great things of God--that which they know is as
nothing, and less than nothing, to the infinitude of which they are
ignorant.

Newton's words sound like a simple and pleasing echo of the words of
that great unknown poet, the writer of the book of Job:--

  "Lo, these are parts of His ways,
  But how little a portion is heard of Him;
  The thunder of His power, who can understand?"

END OF PART I.




PART II

_A COUPLE OF CENTURIES' PROGRESS._




NOTES TO LECTURE X

_Science during the century after Newton_

The _Principia_ published, 1687

  Roemer                1644-1710
  James Bradley         1692-1762
  Clairaut              1713-1765
  Euler                 1707-1783
  D'Alembert            1717-1783
  Lagrange              1736-1813
  Laplace               1749-1827
  William Herschel      1738-1822


_Olaus Roemer_ was born in Jutland, and studied at Copenhagen. Assisted
Picard in 1671 to determine the exact position of Tycho's observatory on
Huen. Accompanied Picard to Paris, and in 1675 read before the Academy
his paper "On Successive Propagation of Light as revealed by a certain
inequality in the motion of Jupiter's First Satellite." In 1681 he
returned to Copenhagen as Professor of Mathematics and Astronomy, and
died in 1710. He invented the transit instrument, mural circle,
equatorial mounting for telescopes, and most of the other principal
instruments now in use in observatories. He made as many observations as
Tycho Brahe, but the records of all but the work of three days were
destroyed by a great fire in 1728.

_Bradley_, Professor of Astronomy at Oxford, discovered the aberration
of light in 1729, while examining stars for parallax, and the nutation
of the earth's axis in 1748. Was appointed Astronomer-Royal in 1742.




LECTURE X

ROEMER AND BRADLEY AND THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT


At Newton's death England stood pre-eminent among the nations of Europe
in the sphere of science. But the pre-eminence did not last long. Two
great discoveries were made very soon after his decease, both by
Professor Bradley, of Oxford, and then there came a gap. A moderately
great man often leaves behind him a school of disciples able to work
according to their master's methods, and with a healthy spirit of
rivalry which stimulates and encourages them. Newton left, indeed, a
school of disciples, but his methods of work were largely unknown to
them, and such as were known were too ponderous to be used by ordinary
men. Only one fresh result, and that a small one, has ever been attained
by other men working according to the methods of the _Principia_. The
methods were studied and commented on in England to the exclusion of all
others for nigh a century, and as a consequence no really important work
was done.

On the Continent, however, no such system of slavish imitation
prevailed. Those methods of Newton's which had been simultaneously
discovered by Leibnitz were more thoroughly grasped, modified, extended,
and improved. There arose a great school of French and German
mathematicians, and the laurels of scientific discovery passed to France
and Germany--more especially, perhaps, at this time to France. England
has never wholly recovered them. During the present century this country
has been favoured with some giants who, as they become distant enough
for their true magnitude to be perceived, may possibly stand out as
great as any who have ever lived; but for the mass and bulk of
scientific work at the present day we have to look to Germany, with its
enlightened Government and extensive intellectual development. England,
however, is waking up, and what its Government does not do, private
enterprise is beginning to accomplish. The establishment of centres of
scientific and literary activity in the great towns of England, though
at present they are partially encumbered with the supply of education of
an exceedingly rudimentary type, is a movement that in the course of
another century or so will be seen to be one of the most important and
fruitful steps ever taken by this country. On the Continent such centres
have long existed; almost every large town is the seat of a University,
and they are now liberally endowed. The University of Bologna (where,
you may remember, Copernicus learnt mathematics) has recently celebrated
its 800th anniversary.

The scientific history of the century after Newton, summarized in the
above table of dates, embraces the labours of the great mathematicians
Clairaut, Euler, D'Alembert, and especially of Lagrange and Laplace.

But the main work of all these men was hardly pioneering work. It was
rather the surveying, and mapping out, and bringing into cultivation, of
lands already discovered. Probably Herschel may be justly regarded as
the next true pioneer. We shall not, however, properly appreciate the
stages through which astronomy has passed, nor shall we be prepared
adequately to welcome the discoveries of modern times unless we pay some
attention to the intervening age. Moreover, during this era several
facts of great moment gradually came into recognition; and the
importance of the discovery we have now to speak of can hardly be
over-estimated.

Our whole direct knowledge of the planetary and stellar universe, from
the early observations of the ancients down to the magnificent
discoveries of a Herschel, depends entirely upon our happening to
possess a sense of sight. To no other of our senses do any other worlds
than our own in the slightest degree appeal. We touch them or hear them
never. Consequently, if the human race had happened to be blind, no
other world but the one it groped its way upon could ever have been
known or imagined by it. The outside universe would have existed, but
man would have been entirely and hopelessly ignorant of it. The bare
idea of an outside universe beyond the world would have been
inconceivable, and might have been scouted as absurd. We do possess the
sense of sight; but is it to be supposed that we possess every sense
that can be possessed by finite beings? There is not the least ground
for such an assumption. It is easy to imagine a deaf race or a blind
race: it is not so easy to imagine a race more highly endowed with
senses than our own; and yet the sense of smell in animals may give us
some aid in thinking of powers of perception which transcend our own in
particular directions. If there were a race with higher or other senses
than our own, or if the human race should ever in the process of
development acquire such extra sense-organs, a whole universe of
existent fact might become for the first time perceived by us, and we
should look back upon our past state as upon a blind chrysalid form of
existence in which we had been unconscious of all this new wealth of
perception.

It cannot be too clearly and strongly insisted on and brought home to
every mind, that the mode in which the universe strikes us, our view of
the universe, our whole idea of matter, and force, and other worlds, and
even of consciousness, depends upon the particular set of sense-organs
with which we, as men, happen to be endowed. The senses of force, of
motion, of sound, of light, of touch, of heat, of taste, and of
smell--these we have, and these are the things we primarily know. All
else is inference founded upon these sensations. So the world appears to
us. But given other sense-organs, and it might appear quite otherwise.
What it is actually and truly like, therefore, is quite and for ever
beyond us--so long as we are finite beings.

Without eyes, astronomy would be non-existent. Light it is which conveys
all the information we possess, or, as it would seem, ever can possess,
concerning the outer and greater universe in which this small world
forms a speck. Light is the channel, the messenger of information; our
eyes, aided by telescopes, spectroscopes, and many other "scopes" that
may yet be invented, are the means by which we read the information that
light brings.

Light travels from the stars to our eyes: does it come instantaneously?
or does it loiter by the way? for if it lingers it is not bringing us
information properly up to date--it is only telling us what the state of
affairs was when it started on its long journey.

Now, it is evidently a matter of interest to us whether we see the sun
as he is now, or only as he was some three hundred years ago. If the
information came by express train it would be three hundred years behind
date, and the sun might have gone out in the reign of Queen Anne without
our being as yet any the wiser. The question, therefore, "At what rate
does our messenger travel?" is evidently one of great interest for
astronomers, and many have been the attempts made to solve it. Very
likely the ancient Greeks pondered over this question, but the earliest
writer known to me who seriously discussed the question is Galileo. He
suggests a rough experimental means of attacking it. First of all, it
plainly comes quicker than sound. This can be perceived by merely
watching distant hammering, or by noticing that the flash of a pistol is
seen before its report is heard, or by listening to the noise of a
flash of lightning. Sound takes five seconds to travel a mile--it has
about the same speed as a rifle bullet; but light is much quicker than
that.

The rude experiment suggested by Galileo was to send two men with
lanterns and screens to two distant watch-towers or neighbouring
mountain tops, and to arrange that each was to watch alternate displays
and obscurations of the light made by the other, and to imitate them as
promptly as possible. Either man, therefore, on obscuring or showing his
own light would see the distant glimmer do the same, and would be able
to judge if there was any appreciable interval between his own action
and the response of the distant light. The experiment was actually tried
by the Florentine Academicians,[22] with the result that, as practice
improved, the interval became shorter and shorter, so that there was no
reason to suppose that there was any real interval at all. Light, in
fact, seemed to travel instantaneously.

Well might they have arrived at this result. Even if they had made far
more perfect arrangements--for instance, by arranging a looking-glass at
one of the stations in which a distant observer might see the reflection
of his own lantern, and watch the obscurations and flashings made by
himself, without having to depend on the response of human
mechanism--even then no interval whatever could have been detected.

