
[Illustration: FIG. 4.--The Orbits of the Components of Gamma Virginis.]

From his observation of the motion of Sirius in 1844, Bessel was led to
believe that the brilliant orb was accompanied by another body, whose
gravitational attraction was responsible for the irregularities observed
in the path of the great dog-star when pursuing his journey through
space. The elements of this hypothetical body were afterwards computed
by Peters and Auwers, and its exact position assigned by Safford in
1861.

On January 31, 1862, Mr. Alvan Clarke, of Cambridgeport, Massachusetts,
when engaged in testing a recently constructed telescope of great power,
directed it on Sirius, and was enabled by good fortune to discover the
companion star at a distance of ten seconds from its primary. Since its
discovery, the star has pursued with such precision the theoretical path
previously assigned to it that astronomers have had no hesitation in
identifying it as the hypothetical body whose existence Bessel had
correctly surmised.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Apparent Orbit of the Companion of Sirius.

(_Drawn by Mr. Burnham._)]

The Sirian satellite is a yellow star of the eighth magnitude, and
shines with a feeble light when contrasted with the surpassing
brilliancy of its neighbour.

Astronomers were for some time in doubt as to whether the uneven motion
which characterised the path of Sirius could be ascribed to the
attraction of its obscure attendant, which presented such a marked
contrast to its primary, and several observers were inclined to believe
that the disturbing body still remained undiscovered. When, however, the
density of the lesser star became known, it was discovered that, weight
for weight, that of Sirius exceeded it only in the proportion of two to
one, though as a light-giver the great orb is believed to be 5,000 times
more luminous. The Sirian satellite revolves round its primary in about
fifty years, and at a distance twenty-eight times that of the Earth from
the Sun.

The surpassing brilliancy of Sirius as compared with that of the other
stars of the firmament has rendered it at all times an object of
interest to observers. The Egyptians worshipped the star as Sothis, and
it was believed to be the abode of the soul of Isis. The nations
inhabiting the region of the Nile commenced their year with the heliacal
rising of Sirius, and its appearance was regarded as a sure forerunner
of the rising of the great river, the fertilising flood of which was
attributed to the influence of this beautiful star. It is believed that
the Mazzaroth in Job is an allusion to this brilliant orb. Among the
Romans Sirius was regarded as a star of evil omen; its appearance above
the horizon after the summer solstice was believed to be associated with
pestilence and fevers, consequent upon the oppressive heat of the
season of the year. The _dies caniculares_, or dog-days, were reckoned
to begin twenty days before, and to continue for twenty days after, the
heliacal rising of Sirius, the dog-star. During those days a peculiar
influence was believed to exist which created diseases in men and
madness among dogs. Homer alludes to the star

                                'whose burning breath
    Taints the red air with fevers, plagues and death.'

Sirius, which is in Canis Major (one of Orion's hunting dogs), is a far
more glorious orb than our Sun. According to recent photometric
measurements it emits seventy times the quantity of light, and is three
times more massive than the great luminary of our system. At the
distance of Sirius (fifty billions of miles) the Sun would shrink to the
dimensions of a third-magnitude star, and the light of seventy such
stars would be required to equal in appearance the brilliant radiance of
the great dog-star. The orb, with his retinue of attendant worlds--some
of which are reported as having been seen--is travelling through space
with a velocity of not less than 1,000 miles a minute.

An irregularity of motion resembling that of Sirius has been detected
with regard to Procyon, the lesser dog-star. But in this case the
companion star has not as yet been seen, though a careful search has
been made for it with the most powerful of telescopes. Should it be a
planetary body, illumined by its primary, its reflected light would not
appear visible to us, even if it were much less remote than it is.

We are able only to perceive the effulgence of brilliant suns scattered
throughout the regions of space; but besides those, there are doubtless
many faintly luminous orbs and opaque bodies of vast dimensions
occupying regions unknown to us, but by a knowledge of the existence of
which an enlarged conception is conveyed to our minds of the greatness
of the universe.

The most rapid of known revolving pairs is Delta Equulei. The components
are so close that only the finest instruments can separate them, and
this they cannot do at all times. They accomplish a revolution in eleven
and a half years. The slowest revolving pair is Zeta Aquarii. The motion
of the components is so tardy that to complete a circuit of their orbits
they require a period of about sixteen centuries. Other binary stars
have had different periods assigned to them; eleven pairs have been
computed to revolve round each other in less than fifty years, and
fifteen in less than 100 but more than fifty. There are other compound
stars whose motions appear to be much more leisurely than those just
mentioned, and although no orbital movement has, so far, been detected
among them, yet, so vast is the scale upon which the sidereal system is
constructed, that thousands of years must elapse before they can have
accomplished a revolution of their orbits.

The Pole Star is an optical double, but the components are of very
unequal magnitude. The Pole Star itself is of the second magnitude, but
its companion is only of the ninth, and on account of its minuteness is
regarded as a good test for telescopes of small aperture. Mizar, in the
constellation Ursa Major, is a beautiful double star. The components are
wide apart, and can be easily observed with a small instrument.

There is a remarkable star in the constellation of the Lyre (Epsilon
Lyrae), described as a double double. This object can just be
distinguished by a person with keen eyesight as consisting of two stars;
when observed with a telescope they appear widely separated, and each
star is seen to have a companion, the entire system forming two binary
pairs in active revolution. The pair which first cross the meridian
complete a revolution in about 2,000 years; the second pair have a more
rapid motion, and accomplish it in half that time. The two pairs are
believed to be physically connected, and revolve round their common
centre of gravity in a period of time not much under one million years.

Cor Caroli, in Canes Venatici, is a pleasing double star, the components
being of a pale white and lilac colour.

Albireo, in the constellation of the Swan, is one of the loveliest of
double stars. The larger component is of the third magnitude, and of a
golden yellow colour; the smaller of the sixth magnitude, and of a
sapphire blue.

Epsilon Booetis, known also as Mirac, and called by Admiral Smyth
'Pulcherrima,' on account of its surpassing beauty, is a delicate object
of charming appearance. The components of this lovely star are of the
third and seventh magnitudes: the primary orange, the secondary
sea-green.

The late Mr. R. A. Proctor, in describing a binary star system, writes
as follows: 'If we regard a pair of stars as forming a double sun, round
which--or, rather, round the common centre of which--other orbs revolve
as planets, we are struck by the difference between such a scheme and
our own solar system; but we find the difference yet more surprising
when we consider the possibility that in some such schemes each
component sun may have its own distinct system of dependent worlds. In
the former case the ordinary state of things would probably be such that
both suns would be above the horizon at the same time, and then,
probably, their distinctive peculiarities would only be recognisable
when one chanced to pass over the disc of the other, as our Moon passes
over the Sun's disc in eclipses. For short intervals of time, however,
at rising or setting, one or other would be visible alone; and the
phenomena of sunset and sunrise must therefore be very varied, and also
exquisitely beautiful, in worlds circling round such double suns. But
when each sun has a separate system, even more remarkable relations must
be presented. For each system of dependent worlds, besides its own
proper sun, must have another sun--less splendid, perhaps (because
farther off), but still brighter beyond comparison than our moon at the
full. And, according to the position of any planet of either system,
there will result for the time being either an interchange of suns,
instead of the change from night to day, or else double sunlight during
the day, and a corresponding intensified contrast between night and day.
Where the two suns are very unequal or very differently coloured, or
where the orbital path of each is very eccentric, so that they are
sometimes close together and at others far apart, the varieties in the
worlds circling round either, or around the common centre of both, must
be yet more remarkable. "It must be confessed," we may well say with Sir
John Herschel, "that we have here a strangely wide and novel field for
speculative excursions, and one which it is not easy to avoid
luxuriating in."'

Anyone who takes a cursory glance at the heavens on a clear night can
readily perceive that there exists considerable diversity of colour
among the stars. The contrast between some is pronounced and well
marked, whilst others exhibit refined gradations of hue.

The most numerous class of stars are those which are described as white
or colourless. They comprise about one-half of the stars visible to the
naked eye. Among the most conspicuous examples of this type are
Sirius--whose diamond blaze is sometimes mingled with an occasional
flash of blue and red--Altair, Spica, Castor, Regulus, Rigel, all the
stars of Ursa Major with the exception of one, and Vega--a glittering
gem of pale sapphire, almost colourless. The light emitted by stars of
this class gives a continuous spectrum, the predominating element being
hydrogen, having a very elevated temperature and under relatively high
pressure. The vapours of iron, sodium, magnesium, and other metals, are
indicated as existing in small quantities.

The second class of stars is that to which our Sun belongs. They are of
a yellow colour, and embrace two-thirds of the remaining stars. The most
prominent examples of this type are Arcturus, Capella, Aldebaran,
Procyon, and Pollux. Hydrogen does not predominate so much in these as
in the Sirian stars, and their spectra resemble closely the solar
spectrum, indicating that they are composed of elements similar to those
which exist in the Sun.

The star which bears the nearest resemblance to our Sun, both as regards
the colour of its light and physical structure, is Capella, the most
conspicuous star in the constellation Auriga, and one of the leading
brilliants in the Northern Hemisphere. Its spectrum presents all the
characteristics observed in the solar spectrum, and there exists an
almost identical similarity in their physical constitution, though
Capella is a much more magnificent orb than the Sun.

The third class of stars includes those which are of a ruddy hue, such
as Betelgeux in the right shoulder of Orion, Antares in Scorpio, and
Alpha Herculis. Their spectra present a banded or columnar appearance,
and there is greater absorption, especially of the blue rays of light.
It is believed that the temperature of stars of this colour is not so
elevated as that of those belonging to the other two orders, and that
this is a sufficient reason to account for the different appearance of
their spectra.

The aid of a good telescope is, however, necessary to enable us to
perceive the varied colours and tints of the sparkling gems with which
Nature has adorned her star-built edifice of the universe. Most of the
precious stones on Earth have their counterparts in the heavens,
presenting in a jewelled form contrasts of colour, pleasing harmonies,
and endless variety of shade. The diamond, sapphire, emerald, amethyst,
topaz, and ruby sparkle among crowds of stars of more sombre hue. Agate,
chalcedony, onyx, opal, beryl, lapis-lazuli, and aquamarine are
represented by the radiant sheen emanating from distant suns, displaying
an inexhaustible variety of colour, blended in tints of untold harmony.

It is among double stars that the richest and most varied colours
predominate. There are pairs of white, yellow, orange, and red stars;
yellow and blue, yellow and pale emerald, yellow and rose red, yellow
and fawn, green and gold, azure and crimson, golden and azure, orange
and emerald, orange and lilac, orange and purple, orange and green,
white and blue, white and lilac, lilac and dark purple, &c., &c. There
are companion stars revolving round their primaries, coloured olive,
lilac, russet, fawn, dun, buff, grey, and other shades indistinguishable
by any name.

Our knowledge of binary star systems brings us to what may be regarded
as the threshold of the fabric of the heavens. For it is known that
other systems exist into the construction of which numerous stars enter.
These form intricate and complex stellar arrangements, in which the
component stars are physically united and retained in their orbits by
their mutual attraction.




CHAPTER VII

THE STARRY HEAVENS


TRIPLE, QUADRUPLE, AND MULTIPLE STARS.--These, when observed with the
naked eye, appear as single stars, but, when examined with a high
magnifying power, each lucid point can be resolved into several
component stars. They vary in number from three to half a dozen or more,
and form systems of a more complex character than what are observed in
the case of binary stars. In the usual construction of a triple system,
the secondary star of a binary is resolvable into two, each star being
in mutual revolution, whilst they both gravitate round their primary. By
another arrangement, a close pair control the movements of a distant
attendant.

One of the most interesting of triple stars is the tricoloured Gamma
Andromedae. The brilliant components of this system have their
counterparts in the topaz, the emerald, and the sapphire--the larger
star is of the third magnitude and of a golden yellow colour; the
secondary of the fifth magnitude and of an emerald green. These stars
are ten seconds apart, and, though they have been under observation
since 1777, no orbital movement has as yet been detected, but their
common proper motion indicates their close relationship and physical
connection. In 1842, Otto Struve discovered that the companion star is
itself double, and round it there gravitates a sapphire sun, which is
believed to accomplish a revolution of its orbit in about 500 years. If
round those suns there should be circling planetary systems of worlds
inhabited by intelligent beings, the varied effects produced by the
light emanating from those different coloured orbs would be of a very
beautiful and pleasing nature.

A system suggestive of the endless variety of stellar arrangement that
exists throughout the sidereal regions is apparent in the case of the
triple star Zeta Cancri. Two of the stars, of magnitudes six and seven,
form a binary in rapid revolution, the components of which complete a
circuit of their orbits in fifty-eight years, whilst the more distant
third star, of almost similar magnitude, accomplishes a wide orbital
ellipse round the other two in 500 or 600 years. These stars have been
closely observed by astronomers during the past forty years, with the
result that their motions have appeared most perplexing, and complicated
beyond precedent. 'If this be really a ternary system,' wrote Sir John
Herschel, 'connected by the mutual attraction of its parts, its
perturbations will present one of the most intricate problems in
physical astronomy.' The second star revolves round its primary, whilst
the third pursues a retrograde course, but its path, instead of being
even, presents the appearance of a series of circular loopings, in
traversing which the star alternately quickens and slackens its pace,
or at times appears to be stationary.

Astronomers have arrived at the conclusion that these perturbations are
produced by the presence of a fourth member, which, though invisible, is
probably the most massive of the system--perhaps a magnificent world
teeming with animated beings, and attended by three suns which gravitate
round it, dispensing light and heat to meet the requirements of the
various forms of life which exist on its surface. In this system we have
an arrangement the reverse of what exists in the solar system, where all
the planets revolve round a predominant sun; but here there is a strange
verification of the old Ptolemaic belief with regard to the path of a
sun, though in this instance there are three suns circling round a dark
globe which they illumine and vivify.

Triple stars occur with comparative frequency throughout the heavens. In
Monoceros there is a fine triple star, discovered by Herschel, which he
describes as 'one of the most beautiful sights in the heavens.' The
stars Xi and Beta Scorpii form triple systems in which the components
are differently arranged. In Xi the primary and secondary consist of two
