the luminaries. It was concluded that these were meteors moving in space
beyond the atmosphere of the earth. The bodies were called "dark
meteors," to emphasise the fact that they were seen in their natural
condition, and not in that momentary one in which they had hitherto been
always seen; _i.e._ when heated to white heat, and rapidly vaporised, in
the course of their passage through the upper regions of our air. This
"discovery" gave promise of such assistance to meteor theories, that
calculations were made from the directions in which they had been seen
to travel, and the speeds at which they had moved, in the hope that some
information concerning their orbits might be revealed. But after a while
some doubt began to be thrown upon their being really meteors, and
eventually an Australian observer solved the mystery. He found that they
were merely tiny particles of dust, or of the black coating on the inner
part of the tube of the telescope, becoming detached from the sides of
the eye-piece and falling across the field of view. He was led to this
conclusion by having noted that a gentle tapping of his instrument
produced the "dark" bodies in great numbers! Thus the opportunity of
observing meteors beyond our atmosphere had once more failed.

_Meteorites_, also known as aerolites and fireballs, are usually placed
in quite a separate category from meteors. They greatly exceed the
latter in size, are comparatively rare, and do not appear in any way
connected with the various showers of meteors. The friction of their
passage through the atmosphere causes them to shine with a great light;
and if not shattered to pieces by internal explosions, they reach the
ground to bury themselves deep in it with a great rushing and noise.
When found by uncivilised peoples, or savages, they are, on account of
their celestial origin, usually regarded as objects of wonder and of
worship, and thus have arisen many mythological legends and deifications
of blackened stones. On the other hand, when they get into the
possession of the civilised, they are subjected to careful examinations
and tests in chemical laboratories. The bodies are, as a rule, composed
of stone, in conjunction with iron, nickel, and such elements as exist
in abundance upon our earth; though occasionally specimens are found
which are practically pure metal. In the museums of the great capitals
of both Continents are to be seen some fine collections of meteorites.
Several countries--Greenland and Mexico, for instance--contain in the
soil much meteoric iron, often in masses so large as to baffle all
attempts at removal. Blocks of this kind have been known to furnish the
natives in their vicinity for many years with sources of workable iron.

The largest meteorite in the world is one known as the Anighito
meteorite. It was brought to the United States by the explorer Peary,
who found it at Cape York in Greenland. He estimates its weight at from
90 to 100 tons. One found in Mexico, called the Bacubirito, comes next,
with an estimated weight of 27-1/2 tons. The third in size is the
Willamette meteorite, found at Willamette in Oregon in 1902. It measures
10 x 6-1/2 x 4-1/2 feet, and weighs about 15-1/2 tons.


[27] The "gem" of the meteor ring, as it has been termed.




CHAPTER XXII

THE STARS


In the foregoing chapters we have dealt at length with those celestial
bodies whose nearness to us brings them into our especial notice. The
entire room, however, taken up by these bodies, is as a mere point in
the immensities of star-filled space. The sun, too, is but an ordinary
star; perhaps quite an insignificant one[28] in comparison with the
majority of those which stud that background of sky against which the
planets are seen to perform their wandering courses.

Dropping our earth and the solar system behind, let us go afield and
explore the depths of space.

We have seen how, in very early times, men portioned out the great mass
of the so-called "fixed stars" into divisions known as constellations.
The various arrangements, into which the brilliant points of light fell
as a result of perspective, were noticed and roughly compared with such
forms as were familiar to men upon the earth. Imagination quickly saw in
them the semblances of heroes and of mighty fabled beasts; and, around
these monstrous shapes, legends were woven, which told how the great
deeds done in the misty dawn of historical time had been enshrined by
the gods in the sky as an example and a memorial for men. Though the
centuries have long outlived such fantasies, yet the constellation
figures and their ancient names have been retained to this day, pretty
well unaltered for want of any better arrangement. The Great and Little
Bears, Cassiopeia, Perseus, and Andromeda, Orion and the rest, glitter
in our night skies just as they did centuries and centuries ago.

Many persons seem to despair of gaining any real knowledge of astronomy,
merely because they are not versed in recognising the constellations.
For instance, they will say:--"What is the use of my reading anything
about the subject? Why, I believe I couldn't even point out the Great
Bear, were I asked to do so!" But if such persons will only consider for
a moment that what we call the Great Bear has no existence in fact, they
need not be at all disheartened. Could we but view this familiar
constellation from a different position in space, we should perhaps be
quite unable to recognise it. Mountain masses, for instance, when seen
from new directions, are often unrecognisable.

It took, as we have seen, a very long time for men to acknowledge the
immense distances of the stars from our earth. Their seeming
unchangeableness of position was, as we have seen, largely responsible
for the idea that the earth was immovable in space. It is a wonder that
the Copernican system ever gained the day in the face of this apparent
fixity of the stars. As time went on, it became indeed necessary to
accord to these objects an almost inconceivable distance, in order to
account for the fact that they remained apparently quite undisplaced,
notwithstanding the journey of millions of miles which the earth was now
acknowledged to make each year around the sun. In the face of the
gradual and immense improvement in telescopes, this apparent immobility
of the stars was, however, not destined to last. The first ascertained
displacement of a star, namely that of 61 Cygni, noted by Bessel in the
year 1838, definitely proved to men the truth of the Copernican system.
Since then some forty more stars have been found to show similar tiny
displacements. We are, therefore, in possession of the fact, that the
actual distances of a few out of the great host can be calculated.

To mention some of these. The nearest star to the earth, so far as we
yet know, is Alpha Centauri, which is distant from us about 25 billions
of miles. The light from this star, travelling at the stupendous rate of
about 186,000 miles per second, takes about 4-1/4 years to reach our
earth, or, to speak astronomically, Alpha Centauri is about 4-1/4 "light
years" distant from us. Sirius--the brightest star in the whole sky--is
at twice this distance, _i.e._ about 8-1/2 light years. Vega is about 30
light years distant from us, Capella about 32, and Arcturus about 100.

The displacements, consequent on the earth's movement, have, however,
plainly nothing to say to any real movements on the part of the stars
themselves. The old idea was that the stars were absolutely fixed; hence
arose the term "fixed stars"--a term which, though inaccurate, has not
yet been entirely banished from the astronomical vocabulary. But careful
observations extending over a number of years have shown slight changes
of position among these bodies; and such alterations cannot be ascribed
to the revolution of the earth in its orbit, for they appear to take
place in every direction. These evidences of movement are known as
"proper motions," that is to say, actual motions in space proper to the
stars themselves. Stars which are comparatively near to us show, as a
rule, greater proper motions than those which are farther off. It must
not, however, be concluded that these proper motions are of any very
noticeable amounts. They are, as a matter of fact, merely upon the same
apparently minute scale as other changes in the heavens; and would
largely remain unnoticed were it not for the great precision of modern
astronomical instruments.

One of the swiftest moving of the stars is a star of the sixth magnitude
in the constellation of the Great Bear; which is known as "1830
Groombridge," because this was the number assigned to it in a catalogue
of stars made by an astronomer of that name. It is popularly known as
the "Runaway Star," a name given to it by Professor Newcomb. Its speed
is estimated to be at least 138 miles per second. It may be actually
moving at a much greater rate, for it is possible that we see its path
somewhat foreshortened.

A still greater proper motion--the greatest, in fact, known--is that of
an eighth magnitude star in the southern hemisphere, in the
constellation of Pictor. Nothing, indeed, better shows the enormous
distance of the stars from us, and the consequent inability of even such
rapid movements to alter the appearance of the sky during the course of
ages, than the fact that it would take more than two centuries for the
star in question to change its position in the sky by a space equal to
the apparent diameter of the moon; a statement which is equivalent to
saying that, were it possible to see this star with the naked eye, which
it is not, at least twenty-five years would have to elapse before one
would notice that it had changed its place at all!

Both the stars just mentioned are very faint. That in Pictor is, as has
been said, not visible to the naked eye. It appears besides to be a very
small body, for Sir David Gill finds a parallax which makes it only as
far off from us as Sirius. The Groombridge star, too, is just about the
limit of ordinary visibility. It is, indeed, a curious fact that the
fainter stars seem, on the average, to be moving more rapidly than the
brighter.

Investigations into proper motions lead us to think that every one of
the stars must be moving in space in some particular direction. To take
a few of the best known. Sirius and Vega are both approaching our system
at a rate of about 10 miles per second, Arcturus at about 5 miles per
second, while Capella is receding from us at about 15 miles per second.
Of the twin brethren, Castor and Pollux, Castor is moving away from us
at about 4-1/2 miles per second, while Pollux is coming towards us at
about 33 miles per second.

Much of our knowledge of proper motions has been obtained indirectly by
means of the spectroscope, on the Doppler principle already treated of,
by which we are enabled to ascertain whether a source from which light
is coming is approaching or receding.

The sun being, after all, a mere star, it will appear only natural for
it also to have a proper motion of its own. This is indeed the case; and
it is rushing along in space at a rate of between ten and twelve miles
per second, carrying with it its whole family of planets and satellites,
of comets and meteors. The direction in which it is advancing is towards
a point in the constellation of Lyra, not far from its chief star Vega.
This is shown by the fact that the stars about the region in question
appear to be opening out slightly, while those in the contrary portion
of the sky appear similarly to be closing together.

Sir William Herschel was the first to discover this motion of the sun
through space; though in the idea that such a movement might take place
he seems to have been anticipated by Mayer in 1760, by Michell in 1767,
and by Lalande in 1776.

A suggestion has been made that our solar system, in its motion through
the celestial spaces, may occasionally pass through regions where
abnormal magnetic conditions prevail, in consequence of which
disturbances may manifest themselves throughout the system at the same
instant. Thus the sun may be getting the credit of _producing_ what it
merely reacts to in common with the rest of its family. But this
suggestion, plausible though it may seem, will not explain why the
magnetic disturbances experienced upon our earth show a certain
dependence upon such purely local facts, as the period of the sun's
rotation, for instance.

One would very much like to know whether the movement of the sun is
along a straight line, or in an enormous orbit around some centre. The
idea has been put forward that it may be moving around the centre of
gravity of the whole visible stellar universe. Maedler, indeed,
propounded the notion that Alcyone--the chief star in the group known as
the Pleiades--occupied this centre, and that everything revolved around
it. He went even further to proclaim that here was the Place of the
Almighty, the Mansion of the Eternal! But Maedler's ideas upon this point
have long been shelved.

To return to the general question of the proper motion of stars.

In several instances these motions appear to take place in groups, as if
certain stars were in some way associated together. For example, a large
number of the stars composing the Pleiades appear to be moving through
space in the same direction. Also, of the seven stars composing the
Plough, all but two--the star at the end of its "handle," and that one
of the "pointers," as they are called, which is the nearer to the pole
star--have a common proper motion, _i.e._ are moving in the same
direction and nearly at the same rate.

Further still, the well-known Dutch astronomer, Professor Kapteyn, of
Groningen, has lately reached the astonishing conclusion that a great
part of the visible universe is occupied by two vast streams of stars
travelling in opposite directions. In both these great streams, the
individual bodies are found, besides, to be alike in design, alike in
chemical constitution, and alike in the stage of their development.

A fable related by the Persian astronomer, Al Sufi (tenth century, A.D.)
shows well the changes in the face of the sky which proper motions are
bound to produce after great lapses of time. According to this fable the
stars Sirius and Procyon were the sisters of the star Canopus. Canopus
married Rigel (another star,) but, having murdered her, he fled towards
the South Pole, fearing the anger of his sisters. The fable goes on to
relate, among other things, that Sirius followed him across the Milky
Way. Mr. J. E. Gore, in commenting on the story, thinks that it may be
based upon a tradition of Sirius having been seen by the men of the
Stone Age on the opposite side of the Milky Way to that on which it now
is.

Sirius is in that portion of the heavens _from_ which the sun is
advancing. Its proper motion is such that it is gaining upon the earth
at the rate of about ten miles per second, and so it must overtake the
sun after the lapse of great ages. Vega, on the other hand, is coming
towards us from that part of the sky _towards_ which the sun is
travelling. It should be about half a million years before the sun and
Vega pass by one another. Those who have specially investigated this
question say that, as regards the probability of a near approach, it is
much more likely that Vega will be then so far to one side of the sun,
that her brightness will not be much greater than it is at this moment.

Considerations like these call up the chances of stellar collisions.
Such possibilities need not, however, give rise to alarm; for the stars,
as a rule, are at such great distances from each other, that the
probability of relatively near approaches is slight.

We thus see that the constellations do not in effect exist, and that
there is in truth no real background to the sky. We find further that
the stars are strewn through space at immense distances from each other,
and are moving in various directions hither and thither. The sun, which
is merely one of them, is moving also in a certain direction, carrying
the solar system along with it. It seems, therefore, but natural to
suppose that many a star may be surrounded by some planetary system in a
way similar to ours, which accompanies it through space in the course of
its celestial journeyings.


[28] Vega, for instance, shines one hundred times more brightly than the
sun would do, were it to be removed to the distance at which that star
is from us.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE STARS--_continued_


The stars appear to us to be scattered about the sky without any orderly
arrangement. Further, they are of varying degrees of brightness; some
being extremely brilliant, whilst others can but barely be seen. The
brightness of a star may arise from either of two causes. On the one
hand, the body may be really very bright in itself; on the other hand,
it may be situated comparatively near to us. Sometimes, indeed, both
these circumstances may come into play together.

Since variation in brightness is the most noticeable characteristic of
the stars, men have agreed to class them in divisions called
"magnitudes." This term, it must be distinctly understood, is employed
in such classification without any reference whatever to actual size,
being merely taken to designate roughly the amount of light which we
receive from a star. The twenty brightest stars in the sky are usually
classed in the first magnitude. In descending the scale, each magnitude
will be noticed to contain, broadly speaking, three times as many stars
as the one immediately above it. Thus the second magnitude contains 65,
the third 190, the fourth 425, the fifth 1100, and the sixth 3200. The
last of these magnitudes is about the limit of the stars which we are
able to see with the naked eye. Adding, therefore, the above numbers
together, we find that, without the aid of the telescope, we cannot see
more than about 5000 stars in the entire sky--northern and southern
hemispheres included. Quite a small telescope will, however, allow us to
see down to the ninth magnitude, so that the total number of stars
visible to us with such very moderate instrumental means will be well
over 100,000.

It must not, however, be supposed that the stars included within each
magnitude are all of exactly the same brightness. In fact, it would be
difficult to say if there exist in the whole sky two stars which send us
precisely the same amount of light. In arranging the magnitudes, all
that was done was to make certain broad divisions, and to class within
them such stars as were much on a par with regard to brightness. It may
here be noted that a standard star of the first magnitude gives us about
one hundred times as much light as a star of the sixth magnitude, and
about one million times as much as one of the sixteenth magnitude--which
is near the limit of what we can see with the very best telescope.

Though the first twenty stars in the sky are popularly considered as
being of the first magnitude, yet several of them are much brighter than
an average first magnitude star would be. For instance, Sirius--the
brightest star in the whole sky--is equal to about eleven first
magnitude stars, like, say, Aldebaran. In consequence of such
differences, astronomers are agreed in classifying the brightest of them
as _brighter_ than the standard first magnitude star. On this principle
Sirius would be about two and a half magnitudes _above_ the first. This
notation is usefully employed in making comparisons between the amount
of light which we receive from the sun, and that which we get from an
individual star. Thus the sun will be about twenty-seven and a half
magnitudes _above_ the first magnitude. The range, therefore, between
the light which we receive from the sun (considered merely as a very
bright star) and the first magnitude stars is very much greater than
that between the latter and the faintest star which can be seen with the
telescope, or even registered upon the photographic plate.

To classify stars merely by their magnitudes, without some definite note
of their relative position in the sky, would be indeed of little avail.
We must have some simple method of locating them in the memory, and the
constellations of the ancients here happily come to our aid. A system
combining magnitudes with constellations was introduced by Bayer in
1603, and is still adhered to. According to this the stars in each
constellation, beginning with the brightest star, are designated by the
letters of the Greek alphabet taken in their usual order. For example,
in the constellation of Canis Major, or the Greater Dog, the brightest
star is the well-known Sirius, called by the ancients the "Dog Star";
and this star, in accordance with Bayer's method, has received the Greek
letter [a] (alpha), and is consequently known as Alpha Canis
Majoris.[29] As soon as the Greek letters are used up in this way the
Roman alphabet is brought into requisition, after which recourse is had
to ordinary numbers.

Notwithstanding this convenient arrangement, some of the brightest
stars are nearly always referred to by certain proper names given to
them in old times. For instance, it is more usual to speak of Sirius,
Arcturus, Vega, Capella, Procyon, Aldebaran, Regulus, and so on, than of
[a] Canis Majoris, [a] Booetis, [a] Lyrae, [a] Aurigae, [a] Canis Minoris,
[a] Tauri, [a] Leonis, &c. &c.

In order that future generations might be able to ascertain what changes
were taking place in the face of the sky, astronomers have from time to
time drawn up catalogues of stars. These lists have included stars of a
certain degree of brightness, their positions in the sky being noted
with the utmost accuracy possible at the period. The earliest known
catalogue of this kind was made, as we have seen, by the celebrated
Greek astronomer, Hipparchus, about the year 125 B.C. It contained 1080
stars. It was revised and brought up to date by Ptolemy in A.D. 150.
Another celebrated list was that drawn up by the Persian astronomer, Al
Sufi, about the year A.D. 964. In it 1022 stars were noted down. A
catalogue of 1005 stars was made in 1580 by the famous Danish
astronomer, Tycho Brahe. Among modern catalogues that of Argelander
(1799-1875) contained as many as 324,198 stars. It was extended by
Schoenfeld so as to include a portion of the Southern Hemisphere, in
which way 133,659 more stars were added.

In recent years a project was placed on foot of making a photographic
survey of the sky, the work to be portioned out among various nations. A
great part of this work has already been brought to a conclusion. About
15,000,000 stars will appear upon the plates; but, so far, it has been
proposed to catalogue only about a million and a quarter of the
brightest of them. This idea of surveying the face of the sky by
photography sprang indirectly from the fine photographs which Sir David
Gill took, when at the Cape of Good Hope, of the Comet of 1882. The
immense number of star-images which had appeared upon his plates
suggested the idea that photography could be very usefully employed to
register the relative positions of the stars.

The arrangement of seven stars known as the "Plough" is perhaps the most
familiar configuration in the sky (see Plate XIX., p. 292). In the
United States it is called the "Dipper," on account of its likeness to
the outline of a saucepan, or ladle. "Charles' Wain" was the old English
name for it, and readers of Caesar will recollect it under
_Septentriones_, or the "Seven Stars," a term which that writer uses as
a synonym for the North. Though identified in most persons' minds with
_Ursa Major_, or the Great Bear, the Plough is actually only a small
portion of that famous constellation. Six out of the seven stars which
go to make up the well-known figure are of the second magnitude, while
the remaining one, which is the middle star of the group, is of the
third.

The Greek letters, as borne by the individual stars of the Plough, are a
plain transgression of Bayer's method as above described, for they have
certainly not been allotted here in accordance with the proper order of
brightness. For instance, the third magnitude star, just alluded to as
being in the middle of the group, has been marked with the Greek letter
[d] (Delta); and so is made to take rank _before_ the stars composing
what is called the "handle" of the Plough, which are all of the second
magnitude. Sir William Herschel long ago drew attention to the irregular
manner in which Bayer's system had been applied. It is, indeed, a great
pity that this notation was not originally worked out with greater care
and correctness; for, were it only reliable, it would afford great
assistance to astronomers in judging of what changes in relative
brightness have taken place among the stars.

Though we may speak of using the constellations as a method of finding
our way about the sky, it is, however, to certain marked groupings in
them of the brighter stars that we look for our sign-posts.

Most of the constellations contain a group or so of noticeable stars,
whose accidental arrangement dimly recalls the outline of some familiar
geometrical figure and thus arrests the attention.[30] For instance, in
an almost exact line with the two front stars of the Plough, or
"pointers" as they are called,[31] and at a distance about five times as
far away as the interval between them, there will be found a third star
of the second magnitude. This is known as Polaris, or the Pole Star, for
it very nearly occupies that point of the heaven towards which the north
pole of the earth's axis is _at present_ directed (see Plate XIX., p.
292). Thus during the apparently daily rotation of the heavens, this
star looks always practically stationary. It will, no doubt, be
remembered how Shakespeare has put into the mouth of Julius Caesar these
memorable words:--

"But I am constant as the northern star,
Of whose true-fix'd and resting quality
There is no fellow in the firmament."

[Illustration: PLATE XIX. THE SKY AROUND THE NORTH POLE

We see here the Plough, the Pole Star, Ursa Minor, Auriga, Cassiopeia's
Chair, and Lyra. Also the Circle of Precession, along which the Pole
makes a complete revolution in a period of 25,868 years, and the
Temporary Star discovered by Tycho Brahe in the year 1572.

