nothing to the experienced O'Hara, and in a moment he was inside the
house. His feet struck soft carpet. Catlike, he stepped to one side in
order to prevent any hidden eyes from perceiving his form silhouetted in
the dim light of the open window. He dared not use his flashlight for
fear that the circle of light would betray his position, thus making him
an excellent target for possible bullets. Following the wall closely he
managed to circle the room without mishap. His searching fingers finally
came in contact with a door frame, and he breathed a sigh of relief.
Here there was nothing to bar his progress except some moth-eaten
portieres. These he brushed aside.

The room which he now entered was probably the same into which the
Professor had ushered Handlon and Perry the day before. There being
still no sign of life about, the reporter decided to throw caution to
the winds. He brought his flash into play. Quickly casting the powerful
beam around the chamber he examined the place with an all-searching
glance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing.

With a stifled oath he turned his attention to the other rooms in the
immediate vicinity. The brilliant light revealed not the slightest trace
of a person, living or dead. The sound must have come from the second
story or from the cellar. He decided on the upper floor.

Feverish with impatience because of the valuable time he had already
lost, he bounded up the heavily carpeted stairs two at a time. Now to
his keen ears came certain faint sounds which told him that he was on
the right track. Before him extended a long, dusty hall, terminating in
a single heavy door. Several other doors opened at intervals along the
corridor. One or two of these were open, and he threw the beam from his
flash hastily into one after another of them. He saw only dusty and
mildewed chamber furnishings of an ancient massive style.

Suddenly he pricked up his ears.

The door ahead of him was creaking slowly open. Instantly he extinguished
his torch and leaped into the nearest room. Whoever was opening that end
door was carrying a lamp. What if the Professor had accomplices who
might discover him and overpower him by force of numbers! O'Hara drew the
automatic from his pocket, deriving a comforting assurance from the
feel of the cold steel. Here was something no man could resist could he
but get it into action. The light was now nearly abreast of his door, and
for a sickening instant he thought the prowler was coming into the room.
He held his breath. Now the lamp was at the open door, and now it was
quickly withdrawn. After a breathless second he tip-toed forward and
peered cautiously down the hallway.

About here it was that James O'Hara began to realize that this was
going to be a horrible night indeed. He had wondered why the progress of
the light had been so deathly slow. Now he knew why, by reason of what
he saw--and what he saw made him feel rather sick. The man with the
lantern was quite plainly Professor Kell, bent nearly double with the
weight of a grotesquely big thing on his back, a thing that flung a dim,
contorted shadow on the ceiling. And that thing was a dead man.

       *       *       *       *       *

A corpse it was--the attitude proved that. With a numb relief O'Hara
realized it was not the body of Skip Handlon. This had been a much
larger man than Skip, and the clothing was different from anything
Handlon had worn.

The light was now disappearing down the stairway. For a moment O'Hara
felt undecided as to his next move. Should he follow Kell and his
burden, or should he not take advantage of this fine opportunity to
continue his search of the upper story? That scream still rang in his
ears; there had been a very evident feminine quality in it, and the
remembrance of that fact reproached him. Had he been guilty of mincing
daintily about in this old house while a woman was being done to death
under his nose, when a little bolder action on his part might have saved
her?

Stepping once more into the hall he advanced to the door just closed
behind the Professor and tried it, only to find it locked. Out of a
pocket came several articles best known to the "profession"--a piece of
stiff wire, a skeleton key and other paraphernalia calculated to reduce
the obstinate mechanism to submission. For a minute, two, three, he
worked at the ancient lock; then, without a creak, the door swung open.
A touch of oil to the hinges had insured their silence. Jimmie O'Hara
believed in being artistic in his work, especially when it came to fine
points, and he was.

       *       *       *       *       *

He found himself in the same room where the drugged cigars had been
proved the undoing of Handlon and Perry. In order not to alarm the
Professor unduly by chance noises and perhaps invite a surprise attack
upon himself, O'Hara closed the laboratory door behind him and let the
lock spring again. Hastily he made search of the place. No trace of the
missing reporter could he find, except two half-consumed cigars in a
corner whence the Professor had impatiently kicked them.

On the big table in the center of the room, however, was an object which
excited his interest. It was apparently nothing more or less than a
giant Crookes tube, connected in some way with a complicated mechanism
contained in a wooden cabinet under the table. Probably this apparatus
was concerned in the Professor's weird experiments which had so aroused
the countryside. He studied it curiously, his eyes for the moment closed
in thought, until a slight sound somewhere near at hand caused him to
open them wide. Was the Kell returning?

Quickly he extinguished the lamp and glided to a nearby door, thinking
to secrete himself here, and take Kell by surprise. To his consternation
the door swung inward at a touch. He prepared instinctively for battle
against any foe who might present himself. For a moment he held himself
taut; then, nothing of an alarming nature having happened, he drew a
swift breath of relief and flashed on his light. He gave vent to a low
exclamation. The swiftly darting shaft from the torch had revealed the
figure of a girl, bound and gagged.

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl lay trembling on a wretched bed in a corner of the dilapidated
old chamber. O'Hara crossed the room and bent over her. Still wary of a
trap he glanced back in the direction of the laboratory door: all safe
there. Jimmie made haste to remove the cruel gag from her mouth.

"Courage," he whispered. "Half a minute and you will be free."

He produced a knife with a suspiciously long blade and cut her bonds. He
then assisted her to her feet, where she reeled dizzily. Realizing the
need for fast action he made her sit down while he massaged the bruised
arms and ankles, which were badly swollen from the tight ropes. The girl
had apparently been in the grip of such terrible fright that she had
temporarily lost her power of speech. Mentally he chalked up another
score against the Professor as the girl made several ineffectual
attempts to speak.

"Easy, kid," Jimmie whispered. "Just sit tight, and when you feel able
you can tell me all about it. I'm going to get him good for this, you
can bank on that."

She thanked him with a faint smile, and of a sudden she found her
voice.

"Who are you? Where is father? Oh, tell me, please! I am afraid that
horrible man has murdered him. Are you a servant here? Oh, I don't know
whom to trust."

"My name is Jimmie O'Hara," replied the reporter briefly; "and I hope
you won't worry about me. I am gunning for the Proff myself. Tell me as
quickly as you can what you know about him." He still kept an eye on the
door of the adjoining laboratory. Any moment he expected to hear the
sound of the old man's approach. The room would make an ideal place to
ambush the maniac, he had swiftly decided.

"I am Norma Manion. Please don't delay, but see if you can locate
father." The girl's voice was agonized. "I heard him groan a half-hour
ago, and a little later came a terrific crash. Oh, I'm afraid he's
dead!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Reluctantly Jimmie gave up the idea of ambushing the Professor.

"Wait here," he commanded curtly. "If you hear a shot join me as soon as
you can. I want to take him alive if I can, but...." With this parting
hint he disappeared through the door into the laboratory. Down the
carpeted hall he crept to the stairway. Here he stopped and listened,
but to his sensitive ears came no sound from below.

"Must have gone down the cellar with the body," he muttered. "Here goes
for a general exploration."

With more boldness than the occasion perhaps really justified he
descended the stairs and proceeded to examine the ground floor rooms
minutely. The first was the room through which he had made entrance to
the house. It proved to be but a storeroom containing nothing of
interest, and he soon decided to waste no more time on it.

The adjoining chamber, however, yielded some surprising finds. He had
pushed back a dusty portiere to find himself in what could be
nothing less than the Professor's sleeping chamber. At present the
bed was unoccupied, though it showed signs of recent use. The
electric torch played swiftly over every possible corner which could
constitute a hiding place for an assassin, revealing nothing. Now
the ever-searching ray fell upon an old-fashioned dresser, on which
was piled a miscellaneous array of articles. Here were combs, brushes,
a wig, a huge magnifying glass, and a gold watch. With a barely
suppressed exclamation, Jimmie pounced upon the gold timepiece.

Handlon's! So well did he know the particular design of his watch that
he could have recognized it in the dark by sense of touch alone. So the
old man was not averse to robbery among his other activities! The former
two-story man thought fast. Handlon had probably been done in, and the
body had been disposed of in some weird manner. The only thing that
remained to be done, since the unlucky photographer was evidently past
human help, was to cut short the Professor's list of murders.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the intention of missing no essential detail O'Hara swept the ray
of the searchlight around the chamber once more, but discovered no more
of importance. Deciding that the sleeping chamber could yield no further
clue he shut off the tell-tale ray and stepped noiselessly back into the
next room. Here he groped his way around until he encountered a door,
which stood open. A moment's cautious exploration with an outstretched
foot revealed the top step of a descending staircase. No faintest
glimmer of light was visible, but muffled sounds proceeding from the
depths told him that someone was below.

With infinite care, feeling his way gingerly over the rickety old steps
and fearful that an unexpected creak from one of the ancient boards
would at any moment prove his undoing, he commenced the descent. Once a
board did groan softly, causing him to stop in his tracks and stand with
bated breath. He listened for sign of a movement below, while his heart
loudly told off a dozen strokes. Stealthily he continued his progress,
until finally soft earth under his feet told him he had reached the
cellar bottom.

Now his straining eyes perceived a tiny bit of light, and simultaneously
he became conscious of a deathly stench. The damp earth padding his
footsteps, he advanced swiftly toward the source of light, which now
seemed to lie in stripes across his line of vision. He soon saw that the
stairs gave upon a small boarded-off section of the cellar proper, and
light was seeping between the boards. Ah, and here was a rickety door,
fortuitously equipped with a large knot-hole. O'Hara applied an eye to
this--and what he saw nearly ruined even his cast iron nerve.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Professor was working beside a heavy wooden cask, from which issued
the horrible stench. From time to time a sodden thud told that he was
hacking something to pieces with an ax. Now and then he would strain
mightily at a dark and bulky thing which lay on the floor, a thing that
required considerable strength to lift. It seemed to be getting lighter
after each spasm of frenzied chopping. For a second Kell's shadow
wavered away from the thing, and the enervated newspaper man saw it
plainly. His senses almost left him as he realized that he was
witnessing the dismemberment of a human body.

As he hacked the fragments of tissue from the torso the fiend carefully
deposited each in the huge cask. At such times a faint boiling sound was
heard, and there arose an effluvium that bade fair to overcome even the
monster engaged in the foul work. At last the limbs and head had been
entirely removed. The Professor evidently decided that the trunk should
be left whole, and he put his entire strength into the job of getting it
into the cask. It was almost more than he could negotiate, but finally a
dull splash told that he had succeeded.

At this moment Jimmie O'Hara came out of his trance. The horrible
proceeding had left him faint and shaken, and he wished heartily that he
could leave the disgusting place as fast as his legs could carry him.
But there was still work to be done and he resolved to get it over.

The lantern! First he must put that out of commission. The maniac would
then be at his mercy. Slowly, steadily he stole through the doorway, his
eyes glued to the Professor's back. Now he was within a yard of the
lantern, and he drew back his foot for the kick.

Next moment Jimmie found himself gazing into the glaring eyes of his
intended victim. Instinctively he struck out with the clubbed automatic,
but the blow must have fallen short, or else the Professor had developed
an uncanny agility. Now to his horror he saw the flashing blade of the
bloodstained ax raised on high. He had no time to dodge the blow. He
pressed the trigger of the Colt from the position in which he held it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bullet grazed the upraised arm. The ax fell toward O'Hara from
fingers lacking strength to retain it, and he grasped it by the handle
in midair. The next moment the assassin collected his wits and sprang at
him. Silently, the breath of both coming in gasps, the two men strove,
each clawing desperately at the other's throat. The reporter fought with
the knowledge that should he lose he would never again see the light of
day, the other with the fear of the justice that would deal with him.

The maniac hugged his arms tightly about Jimmie, pinioning him so
tightly that the reporter could not use his gun. At length their
convulsive movements brought the men close to the lantern, and the next
instant the cellar was plunged in darkness. A second later the Professor
tripped over some hidden obstruction and fell, dragging his opponent
with him to the earthen floor. To Jimmie's surprise there was no further
movement from the body beneath him. Could the old villain be playing
possum? He cautiously shifted his hold and grasped the hidden throat. He
pressed the Professor's windpipe for a moment, but there was no
answering struggle. Slowly the truth dawned upon him. The heavy fall to
the floor had rendered the older man insensible.

He must work fast. Reaching into his pocket he brought out the ever
handy electric torch and flashed it over the features of his prisoner.
Kell was breathing heavily. With dexterous hands O'Hara swiftly went
through the old man's pockets, removing all which might tend to make
that worthy dangerous--an ugly looking pistol of large caliber, a
blackjack similar to his own and a small bottle.

The latter item Jimmie examined curiously, finally uncorking it and
inhaling the contents. He inhaled, not wisely but too well. The fumes
from the vial were nigh overpowering, and he reeled back nauseated. The
cork he hastily replaced. Just what the nature of the powerful stuff
was he never attempted to discover. One acquaintance was enough.

       *       *       *       *       *

He staggered to his feet and got the lantern lighted, then sat, gun in
hand, waiting for his prisoner's return to his senses. This was becoming
increasingly imminent, judging by certain changes in the Professor's
respiration. Finally there came a series of shuddering movements as the
man attempted to raise his battered body.

"Get up, you damned butcher," ordered Jimmie, "and march upstairs. And
just remember that I've got you covered; don't make any false moves." He
prodded the prostrate form of the by now glaring fiend before him. The
stench of the place was nearly overcoming him, and again he felt an
overwhelming desire to dash madly from that den of evil, and once more
breathe God's fresh air. Under the stimulus of several shoves the
Professor finally won to his feet and stumbled up the stairs. Jimmie was
taking no chances and kept the automatic sharply digging into the ribs
of his prisoner. The fight, however, seemed temporarily to have been all
taken out of the old man, and he made no resistance as the reporter
drove him on up to the laboratory.

The room he found exactly as he left it. At a word from him Norma Manion
came from her hiding place in the horrible room where she had been kept
prisoner.

With an hysterical scream she fell limply to the floor. The sight of her
father's murderer had proved too much for her. Forgetting his prisoner
for the moment Jimmie sprang to the girl's side.

Kell chose this moment to make a dash for freedom. His footsteps,
however, were not as noiseless as he had intended, and O'Hara whirled
just in time to see his quarry about to throw open the hall door. Jimmie
dove for his gun, only to encounter the Professor's mysterious vial,
which, though forgotten, still lay in his pocket. With no time to
think, he acted purely upon instinct. His arm drew back and the bottle
flew straight for the Professor's head.

       *       *       *       *       *

By a miracle the missile missed its mark. Came a shivering crash, as the
bottle struck a stud in the massive door. Of a sudden recalling the
terrific potency of the contents of that particular bottle, Jimmie
gasped in dismay. Norma Manion's safety drove every other thought from
his mind. At any cost he must remove her from the proximity of those
lethal fumes.
