in. long. Leaves: Alternate, petioled, 2 to 3 in. long, ovate,
very sharply cut or lobed, the teeth glandular-tipped. Fruit:
Coral red, round or oval; not edible.
Preferred Habitat - Thickets, fence-rows, woodland borders.
Flowering Season - May.
Distribution - Newfoundland and Manitoba southward to the Gulf of
Mexico.

     "The fair maid who, the first of May,
      Goes to the fields at break of day
      And washes in dew from the hawthorn tree
      Will ever after handsome be."

Here is a popular recipe omitted from that volume of
heart-to-heart talks entitled "How to Be Pretty though Plain"!

The sombre-thoughted Scotchman, looking for trouble, tersely
observes:

     "Mony haws,
      Mony snaws."

But in delicious, blossoming May, when the joy of living fairly
intoxicates one, and every bird's throat is swelling with happy
music, who but a Calvinist would croak dismal prophecies? In
Ireland, old crones tell marvelous tales about the hawthorns, and
the banshees which have a predilection for them. So much for
folklore.

As one might suspect from the rather disagreeable odor of these
blossoms, they are most attractive to flies and beetles, which,
carrying pollen from older flowers, leave some on the stigmas
that are already mature in newly-opened ones. A concave
nectar-secreting disk, not concealed by the filaments in this
case, is eagerly pilfered by numerous little short-lipped insects
which render no benefit in return; but many others assist in
self-pollination after the anthers ripen. The splendid monarch
butterfly (Anosia plexippus), the banded purple (Basilarchia
arthemis), whose caterpillar feeds on hawthorn foliage, and the
light brown hunter's butterfly [American painted lady] (Pyrameis
huntera [Vanessa virginiensis]) are, among the visitors seen
flitting about this exquisite little tree in early May, when it
is fairly white with bloom.

The RED-FRUITED THORN (C. mollis), more hairy on its twigs,
petioles, calices, and fruit than the preceding, but so like it
in most respects it was formerly accounted a mere variety, is an
earlier and even more prolific bloomer, the generous, large
clusters of malodorous flowers coming with the leaves in April,
and lasting until the common hawthorn starts into lively
competition with it for insect trade.

Numerous long, slender thorns, often measuring a finger-length,
distinguish the COCKSPUR or NEWCASTLE THORN (C. Crus-Galli),
whose abundant small flowers and shining, leathery leaves, dull
underneath, are conspicuous in thickets from Quebec to the Gulf.
Immense numbers of little bees, among many other visitors, may be
noted on a fine day in May and early June about this showy shrub
or tree. Because it blooms later than its rival sisters, it has
the insect wooers then abroad all to itself.

While most of our beautiful native hawthorns have been introduced
to European gardens, it is the WHITE THORN or MAY (C. Oxyacantha)
of Europe and Asia which is most commonly cultivated here. Truly
a shrub, like a prophet, is not without honor save in its own
country.


WHITE SWEET CLOVER; BOKHARA or TREE CLOVER; WHITE MELILOT; HONEY
LOTUS
  (Melilotus alba)  Pea family

Flowers - Small, white, fragrant, papilionaceous, the standard
petal a trifle longer than the wings; borne in slender racemes.
Stem: 3 to 10 ft. tall, branching. Leaves: Rather distant,
petioled, compounded of 3 oblong, saw-edged leaflets; fragrant,
especially when dry.
Preferred Habitat - Wastelands, roadsides.
Flowering Season - June-November.
Distribution - United States, Europe, Asia.

Happy must the honeybees have been to find that the sweet clover,
one of their dearest delights in the Old World, had preceded them
in immigrating to the New. Immense numbers of insects - bees in
great variety, wasps, flies, moths, and beetles - visit the
little blossoms that provide entertainment so generous and
accessible; but honey-bees are ever especially abundant. Slight
weight depresses the keel, releasing the stigma and anthers
therefore, so soon as a bee alights and opens the flower, he is
hit below the belt by the projecting stigma. Pollen carried by
him there from other clovers comes off on its sticky surface
before his abdomen gets freshly dusted from the anthers, which
are necessarily rubbed against while he sips nectar. On the
removal of his pressure, the floret springs back to its closed
condition, to protect the precious nectar and pollen from rain
and pilferers. As the stigma projects too far beyond the anthers
to be likely to receive any of the flower's own pollen, good
reason is there for the blossoms guarding their attractions for
the benefit of their friends, which transfer the vitalizing dust
from one floret to another. By clustering its small flowers in
spikes, to make them conspicuous, as well as to facilitate dining
for its benefactors; by prolonging its season of bloom, to get
relief from the fiercest competition for insect trade, and so to
insure an abundance of vigorous cross-fertilized seed, this plant
reveals at a glance some of the reasons why it has been able to
establish itself so quickly throughout our vast area.

Both the white and the yellow sweet clover put their leaves to
sleep at night in a remarkable manner: the three leaflets of each
leaf twist through an angle of 90 degrees, until one edge of each
vertical blade is uppermost. The two side leaflets, Darwin found,
always tend to face the north with their upper surface, one
facing north-northwest and the other north-northeast, while the
terminal leaflet escapes the chilling of its sensitive upper
surface through radiation by twisting to a vertical also, but
bending to either east or west, until it comes in contact with
the vertical upper surface of either of the side leaflets. Thus
the upper surface of the terminal and of at least one of the side
leaflets is sure to be well protected through the night; one is
"left out in the cold."

The dried branches of sweet clover will fill a room with
delightful fragrance; but they will not drive away flies, nor
protect woolens from the ravages of moths, as old women once
taught us to believe.

The ubiquitous WHITE or DUTCH CLOVER (Trifolium repens), whose
creeping branches send up solitary round heads of white or
pinkish flowers on erect, leafless stems, from May to December,
in fields, open waste land, and cultivated places throughout our
area, Europe, and Asia, devotes itself to wooing bees, since
these are the only insects that effect cross-fertilization
regularly, other visitors aiding it only occasionally. When nets
are stretched over these flowers to exclude insects, only
one-tenth the normal quantity of fertile seed is set. Therefore,
for the bee's benefit, does each little floret conceal nectar in
a tube so deep that small pilferers cannot reach it; but when a
honeybee, for example, depresses the keel of the papilionaceous
blossom, abundant reward awaits him in consideration of his
services in transferring pollen. After the floret which he has
been the means of fertilizing closes over its seed-vessel on his
departure, it gradually withers, grows brown, and hangs downward,
partly to indicate to the next bee that comes along which fords
in the head still contain nectar, and which are done for; partly
to hide the precious little vigorous green seed-pod in the center
of each withered, papery corolla from the visitation of certain
insects whose minute grubs destroy countless millions of the
progeny of less careful plants. Thus the erect florets in a head
stand awaiting their benefactors; those drooping around the outer
edge are engaged in the most serious business of life. Sometimes
a solitary old maid remains standing, looking anxiously for a
lover, at the end of the season. Usually all the florets are then
bent down around the stem in a brown and crumpled mass. But
however successfully the clover guards its seeds from
annihilation, its foliage is the favorite food of very many
species of caterpillars and of all grazing cattle the world
around. This is still another plant frequently miscalled
shamrock. Good luck or bad attends the finding of the leaves,
when compounded of an even or an odd number of leaflets more than
the normal count, according to the saying of many simple-minded
folk.

The little RABBIT'S-FOOT, PUSSY, OLD-FIELD, or STONE CLOVER (T.
arvense) has silky plumed calices to hold its minute whitish
florets, giving the dense, oblong heads a charming softness and
dove color after it has gone to seed. Like most other clovers, it
has come to us from the Old World.


FLOWERING SPURGE
  (Euphorbia corollata)  Spurge family

Flowers - (Apparently) white, small, borne in forked,
long-stalked umbels, subtended by green bracts; but the true
flowers are minute, and situated within the white cup-shaped
involucre, usually mistaken for a corolla. Staminate flowers
scattered over inner surface of involucre, each composed of a
single stamen on a thread-like pedicel with a rudimentary calyx
or tiny bract below it. A solitary pistillate flower at bottom of
involucre, consisting of 3-celled ovary; 3 styles, 2-cleft, at
length forming an erect 3-lobed capsule separating into 3
2-valved carpels. Stem: 1 to 3 ft. high, often brightly spotted,
simple below, umbellately 5-branched above (usually). Leaves:
Linear, lance-shaped or oblong, entire; lower ones alternate,
upper ones whorled.
Preferred Habitat -  Dry soil, gravelly or sandy.
Flowering Season - April-October.
Distribution - From Kansas and Ontario to the Atlantic.

A very commonplace and uninteresting looking weed is this spurge,
which no one but a botanist would suspect of kinship with the
brilliant vermilion poinsettia, so commonly grown in American
greenhouses. Examination shows that these little bright white
cups of the flowering spurge, simulating a five-cleft corolla,
are no more the true flowers in the one case than the large red
bracts around the poinsettia's globular greenish blossom
involucres are in the other. From the milky juice alone one might
guess the spurge to be related to the rubber plant. Still another
familiar cousin is the stately castor-oil plant; and while the
common dull purplish IPECAC SPURGE (E. Ipecacuanhae) also
suggests unpleasant doses, it is really a member of quite another
family that furnishes the old-fashioned emetic. The flowering
spurge, having its staminate and pistillate flowers distinct,
depends upon flies, its truest benefactors, to transfer pollen
from the former to the latter.


STAGHORN SUMAC; VINEGAR TREE
  (Rhus hirta; R. typhina of Gray)  Sumac family

Flowers - Greenish or yellowish white, very small, usually
5-parted, and borne in dense upright, terminal, pyramidal
clusters. Stem: A shrub or small tree, 6 to 40 ft. high, the ends
of branches forked somewhat like a stag's horns. Leaves.
Compounded of 11 to 31 lance-shaped, saw-edged leaflets, dark
green above, pale below; the petioles and twigs often
velvety-hairy. Fruit: Small globules, very thickly covered with
crimson hairs.
Preferred Habitat - Dry, rough or rocky places, banks, roadsides.
Flowering Season - June.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Georgia, and westward 1500 miles.

Painted with glorious scarlet, crimson, and gold, the autumnal
foliage of the sumacs, and even the fruit, so far eclipse their
inconspicuous flowers in attractiveness that one quite ignores
them. Not so the small, short-tongued bees (chiefly Andrenidae)
and flies (Dipteria) seeking the freely exposed nectar secreted
in five orange-colored glands in the shallow little cups. As some
of the flowers are staminate and some pistillate, although others
show a tendency to revert to the perfect condition of their
ancestors, it behooves them to entertain their little
pollen-carrying visitors generously, otherwise no seed can
possibly be set. And how the autumnal landscape would suffer from
the loss of the decorative, dark-red, velvety panicles! Beware
only of the poison sumac's deadly, round grayish-white berries.

Most sumacs contain more or less tannin in their bark and leaves,
that are therefore eagerly sought by agents for the leather
merchants. The beautiful SMOKE or MIST TREE (R. cotinus),
commonly imported from southern Europe to adorn our lawns
(although a similar species grows wild in the Southwest), serves
a more utilitarian purpose in supplying commerce with a rich
orange-yellow dye-wood known as young fustic. All this tribe of
shrubs and trees contain resinous, milky juice, drying dark like
varnish, which in a Japanese species is transformed by the clever
native artisans into their famous lacquer. With a commercial
instinct worthy of the Hebrew, they guard this process as a
national secret.

The SMOOTH, UPLAND, or SCARLET SUMAC (R. glabra), similar to the
staghorn, but lacking its velvety down, and usually of much lower
growth, is the very common and widely distributed shrub of dry
roadsides, railroad banks, and barren fields. Another
low-growing, but more or less downy upland sumac, the DWARF,
BLACK, or MOUNTAIN SUMAC (R. copallina), may be known by its
dark, glossy green foliage, pale on the underside, and by the
broadening of the stem into wings between the leaflets. Hungry
migrating birds alight to feast on the harmless acid red fruit
when the gorgeous autumnal foliage illuminates their route
southward. But while they are, of course, the natural agents for
distributing the plants over the country, men find that by
cutting bits of any sumac root and planting them in good garden
soil, strong specimens are secured within a year. An exquisite
cut-leaved variety of the smooth sumac adorns many fine lawns.

Everyone should know the POISON SUMAC (R. Vernix - R. venenata of
Gray) as the shrub above all others to avoid. Like its cousin,
the POISON or THREE-LEAVED IVY (R. radicans), which once had the
specific name Toxicodendron, although Linnaeus applied that title
to a hairy shrub of the Southern States, the poison sumac causes
most painful swelling and irritation to the skin of some people,
though they do nothing more than pass it by when the wind is
blowing over it. Others may handle both these plants with
impunity. In spring they are especially noisome; but when the
pores of the skin are opened by perspiration, people who are at
all sensitive should give them a wide berth at any season.
Usually the poison sumac grows in wet or swampy ground; its bark
is gray, its leaf-stalks are red; the leaves are compounded, of
fewer leaflets than those of the innocent sumacs - that is, of
from seven to thirteen - which are green on both sides; the
flowers, which are dull whitish-green, grow in loose panicles
from the axils of the leaves, and naturally the berries follow
them in the same unusual situation. "By their fruits ye shall
know them:" all the harmless sumacs have red fruit clusters at
the ends of the branches, whereas both the poison sumac's and the
poison ivy's axillary clusters are dull grayish-white.


AMERICAN HOLLY
  (Ilex opaca)  Holly family

Flowers - Very small, greenish or yellowish white, from 3 to 10
staminate ones in a short cyme; fertile flowers usually solitary,
scattered. Stem: A small tree of very slow growth, rarely
attaining any great height. Leaves: Evergreen, thick, rigid,
glossy, elliptical, scalloped edged, spiny-tipped. Fruit: Round,
red berries.
Preferred Habitat - Moist woods and thickets.
Flowering Season - April-June.
Distribution - Maine to the Gulf of Mexico, west to Texas,
chiefly near the coast and south of New York.

Happily we continue to borrow all the beautiful Old World
associations, poetical and legendary, that cluster about the
holly at Christmas time, although our native tree furnishes most
of our holiday decorations. So far back as Pliny's day, the
European holly had all manner of supernatural qualities
attributed to it: its insignificant little flowers caused water
to freeze, he tells us; because it was believed to repel
lightning, the Romans planted it near their houses; and a branch
of it thrown after any refractory animal, even if it did not hit
him, would subdue him instantly, and cause him to lie down meekly
beside the stick! Can it be that the Italian peasants, who still
believe cattle kneel in their stalls at midnight on the
anniversary of Jesus' birth, decorate the mangers on Christmas
eve with holly, among other plants, because of a survival of this
old pagan notion about its subduing effect on animals?

Would that the beautiful holly of English gardens (I.
Aquifolium), more glossy and spiny of leaf and redder of berry
than our own, might live here; but it is too tender to withstand
New England winters, and the hot, dry summers farther south soon
prove fatal. Ilex was the ancient name, not of these plants, but
of the holly oak.

The MOUNTAIN HOLLY (Ilicioides mucronata - Nemopanthes Canadensis
of Gray) a shrub of the northern swamps, about six feet high, and
by no means confined to mountainous regions, since it is also
abundant in the middle West, has smooth-edged, elliptic, petioled
leaves, ash-colored bark, small, solitary, narrow-petalled
staminate and pistillate flowers on long, threadlike pedicels
from the leaf-axils in May. In August dull pale-red berries
appear. Darwin proved that seed set with the help of pollen
brought from distinct plants produces offspring that vanquishes
the offspring of seed set with pollen brought from another flower
on the same plant in the struggle for existence. Thus we see, in
very many ambitious plants besides those of the holly tribe, a
tendency to separate the male and the female flowers as widely as
possible.


BLACK ALDER; WINTERBERRY FEVER-BUSH
  (Ilex verticillata)  Holly family

Flowers - Small, greenish white, the staminate clusters 2 to 10
flowered the fertile ones 1 to 3 flowered. Stem: A shrub 6 to 25
ft. high. Leaves: Oval, tapering to a point, about 1 in. wide,
saw-edged, dark green, smooth above, hairy, especially along
veins underneath. Fruit: Bright red berries, about the size of a
pea, apparently whorled around the twigs.
Preferred Habitat - Swamps, ditches, fencerows, and low thickets.
Flowering Season - June-July.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Florida, west to Missouri.

Beautiful bright red berries, dotted or clustered along the naked
twigs of the black alder, add an indispensable cheeriness to the
somber winter landscape. Bunches of them, commonly sold in the
city streets for household decoration, bring twenty-five cents
each; hence the shrubs within a large radius of each market get
ample pruning every autumn. The leaves turn black before dropping
off.

The SMOOTH WINTERBERRY (I. laevigata), a similar species, but of
more restricted range, ripens its larger, orange-red berries
earlier than the preceding, and before its leaves, which turn
yellow, not black, in autumn, have fallen. Another distinguishing
feature is that its small, greenish-white staminate flowers grow
on long, very slender pedicels; whereas the solitary fertile
flowers are much nearer the stern.


BITTERSWEET; WAX-WORK; STAFF-TREE
  (Celastrus scandens)  Staff-tree family

Flowers - Small, greenish-white, 5-parted, some staminate, some
pistillate only; in terminal compound racemes 4 in. long or less.
Stem: Woody, twining. Leaves: Alternate, oval, tapering, finely
toothed, thin, with a tendency to show white variations. Fruit: A
yellow-orange berry-like capsule, splitting at maturity and
curling back to display the scarlet, pulpy coating of the seeds
within.
Preferred Habitat - Rich soil of thickets, fence rows, and
wayslde tangles.
Flowering Season - June.
Distribution - North Carolina, New Mexico, and far north.

Not to be hung above mirror and picture frames in farmhouse
parlors, as we have been wont to think, do the brilliant clusters
of orange-red wax-work berries attract the eye, where they
brighten old walls, copses, and fence rows in autumn; but to
advertise their charming wares to hungry migrating birds, which
will drop the seeds concealed within the red berry perhaps a
thousand miles away, and so plant new colonies. On the smaller,
less specialized bees and flies the vine depends in June to carry
pollen from its staminate flowers to the fertile ones, whose
thick, erect pistil would wither without fruiting without their
help.

But the best laid plans of other creatures than mice and men
"gang aft a-gley." What mean the little cottony tufts all along
the stems of so very many bittersweet vines, but that these have
foes as well as friends? Curious little parasitic tree-hoppers
(Membracis binotata), which spend their entire lives on the
stems, sucking the juices through their little beaks, just as the
aphids moor themselves to the tender rose-twigs, might be
mistaken for thorns during one of their protective masquerades.
Again they look like diminutive flocks of fowl, their heads ever
pointing in one direction, no matter how the vine may twist and
turn - always toward the top of the branch, that they may the
better siphon the sap down their tiny throats. Toward the end of
summer the females, which have a sharp instrument at the rear of
their bodies, cut deeply into the juicy food-store, the cambium
layer of bark, and there deposit their eggs. Presently, a nest
being filled, the mother emits a substantial froth at the end of
her ovipositor, and proceeds to construct the cottony, corrugated
dome over her nursery which first attracted our attention. This
is especially skilful work, for she works behind her, evidently
not from sight, but from instinct only. Inasmuch as the young
hoppers will not come forth until the following summer, some such
snug protection is required during winter's cold and snows. With
hordes of little parasites constantly preying on its juices, is
it any wonder the vine is often too enfeebled to produce seed, or
that the leaves lose part of their color and become, as we say,
variegated? Occasionally one finds the cottony nursery domes of
this little hopper on the locust tree - the favorite home of its
big, noisy relative, the so-called locust, or cicada.


NEW JERSEY TEA; WILD SNOWBALL; RED-ROOT
  (Ceanothus Americanus)  Buckthorn family

Flowers - Small, white, on white pedicels, crowded in dense,
oblong, terminal clusters. Calyx white, hemispheric, 5-lobed;
petals, hooded and long-clawed; 5 stamens with long filaments;
style short, 3-cleft. Stems: Shrubby, 1 to 3 ft. high, usually
several, from a deep reddish root. Leaves: Alternate,
ovate-oblong, acute at tip, finely saw-edged, 3-nerved, on short
petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Dry, open woods and thickets.
Flowering Season - May-July.
Distribution - Ontario south and west to the Gulf of Mexico.

Light, feathery clusters of white little flowers crowded on the
twigs of this low shrub interested thrifty colonial housewives of
Revolutionary days not at all; the tender, young, rusty, downy
leaves were what they sought to dry as a substitute for imported
tea. Doubtless the thought that they were thereby evading George
the Third's tax and brewing patriotism in every kettleful added a
sweetness to the homemade beverage that sugar itself could not
impart. The American troops were glad enough to use New Jersey
tea throughout the war. A nankeen or cinnamon-colored dye is made
from the reddish root.


NORTHERN, WILD, FOX, or PLUM GRAPE
  (Vitis Labrusca)  Grape family

Flowers - Greenish, small, deliciously fragrant, some staminate,
some pistillate, rarely perfect; the fertile flowers in more
compact panicles than the sterile ones. Stem: Climbing with the
help of tendrils; woody, bark loose. Leaves: Large, rounded or
lobed, toothed, rusty-hairy underneath, especially when young,
each leathery leaf opposite a tendril or a flower cluster. Fruit:
Clusters containing a few brownish, purple, musky-scented grapes,
3/4 in. across. Ripe, August-September.
Preferred Habitat - Sunny thickets, loamy or gravelly soil.
Flowering Season - June.
Distribution - New England to Georgia, west to Minnesota and
Tennessee.

Aesop's fox may never have touched the grapes of fable, but this,
our wild species, certainly retains a strong foxy odor, which at
least suggests that he came very near them. Tough pulp and thick
skin by no means deter birds and beasts from feasting on this
fruit, and so dispersing the seeds; but mankind prefers the
tender, delightful flavored Isabella, Catawba, and Concord grapes
derived from it. The Massachusetts man who produced the Concord
variety in the town whose name he gave it, declares he would be a
millionaire had he received only a penny royalty on every Concord
grapevine planted.

What fragrance is more delicious than that of the blossoming
grape? To swing in a loop made by some strong old vine, when the
air almost intoxicates one with its sweetness on a June evening,
is many a country child's idea of perfect bliss. Not until about
nine o'clock do the leaves "go to sleep" by becoming depressed in
the center like saucers. This was the signal for bedtime that one
child, at least, used to wait for. We have seen in the clematis
how its sensitive leafstalks hook themselves over any support
they rub against; but the grapevine has gone a step farther, and
by discarding an occasional flower cluster and prolonging the
flower stalk into a coiling, forking tendril it moors itself to
the thicket. We know that all tendrils are either transformed
leaves, as in the case of the pea vine, where each branch of its
tendril represents a modified leaflet; or they are transformed
flower stalks or other organs. Occasionally the tendril of a
grapevine reveals its ancestry by bearing a blossom or a cluster
of flowers, and sometimes even fruit, about midway on the coil,
which attempts to fill all offices at once like Pooh Bah.

The phylloxera having destroyed many of the finest vineyards in
Europe, it would seem that Americans have the best of chances to
supply the world with high-class wines, for there is not a State
in the Union where the vine will not flourish. Here its worst
enemy is mildew, a parasitical fungus which attacks the leaves,
revealing itself in yellowish-brown patches on the upper side,
and thin, frosty patches underneath. Soon the leaves become sere,
and then they fall. The microscope reveals a miniature forest of
growth in each leaf, with the threadlike roots of the fungi
searching about the leaf cells for food. To burn old leaves, and
to blow sulphur over the vine while it is wet, are efficacious
remedies. Bees and wasps which puncture grapes to feast on them,
are the innocent means of destroying quantities.

Both the RIVERSIDE or SWEET-SCENTED GRAPE (V. vulpina; formerly
V. cordifolia, var. riparia) - whose bluish-black, bloom-covered
fruit begins to ripen in July; and the FROST, CHICKEN, POSSUM, or
WINTER GRAPE (V. cordifolia), whose smaller, shining black
berries are not at their best till after frost, grow along
streams and preferably in rocky situations. The shining, light
green, thin leaves of the sweet-scented species are sharply
lobed, the three to seven lobes have acute teeth, and the
tendrils are intermittent. The frost grape's leaves, which are
commonly three or four inches wide, are deeply heart-shaped,
entire (rarely slightly three-lobed), tapering to a long point
and acutely toothed.

Another familiar member of the Grape family, the VIRGINIA
CREEPER, FALSE GRAPE, AMERICAN or FIVE-LEAVED IVY, also
erroneously called WOODBINE (Parthenocissus quinquefolia;
formerly Ampelopsis quinquefolia) - is far more charming in its
glorious autumnal foliage, when its small dark blue berries hang
from red peduncles, than when its insignificant greenish flower
clusters appear in July. The leaves, compounded of five leaflets,
should sufficiently distinguish the harmless vine from the
three-leaved poison ivy, sometimes confounded with it. From
Manitoba and Mexico to the Atlantic Ocean, and even in Cuba, the
Virginia creeper rambles over thickets, fences, and walls,
ascends trees, festoons rocky woodlands, drapes our verandas,
making its way with the help of modified flower stalks that are
now branching tendrils, each branch bearing an adhesive disk at
the end. "In the course of about two days after a tendril has
arranged its branches so as to press upon any surface," says
Darwin, "its curved tips swell, become bright red, and form on
their undersides little disks or cushions with which they adhere
firmly." It is supposed that these disks secrete a cement. At any
rate, we know that they have a very tenacious hold, because often
one contracting tendril, as elastic as a steel spring, supports,
by means of these little disks, the entire weight of the branch
it lifts up. Darwin concluded that a tendril with five
disk-bearing branches, on which he experimented, would stand a
strain of ten pounds, even after ten years' exposure to high
winds and softening rains.


WHITE VIOLETS
  (Viola)  Violet family

Three small-flowered, white, purple-veined, and almost beardless
species which prefer to dwell in moist meadows, damp, mossy
places, and along the borders of streams, are the LANCE-LEAVED
VIOLET (V. lanceolata), the PRIMROSE-LEAVED VIOLET (V.
prirnulaefolia), and the SWEET WHITE VIOLET (V. blanda), whose
leaves show successive gradations from the narrow, tapering,
smooth, long-petioled blades of the first to the oval form of the
second and the almost circular, cordate leaf of the delicately
fragrant, little white blanda, the dearest violet of all.
Inasmuch as these are short-spurred species, requiring no effort
for bees to drain their nectaries, no footholds in the form of
beards on the side petals are provided for them. The purple
veinings show the stupidest visitor the path to the sweets.

The sprightly CANADA VIOLET (V. Canadensis), widely distributed
in woodlands, chiefly in hilly and mountainous regions, rears
tall, leafy stems terminated by faintly fragrant white or pale
lavender blossoms, purple-tinged without and purple veined, the
side petals bearded, the long sepals tapering to sharp points.
Here we see a violet in the process of changing from the white
ancestral type to the purple color which Sir John Lubbock, among
other scientists, considers the highest step in chromatic
evolution. This species has heart-shaped, saw-edged leaves which
taper acutely. From May even to July is its regular blooming
season; but the delightful family eccentricity of flowering again
in autumn appears to be a confirmed habit with the Canada violet.


ENCHANTER'S NIGHTSHADE
  (Circaea Lutetiana)  Evening Primrose family

Flowers - Very small, white, slender pedicelled, in terminal and
lateral racemes. Calyx 2-parted, hairy 2 petals, 2 alternate
stamens. Stem: 1 to 2 ft. high, slender, branching, swollen at
nodes. Leaves: Opposite, tapering to a point, distantly toothed,
2 to 4 in. long, slender petioled. Fruit: Pear-shaped, 2-celled,
densely covered with stiff, hooked hairs.
Preferred Habitat - Woods; shady roadsides.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Georgia, westward to Nebraska.
Europe and Asia.

Why Circe, the enchantress, skilled in the use of poisonous
herbs, should have had her name applied to this innocent and
insignificant looking little plant is not now obvious; neither is
the title of nightshade any more appropriate.

Each tiny flower having a hairy calyx, that acts as a stockade
against ants and other such crawling pilferers, we suspect there
are abundant sweets secreted in the fleshy ring at the base of
the styles for the benefit of the numerous flies seen hovering
about. Among other visitors, watch the common housefly alighting
on the knobby stigma, a most convenient landing place, where he
leaves some pollen carried on his underside from other nightshade
blossoms. In clasping the bases of the two pliable stamens, his
only available supports as he sucks, he will surely get well
dusted again, that he may fertilize the next blossom he flies to
for refreshment. The nightshade's little pear-shaped seed
vessels, armed with hooked bristles by which they steal a ride on
any passing petticoat or trouser leg, reveal at a glance how this
plant has contrived to travel around the globe.

A smaller, weaker species (Circaea alpina), found in cool, moist
woods, chiefly north, has thin, shining leaves and soft, hooked
hairs on its vagabond seeds. Less dependence seems to be placed
on these ineffective hooks to help perpetuate the plant than on
the tiny pink bulblets growing at the end of an exceedingly
slender thread sent out by the parent roots.


AMERICAN SPIKENARD; INDIAN ROOT; SPIGNET
  (Aralia racemosa)  Ginseng family

Flowers - Greenish white, small, 5-parted, mostly imperfect, in a
drooping compound raceme of rounded clusters. Stem: 3 to 6 ft.
high, branches spreading. Roots: Large, thick, fragrant. Leaves:
Compounded of heart-shaped, sharply tapering, saw-edged leaflets
from 2 to 5 in. long, often downy underneath. Lower leaves often
enormous. Fruit: Dark reddish-brown berries.
Preferred Habitat - Rich open woods, wayside thickets, light
soil.
Flowering Season - July-August.
Distribution - New Brunswick to Georgia, west to the Mississippi.

A striking, decorative plant, once much sought after for its
medicinal virtues - still another herb with which old women
delight to dose their victims for any malady from a cold to a
carbuncle. Quite a different plant, but a relative, is the one
with hairy, spike-like shoots from its fragrant roots, from which
the "very precious" ointment poured by Mary upon the Saviour's
