Time? Something Divinely Everlasting.

Thus, into the void came Time. And now, if carefully you will ponder
it, I am sure that once and for all quite suddenly and forcefully will
come to you the true conception of Time--something Everlasting--an
Infinity of Divine existence, Everlasting.

It is _not_ something which changes. _Not_ something which moves, or
flows or passes. This is where our consciousness leads us astray, like
the child on a train who conceives that the landscape is sliding past.

Time is an unmoving, unchanging Divine Force--the force which holds
events separate, the Eternal Scroll upon which the Great Creator wrote
Everything.

And this was the Creation: everything planned and set down upon the
scroll of Time--forever. The birth of a star, its lifetime, its death;
your birth, and mine; your death, and mine--all are there. Unchanging.

Once you have that fundamental conception, there can be no confusion
in the rest. We feel, because we move along the scroll of Time for the
little journey of our life, that Time moves; but it does not. We say,
The past did exist; the future will exist. The past is gone and the
future has not yet come. But that is fatuous and absurd. It is merely
our _consciousness_ which travels from one successive event to
another.

Why and how we move along the scroll of Time, is scientifically simple
to grasp. Conceive, for instance, an infinitely long motion picture
film. Each of its tiny pictures is a little different from the other.
Casting your viewpoint--your consciousness--successively along the
film, gives _motion_.

The same is true of the Eternal Time-scroll. Motion is merely a
_change_. There is no absolute motion, but only the comparison of two
things relatively slightly different. We are conscious of one state of
affairs--and then of another state, by comparison slightly different.

       *       *       *       *       *

As early as 1930, they were groping for this. They called it the
Theory of Intermittent Existence--the Quantum Theory--by which they
explained that nothing has any Absolute Duration. You, for instance,
as you read this, exist instantaneously; you are non-existent; and you
exist again, just a little changed from before. Thus you pass, not
with a flow of persisting existence, but by a series of little jerks.
There is, then, like the illusion of a motion picture film, only a
pseudo-movement. A change, from one existence to the next.

And all this, with infinite care, the Creator engraved upon the scroll
of Time. Our series of little pictures are there--yours and mine.

But why, and how, scientifically do we progress along the Time-scroll?
Why? In 2930, they told me that the gentle Creator gave each of us a
consciousness that we might find Eternal Happiness when we left the
scroll and joined Him. Happiness here, and happiness there with Him.
The quest for Eternal Happiness, which was always His Own Divine
Thought. Why, then, did He create ugliness and evil? Why write those
upon the scroll? Ah, this perhaps is the Eternal Riddle! But, in 2930,
they told me that there could be no beauty without ugliness with which
to compare it; no truth without a lie; no consciousness of happiness
without unhappiness to make it poignant.

I wonder if that were His purpose....

How, scientifically, do we progress along the Time-scroll? That I can
make clear by a simple analogy.

Suppose you conceive Time as a narrow strip of metal, laid flat and
extending for an infinite length. For simplicity, picture it with two
ends. One end of the metal band is very cold; the other end is very
hot. And every graduation of temperature is in between.

This temperature is caused, let us say, by the vibration of every tiny
particle with which the band is composed. Thus, at every point along
the band, the vibration of its particles would be just a little
different from every other point.

       *       *       *       *       *

Conceive, now, a material body--your body, for instance. Every tiny
particle of which it is constructed, is vibrating. I mean no simple
vibration. Do not picture the physical swing of a pendulum. Rather,
the intricate total of all the movements of every tiny electron of
which your body is built. Remember, in the last analysis, your body is
merely movement--vibration--a vortex of Nothingness. You have, then, a
certain vibratory factor.

You take your place then upon the Time-scroll at a point where your
inherent vibratory factor is compatible with the scroll. You are in
tune; in tune as a radio receiver tunes in with etheric waves to make
them audible. Or, to keep the heat analogy, it is as though the
scroll, at the point where the temperature is 70 deg.F, will tolerate
nothing upon it save entities of that register.

And so, at that point on the scroll, the myriad things, in myriad
positions which make up the Cosmos, lie quiescent. But their existence is
only instantaneous. They have no duration. At once, they are blotted out
and re-exist. But now they have changed their vibratory combinations. They
exist a trifle differently--and the Time-scroll passes them along to the
new position. On a motion picture film you would call it the next frame,
or still picture. In radio you would say it has a trifle different tuning.
Thus we have a pseudo-movement--Events. And we say that Time--the
Time-scroll--keeps them separate. It is we who change--who seem to move,
shoved along so that always we are compatible with Time.

       *       *       *       *       *

And thus is Time-traveling possible. With a realization of what I have
here summarized, Harl and the cripple Tugh made an exhaustive study of
the vibratory factors by which Matter is built up into form, and
seeming solidity. They found what might be termed the Basic Vibratory
Factor--the sum of all the myriad tiny movements. They found this
Basic Factor identical for all the material bodies when judged
simultaneously. But, every instant, the Factor was slightly changed.
This was the natural change, moving us a little upon the Time-scroll.

They delved deeper, until, with all the scientific knowledge of their
age, they were able with complicated electronic currents to alter the
Basic Vibratory Factors; to tune, let us say, a fragment or something
to a different etheric wave-length.

They did that with a small material particle--a cube of metal. It
became wholly incompatible with its _Present_ place on the
Time-scroll, and whisked away to another place where it was
compatible. To Harl and Tugh, it vanished. Into their Past, or their
Future: they did not know which.

I set down merely the crudest fundamentals of theory in order to avoid
the confusion of technicalities. The Time-traveling cages, intricate
in practical working mechanisms beyond the understanding of any human
mind of my Time-world, nevertheless were built from this simple
theory. And we who used them did but find that the Creator had given
us a wider part to play; our pictures, our little niches were engraven
upon the scroll over wider reaches.

       *       *       *       *       *

Again to consider practicality, I asked Tina what would happen if I
were to travel to New York City around 1920. I was a boy, then. Could
I not leave the cage and do things in 1920 at the same time in my
boyhood I was doing other things? It would be a condition unthinkable.

But there, beyond all calculation of Science, the all-wise Omnipotence
forbids. One may not appear twice in simultaneity upon the
Time-scroll. It is an eternal, irrevocable record. Things done cannot
be undone.

"But," I persisted, "suppose we tried to stop the cage?"

"It would not stop," said Tina. "Nor can we see through its windows
events in which we are actors."

One may not look into the future! Through all the ages, necromancers
have tried to do that but wisely it is forbidden. And I can recall,
and so can Larry, as we traveled through Time, the queer blank spaces
which marked forbidden areas.

Strangely wonderful, this vast record on the scroll of Time! Strangely
beautiful, the hidden purposes of the Creator! Not to be questioned
are His purposes. Each of us doing our best; struggling with our
limitations; finding beauty because we have ugliness with which to
compare it; realizing, every one of us--savage or civilised, in every
age and every condition of knowledge--realizing with implanted
consciousness the existence of a gentle, beneficent, guiding Divinity.
And each of us striving always upward toward the goal of Eternal
Happiness.

To me it seems singularly beautiful.


CHAPTER XI

_Back to the Beginning of Time_

As Mary Atwood and I sat chained to the floor of the Time-cage, with
Migul the Robot guarding us, I felt that we could not escape. This
mechanical thing which had captured us seemed inexorable, utterly
beyond human frailty. I could think of no way of surprising it, or
tricking it.

The Robot said. "Soon we will be there in 1777. And then there is that
I will be forced to do.

"We are being followed," it added. "Did you know that?"

"No," I said. Followed? What could that mean?

There was a device upon the table. I have already described a similar
one, the Time-telespectroscope. At this--I cannot say Time: rather
must I invent a term--exact instant of human consciousness. Larry,
Tina and Harl were gazing at their telespectroscopes, following us.

The Robot said. "Enemies follow us. But I will escape them. I shall go
to the Beginning, and shake them off."

Rational, scheming thought. And I could fancy that upon its frozen
corrugated forehead there was a frown of annoyance. Its hand gesture
was so human! So expressive!

It said. "I forget. I must make several quick trips from 2930 to 1935.
My comrades must be transported. It requires careful calculation, so
that very little Time is lost to us."

"Why?" I demanded. "What for?"

It seemed lost in a reverie.

I said sharply, "Migul!"

Instantly it turned. "What?"

"I asked you why you are transporting your comrades to 1935."

"I did not answer because I did not wish to answer," it said.

Again came the passage of Time.

       *       *       *       *       *

I think that I need only sketch the succeeding incidents, since
already I have described them from the viewpoint of Larry, in 1777,
and Dr. Alten, in 1935. It was Mary's idea to write the note to her
father, which the British redcoats found in Major Atwood's garden. I
had a scrap of paper and a fountain pen in my pocket. She scribbled it
while Migul was intent upon stopping us at the night and hour he
wished. It was her good-by to her father, which he was destined not to
see. But it served a purpose which we could not have guessed: it
reached Larry and Tina.

The vehicle stopped with a soundless clap. When our senses cleared we
became aware that Migul had the door open.

Darkness and a soft gentle breeze were outside.

Migul turned with a hollow whisper. "If you make a sound I will kill
you."

A moment's pause, and then we heard a man's startled voice. Major
Atwood had seen the apparition. I squeezed the paper into a ball and
tossed it through the bars, but I could see nothing of what was
happening outside. There seemed a radiance of red glow. Whether Mary
and I would have tried to shout and warn her father I do not know. We
heard his voice only a moment. Before we realized that he had been
assailed. Migul came striding back; and outside, from the nearby house
a negress was screaming. Migul flung the door closed, and we sped
away.

The cage which had been chasing us seemed no longer following. From
1777, we turned forward toward 1935 again. We flashed past Larry, Tina
and Harl who were arriving at 1777 in pursuit of us. I think that
Migul saw their cage go past; but Larry afterward told me that they
did not notice our swift passing, for they were absorbed in landing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beginning then, we made a score or more passages from 1935 to 2930.
And we made them in what, to our consciousness, might have been the
passing of a night. Certainly it was no longer than that.[1]

[Footnote 1: At the risk of repetition I must make the following
clear: Time-traveling only consumes Time in the sense of the
perception of human consciousness that the trip has duration. The
vehicles thus moved "fast" or "slow" according to the rate of change
which the controls of the cage gave its inherent vibration factors.
Too sudden a change could not be withstood by the human passengers.
Hence the trips--for them--had duration.

Migul took Mary and me from 1935 to 1777. The flight seems perhaps
half an hour. At a greater rate of vibration change, we sped to 2930;
and back and forth from 2930 to 1935. At each successive arrival in
1935, Migul so skilfully calculated the stop that it occurred upon the
same night, at the same hour, and only a minute or so later. And in
2930 he achieved the same result. To one who might stand at either end
and watch the cage depart, the round trip was made in three or four
minutes at most.]

We saw, at the stop in 2930, only a dim blue radiance outside. There
was the smell of chemicals in the air, and the faint, blended hum and
clank of a myriad machines.

They were weird trips. The Robots came tramping in, and packed
themselves upright, solidly, around us. Yet none touched us as we
crouched together. Nor did they more than glance at us.

Strange passengers! During the trips they stood unmoving. They were as
still and silent as metal statues, as though the trip had no duration.
It seemed to Mary and me, with them thronged around us, that in the
silence we could hear the ticking, like steady heart-beats, of the
mechanisms within them....

In the backyard of the house on Patton Place--it will be recalled that
Migul chose about 9 P. M. of the evening of June 9--the silent Robots
stalked through the doorway. We flashed ahead in Time again; reloaded
the cage; came back. Two or three trips were made with inert
mechanical things which the Robots used in their attack on the city of
New York. I recall the giant projector which brought the blizzard upon
the city. It, and the three Robots operating it, occupied the entire
cage for a passage.

At the end of the last trip, one Robot, fashioned much like Migul
though not so tall, lingered in the doorway.

"Make no error, Migul," it said.

"No; do not fear. I deliver now, at the designated day, these
captives. And then I return for you."

"Near dawn."

"Yes; near dawn. The third dawn; the register to say June 12, 1935. Do
your work well."

We heard what seemed a chuckle from the departing Robot.

Alone again with Migul we sped back into Time.

Abruptly I was aware that the other cage was after us again! Migul
tried to elude it, to shake it off. But he had less success than
formerly. It seemed to cling. We sped in the retrograde, constantly
accelerating back to the Beginning. Then came a retardation, for a
swift turn. In the haze and murk of the Beginning, Migul told us he
could elude the pursuing cage.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Migul, let us come to the window," I asked at last.

The Robot swung around. "You wish it very much, George Rankin?"

"Yes."

"There is no harm, I think. You and this girl have caused me no
trouble. That is unusual from a human."

"Let us loose. We've been chained here long enough. Let us stand by
the window with you," I repeated.

We did indeed have a consuming curiosity to see out of that window.
But even more than that, it seemed that if we were loose something
might transpire which would enable us to escape. At all events it was
better than being chained.

"I will loose you."

It unfastened the chain. I whispered:

"Mary, whatever comes, be alert."

She pressed my arm. "Yes."

"Come," said the Robot. "If you wish to see the Cosmorama, now, from
the Beginning, come quickly."

We joined him at the window. We had made the turn, and were speeding
forward again.
