He was hacking at the wall with a pick. Presently he dropped the tool
and wrenched at the rock with bare hands. A large chunk came loose. He
hugged it to him and turned and strode back towards the two on the
floor, and as he drew near they could plainly see a gleam of triumph
in his eyes.

"You know what this is?" he shouted. Guinness could only faintly hear
him. "Wealth! Millions! Of course we always knew the radium was here,
but this is the proof. And now we've a way of getting it out--thanks
to your borer! All the credit is yours, Professor Guinness! You shall
have the credit, and I'll have the money."

Guinness tugged furiously at his bonds again. "You--you--" he gasped.
"How dare you tie us this way! Release us at once! What do you mean by
it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Quade smiled unpleasantly. "You're very stupid, Guinness. Haven't you
guessed by now what I'm going to do?" He paused, as if waiting for an
answer, and the smile on his face gave way to a look of savage menace.
For the first time his bitter feelings came to the surface.

"Have you forgotten how close I came to going to jail over those
charges of yours a year ago?" he said. "Have you forgotten the
disgrace to me that followed?--the stigma that forced me to disappear
for months? You fool, do you think I've forgotten?--or that I'd let
you--"

"Quade," interrupted the older man, "you know very well you were
guilty. I caught you red-handed. You didn't fool anyone--except the
jury that let you go. So save your breath, and, if you've the sense
you were born with, release my daughter and me. Why, you're crazy!" he
cried with mounting anger. "You can't get away with this! I'll have
you in jail within forty-eight hours, once I get back to the surface!"

With an effort Quade controlled his feelings and assumed his oily,
sarcastic manner. "That's just it," he said: "'once you get back!' How
stupid you are! You don't seem to realize that you're not going back
to the surface. You and your daughter."

Sue gasped, and her father's eyes went wide. There was a tense
silence.

"You wouldn't dare!" the inventor cried finally. "You wouldn't dare!"

"It's rather large, this cavern," Quade went on. "You'll have plenty
of room. Perhaps I'll untie you before I go back up, so--"

"You can't get away with it!" shouted the old man, tremendously
excited. "Why, you can't, possibly! Philip Holmes'll track you
down--he'll tell the police--he'll rescue us! And then--"

Quade smiled suavely. "Oh, no, he won't. Perhaps you remember the shot
that sounded from the water-hole? Well, when I and my assistant, Juan,
heard Holmes say he was going for water, I told Juan to follow him to
the water-hole and bind him, to keep him from interfering till I got
back up. But Mr. Holmes is evidently of an impulsive disposition, and
must have caused trouble. Juan, too, is impulsive; he is a Mexican.
And he had a gun. I'm afraid he was forced to use it.... I am quite
sure Philip Holmes will not, as you say, track me down."

David Guinness looked at his daughter's white face and horror-filled
eyes and suddenly crumpled. Humbly, passionately, he begged Quade to
take her back up. "Why, she's never done anything to you, Quade!" he
pleaded. "You can't take her life like that! Please! Leave me, if you
must, but not her! You can't--"

       *       *       *       *       *

But suddenly the old man noticed that Quade was not listening. His
head was tilted to one side as if he was straining to hear something
else. Guinness was held silent for a moment by the puzzled look on the
other's face and the strange way he was acting.

"Do you hear it?" Quade asked at last; and without waiting for an
answer, he knelt down and put his ear to the ground. When he rose his
face was savage, and he cursed under his breath.

"Why, it's a humming!" muttered Professor Guinness. "And it's getting
louder!"

"It sounds like another borer!" ventured Sue.

The humming grew in volume. Then, from the ceiling, a rock dropped.
They were looking at the cavern roof and saw it start, but they did
not hear it strike, for the ever-growing humming echoed loudly through
the cavern. They saw another rock fall; and another.

"For God's sake, what is it?" cried Guinness.

Quade looked at him and slowly drew out his automatic.

"Another earth-borer, I think," he answered. "And I rather expect it
contains your young friend Mr. Holmes. Yes--coming to rescue you."

For a moment Guinness and his daughter were too astounded to do
anything but gape. She finally exclaimed:

"But--but then Phil's alive?"

James Quade smiled. "Probably--for the moment. But don't let your
hopes rise too high. The borer he's in isn't strong enough to survive
a fifty-foot plunge." He was shouting now, so loud was the thunder
from above. "And," he added, "I'm afraid he's not strong enough to
survive it, either!"


CHAPTER II

_The Man-Hunt_

When Phil Holmes started off to the water-hole, his head was full of
the earth-borer and the imminent descent. Now that the long-awaited
time had come, he was at fever-pitch to be off, and it did not take
him long to cover the mile of sandy waste. His thoughts were far
inside the earth as he dipped the jug into the clear cool water and
sloshed it full.

So the rope that snaked softly through the air and dropped in a loop
over his shoulders came as a stark surprise. Before he knew what was
happening it had slithered down over his arms and drawn taut just
above the elbows, and he was yanked powerfully backwards and almost
fell.

But he managed to keep his feet as he staggered backward, and turning
his head he saw the small dark figure of his aggressor some fifteen
feet away, keeping tight the slack.

Phil's surprise turned to sudden fury and he completely lost his head.
What he did was rash; mad; and yet, as it turned out, it was the only
thing that could have saved him. Instinctively, without hesitating
one second, and absolutely ignoring an excited command to stand still,
he squirmed face-on to his aggressor, lowered his head and charged.

The distance was short. Halfway across it, a gun barked, and he heard
the bullet crack into the water jug, which he was still holding in
front of himself. And even before the splintered fragments reached the
ground he had crashed into the firer.

He hit him with all the force of a tackling lineman, and they both
went down. The man grunted as the wind was jarred out of him, but he
wriggled like an eel and managed to worm aside and bring up his gun.

Then there was a desperate flurry of bodies in the coarse sand. Holmes
dived frantically for the gun hand and caught it; but, handicapped as
he was by the rope, he could not hold it. Slowly its muzzle bent
upward to firing position.

Desperately, he wrenched the arm upwards, in the direction it had been
straining to go, and the sudden unexpected jerk doubled the man's arm
and brought the weapon across his chest. For a moment there was a test
of strength as Phil lay chest to chest over his opponent, the gun
blocked between. Then the other grunted; squirmed violently--and there
was a muffled explosion.

A cry of pain cut the midnight air, and with insane strength Holmes'
ambusher fought free from his grip, staggered to his feet and went
reeling away. Phil tore loose from the rope and bounded after him,
never feeling, at the moment, his powder-burned chest.

And then he halted in his tracks.

A great roar came thundering over the desert!

       *       *       *       *       *

At once he knew that it came from the earth-borer's disintegrators.
The sphere had started down without him.

He stood stock still, petrified with surprise, facing the sound, while
his attacker melted farther and farther into the night. And then,
suddenly, Phil Holmes was sprinting desperately back towards the
Guinness camp.

He ran until he was exhausted; walked for a little while his legs
gathered more strength, and his laboring lungs more air; and then ran
again. As the minutes passed, the thunder lessened rapidly into a
muffled drone; and by the time Phil had panted up to the brink of the
hole that gaped where but a little time before the sphere was
standing, it had become but a distant purr. He leaned far over and
peered into the hot blackness below, but could see nothing.

Phil knelt there silently for some minutes, shocked by his strange
attack, bewildered by the unexpected descent of the borer. For a time
his mind would not work; he had no idea what to do. But gradually his
thoughts came to order and made certain things clear.

He had been deliberately ambushed. Only by luck had he escaped, he
told himself. If it hadn't been for the water jug, he'd now be out of
the picture. And on the heels of the ambush had came the surprising
descent of the earth-borer. The two incidents coincided too well: the
same mind had planned them. And two, men, at least, were in on the
plot.... It suddenly became very clear to him that the answer to the
puzzle lay with the man who had ambushed him. He would have to get
that man. Track him down.

Phil acted with decision. He got to his feet and strode rapidly to the
deserted Guinness shack, horribly quiet and lonely now in the bright
moonlight. In a minute he emerged with a flashlight at his belt and a
rifle across his arm.

Once again he went over to the new black hole in the desert and looked
down. From far below still came the purr, now fainter than ever. His
friend, the girl he loved, were down there, he reflected bitterly, and
he was helpless to reach them. Well, there was one thing he could
do--go man-hunting. Turning, he started off at a long lope for the
water-hole.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ten minutes later he was there, and off to the side he found the marks
of their scuffle--and small black blotches that could be nothing but
blood. The other was wounded: could probably not get far. But he might
still have his gun, so Phil kept his rifle handy, and tempered his
impatience with caution as he set out on the trail of the widely
spaced footprints.

They led off towards the nearby hills, and in the bright moonlight
Phil did not use his flashlight at all, except to investigate other
round black blotches that made a line parallel to the prints. As he
went on he found his quarry's steps coming more closely together:
becoming erratic. Soon they showed as painful drags in the sand, a
laborious hauling of one foot after the other.... Phil put away his
light and advanced very cautiously.

He wondered, as he went, who in the devil was behind it all. The
radium-finding project had been kept strictly secret. Not another soul
was supposed to know of the earth-borer and its daring mission into
the heart of the earth. Yet, obviously, someone had found out, and
whoever it was had laid at least part of his scheme cunningly. An old
man and a girl cannot offer much resistance: he, Phil, would have been
well taken care of had it not been for the water jug. So far, there
were at least two in the plot: the man who had ambushed him and the
unknown who had evidently kidnapped both Professor and Sue Guinness.
But there might be still more.

There might be friends, nearby, of the man he was tracking. The fellow
might have reached them, and warned them that the scheme hadn't gone
through, that Phil was loose. They could very easily conceal
themselves alongside their partner's tracks and train their rifles on
the tracker....

The trail was leading up into one of the canons in the cluster of
hills to the west. For some distance he followed it up through a slash
of black below the steep moonlit heights of the hills to each
side--and then, suddenly, he vaguely made out the forms of two huts
just ahead.

Immediately he stooped low, and went skirting widely off up one side.
He proceeded slowly, with great caution, his rifle at the ready. At
any moment, he knew, the hush might be split by the cracks of
waylaying guns. Warily he advanced along the narrow canyon wall above
the huts. No lights were lit, and the place seemed unoccupied. He was
debating what to do next when his attention was attracted to a large
dark object lying in the canyon trail some twenty yards from the
nearest hut. Straining his eyes in the inadequate moonlight, he saw
that it was the outstretched figure of a man. His quarry--his
ambusher!

       *       *       *       *       *

Phil dropped flat, fearful of being seen. Keeping as best he could in
the shadows, fearing every moment to hear the sharp bark of a gun, he
crawled forward. It took him a long time to approach the sprawled
figure, but he wasn't taking chances. When within twenty feet, he rose
suddenly and darted forward to the man's side.

His rapid glance showed him that the fellow was completely out: and
another quick look around failed to show that anyone else was
watching, so he returned to his examination of the man. It was the
ambusher, all right: a Mexican. He was still breathing, though his
face was drawn and white from the loss of blood from a wound under the
blood-soaked clothing near his upper right arm. A hasty search showed
that he no longer had his gun, so Phil, satisfied that he was
powerless for some time to come, cautiously wormed his way towards the
two shacks.

There was something sinister in the strange silence that hung over
them. One was of queer construction--a windowless, square, high box
of galvanized iron. The other was obviously a dwelling place.
Carefully Phil sneaked up to the latter. Then, rifle ready, he pushed
its door open and sent a beam of light stabbing through the darkness
of the interior.

There was no one there. Only two bunks, a table, chair, a pail of
water and some cooking utensils met his view. He crept out toward the
other building.

Come close, Phil found that a dun-colored canvas had been thrown over
the top of it, making an adequate camouflage in daytime. The place was
about twenty feet high. He prowled around the metal walls and
discovered a rickety door. Again, gun ready, he flung it open. The
beam from his flash speared a path through the blackness--and he
gasped at sight of what stood revealed.

There, inside, was a long, bullet-like tube of metal, the pointed end
upper-most, and the bottom, which was flat, toward the ground. It was
held in a wooden cradle, and was slanted at the floor. In the bottom
were holes of two shapes--rocket tubes and disintegrating projectors.
It was another earth-borer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Phil stood frozen with surprise before this totally unlooked-for
machine. He could easily have been overcome, had the owner been in the
building, for he had forgotten everything but what his eyes were
staring at. He started slowly around the borer, found a long narrow
door slightly ajar, and stepped inside.

This borer, like Guinness's, had a double shell, and much the same
instruments, though the whole job was simpler and cruder. A small
instrument board contained inclination, temperature, depth and
air-purity indicators, and narrow tubes led to the air rectifiers. But
what kept Holmes' attention were the wires running from the magneto to
the mixing chambers of the disintegrating tubes.

"The fools!" he exclaimed, "--they didn't know how to wire the thing!
Or else," he added after a moment, "didn't get around to doing it." He
noticed that the projectile's interior contained no gyroscope: though,
he thought, none would be needed, for the machine, being long and
narrow, could not change keel while in the ground. Here he was
reminded of something. Stepping outside, he estimated the angle the
borer made with the dirt floor. Twenty degrees. "And pointed
southwest!" he exclaimed aloud. "This borer would come close to
meeting the professor's, four miles under our camp!"

       *       *       *       *       *

At once he knew what he would do. First he went back to the other
shack and got the pail of water he had noticed, and took this out
where the Mexican lay outstretched. He bathed the man's face and the
still slightly bleeding bullet wound in his shoulder.

Presently the wounded man came to. His eyes opened, and he stared up
into a steel mask of a face, in which two level black eyes bored into
his. He remembered that face--remembered it all too well. He trembled,
cowered away.

"No!" he gasped, as if he had seen a ghost. "No--no!"

"Yes, I'm the man," Holmes told him firmly, menacingly. "The same one
you tried to ambush." He paused a moment, then said: "Do you want to
live?"

It was a simple question, frightening in its simplicity.

"Because if you don't answer my questions, I'm going to let you lie
here," Phil went on coldly. "And that would probably mean your death.
If you do answer, I'll fix you up so you can have a chance."

The Mexican nodded eagerly. "I talk," he said.

"Good," said Phil. "Then tell me who built that machine?"

"Senor Quade. Senor James Quade."

"Quade!" Phil had heard the name before. "Of course!" he said.
"Guinness's old partner!"

"I not know," the Mexican answered. "He hire me with much money. He
