that her expression was rather puzzled and worried. She looked even
more confused than she had the last time he'd seen her.

He took a deep breath, wished for a cigar and plunged blindly ahead
into the toils of court etiquette.

"Your Majesty," he said, "I know full well that you are aware of the
thoughts that I have had concerning the case we have been working on.
I beg Your Majesty's pardon for having doubted Your Majesty's Royal
Word. Since my first doubts, of which I am sore ashamed, I have been
informed by Our Majesty's Royal Psychiatrist that my doubts were
ill-founded, and I wish to convey my deepest apologies. Now, having
been fully convinced of the truth of Your Majesty's statements, I have
a theory I would discuss with you, the particulars of which you can
doubtless see in my mind."

He paused. Her Majesty was staring at him, her face pale.

"Sir Kenneth," she said in a strained voice, "we appreciate your
attitude. However--" She paused for a moment, and then continued.
"However, Sir Kenneth, it is our painful duty to inform you--"

She stopped again. And when she managed to speak, she had dropped all
pretense of Court Etiquette.

"Sir Kenneth, I've been so worried! I was afraid you were dead!"

Malone blinked. "Dead?" he asked.

"For the past twenty-four hours," Her Majesty said in a frightened
voice, "I've been unable to contact your mind. And right now, as you
stand there, I can't read anything!

"It's as though you weren't thinking at all!"

[Illustration]


PART 3

IX

Malone stared at Her Majesty for what seemed like a long time. "Not
thinking at all?" he said at last, weakly. "But I _am_ thinking. At
least, I _think_ I am." He suddenly felt as if he had gone Rene
Descartes one better. It wasn't a pleasant feeling.

Her Majesty regarded Malone for an interminable, silent second. Then
she turned to Lady Barbara. "My dear," she said, "I would like to
speak to Sir Kenneth alone. We will go to my chambers."

Malone, feeling as though his brain had suddenly turned to quince
jelly, followed the two women out of a small door at the rear of the
Throne Room, and into Her Majesty's private apartments. Lady Barbara
left them alone with some reluctance, but she'd evidently been getting
used to following her patient's orders. Which, Malone thought with
admiration, must take a lot of effort for a nurse.

The door closed and he was alone with the Queen. Malone opened his
mouth to speak, but Her Majesty raised a monitory hand. "Please, Sir
Kenneth," she said. "Just a moment. Don't say anything for a little
bit."

Malone shut his mouth. When the minute was up, Her Majesty began to
nod her head, very slowly. Her voice, when she spoke, was low and
calm.

"It's as though you were almost invisible," she said. "I can see you
with my eyes, of course, but mentally you are almost completely
indetectable. Knowing you as well as I do, and being this close to
you, it is just possible for me to detect very faint traces of
activity."

"Now, wait a minute," Malone said. "I am thinking. I know I am. Maybe
it's not me. Your telepathy might be fading out temporarily, or
something like that. It's possible, isn't it?" He was reasonably sure
it wasn't, but it was a last try at making sense. Her Majesty shook
her head.

"I can still receive Sir Thomas, for instance, quite clearly," she
said. She seemed a little miffed, but the irritation was overpowered
by her worry. "I think, Sir Kenneth, that you just don't know your own
power, that's all. I don't know how, but you've managed somehow to
smother telepathic communication almost completely."

"But not quite?" Malone said. Apparently, he was thinking, but very
weakly. Like a small child, he told himself dismally. Like a small
Elizabethan child.

Her Majesty's face took on a look of faraway concentration. "It's like
looking at a very dim light," she said, "a light just at the threshold
of perception. You might say that you've got to look at such a light
sideways. If you look directly at it, you can't see it. And, of
course, you can't see it at all if you're a long way off." She
blinked. "It's not exactly like that, you understand," she finished.
"But in some ways--"

"I get the idea," Malone said. "Or I think I do. But what's causing
it? Sunspots? Little green men?"

"Not so little," Her Majesty said with some return of her old humor,
"and not green, either. As a matter of fact, _you_ are, Sir Kenneth."

Malone opened his mouth, shut it again and finally managed to say:
"Me?" in a batlike squeal of surprise.

"I don't know how, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty went on, "but you are.
It's ... rather frightening to me, as a matter of fact; I've never
seen such a thing before. I've never even considered it before."

"You?" Malone said. "How about me?" It was like suddenly discovering
that you'd been lifting two-hundred-pound barbells and not knowing it.
"How could I be doing anything like that without knowing anything
about it?"

Her Majesty shook her head. "I haven't the faintest idea," she said.

But Malone, very suddenly, did. He remembered deciding to keep a close
check on his mental processes to make sure those bursts of energy
didn't do anything to him. Subconsciously, he knew, he was still
keeping that watch.

And maybe the watch itself caused the complete blanking of his
telepathic faculties. It was worth a test, at least, he decided. And
it was an easy test to make.

"Listen," he said. He told himself that he would now allow
communication between himself and Her Majesty--and only between those
two. Maybe it wasn't possible to let down the barrier in a selective
way, but he gave it all he had. A long second passed.

"My goodness!" Her Majesty said in pleased surprise. "There you are
again!"

"You can read me?" Malone asked.

"Why ... yes," Her Majesty said. "And I can see just what you're
thinking. I'm afraid, Sir Kenneth, that I don't know whether it's
selective or not. But ... oh. Just a minute. You go right on thinking,
now, just the way you are." Her Majesty's eyes unfocused slightly and
a long time passed, while Malone tried to keep on thinking. But it was
difficult, he told himself, to think about things without having any
things to think about. He felt his mind begin to spin gently with the
rhythm of the last sentence, and he considered slowly the possibility
of thinking about things when there weren't any things thinking about
you. That seemed to make as much sense as anything else, and he was
turning it over and over in his mind when a voice broke in.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I was contacting Willie," Her Majesty said.

"Ah," Malone said. "Willie. Of course. Very fine for contacting."

Her Majesty frowned. "You remember Willie, don't you?" she said.
"Willie Logan--who used to be a spy for the Russians, just because he
didn't know any better, poor boy?"

"Oh," Malone said. "Logan." He remembered the catatonic youngster who
had used his telepathic powers against the United States until Her
Majesty, the FBI, and Kenneth J. Malone had managed to put matters
right. That had been the first time he'd met Her Majesty; it seemed
like fifty years before.

"Well," Her Majesty said, "Willie and I had a little argument just
now. And I think you'll be interested in it."

"I'm fascinated," Malone said.

"Was he thinking about things or were things thinking about him?"

"Really, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said, "you do think about the
silliest notions when you don't watch yourself."

Malone blushed slightly. "Anyhow," he said after a pause, "what was
the argument about?"

"Willie says you aren't here," Her Majesty said. "He can't detect you
at all. Even when I let him take a peek at you through my own
mind--making myself into sort of a relay station, so to speak--Willie
wouldn't believe it. He said I was hallucinating."

"Hallucinating me?" Malone said. "I think I'm flattered. Not many
people would bother."

"Don't underestimate yourself, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said, rather
severely. "But you do see what this little argument means, don't you?
I think you may assume that your telepathic contact is quite
selective. If Willie can't read you, Sir Kenneth, believe me, nobody
at all can ... unless you let them."

How he had developed this mental shield, he couldn't imagine, unless
his subconscious had done it for him. Good old subconscious, he
thought, always looking out for a person's welfare, preparing little
surprises and things. Though he hoped vaguely that the next surprise,
if there were a next one, would sneak up a little more gently. Being
told flatly that your mind was not in operation was not a very good
way to start an investigation.

Then he thought of something else. "Do you think this ... barrier of
mine will keep out those little bursts of mental energy?" he said.

Her Majesty looked judicious. "I really do," she said. "It does appear
quite impenetrable, Sir Kenneth. I can't understand how you're doing
it. Or why, for that matter."

"Well--" Malone began.

Her Majesty raised a hand. "No," she said. "I'd rather not know, if
you please." Her voice was stern, but just a little shaken. "The
thought of blocking off thought--the only real form of communication
that exists--is, frankly, quite horrible to me. I would rather be
blinded, Sir Kenneth. I truly would."

Malone thought of Dr. Marshall and blushed. Her Majesty peered at him
narrowly, and then smiled.

"You've been talking to my Royal Psychiatrist again, haven't you?" she
said. Malone nodded. "Frankly, Sir Kenneth," she went on, "I think
people pay too much attention to that sort of thing nowadays."

The subject, Malone recognized, was firmly closed. He cleared his
throat and started up another topic. "Let's talk about these energy
bursts," he said. "Do you still pick them up occasionally?"

"Oh, my, yes," Her Majesty said. "And it's not only me. Willie has
been picking them up too. We've had some long talks about it, Willie
and I. It's frightening, in a way, but you must admit that it's very
interesting."

"Fascinating," Malone muttered. "Tell me, have you figured out what
they might be, yet?"

Her Majesty shook her head. "All we know is that they do seem to occur
just before a person intends to make a decision. The burst somehow
appears to influence the decision. But we don't know how, and we don't
know where they come from, or what causes them. Or even why."

"In other words," Malone said, "we know absolutely nothing new."

"I'm afraid not, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said. "But Willie and I do
intend to keep working on it. It is important, isn't it?"

"Important," Malone said, "is not the word." He paused. "And now, if
your Majesty will excuse me," he said, "I'll have to go. I have work
to do, and your information has been most helpful."

"You may go, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said, returning with what
appeared to be real pleasure to the etiquette of the Elizabethan
Court. "We are grateful that you have done so much, and continue to do
so much, to defend the peace of Our Realm."

"I pledge myself to continue in those efforts which please Your
Majesty," Malone said, and started back for the costume room. Once
he'd changed into his regular clothing again he snapped himself back
to the room he had rented in the Great Universal. He had a great deal
of thinking to do, he told himself, and not much time to do it in.

       *       *       *       *       *

However, he was alone. That meant he could light up a cigar--something
which, as an FBI Agent, he didn't feel he should do in public. Cigars
just weren't right for FBI Agents, though they were all right for
ordinary detectives like Malone's father. As a matter of fact, he
considered briefly hunting up a vest, putting it on and letting the
cigar ash dribble over it. His father seemed to have gotten a lot of
good ideas that way. But, in the end, he rejected the notion as being
too complicated, and merely sat back in a chair, with an ashtray
conveniently on a table by his side, and smoked and thought.

Now, he knew with reasonable certainty that Andrew J. Burris was wrong
and that he, Malone, was right. The source of all the confusion in the
country was due to psionics, not to psychodrugs and Walt Disney spies.

His first idea was to rush back and tell Burris. However, this looked
like a useless move, and every second he thought about it made it seem
more useless. He simply didn't have enough new evidence to convince
Burris of anything whatever; psychiatric evidence was fine to back up
something else, but on its own it was still too shaky to be accepted
by the courts, in most cases. And Burris thought even more strictly
than the courts in such matters.

Not only that, Malone realized with alarm, but even if he did manage
somehow to convince Burris there was very little chance that Burris
would stay convinced. If his mind could be changed by a burst of wild
mental power--and why not? Malone reflected--then he could be
unconvinced as often as necessary. He could be spun round and round
like a top and never end up facing the way Malone needed him to face.

That left the burden of solving the problem squatting like a
hunchback's hunch squarely on Malone's shoulders. He thought he could
bear the weight for a while, if he could only think of some way of
dislodging it. But the idea of its continuing to squat there forever
was horribly unnerving. "Quasimodo Malone," he muttered, and uttered a
brief prayer of thanks that his father had been spared a classical
education. "Ken" wasn't so bad. "Quasi" would have been awful.

He couldn't think of any way to get a fingerhold on the thing that
weighed him down. Slowly, he went over it in his mind.

Situation: an unidentifiable something is attacking the United States
with an untraceable something else from a completely unknown source.

Problem: how do you go about latching on to anything as downright
nonexistent as all that?

Even the best detective, Malone told himself irritably, needed clues
of some kind. And this thing, whatever it was, was not playing fair.
It didn't go around leaving bloody fingerprints or lipsticked
cigarette butts or packets of paper matches with _Ciro's, Hollywood_,
written on them. It didn't even have an alibi for anything that could
be cracked, or leave tire marks or footprints behind that could be
photographed. Hell, Malone thought disgustedly, it wasn't that the
trail was cold. It just _wasn't_.

Of course, there were ways to get clues, he reflected. He thought of
his father. His father would have gone to the scene of the crime, or
questioned some of the witnesses. But the scene of the crime was
anywhere and everywhere, and most of the witnesses didn't know they
were witnessing anything. Except for Her Majesty, of course--but he'd
already questioned her, and there hadn't been any clues he could
recall in that conversation.

Malone stubbed out his cigar, lit another one absent-mindedly, and
rescued his tie, which was working its slow way around to the side of
