many hurts. The machine was near--but a barrier blocked the way.

Hagendorff's bulk lay outstretched on a side table, black in the
shadows, and from him came the level breathing of a sound sleeper,
climaxed now and again by a rumbling snore. He was taking no chances;
his presence there seemed to destroy any hope of the midget's
regaining normal size. But Garth was desperate, and for a minute or so
he considered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Forty seconds, the increase would take, at half speed. It might be
that long before the giant would waken thoroughly and see what was
happening. He, Garth, might start the process, and, when he saw the
huge figure stirring and waking from the noise of the dynamo, switch
off the ray and get out. No matter how short a time it took Hagendorff
to throw off the fogginess of his sleep, he would be somewhat
increased in size, and the odds of combat would not be so great.

It was a terrible risk. Did he dare take it? He thought of the forest,
of the raw night, of what was threatened in the morning.... Yes!

Silently, the manikin clasped the nearest table leg, shinnied up and
hauled himself over the top. As he got there his heart leaped. A sharp
thumping had come from behind. He dropped to his knees and glanced
round; but he immediately rose again, reassured. It was only the
rabbits in their cage, disturbed by the strange figure on the table.
He thanked God that they--and his tarantulas and other insects--could
make no alarming noises.

Garth found a long strand of wire. The panel's control lever, swung to
the left, controlled increase; to the right, decrease. Garth's plan
was to wind the middle of the wire around it, relay each end around
the two supporting posts of the switchboard, and thus have both ends
of the wire in his hands when he stood inside the chamber. One end of
the wire would enable him to pull the lever over for increase, and
the other to pull it back to neutral when the increase was completed,
or when Hagendorff arose.

Quickly he started to arrange the wire. Then suddenly his hands
dropped and he stared dismayed at the control panel.

The power switch had been removed!

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Hagendorff's work, of course. He had guarded every angle.
Without that switch, the mechanism was lifeless and literally
powerless. It worked on a delicately adjusted and enclosed rheostat;
there was nothing that could be substituted for it. It would take
hours to improvise one in the heart of the apparatus.

The switch, Garth reflected bitterly, was probably concealed somewhere
about the giant's body.

He considered the possibility of tying him. He knew where there was a
coil of light, pliable wire on the floor; he might be able to loop it
over the giant's hands and legs while he slept, tie him securely, and
then go through his pockets for the switch. Another hazard! But there
was nothing else to do.

Garth lowered himself over the table's edge and slid quietly down the
leg. He glanced at the sleeping man, then over across the room to
where, beneath another table, the wire was--and his nerves jumped at
what he saw there.

From the darkness under the table two spots of greenish fire, close to
the floor, held steadily on him.

As he stared, they vanished, to reappear more to the right. With the
movement, he glimpsed the outline of a lithe, crouching animal, and
knew it to be the cat he and Hagendorff had experimented on earlier
that night. It was stalking him in the deliberate manner of its kind!

       *       *       *       *       *

It came edging around, so as to leap on him from the side. He knew
that he represented fair prey to it; that if he tried to run, it would
pounce on him from behind. Wearily he tensed his miniature body,
standing poised on the balls of his feet and never dropping his eyes
for a moment. He could not repress a grim smile at the ludicrousness
of being attacked by an ordinary house-cat, even though it was
tiger-sized to him. Though his victory over the weasel, a far deadlier
fighter, made him confident he could dispatch it, there was another
aspect to the approaching struggle. It would have to be fought in
silence. Not four feet away, Hagendorff slept. There lay the
overwhelming danger.

Even as these things flashed through his brain, the cat steadily
inched nearer on its padded paws. Ghostly starlight framed it now;
Garth could see the eager, quivering muscles, the long tail, flat
behind, twitching slightly, the rigid, unstirring head and the slowly
contracting paws. The terrible suspense of its stalking scraped his
nerves. There would be a long pause, then an almost imperceptible
hunching forward, with the tail ever twitching; then the same thing
again, and over again. It became unbearable. Garth deliberately
invited the attack.

He pretended to turn and run, his back towards it. At once he sensed
its tensing body, its bunching muscles--then knew that it had sprung.

Whirling, he had a fleeting impression of a supple body in midair, of
bristling claws and bared, needlepoint fangs. But he was ready. The
weasel had taught him his best weapon, the great weight of his body.
He streaked in beneath the wide-spread paws, shot his hands into the
fur of the throat and threw himself against the shock of the animal's
suddenly arrested leap.

There was no standing his weight. Over the cat went, its back thudding
into the floor, its claws held powerless by the hundred and eighty
pounds of hard flesh that straddled it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fall had made little noise; but, as Garth tightened the grip of
his fingers and bored inward, a dull, steady thumping began to sound.
It was the cat's tail, pounding on the floor!

Desperately he tried to hook a leg over it, but could not reach far
enough. It beat like a tom-tom. From above, there came the sound of a
huge frame stirring, and the rumble of a sleepy grunt.

In a moment, the titan would be thoroughly awake.

By the drumming tail alone, Garth realized, his chance of regaining
full size was sent glimmering. There was nothing but retreat, now, and
a hasty one, if he valued life. Another noise came from the waking
Hagendorff. He was sitting up, staring around. Garth jumped to his
feet, threw the cat's twitching body beneath the table, and dodged at
full speed for the hole whereby he had entered.

Like a mouse he wriggled through, leaped to the ground, scrambled up
and made for the forest. He ran with all the speed at his command, and
was almost surprised when he reached the black fringe of the forest in
safety. In the protecting gloom, he dared to pause and look back.

Hagendorff was not pursuing him. From the sound, he was merely
boarding shut the drain hole, to prevent another entrance in that way;
then, afterwards, the windows.

Garth was puzzled. "I don't understand it," he said aloud. "Why is he
so sure he can get me in the morning? Isn't he afraid I'll leave the
island? Why I've _got_ to try to get away, now. It would be death to
be here after the dawn!"

He stood there making his plans. They had a rowboat below, powered
with an outboard motor. Even in his present size, he might possibly
run it, if he could get it started. He would strike down-river for
Detroit, and when the gas gave out, the current would carry him on.
Some river boat might pick him up and carry him to friends in the
city. His grotesquely dwarfed body would prove his story, and they
would bring him back and end Hagendorff's mad dream of fame, and help
him to regain his normal size. He could superintend the construction
of another machine if the present one was wrecked.

When he started down the trail to the river, he seemed to be walking
through a haze. He felt curiously light-headed, and his body was
completely numb. The long exposure was telling on him, and there was
much more of it to come. He wondered if he could hold out until he
reached the mainland.

But his mind cleared of the daze the cold and near-exhaustion had
brought it to when at last he came to the beach and realized that
again Hagendorff had anticipated him. The rowboat was gone! No wonder
the giant could afford to wait until daylight.

       *       *       *       *       *

Garth floundered down to the beach and ran to where the craft usually
lay. There was only a groove in the rough, pebbly surface, a groove
left by the boat's keel. He followed it up the bank, and twenty yards
in found the dinghy chained and locked firmly to a large tree.

The midget's face grew suddenly very haggard as he stood there,
staring at what looked like his death sentence. He should have known
Hagendorff would secure the boat, he told himself bitterly. It was a
cruel blow, and sheer misery of mind and body gripped him as he turned
and peered through the darkness of wind-whipped water and sky toward a
horizon that was already lightening. Down-river lay Detroit, a
friendly, everyday world. It was not far in miles, but it seemed lost
to him forever....

Garth took his eyes from that prospect with a wry twist to his mouth.
It chanced that they fell on the painter of the rowboat.

It was a stout Manila cord, some twenty feet in length, and tied
tightly to a ring in the bow of the boat. He looked at it dully for a
full minute before the idea came to him. Then suddenly the lethargy
bred of hopelessness left him. Garth remembered a pocket knife he had
left in the boat the day before. He climbed over the side and began to
fumble about in the darkness. First he came upon a torn handkerchief
which he hastily tied about his loins. Further probing disclosed the
knife wedged under a seat in the boat. When he had finally extricated
it, he threw the knife over the side and climbed out.

After some minutes of frantic cutting and hacking he severed the rope,
and, quickly taking up one of the ends, ran with it further along the
bank.

There was still a way of getting off the island. A cold and risky way,
but better than waiting miserably for capture. On the bank was a pile
of sawn logs, intended for firewood; and a strong rope was in his
hands. Much indeed could be done now.

       *       *       *       *       *

The making of his raft proved a herculean task, a racking and almost
impossible one for a man limited by doll-sized hands and a foot-high
body. First the logs had to be rolled to the water's edge, six of
them. Each was as thick as he was tall, and this first part of his
task took him a precious half hour, every minute of which brought
nearer the dawn. Ripples like ordinary waves washed up the struggling
manikin and left him gasping as he stood braced in the cold water and
tugged one log after another out and wound the rope under and over it.
The raft had to be built in water; he would never have been able to
drag the whole thing off the beach.

When at last he wearily tied the rope end to the last log, and stuck
his knife handy in it, the clouds on the horizon were flushed by the
coming sun. But his means of escape was completed; and hanging on the
end, he shoved the raft out into the river. Right then he almost lost
his life. For when his feet left the sloping bottom, his great weight,
out of all proportion to the size of his body, pulled him under, and
it was only by virtue of a desperate clutch on the raft that he
escaped drowning. Thrashing furiously, he struggled up from the water,
and lay, totally blown, on the logs. It was then he first realized
that his chance of life was no stronger than the rope which held them
together. For swimming was out of the question, and one or two logs
would never support his hundred and eighty pounds.

The end which he lay on was well under water, and the waves splashed
up between the bobbing logs. The current he was headed for swept down
fifty yards offshore, which was a sixth of a mile to the little legs
now thrust out behind and making a rhythmic flutter.

He was off the island! Freedom and life were near! Though his teeth
were chattering, his fingers crushed by the jarring logs, and his body
utterly wretched, he grinned with joy as the stretch between him and
the gloomy mass of the island slowly widened.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then came the sun. The skies faded from gray into a delicate,
cloud-flecked blue; slowly the air warmed, and the surface of the
water seemed to calm under it. Though the sun was good on his body,
Garth realized night was more friendly to him, for in the growing
light his craft was all too conspicuous to the giant who would
presently be following his tracks down to the beach. He chided himself
for not having thought of camouflaging the raft with leafy branches.
Doggedly, he forced it out.

When at last he felt the pull of the current, he ceased his weary
kicking and glanced up into the swiftly advancing dawn. There was a
bird soaring through the keen air up there, gliding in easy circles
with almost motionless wings. Garth gazed at it somewhat wistfully,
envying its freedom and power of flight. And then he shut his eyes. He
was very tired....

He must have dozed off for a moment, for he awoke to find himself
slipping off. With a sudden jerk he regained his position--and that
was what saved his life at that moment. For without warning, while he
was nodding, plumed death struck from the skies.

It dropped like a plummet, as was its manner. It had been circling
above and judging its swoop, and by rights its curved talons should
have arched deep into the unguarded back of the naked figure on the
raft. But at the last second the figure moved aside--too late for the
hawk to alter its swoop.

The raft rocked under the impact; for a moment Garth Howard, dazed by
the sudden attack, did not know what had happened. Huge scratching
wings were thrashing about him; his left arm stung from where a claw
had raked it; and he wrenched around to stare into two wicked slits of
eyes behind a fierce, rounded beak that jabbed at him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Evidently he represented easy prey to the hawk, for it did not soar
away, but instead came at him again in a flurry of beating wings and
stabbing beak, a vicious, feathered fighter from above. Caught off
guard by the suddenness and savagery of the onslaught, Garth retreated
stumblingly, forgetting his weight and the size of the raft and
defending himself with his arms as best he could against the rushes of
the hawk. The raft tilted perilously; water washed around his legs and
he slipped and went under.

He felt his fingers slipping inexorably over the edge of the log he
had gripped; his legs threshed up a welter of foam, but he kept going
down. Panic clutched him; his weight would sink him like a stone. But
suddenly his clutching hand was gripped by steel-like talons, and
through the water he caught a glimpse of the hawk straining backwards
with mighty sweeps of its wings in an effort to lift him bodily into
the air.

His size had deceived it. It could not hoist him, but did manage to
drag his head and chest out of the water. That was enough. With an
effort, Garth scrambled onto the raft.

The hawk, probably greatly surprised by its failure to soar away with
such tiny prey, tore into him again, raking his body painfully. Hardly
knowing what he did, Garth grabbed out as it hovered over him and
succeeded in wrapping his fingers around one of its legs. Then,
bracing himself as best he could, and ignoring the scratching wings
and piercing beak, he gave the leg a sharp twist and heard the crack
of breaking bone.

He was only half-conscious of the hawk's shrill scream of pain, of
its swift retreat into the blue, with the broken leg dangling
grotesquely. For only a moment he was aware that he had driven it off;
then the pain of his wounds and his utter exhaustion swept up over
him, and he flopped down on the raft in a dead faint....

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time Garth was dimly aware of familiar noises. At first
they were faint and scarcely perceptible; but, as his senses slowly
began to return, disturbing thoughts came to him. He felt that he was
on his back, and confined, and when he twisted, to turn over, he found
he could not. He opened his eyes and blinked.

He was back in the laboratory--lying bound, hand and foot, on the long
table.

The giant Hagendorff appeared over him, and his deep voice rumbled:

"Badly scarred and bruised, my little friend! Cats you have fought,
and birds, and each has left its mark. It was useless to run away last
night--not?"

Garth was suddenly too full of a weary resignation to even think of
speaking. Remonstrance, he knew, would avail him nothing. The long
struggle for freedom and life was over, and he had lost.

The assistant was apparently in good humor. He went on:

"Really, it is too bad, after that magnificent fight of yours! A
hawk--was it not? I was following your tracks, and had just reached
the beach when I see a great fuss on the water. A raft, I see! A bird,
attacking something on it! A little white figure, struggling! Well, it
is that easy. I unlock the boat and go to the raft and find my elusive
friend there, unconscious. So I bring him back here. He has forgotten:
we have an experiment to complete."

There was a fire of exultation in the man's eyes as they glared down
at the midget who lay on the laboratory table, just a few feet away
from the chamber of the machine. He reached out and ran a thick finger
