and 9h. 56m. in the dark belts and higher latitudes. There is some
indication that the larger part of the visible surface rotates in 9h.
55.6m., while a broad stream along the equator flows eastward some 270
miles per hour, and thus comes back to the center of the planet, as seen
from the earth, five or six minutes earlier than the parts which do not
share in this motion. Judged by terrestrial standards, 270 miles per
hour is a great velocity, but Jupiter is constructed on a colossal
scale, and, too, we have to compare this movement, not to a current
flowing in the ocean, but to a wind blowing in the upper regions of the
earth's atmosphere. The visible surface of Jupiter is only the top of a
cloud formation, and contains nothing solid or permanent, if indeed
there is anything solid even at the core of the planet. The great red
spot during the first dozen years of its existence, instead of remaining
fixed relative to the surrounding formations, drifted two thirds of the
way around the planet, and having come to a standstill about 1891, it is
now slowly retracing its path.

139. PHYSICAL CONDITION.--For a better understanding of the physical
condition of Jupiter, we have now to consider some independent lines of
evidence which agree in pointing to the conclusion that Jupiter,
although classed with the earth as a planet, is in its essential
character much more like the sun.

_Appearance._--The formations which we see in Fig. 87 look like clouds.
They gather and disappear, and the only element of permanence about them
is their tendency to group themselves along zones of latitude. If we
measure the light reflected from the planet we find that its albedo is
very high, like that of snow or our own cumulus clouds, and it is of
course greater from the light parts of the disk than from the darker
bands. The spectroscope shows that the sunlight reflected from these
darker belts is like that reflected from the lighter parts, save that a
larger portion of the blue and violet rays has been absorbed out of it,
thus producing the ruddy tint of the belts, as sunset colors are
produced on the earth, and showing that here the light has penetrated
farther into the planet's atmosphere before being thrown back by
reflection from lower-lying cloud surfaces. The dark bands are therefore
to be regarded as rifts in the clouds, reaching down to some
considerable distance and indicating an atmosphere of great depth. The
great red spot, 28,000 miles long, and obviously thrusting back the
white clouds on every side of it, year after year, can hardly be a mere
patch on the face of the planet, but indicates some considerable depth
of atmosphere.

_Density._--So, too, the small mean density of the planet, only 1.3
times that of water and actually less than the density of the sun,
suggests that the larger part of the planet's bulk may be made of gases
and clouds, with very little solid matter even at the center; but here
we get into a difficulty from which there seems but one escape. The
force of gravity at the visible surface of Jupiter may be found from its
mass and dimensions to be 2.6 times as great as at the surface of the
earth, and the pressure exerted upon its atmosphere by this force ought
to compress the lower strata into something more dense than we find in
the planet. Some idea of this compression may be obtained from Fig. 88,
where the line marked _E_ shows approximately how the density of the air
increases as we move from its upper strata down toward the surface of
the earth through a distance of 16 miles, the density at any level being
proportional to the distance of the curved line from the straight one
near it. The line marked _J_ in the same figure shows how the density
would increase if the force of gravity were as great here as it is in
Jupiter, and indicates a much greater rate of increase. Starting from
the upper surface of the cloud in Jupiter's atmosphere, if we descend,
not 16 miles, but 1,600 or 16,000, what must the density of the
atmosphere become and how is this to be reconciled with what we know to
be the very small mean density of the planet?

We are here in a dilemma between density on the one hand and the effects
of gravity on the other, and the only escape from it lies in the
assumption that the interior of Jupiter is tremendously hot, and that
this heat expands the substance of the planet in spite of the pressure
to which it is subject, making a large planet with a low density,
possibly gaseous at the very center, but in its outer part surrounded by
a shell of clouds condensed from the gases by radiating their heat into
the cold of outer space.

[Illustration: FIG. 88.--Increase of density in the atmospheres of
Jupiter and the earth.]

This is essentially the same physical condition that we found for the
sun, and we may add, as further points of resemblance between it and
Jupiter, that there seems to be a circulation of matter from the hot
interior of the planet to its cooler surface that is more pronounced in
the southern hemisphere than in the northern, and that has its periods
of maximum and minimum activity, which, curiously enough, seem to
coincide with periods of maximum and minimum sun-spot development. Of
this, however, we can not be entirely sure, since it is only in recent
years that it has been studied with sufficient care, and further
observations are required to show whether the agreement is something
more than an accidental and short-lived coincidence.

_Temperature._--The temperature of Jupiter must, of course, be much
lower than that of the sun, since the surface which we see is not
luminous like the sun's; but below the clouds it is not improbable that
Jupiter may be incandescent, white hot, and it is surmised with some
show of probability that a little of its light escapes through the
clouds from time to time, and helps to produce the striking brilliancy
with which this planet shines.

140. THE SATELLITES OF JUPITER.--The satellites bear much the same
relation to Jupiter that the moon bears to the earth, revolving about
the planet in accordance with the law of gravitation, and conforming to
Kepler's three laws, as do the planets in their courses about the sun.
Observe in Fig. 86 the position of satellite No. _1_ on the four dates,
and note how it oscillates back and forth from left to right of Jupiter,
apparently making a complete revolution in about two days, while No. _4_
moves steadily from left to right during the entire period, and has
evidently made only a fraction of a revolution in the time covered by
the pictures. This quicker motion, of course, means that No. _1_ is
nearer to Jupiter than No. _4_, and the numbers given to the satellites
show the order of their distances from the planet. The peculiar way in
which the satellites are grouped, always standing nearly in a straight
line, shows that their orbits must lie nearly in the same plane, and
that this plane, which is also the plane of the planets' equator, is
turned edgewise toward the earth.

These satellites enjoy the distinction of being the first objects ever
discovered with the telescope, having been found by Galileo almost
immediately after its invention, A. D. 1610. It is quite possible that
before this time they may have been seen with the naked eye, for in more
recent years reports are current that they have been seen under
favorable circumstances by sharp-eyed persons, and very little
telescopic aid is required to show them. Look for them with an opera or
field glass. They bear the names Io, Europa, Ganymede, Callisto, which,
however, are rarely used, and, following the custom of astronomers, we
shall designate them by the Roman numerals I, II, III, IV.

[Illustration: FIG. 89.--Orbits of Jupiter's satellites.]

For nearly three centuries (1610 to 1892) astronomers spoke of the four
satellites of Jupiter; but in September, 1892, a fifth one was added to
the number by Professor Barnard, who, observing with the largest
telescope then extant, found very close to Jupiter a tiny object only
1/600 part as bright as the other satellites, but, like them, revolving
around Jupiter, a permanent member of his system. This is called the
fifth satellite, and Fig. 89 shows the orbits of these satellites around
Jupiter, which is here represented on the same scale as the orbits
themselves. The broken line just inside the orbit of I represents the
size of the moon's orbit. The cut shows also the periodic times of the
satellites expressed in days, and furnishes in this respect a striking
illustration of the great mass of Jupiter. Satellite I is a little
farther from Jupiter than is the moon from the earth, but under the
influence of a greater attraction it makes the circuit of its orbit in
1.77 days, instead of taking 29.53 days, as does the moon. Determine
from the figure by the method employed in § 111 how much more massive is
Jupiter than the earth.

Small as these satellites seem in Fig. 86, they are really bodies of
considerable size, as appears from Fig. 90, where their dimensions are
compared with those of the earth and moon, save that the fifth satellite
is not included. This one is so small as to escape all attempts at
measuring its diameter, but, judging from the amount of light it
reflects, the period printed with the legend of the figure represents a
gross exaggeration of this satellite's size.

[Illustration: FIG. 90.--Jupiter's satellites compared with the earth
and moon.]

Like the moon, each of these satellites may fairly be considered a world
in itself, and as such a fitting object of detailed study, but,
unfortunately, their great distance from us makes it impossible, even
with the most powerful telescope, to see more upon their surfaces than
occasional vague markings, which hardly suffice to show the rotations of
the satellites upon their axes.

One striking feature, however, comes out from a study of their influence
in disturbing each other's motion about Jupiter. Their masses and the
resulting densities of the satellites are smaller than we should have
expected to find, the density being less than that of the moon, and
averaging only a little greater than the density of Jupiter itself. At
the surface of the third satellite the force of gravity is but little
less than on the moon, although the moon's density is nearly twice as
great as that of III, and there can be no question here of accounting
for the low density through expansion by great heat, as in the case of
the sun and Jupiter. It has been surmised that these satellites are not
solid bodies, like the earth and moon, but only shoals of rock and
stone, loosely piled together and kept from packing into a solid mass by
the action of Jupiter in raising tides within them. But the explanation
can hardly be regarded as an accepted article of astronomical belief,
although it is supported by some observations which tend to show that
the apparent shapes of the satellites change under the influence of the
tidal forces impressed upon them.

141. ECLIPSES OF THE SATELLITES.--It may be seen from Fig. 89 that in
their motion around the planet Jupiter's satellites must from time to
time pass through his shadow and be eclipsed, and that the shadows of
the satellites will occasionally fall upon the planet, producing to an
observer upon Jupiter an eclipse of the sun, but to an observer on the
earth presenting only the appearance of a round black spot moving slowly
across the face of the planet. Occasionally also a satellite will pass
exactly between the earth and Jupiter, and may be seen projected against
the planet as a background. All of these phenomena are duly predicted
and observed by astronomers, but the eclipses are the only ones we need
consider here. The importance of these eclipses was early recognized,
and astronomers endeavored to construct a theory of their recurrence
which would permit accurate predictions of them to be made. But in this
they met with no great success, for while it was easy enough to foretell
on what night an eclipse of a given satellite would occur, and even to
assign the hour of the night, it was not possible to make the predicted
minute agree with the actual time of eclipse until after Roemer, a
Danish astronomer of the seventeenth century, found where lay the
trouble. His discovery was, that whenever the earth was on the side of
its orbit toward Jupiter the eclipses really occurred before the
predicted time, and when the earth was on the far side of its orbit they
came a few minutes later than the predicted time. He correctly inferred
that this was to be explained, not by any influence which the earth
exerted upon Jupiter and his satellites, but through the fact that the
light by which we see the satellite and its eclipse requires an
appreciable time to cross the intervening space, and a longer time when
the earth is far from Jupiter than when it is near.

For half a century Roemer's views found little credence, but we know now
that he was right, and that on the average the eclipses come 8m. 18s.
early when the earth is nearest to Jupiter, and 8m. 18s. late when it is
on the opposite side of its orbit. This is equivalent to saying that
light takes 8m. 18s. to cover the distance from the sun to the earth, so
that at any moment we see the sun not as it then is, but as it was 8
minutes earlier. It has been found possible in recent years to measure
by direct experiment the velocity with which light travels--186,337
miles per second--and multiplying this number by the 498s. (= 8m. 18s.)
we obtain a new determination of the sun's distance from the earth. The
product of the two numbers is 92,795,826, in very fair agreement with
the 93,000,000 miles found in Chapter X; but, as noted there, this
method, like every other, has its weak side, and the result may be a
good many thousands of miles in error.

It is worthy of note in this connection that both methods of obtaining
the sun's distance which were given in Chapter X involve Kepler's Third
Law, while the result obtained from Jupiter's satellites is entirely
independent of this law, and the agreement of the several results is
therefore good evidence both for the truth of Kepler's laws and for the
soundness of Roemer's explanation of the eclipses. This mode of proof,
by comparing the numerical results furnished by two or more different
principles, and showing that they agree or disagree, is of wide
application and great importance in physical science.


SATURN

142. THE RING OF SATURN.--In respect of size and mass Saturn stands next
to Jupiter, and although far inferior to him in these respects, it
contains more material than all the remaining planets combined. But the
unique feature of Saturn which distinguishes it from every other known
body in the heavens is its ring, which was long a puzzle to the
astronomers who first studied the planet with a telescope (one of them
called Saturn a planet with ears), but, was after nearly half a century
correctly understood and described by Huyghens, whose Latin text we
translate into--"It is surrounded by a ring, thin, flat, nowhere
touching it, and making quite an angle with the ecliptic."

[Illustration: FIG. 91.--Aspects of Saturn's rings.]

Compare with this description Fig. 91, which shows some of the
appearances presented by the ring at different positions of Saturn in
its orbit. It was their varying aspects that led Huyghens to insert the
last words of his description, for, if the plane of the ring coincided
with the plane of the earth's orbit, then at all times the ring must be
turned edgewise toward the earth, as shown in the middle picture of the
group. Fig. 92 shows the sun and the orbit of the earth placed near the
center of Saturn's orbit, across whose circumference are ruled some
oblique lines representing the plane of the ring, the right end always
tilted up, no matter where the planet is in its orbit. It is evident
that an observer upon the earth will see the _N_ side of the ring when
the planet is at _N_ and the _S_ side when it is at _S_, as is shown in
the first and third pictures of Fig. 91, while midway between these
positions the edge of the ring will be presented to the earth.

[Illustration: FIG. 92.--Aspects of the ring in their relation to
Saturn's orbital motion.]

The last occasion of this kind was in October, 1891, and with the large
telescope of the Washburn Observatory the writer at that time saw
Saturn without a trace of a ring surrounding it. The ring is so thin
that it disappears altogether when turned edgewise. The names of the
zodiacal constellations are inserted in Fig. 92 in their proper
direction from the sun, and from these we learn that the ring will
disappear, or be exceedingly narrow, whenever Saturn is in the
constellation Pisces or near the boundary line between Leo and Virgo. It
will be broad and show its northern side when Saturn is in Scorpius or
Sagittarius, and its southern face when the planet is in Gemini. What
will be its appearance in 1907 at the date marked in the figure?

143. NATURE OF THE RING.--It is apparent from Figs. 91 and 93 that
Saturn's ring is really made up of two or more rings lying one inside of
the other and completely separated by a dark space which, though narrow,
is as clean and sharp as if cut with a knife. Also, the inner edge of
the ring fades off into an obscure border called the _dusky ring_ or
_crape ring_. This requires a pretty good telescope to show it, as may
be inferred from the fact that it escaped notice for more than two
centuries during which the planet was assiduously studied with
telescopes, and was discovered at the Harvard College Observatory as
recently as 1850.

Although the rings appear oval in all of the pictures, this is mainly an
effect of perspective, and they are in fact nearly circular with the
planet at their center. The extreme diameter of the ring is 172,000
miles, and from this number, by methods already explained (Chapter IX),
the student should obtain the width of the rings, their distance from
the ball of the planet, and the diameter of the ball. As to thickness,
it is evident, from the disappearance of the ring when its edge is
turned toward the earth, that it is very thin in comparison with its
diameter, probably not more than 100 miles thick, although no exact
measurement of this can be made.

[Illustration: FIG. 93.--Saturn.]

From theoretical reasons based upon the law of gravitation astronomers
have held that the rings of Saturn could not possibly be solid or
liquid bodies. The strains impressed upon them by the planet's
attraction would tear into fragments steel rings made after their size
and shape. Quite recently Professor Keeler has shown, by applying the
spectroscope (Doppler's principle) to determine the velocity of the
ring's rotation about Saturn, that the inner parts of the ring move, as
Kepler's Third Law requires, more rapidly than do the outer parts, thus
furnishing a direct proof that they are not solid, and leaving no doubt
that they are made up of separate fragments, each moving about the
planet in its own orbit, like an independent satellite, but standing so
close to its neighbors that the whole space reflects the sunlight as
completely as if it were solid. With this understanding of the rings it
is easy to see why they are so thin. Like Jupiter, Saturn is greatly
flattened at the poles, and this flattening, or rather the protuberant
mass about the equator, lays hold of every satellite near the planet and
exerts upon it a direct force tending to thrust it down into the plane
of the planet's equator and hold it there. The ring lies in the plane of
Saturn's equator because each particle is constrained to move there.

The division of the ring into two parts, an outer and an inner ring, is
usually explained as follows: Saturn is surrounded by a numerous brood
of satellites, which by their attractions produce perturbations in the
material composing the rings, and the dividing line between the outer
and inner rings falls at the place where by the law of gravitation the
perturbations would have their greatest effect. The dividing line
between the rings is therefore a narrow lane, 2,400 miles wide, from
which the fragments have been swept clean away by the perturbing action
of the satellites. Less conspicuous divisions are seen from time to time
in other parts of the ring, where the perturbations, though less, are
still appreciable. But it is open to some question whether this
explanation is sufficient.

The curious darkness of the inner or crape ring is easily explained.
The particles composing it are not packed together so closely as in the
outer ring, and therefore reflect less sunlight. Indeed, so sparsely
strewn are the particles in this ring that it is in great measure
transparent to the sunlight, as is shown by a recorded observation of
one of the satellites which was distinctly although faintly seen while
moving through the shadow of the dark ring, but disappeared in total
eclipse when it entered the shadow cast by the bright ring.

144. THE BALL OF SATURN.--The ball of the planet is in most respects a
smaller copy of Jupiter. With an equatorial diameter of 76,000 miles, a
polar diameter of 69,000 miles, and a mass 95 times that of the earth,
its density is found to be the least of any planet in the solar system,
only 0.70 of the density of water, and about one half as great as is the
density of Jupiter. The force of gravity at its surface is only a little
greater (1.18) than on the earth; and this, in connection with the low
density, leads, as in the case of Jupiter, to the conclusion that the
planet must be mainly composed of gases and vapors, very hot within, but
inclosed by a shell of clouds which cuts off their glow from our eyes.

Like Jupiter in another respect, the planet turns very swiftly upon its
axis, making a revolution in 10 hours 14 minutes, but up to the present
it remains unknown whether different parts of the surface have different
rotation times.

145. THE SATELLITES.--Saturn is attended by a family of nine satellites,
a larger number than belongs to any other planet, but with one exception
they are exceedingly small and difficult to observe save with a very
large telescope. Indeed, the latest one is said to have been discovered
in 1898 by means of the image which it impressed upon a photographic
plate, and it has never been _seen_.

Titan, the largest of them, is distant 771,000 miles from the planet and
bears much the same relation to Saturn that Satellite III bears to
Jupiter, the similarity in distance, size and mass being rather
striking, although, of course, the smaller mass of Saturn as compared
with Jupiter makes the periodic time of Titan--15 days 23 hours--much
greater than that of III. Can you apply Kepler's Third Law to the motion
of Titan so as to determine from the data given above, the time required
for a particle at the outer or inner edge of the ring to revolve once
around Saturn?

Japetus, the second satellite in point of size, whose distance from
Saturn is about ten times as great as the moon's distance from the
earth, presents the remarkable peculiarity of being always brighter in
one part of its orbit than in another, three or four times as bright
when west of Saturn as when east of it. This probably indicates that,
like our own moon, the satellite turns always the same face toward its
planet, and further, that one side of the satellite reflects the
sunlight much better than the other side--i. e., has a higher albedo.
With these two assumptions it is easily seen that the satellite will
always turn toward the earth one face when west, and the other face when
east of Saturn, and thus give the observed difference of brightness.


URANUS AND NEPTUNE

146. CHIEF CHARACTERISTICS.--The two remaining large planets are
interesting chiefly as modern additions to the known members of the
sun's family. The circumstances leading to the discovery of Neptune have
