thy fair lady."

"Who be ye, that thus rudely breaks in upon the peace of my castle, and
makes bold to insult my guests?" demanded Roger de Leybourn.

"Who be I! If you wait, you shall see my mark upon the forehead of yon
grinning baboon," replied the outlaw, pointing a mailed finger at one
who had been seated close to De Leybourn.

All eyes turned in the direction that the rigid finger of the outlaw
indicated, and there indeed was a fearful apparition of a man. With
livid face he stood, leaning for support against the table; his craven
knees wabbling beneath his fat carcass; while his lips were drawn apart
against his yellow teeth in a horrid grimace of awful fear.

"If you recognize me not, Sir Roger," said Norman of Torn, drily, "it is
evident that your honored guest hath a better memory."

At last the fear-struck man found his tongue, and, though his eyes never
left the menacing figure of the grim, iron-clad outlaw, he addressed the
master of Leybourn; shrieking in a high, awe-emasculated falsetto:

"Seize him! Kill him! Set your men upon him! Do you wish to live another
moment, draw and defend yourselves for he be the Devil of Torn, and
there be a great price upon his head.

"Oh, save me, save me! for he has come to kill me," he ended in a
pitiful wail.

The Devil of Torn! How that name froze the hearts of the assembled
guests.

The Devil of Torn! Slowly the men standing there at the board of Sir
Roger de Leybourn grasped the full purport of that awful name.

Tense silence for a moment held the room in the stillness of a
sepulchre, and then a woman shrieked, and fell prone across the table.
She had seen the mark of the Devil of Torn upon the dead brow of her
mate.

And then Roger de Leybourn spoke:

"Norman of Torn, but once before have you entered within the walls of
Leybourn, and then you did, in the service of another, a great service
for the house of Leybourn; and you stayed the night, an honored guest.
But a moment since, you said that you had no quarrel with me. Then why
be you here? Speak! Shall it be as a friend or an enemy that the master
of Leybourn greets Norman of Torn; shall it be with outstretched hand or
naked sword?"

"I come for this man, whom you may all see has good reason to fear me.
And when I go, I take part of him with me. I be in a great hurry, so I
would prefer to take my great and good friend, Peter of Colfax, without
interference; but, if you wish it otherwise; we be a score strong within
your walls, and nigh a thousand lie without. What say you, My Lord?"

"Your grievance against Peter of Colfax must be a mighty one, that you
search him out thus within a day's ride from the army of the King who
has placed a price upon your head, and from another army of men who be
equally your enemies."

"I would gladly go to hell after Peter of Colfax," replied the outlaw.
"What my grievance be matters not. Norman of Torn acts first and
explains afterward, if he cares to explain at all. Come forth, Peter of
Colfax, and for once in your life, fight like a man, that you may save
your friends here from the fate that has found you at last after two
years of patient waiting."

Slowly, the palsied limbs of the great coward bore him tottering to the
center of the room, where gradually a little clear space had been made;
the men of the party forming a circle, in the center of which stood
Peter of Colfax and Norman of Torn.

"Give him a great draught of brandy," said the outlaw, "or he will sink
down and choke in the froth of his own terror."

When they had forced a goblet of the fiery liquid upon him, Peter of
Colfax regained his lost nerve enough so that he could raise his sword
arm and defend himself and, as the fumes circulated through him, and the
primal instinct of self-preservation asserted itself, he put up a more
and more creditable fight, until those who watched thought that he might
indeed have a chance to vanquish the Outlaw of Torn. But they did not
know that Norman of Torn was but playing with his victim, that he might
make the torture long, drawn out, and wreak as terrible a punishment
upon Peter of Colfax, before he killed him, as the Baron had visited
upon Bertrade de Montfort because she would not yield to his base
desires.

The guests were craning their necks to follow every detail of the
fascinating drama that was being enacted before them.

"God, what a swordsman!" muttered one.

"Never was such swordplay seen since the day the first sword was
drawn from the first scabbard!" replied Roger de Leybourn. "Is it not
marvellous!"

Slowly but surely was Norman of Torn cutting Peter of Colfax to pieces;
little by little, and with such fiendish care that, except for loss
of blood, the man was in no way crippled; nor did the outlaw touch
his victim's face with his gleaming sword. That he was saving for the
fulfillment of his design.

And Peter of Colfax, cornered and fighting for his life, was no
marrowless antagonist, even against the Devil of Torn. Furiously he
fought; in the extremity of his fear, rushing upon his executioner with
frenzied agony. Great beads of cold sweat stood upon his livid brow.

And then the gleaming point of Norman of Torn flashed, lightning-like,
in his victim's face, and above the right eye of Peter of Colfax was a
thin vertical cut from which the red blood had barely started to ooze
ere another swift move of that master sword hand placed a fellow to
parallel the first.

Five times did the razor point touch the forehead of Peter of Colfax,
until the watchers saw there, upon the brow of the doomed man, the seal
of death, in letters of blood--NT.

It was the end. Peter of Colfax, cut to ribbons yet fighting like the
maniac he had become, was as good as dead, for the mark of the Outlaw of
Torn was upon his brow. Now, shrieking and gibbering through his frothy
lips, his yellow fangs bared in a mad and horrid grin, he rushed full
upon Norman of Torn. There was a flash of the great sword as the outlaw
swung it to the full of his mighty strength through an arc that passed
above the shoulders of Peter of Colfax, and the grinning head rolled
upon the floor, while the loathsome carcass, that had been a baron of
England, sunk in a disheveled heap among the rushes of the great hall of
the castle of Leybourn.

A little shudder passed through the wide-eyed guests. Some one broke
into hysterical laughter, a woman sobbed, and then Norman of Torn,
wiping his blade upon the rushes of the floor as he had done upon
another occasion in that same hall, spoke quietly to the master of
Leybourn.

"I would borrow yon golden platter, My Lord. It shall be returned, or a
mightier one in its stead."

Leybourn nodded his assent, and Norman of Torn turned, with a few words
of instructions, to one of his men.

The fellow gathered up the head of Peter of Colfax, and placed it upon
the golden platter.

"I thank you, Sir Roger, for your hospitality," said Norman of Torn,
with a low bow which included the spellbound guests. "Adieu." Thus
followed by his men, one bearing the head of Peter of Colfax upon the
platter of gold, Norman of Torn passed quietly from the hall and from
the castle.




CHAPTER XVIII

Both horses and men were fairly exhausted from the gruelling strain of
many days of marching and fighting, so Norman of Torn went into camp
that night; nor did he again take up his march until the second morning,
three days after the battle of Lewes.

He bent his direction toward the north and Leicester's castle, where he
had reason to believe he would find a certain young woman, and though it
galled his sore heart to think upon the humiliation that lay waiting his
coming, he could not do less than that which he felt his honor demanded.

Beside him on the march rode the fierce red giant, Shandy, and the wiry,
gray little man of Torn, whom the outlaw called father.

In no way, save the gray hair and the parchment-surfaced skin, had
the old fellow changed in all these years. Without bodily vices, and
clinging ever to the open air and the exercise of the foil, he was still
young in muscle and endurance.

For five years, he had not crossed foils with Norman of Torn, but he
constantly practiced with the best swordsmen of the wild horde, so that
it had become a subject often discussed among the men as to which of the
two, father or son, was the greater swordsman.

Always taciturn, the old fellow rode in his usual silence. Long since
had Norman of Torn usurped by the force of his strong character and
masterful ways, the position of authority in the castle of Torn. The old
man simply rode and fought with the others when it pleased him; and he
had come on this trip because he felt that there was that impending for
which he had waited over twenty years.

Cold and hard, he looked with no love upon the man he still called "my
son." If he held any sentiment toward Norman of Torn, it was one of
pride which began and ended in the almost fiendish skill of his pupil's
mighty sword arm.

The little army had been marching for some hours when the advance guard
halted a party bound south upon a crossroad. There were some twenty or
thirty men, mostly servants, and a half dozen richly garbed knights.

As Norman of Torn drew rein beside them, he saw that the leader of the
party was a very handsome man of about his own age, and evidently a
person of distinction; a profitable prize, thought the outlaw.

"Who are you," said the gentleman, in French, "that stops a prince of
France upon the highroad as though he were an escaped criminal? Are you
of the King's forces, or De Montfort's?"

"Be this Prince Philip of France?" asked Norman of Torn.

"Yes, but who be you?"

"And be you riding to meet my Lady Bertrade de Montfort?" continued the
outlaw, ignoring the Prince's question.

"Yes, an it be any of your affair," replied Philip curtly.

"It be," said the Devil of Torn, "for I be a friend of My Lady Bertrade,
and as the way be beset with dangers from disorganized bands of roving
soldiery, it is unsafe for Monsieur le Prince to venture on with so
small an escort. Therefore will the friend of Lady Bertrade de Montfort
ride with Monsieur le Prince to his destination that Monsieur may arrive
there safely."

"It is kind of you, Sir Knight, a kindness that I will not forget. But,
again, who is it that shows this solicitude for Philip of France?"

"Norman of Torn, they call me," replied the outlaw.

"Indeed!" cried Philip. "The great and bloody outlaw?" Upon his handsome
face there was no look of fear or repugnance.

Norman of Torn laughed.

"Monsieur le Prince thinks, mayhap, that he will make a bad name for
himself," he said, "if he rides in such company?"

"My Lady Bertrade and her mother think you be less devil than saint,"
said the Prince. "They have told me of how you saved the daughter of De
Montfort, and, ever since, I have been of a great desire to meet you,
and to thank you. It had been my intention to ride to Torn for that
purpose so soon as we reached Leicester, but the Earl changed all our
plans by his victory and only yesterday, on his orders, the Princess
Eleanor, his wife, with the Lady Bertrade, rode to Battel, where Simon
de Montfort and the King are to be today. The Queen also is there
with her retinue, so it be expected that, to show the good feeling and
renewed friendship existing between De Montfort and his King, there will
be gay scenes in the old fortress. But," he added, after a pause, "dare
the Outlaw of Torn ride within reach of the King who has placed a price
upon his head?"

"The price has been there since I was eighteen," answered Norman of
Torn, "and yet my head be where it has always been. Can you blame me
if I look with levity upon the King's price? It be not heavy enough to
weigh me down; nor never has it held me from going where I listed in all
England. I am freer than the King, My Lord, for the King be a prisoner
today."

Together they rode toward Battel, and as they talked, Norman of Torn
grew to like this brave and handsome gentleman. In his heart was no
rancor because of the coming marriage of the man to the woman he loved.

If Bertrade de Montfort loved this handsome French prince, then Norman
of Torn was his friend; for his love was a great love, above jealousy.
It not only held her happiness above his own, but the happiness and
welfare of the man she loved, as well.

It was dusk when they reached Battel and as Norman of Torn bid the
prince adieu, for the horde was to make camp just without the city, he
said:

"May I ask My Lord to carry a message to Lady Bertrade? It is in
reference to a promise I made her two years since and which I now, for
the first time, be able to fulfill."

"Certainly, my friend," replied Philip. The outlaw, dismounting, called
upon one of his squires for parchment, and, by the light of a torch,
wrote a message to Bertrade de Montfort.

Half an hour later, a servant in the castle of Battel handed the missive
to the daughter of Leicester as she sat alone in her apartment. Opening
it, she read:

To Lady Bertrade de Montfort, from her friend, Norman of Torn.

Two years have passed since you took the hand of the Outlaw of Torn in
friendship, and now he comes to sue for another favor.

It is that he may have speech with you, alone, in the castle of Battel
this night.

Though the name Norman of Torn be fraught with terror to others, I know
that you do not fear him, for you must know the loyalty and friendship
which he bears you.

My camp lies without the city's gates, and your messenger will have safe
conduct whatever reply he bears to,

Norman of Torn.

Fear? Fear Norman of Torn? The girl smiled as she thought of that moment
of terrible terror two years ago when she learned, in the castle of
Peter of Colfax, that she was alone with, and in the power of, the Devil
of Torn. And then she recalled his little acts of thoughtful chivalry,
nay, almost tenderness, on the long night ride to Leicester.

What a strange contradiction of a man! She wondered if he would come
with lowered visor, for she was still curious to see the face that lay
behind the cold, steel mask. She would ask him this night to let her see
his face, or would that be cruel? For, did they not say that it was
from the very ugliness of it that he kept his helm closed to hide the
repulsive sight from the eyes of men!

As her thoughts wandered back to her brief meeting with him two years
before, she wrote and dispatched her reply to Norman of Torn.

In the great hall that night as the King's party sat at supper, Philip
of France, addressing Henry, said:

"And who thinkest thou, My Lord King, rode by my side to Battel today,
that I might not be set upon by knaves upon the highway?"

"Some of our good friends from Kent?" asked the King.

"Nay, it was a man upon whose head Your Majesty has placed a price,
Norman of Torn; and if all of your English highwaymen be as courteous
and pleasant gentlemen as he, I shall ride always alone and unarmed
through your realm that I may add to my list of pleasant acquaintances."

"The Devil of Torn?" asked Henry, incredulously. "Some one be hoaxing
you."

"Nay, Your Majesty, I think not," replied Philip, "for he was indeed a
grim and mighty man, and at his back rode as ferocious and awe-inspiring
a pack as ever I beheld outside a prison; fully a thousand strong they
rode. They be camped not far without the city now."

"My Lord," said Henry, turning to Simon de Montfort, "be it not time
that England were rid of this devil's spawn and his hellish brood?
Though I presume," he added, a sarcastic sneer upon his lip, "that it
may prove embarrassing for My Lord Earl of Leicester to turn upon his
companion in arms."

"I owe him nothing," returned the Earl haughtily, "by his own word."

"You owe him victory at Lewes," snapped the King. "It were indeed a
sad commentary upon the sincerity of our loyalty-professing lieges
who turned their arms against our royal person, 'to save him from the
treachery of his false advisers,' that they called upon a cutthroat
outlaw with a price upon his head to aid them in their 'righteous
cause'."

"My Lord King," cried De Montfort, flushing with anger, "I called not
upon this fellow, nor did I know he was within two hundred miles of
Lewes until I saw him ride into the midst of the conflict that day.
Neither did I know, until I heard his battle cry, whether he would fall
upon baron or royalist."

"If that be the truth, Leicester," said the King, with a note of
skepticism which he made studiously apparent, "hang the dog. He be just
without the city even now."

"You be King of England, My Lord Henry. If you say that he shall be
hanged, hanged he shall be," replied De Montfort.

"A dozen courts have already passed sentence upon him, it only remains
to catch him, Leicester," said the King.

"A party shall sally forth at dawn to do the work," replied De Montfort.

"And not," thought Philip of France, "if I know it, shall the brave
Outlaw of Torn be hanged tomorrow."

In his camp without the city of Battel, Norman of Torn paced back and
forth waiting an answer to his message.

Sentries patrolled the entire circumference of the bivouac, for the
outlaw knew full well that he had put his head within the lion's jaw
when he had ridden thus boldly to the seat of English power. He had no
faith in the gratitude of De Montfort, and he knew full well what the
King would urge when he learned that the man who had sent his soldiers
naked back to London, who had forced his messenger to eat the King's
message, and who had turned his victory to defeat at Lewes, was within
reach of the army of De Montfort.

Norman of Torn loved to fight, but he was no fool, and so he did not
relish pitting his thousand upon an open plain against twenty thousand
within a walled fortress.

No, he would see Bertrade de Montfort that night and before dawn his
rough band would be far on the road toward Torn. The risk was great to
enter the castle, filled as it was with his mighty enemies. But if he
died there, it would be in a good cause, thought he and, anyway, he had
