water when we try the new projector."

The _Esperance_ swung about and headed back toward the island. The sea
and the distant island looked comfortingly normal and beautiful in the
sunshine. Under so blue a sky it did not seem reasonable to worry about
anything. Events or schemes at the bottom of the sea seemed certainly
the last things to be likely to matter to anyone.

Terry had the _Esperance_ almost between the reefs before he tried the
new contrivance. If it worked, it should be possible to make a relief
map of the ocean bottom with every height and depth on the sea-bed
plotted with precision.

He started to operate the new instrument. First he traced the steep
descent from the flanks of the submarine mountain whose tip was Thrawn
Island. He traced them down to the abyss which was the Luzon Deep. Then
he began to trace the ocean bottom at its extreme depth, on what should
have been submarine plains at the foot of the submerged mountain. The
instrument began to give extraordinary readings. The bottom, in a
certain spot, read forty-five hundred fathoms down. But suddenly there
was a reading of twenty-five hundred. There was a huge obstruction,
twelve thousand feet above the bottom of the sea, more than twenty
thousand feet below the surface. The instrument scanned the area.
Something else was found eighteen hundred fathoms up. These were objects
of enormous size, floating, or perhaps swimming in the blackness. They
were not whales. Whales are air-breathers. They cannot stay too long in
deep waters, motionless between the top and the bottom of the sea.

The instrument picked up more and more such objects. Some were
twenty-five hundred fathoms from the bottom, and two thousand from the
surface. Some were twenty-two hundred up, and twenty-three hundred down.
There were eighteen hundred-fathom readings, and twenty-one, and
twenty-four, and nineteen. The readings were of objects bigger than
whales. They rose very slowly, and appeared to rest, then rose some
more, and rested....

Blank faces turned to Terry. He licked his lips and looked for Deirdre.
Then he said evenly, "We go into the lagoon. And if we come out
again--if!--we leave Deirdre ashore, unless these readings have been
cleared up. There are chances I'm not willing to take."

The _Esperance_ headed in. It was not possible for the new instrument to
tell what the large objects were. They could be monstrous living
creatures, perhaps squids, and one could only guess that their errand
was to deal with the surface-creatures--men--who speared fish and giant
squids and set off explosions in the Luzon Deep.

Or the rising objects could be, say, bolides which had dived into the
Deep from outer space and were now coming to the surface to make sure
that the natives of the earth did not again disturb the depths taken
over by beings from another planet.




_Nine_


The sun rose high in the sky as the _Esperance_ returned to the wharf.
Davis went ashore and held lengthy conversations with Manila by
short-wave radio. The biologists essayed to investigate the squid. _La
Rubia_ still attempted to catch fish. All efforts seemed to tend toward
frustration.

When Terry walked over to see his victim at close range, he found the
biologists balked by the mere huge size of the squid. There were
literally tens of tons of flesh to be handled. Squid have no backbone,
but a modified internal shell is important to biologists for study. The
biologists wanted it. The gills needed to be examined, and their
position under the mantle noted, and their filaments counted. The
nervous system of the huge creature must have its oddities. But the
actual preservation of the squid was out of the question. The mere
handling of so large an object was an engineering problem.

Terry consulted the frenziedly swearing Capitan Saavedra, who was ready
to weep with sheer rage as he contemplated torn nets, and fish he could
not capture. Squids were an article of commerce. Terry took the Capitan
to view this one. His crew would help the biologists get at the
scientifically important items, and for reward they would have the rest
of the giant--more than they could load upon _La Rubia_. This would make
their voyage profitable, and the Capitan would have the opportunity to
tell the most stupendous story of his capture and killing of the giant.
With the evidence he'd have, people might believe him.

Presently, the crewmen of _La Rubia_ clambered over the monster, huge
knives at work under the direction of the men from Manila. There was
bitter dispute with the tracking station cook, who objected to the use
of his refrigeration space to freeze biological material before it was
sent to Manila by helicopter.

In mid-afternoon the _Esperance_ left the lagoon again. The
sonar-depth-finder probed the depths delicately. The objects in mid-sea,
it appeared, had been rising steadily. Their previous position had
averaged twenty-five hundred fathoms deep. They were now less than two
thousand fathoms down, and there were many of them. Unfortunately, the
_Esperance_ was not a steady enough platform for the instrument. But a
fairly accurate calculation was made, and if the unidentified objects
continued their ascent at their present rate, they would surface not
long after sunrise. Then what?

Increasingly urgent queries came by short-wave, asking for Dr. Morton's
explanation of how he had computed the landing place and time of the
latest bolide. His accuracy was not disputed. But astronomers and
physicists wanted to be able to do it themselves. How had he done it?

Terry came upon him sitting gloomily before a cup of coffee in the
tracking station. Davis was there too.

"I wish I hadn't done it," Morton confided. "It's one of those things
that shouldn't happen. It's bad enough to have a giant squid to account
for. They tell me it's a new species, by the way. Never found or even
described before. One of the _Pelorus_ men tells me it's an immature
specimen, too. It's not full-grown! What will a grown-up one be like?"

"I have a hunch we'll find out when those submerged giants reach the
surface," said Davis unhappily.

Terry said, "The one we killed couldn't get out of the water. I wonder
if the adult forms can walk over the land!"

Davis stared. "Should we send Deirdre to safety on the _Esperance_?"

"Safety?" asked Terry. "On a boat? When a mass of bubbles from undersea
could provoke such a turmoil in the water that no ship could stay
afloat? That's how one ship disappeared. It might be the _Esperance's_
turn next. Who knows?" Then he added, "There's no limit to the size of a
swimming creature!"

A bald-headed member of the tracking station staff walked in. He
carried an object of clear plastic. It was a foot and a half long, about
six inches in diameter. There was an infinite complexity of metallic
parts enclosed in the plastic.

"I caught one of the fishermen making off with this," he said in a flat
voice. "It was fastened to one of the squid's shorter arms. The
fishermen didn't want to give it up. The skipper claimed it as
treasure-trove."

He put it down on the table. Davis, Terry and Morton looked at it. Then
Morton shrugged his shoulders, almost up to his ears.

"The intelligent being that made it," said Davis, "apparently came down
from the sky in a bolide. That's easier to believe than that a submarine
civilization of earthly origin lives down in the depths. But why would
anybody prefer the bottom of the sea to--anywhere else on earth? Where
would such a creature come from?"

Deirdre walked in and stood by the table, watching Terry's face. The
bald-headed man said, "I could believe some pretty strange things, but
you can't make me believe that a creature can develop intelligence
without plenty of oxygen. There's not much free oxygen at the bottom of
the sea."

"But there's something intelligent down there," said Davis doggedly. "If
it has to have free oxygen, you've only raised the question of where it
gets it. Maybe it brings it."

Deirdre shook her head. "Foam," she said.

The four men stared at her. Then Terry said sharply, "That's it! On the
_Esperance_ there's a picture of a huge mass of foam on the sea. A ship
dropped right out of sight right into it. Deirdre found the answer!
Something down below needs free oxygen. In quantity. Why not get it from
the water? What to do with the hydrogen that is left? Let it loose!
It'll come to the surface, make a foam-patch...."

Dr. Morton said with a sort of mirthless geniality, "I add a stroke of
pure genius! Davis just asked what would be the origin of a creature
which preferred the depths of the sea to any other place on earth.
What's to be found down there that's missing everywhere else? Cold? No.
Moisture? No. Just two things! Darkness and pressure! At the bottom of
the Luzon Deep the pressure is over seven tons to the square inch.
There's no light--I repeat, none--below three hundred fathoms. Down at
the sea-bottom it's black, black, black! Now, where in the universe
could there be creatures capable of riding down here in a bolide, and in
need of an environment like that?"

Terry shook his head. He remembered seeing a book on the solar planets,
in the after-cabin of the _Esperance_. He hadn't read it. The others on
the yacht must have.

"How about Jupiter?" asked Deirdre. "The gravity's four times the
earth's, and the atmosphere is thousands of miles thick. The pressure at
the surface should be tons to the square inch."

Morton nodded. With the same false geniality he added, "And there'll be
no light. Sunlight will never get through that muggy thick atmosphere!
So we consider ourselves to be rational beings and guess that the
bolides come from Jupiter! But I must admit that the last bolide was
headed inward toward the sun, and from the general direction of Jupiter.
So-o-o-o, do we warn the world that creatures from Jupiter are
descending in space ships and are settling down under water, at a depth
of forty-five hundred fathoms? Like hell we do!"

He got up and walked abruptly away.

"I ..." said the bald-headed man, shaking his head incredulously, "will
put this gadget away and go back to carve some more squid."

"I'll talk to Manila," said Davis drearily. "Something is coming up from
below. There shouldn't be any ships allowed to come this way until we
find out what's happening."

Deirdre smiled at Terry, now that they were alone.

"Have you anything very important to do just now?"

He shook his head.

"If the things that are coming up are--space ships, we can't fight them.
If they're anything else, they can't very well fight us. If we wanted to
attack something at the bottom of the sea we'd have to fumble at the
job. We wouldn't know where to begin. So maybe, if a submarine power
wants to attack at the surface of the sea, it may find it difficult,
too."

He frowned. Deirdre said, "Let's go look at the sea and think things
over!"

She very formally took his arm and they walked out. Presently, they
stood on the white coral beach on the outer shore, and talked. Terry's
mind came back, now and then, to how inadequate his previous guesses
about the impending menace had been. It seemed now that the menace must
be much worse than he had imagined. But there were many things he wanted
to say to Deirdre.

As they talked, they were disturbed. The helicopter, which had left
before noon loaded down with biological material for Manila, was
approaching again. It landed by the tracking station. Then they were
alone again.

When night fell, they were astonished at how quickly time had passed.
They went back to the station. The helicopter was on the ground. The
biologists had stopped their work, exhausted but very excited by their
discovery of a new species of squid, of which an immature specimen
measured eighty feet. It had offered extremely interesting phylogenic
material for the Cephalopoda in general. The photographs they'd taken
were invaluable, from a scientific viewpoint.

The crew of _La Rubia_ had returned to their boat. The _Esperance_ had
been out beyond the reef once more. The unidentified objects were still
rising. They had risen to less than a thousand fathoms from the surface,
well before sundown. At this same rate of rise, they should reach the
surface some time after midnight. What would happen after that?

"What will happen depends," said Terry, "on how accurate their
information about us is. It depends on their instruments, really. I
suspect their ideas about us are weird. I find I haven't any ideas about
them."

At dinner, Davis said worriedly, "I talked to Manila. The mine layer
that was in the Bay left harbor yesterday. The flattop picked it up by
radio and they're both going to come on here tomorrow. I had to talk
about the foam. They weren't impressed. The squid does impress them, but
the foam--no. I hate," he said indignantly, "to try to convince people
of things I couldn't possibly be convinced of myself!"

They talked leisurely. Somebody mentioned _La Rubia_. It had been more
or less expected that her skipper would turn up for drinks and
conversation again. But he hadn't. The conversation turned to the
plastic objects. They might or might not pick up sounds. It was not
likely they'd respond to light. Certainly, complete images would be
meaningless to creatures who had evolved in blackness and without a
sense of sight. They might respond to pressure-waves, such as are known
to be picked up by fish when something struggles in the water, even
though man-made instruments have not yet detected them. They might
furnish data of a sensory kind that is meaningless to humans, as
pictures would be to Jovians. _If_ there were such things....

"Why argue only for Jupiter?" asked Deirdre. "Venus is supposed to be
mostly ocean. There could be abyssal life there."

The crew-cuts joined in the argument, but tentatively, because there
were many experts present.

Midnight came. The open sea outside the reef showed nothing unusual. The
waves glittered palely at their tips. There were little flashings in the
water where an occasional surface fish darted. The stars shone. The moon
was not yet risen.

Two o'clock came. The _Esperance_ people were divided. Terry and Davis
were too apprehensive to sleep. Deirdre'd gone confidently to the yacht
to turn in. The crew-cuts slept peacefully, too. Davis said uneasily,
"I've got a feeling that the ... objects are at the surface, or very
close to it, but that they simply aren't showing themselves. I think
they're lying in ambush. The squid that was killed must have had trouble
getting into the lagoon. They probably won't try to get the big ones in.
They'll wait...."

Terry shook his head.

"We killed that little one--save the mark!--and its death was probably
reported in some fashion. So maybe they'll use the big ones on the
surface as bait for another kind of weapon. Foam, for example. We know
how a ship simply dropped out of sight, as if into a hole."

"I know!" said Davis drearily. "I told the flattop about that. But I
don't think they really believe it."

At two-thirty Davis and Terry went down to the yacht. They stood on the
deck. They kept watch by mere instinct. There was no activity anywhere.
Faint noises were coming from _La Rubia_. Maybe her crew was repacking
the hastily loaded masses of squid-flesh. The last-quarter moon rose at
long last, and shone upon the glassy-rippled water of the lagoon.
Star-images danced beside its reflection.

A little after three, quite abruptly, the Diesels of _La Rubia_ rumbled
and boomed. The dark silhouette of the ship headed across the lagoon
toward its opening. Terry swore.

"She lifted her anchor without making a noise," he said angrily. "Her
skipper wants to get to Manila with his catch before it spoils!
Damnation! I told him not to leave without warning. Anything could be
waiting outside!"

