pecuniary prizes of their calling. Poor fellows, theirs was indeed a
trying business, preaching to men a generosity and unselfishness which
they and everybody knew would, in the existing state of the world,
reduce to poverty those who should practice them, laying down laws of
conduct which the law of self-preservation compelled men to break.
Looking on the inhuman spectacle of society, these worthy men bitterly
bemoaned the depravity of human nature; as if angelic nature would not
have been debauched in such a devil's school! Ah, my friends, believe
me, it is not now in this happy age that humanity is proving the
divinity within it. It was rather in those evil days when not even the
fight for life with one another, the struggle for mere existence, in
which mercy was folly, could wholly banish generosity and kindness from
the earth.

"It is not hard to understand the desperation with which men and women,
who under other conditions would have been full of gentleness and
truth, fought and tore each other in the scramble for gold, when we
realize what it meant to miss it, what poverty was in that day. For the
body it was hunger and thirst, torment by heat and frost, in sickness
neglect, in health unremitting toil; for the moral nature it meant
oppression, contempt, and the patient endurance of indignity, brutish
associations from infancy, the loss of all the innocence of childhood,
the grace of womanhood, the dignity of manhood; for the mind it meant
the death of ignorance, the torpor of all those faculties which
distinguish us from brutes, the reduction of life to a round of bodily
functions.

"Ah, my friends, if such a fate as this were offered you and your
children as the only alternative of success in the accumulation of
wealth, how long do you fancy would you be in sinking to the moral
level of your ancestors?

"Some two or three centuries ago an act of barbarity was committed in
India, which, though the number of lives destroyed was but a few score,
was attended by such peculiar horrors that its memory is likely to be
perpetual. A number of English prisoners were shut up in a room
containing not enough air to supply one-tenth their number. The
unfortunates were gallant men, devoted comrades in service, but, as the
agonies of suffocation began to take hold on them, they forgot all
else, and became involved in a hideous struggle, each one for himself,
and against all others, to force a way to one of the small apertures of
the prison at which alone it was possible to get a breath of air. It
was a struggle in which men became beasts, and the recital of its
horrors by the few survivors so shocked our forefathers that for a
century later we find it a stock reference in their literature as a
typical illustration of the extreme possibilities of human misery, as
shocking in its moral as its physical aspect. They could scarcely have
anticipated that to us the Black Hole of Calcutta, with its press of
maddened men tearing and trampling one another in the struggle to win a
place at the breathing holes, would seem a striking type of the society
of their age. It lacked something of being a complete type, however,
for in the Calcutta Black Hole there were no tender women, no little
children and old men and women, no cripples. They were at least all
men, strong to bear, who suffered.

"When we reflect that the ancient order of which I have been speaking
was prevalent up to the end of the nineteenth century, while to us the
new order which succeeded it already seems antique, even our parents
having known no other, we cannot fail to be astounded at the suddenness
with which a transition so profound beyond all previous experience of
the race must have been effected. Some observation of the state of
men's minds during the last quarter of the nineteenth century will,
however, in great measure, dissipate this astonishment. Though general
intelligence in the modern sense could not be said to exist in any
community at that time, yet, as compared with previous generations, the
one then on the stage was intelligent. The inevitable consequence of
even this comparative degree of intelligence had been a perception of
the evils of society, such as had never before been general. It is
quite true that these evils had been even worse, much worse, in
previous ages. It was the increased intelligence of the masses which
made the difference, as the dawn reveals the squalor of surroundings
which in the darkness may have seemed tolerable. The key-note of the
literature of the period was one of compassion for the poor and
unfortunate, and indignant outcry against the failure of the social
machinery to ameliorate the miseries of men. It is plain from these
outbursts that the moral hideousness of the spectacle about them was,
at least by flashes, fully realized by the best of the men of that
time, and that the lives of some of the more sensitive and generous
hearted of them were rendered well nigh unendurable by the intensity of
their sympathies.

"Although the idea of the vital unity of the family of mankind, the
reality of human brotherhood, was very far from being apprehended by
them as the moral axiom it seems to us, yet it is a mistake to suppose
that there was no feeling at all corresponding to it. I could read you
passages of great beauty from some of their writers which show that the
conception was clearly attained by a few, and no doubt vaguely by many
more. Moreover, it must not be forgotten that the nineteenth century
was in name Christian, and the fact that the entire commercial and
industrial frame of society was the embodiment of the anti-Christian
spirit must have had some weight, though I admit it was strangely
little, with the nominal followers of Jesus Christ.

"When we inquire why it did not have more, why, in general, long after
a vast majority of men had agreed as to the crying abuses of the
existing social arrangement, they still tolerated it, or contented
themselves with talking of petty reforms in it, we come upon an
extraordinary fact. It was the sincere belief of even the best of men
at that epoch that the only stable elements in human nature, on which a
social system could be safely founded, were its worst propensities.
They had been taught and believed that greed and self-seeking were all
that held mankind together, and that all human associations would fall
to pieces if anything were done to blunt the edge of these motives or
curb their operation. In a word, they believed--even those who longed
to believe otherwise--the exact reverse of what seems to us
self-evident; they believed, that is, that the anti-social qualities of
men, and not their social qualities, were what furnished the cohesive
force of society. It seemed reasonable to them that men lived together
solely for the purpose of overreaching and oppressing one another, and
of being overreached and oppressed, and that while a society that gave
full scope to these propensities could stand, there would be little
chance for one based on the idea of cooperation for the benefit of all.
It seems absurd to expect any one to believe that convictions like
these were ever seriously entertained by men; but that they were not
only entertained by our great-grandfathers, but were responsible for
the long delay in doing away with the ancient order, after a conviction
of its intolerable abuses had become general, is as well established as
any fact in history can be. Just here you will find the explanation of
the profound pessimism of the literature of the last quarter of the
nineteenth century, the note of melancholy in its poetry, and the
cynicism of its humor.

"Feeling that the condition of the race was unendurable, they had no
clear hope of anything better. They believed that the evolution of
humanity had resulted in leading it into a cul de sac, and that there
was no way of getting forward. The frame of men's minds at this time is
strikingly illustrated by treatises which have come down to us, and may
even now be consulted in our libraries by the curious, in which
laborious arguments are pursued to prove that despite the evil plight
of men, life was still, by some slight preponderance of considerations,
probably better worth living than leaving. Despising themselves, they
despised their Creator. There was a general decay of religious belief.
Pale and watery gleams, from skies thickly veiled by doubt and dread,
alone lighted up the chaos of earth. That men should doubt Him whose
breath is in their nostrils, or dread the hands that moulded them,
seems to us indeed a pitiable insanity; but we must remember that
children who are brave by day have sometimes foolish fears at night.
The dawn has come since then. It is very easy to believe in the
fatherhood of God in the twentieth century.

"Briefly, as must needs be in a discourse of this character, I have
adverted to some of the causes which had prepared men's minds for the
change from the old to the new order, as well as some causes of the
conservatism of despair which for a while held it back after the time
was ripe. To wonder at the rapidity with which the change was completed
after its possibility was first entertained is to forget the
intoxicating effect of hope upon minds long accustomed to despair. The
sunburst, after so long and dark a night, must needs have had a
dazzling effect. From the moment men allowed themselves to believe that
humanity after all had not been meant for a dwarf, that its squat
stature was not the measure of its possible growth, but that it stood
upon the verge of an avatar of limitless development, the reaction must
needs have been overwhelming. It is evident that nothing was able to
stand against the enthusiasm which the new faith inspired.

"Here, at last, men must have felt, was a cause compared with which the
grandest of historic causes had been trivial. It was doubtless because
it could have commanded millions of martyrs, that none were needed. The
change of a dynasty in a petty kingdom of the old world often cost more
lives than did the revolution which set the feet of the human race at
last in the right way.

"Doubtless it ill beseems one to whom the boon of life in our
resplendent age has been vouchsafed to wish his destiny other, and yet
I have often thought that I would fain exchange my share in this serene
and golden day for a place in that stormy epoch of transition, when
heroes burst the barred gate of the future and revealed to the kindling
gaze of a hopeless race, in place of the blank wall that had closed its
path, a vista of progress whose end, for very excess of light, still
dazzles us. Ah, my friends! who will say that to have lived then, when
the weakest influence was a lever to whose touch the centuries
trembled, was not worth a share even in this era of fruition?

"You know the story of that last, greatest, and most bloodless of
revolutions. In the time of one generation men laid aside the social
traditions and practices of barbarians, and assumed a social order
worthy of rational and human beings. Ceasing to be predatory in their
habits, they became co-workers, and found in fraternity, at once, the
science of wealth and happiness. 'What shall I eat and drink, and
wherewithal shall I be clothed?' stated as a problem beginning and
ending in self, had been an anxious and an endless one. But when once
it was conceived, not from the individual, but the fraternal
standpoint, 'What shall we eat and drink, and wherewithal shall we be
clothed?'--its difficulties vanished.

"Poverty with servitude had been the result, for the mass of humanity,
of attempting to solve the problem of maintenance from the individual
standpoint, but no sooner had the nation become the sole capitalist and
employer than not alone did plenty replace poverty, but the last
vestige of the serfdom of man to man disappeared from earth. Human
slavery, so often vainly scotched, at last was killed. The means of
subsistence no longer doled out by men to women, by employer to
employed, by rich to poor, was distributed from a common stock as among
children at the father's table. It was impossible for a man any longer
to use his fellow-men as tools for his own profit. His esteem was the
only sort of gain he could thenceforth make out of him. There was no
more either arrogance or servility in the relations of human beings to
one another. For the first time since the creation every man stood up
straight before God. The fear of want and the lust of gain became
extinct motives when abundance was assured to all and immoderate
possessions made impossible of attainment. There were no more beggars
nor almoners. Equity left charity without an occupation. The ten
commandments became well nigh obsolete in a world where there was no
temptation to theft, no occasion to lie either for fear or favor, no
room for envy where all were equal, and little provocation to violence
where men were disarmed of power to injure one another. Humanity's
ancient dream of liberty, equality, fraternity, mocked by so many ages,
at last was realized.

"As in the old society the generous, the just, the tender-hearted had
been placed at a disadvantage by the possession of those qualities; so
in the new society the cold-hearted, the greedy, and self-seeking found
themselves out of joint with the world. Now that the conditions of life
for the first time ceased to operate as a forcing process to develop
the brutal qualities of human nature, and the premium which had
heretofore encouraged selfishness was not only removed, but placed upon
unselfishness, it was for the first time possible to see what
unperverted human nature really was like. The depraved tendencies,
which had previously overgrown and obscured the better to so large an
extent, now withered like cellar fungi in the open air, and the nobler
qualities showed a sudden luxuriance which turned cynics into
panegyrists and for the first time in human history tempted mankind to
fall in love with itself. Soon was fully revealed, what the divines and
philosophers of the old world never would have believed, that human
nature in its essential qualities is good, not bad, that men by their
natural intention and structure are generous, not selfish, pitiful, not
cruel, sympathetic, not arrogant, godlike in aspirations, instinct with
divinest impulses of tenderness and self-sacrifice, images of God
indeed, not the travesties upon Him they had seemed. The constant
pressure, through numberless generations, of conditions of life which
might have perverted angels, had not been able to essentially alter the
natural nobility of the stock, and these conditions once removed, like
a bent tree, it had sprung back to its normal uprightness.

"To put the whole matter in the nutshell of a parable, let me compare
humanity in the olden time to a rosebush planted in a swamp, watered
with black bog-water, breathing miasmatic fogs by day, and chilled with
poison dews at night. Innumerable generations of gardeners had done
their best to make it bloom, but beyond an occasional half-opened bud
with a worm at the heart, their efforts had been unsuccessful. Many,
indeed, claimed that the bush was no rosebush at all, but a noxious
shrub, fit only to be uprooted and burned. The gardeners, for the most
part, however, held that the bush belonged to the rose family, but had
some ineradicable taint about it, which prevented the buds from coming
out, and accounted for its generally sickly condition. There were a
few, indeed, who maintained that the stock was good enough, that the
trouble was in the bog, and that under more favorable conditions the
plant might be expected to do better. But these persons were not
regular gardeners, and being condemned by the latter as mere theorists
and day dreamers, were, for the most part, so regarded by the people.
Moreover, urged some eminent moral philosophers, even conceding for the
sake of the argument that the bush might possibly do better elsewhere,
it was a more valuable discipline for the buds to try to bloom in a bog
than it would be under more favorable conditions. The buds that
succeeded in opening might indeed be very rare, and the flowers pale
and scentless, but they represented far more moral effort than if they
had bloomed spontaneously in a garden.

"The regular gardeners and the moral philosophers had their way. The
bush remained rooted in the bog, and the old course of treatment went
on. Continually new varieties of forcing mixtures were applied to the
roots, and more recipes than could be numbered, each declared by its
advocates the best and only suitable preparation, were used to kill the
vermin and remove the mildew. This went on a very long time.
Occasionally some one claimed to observe a slight improvement in the
appearance of the bush, but there were quite as many who declared that
it did not look so well as it used to. On the whole there could not be
said to be any marked change. Finally, during a period of general
despondency as to the prospects of the bush where it was, the idea of
transplanting it was again mooted, and this time found favor. 'Let us
try it,' was the general voice. 'Perhaps it may thrive better
elsewhere, and here it is certainly doubtful if it be worth cultivating
longer.' So it came about that the rosebush of humanity was
transplanted, and set in sweet, warm, dry earth, where the sun bathed
it, the stars wooed it, and the south wind caressed it. Then it
appeared that it was indeed a rosebush. The vermin and the mildew
disappeared, and the bush was covered with most beautiful red roses,
whose fragrance filled the world.

"It is a pledge of the destiny appointed for us that the Creator has
set in our hearts an infinite standard of achievement, judged by which
our past attainments seem always insignificant, and the goal never
nearer. Had our forefathers conceived a state of society in which men
should live together like brethren dwelling in unity, without strifes
or envying, violence or overreaching, and where, at the price of a
degree of labor not greater than health demands, in their chosen
occupations, they should be wholly freed from care for the morrow and
left with no more concern for their livelihood than trees which are
watered by unfailing streams,--had they conceived such a condition, I
say, it would have seemed to them nothing less than paradise. They
would have confounded it with their idea of heaven, nor dreamed that
there could possibly lie further beyond anything to be desired or
striven for.

"But how is it with us who stand on this height which they gazed up to?
Already we have well nigh forgotten, except when it is especially
called to our minds by some occasion like the present, that it was not
always with men as it is now. It is a strain on our imaginations to
conceive the social arrangements of our immediate ancestors. We find
them grotesque. The solution of the problem of physical maintenance so
as to banish care and crime, so far from seeming to us an ultimate
attainment, appears but as a preliminary to anything like real human
progress. We have but relieved ourselves of an impertinent and needless
harassment which hindered our ancestor from undertaking the real ends
of existence. We are merely stripped for the race; no more. We are like
a child which has just learned to stand upright and to walk. It is a
great event, from the child's point of view, when he first walks.
Perhaps he fancies that there can be little beyond that achievement,
but a year later he has forgotten that he could not always walk. His
horizon did but widen when he rose, and enlarge as he moved. A great
event indeed, in one sense, was his first step, but only as a
beginning, not as the end. His true career was but then first entered
on. The enfranchisement of humanity in the last century, from mental
and physical absorption in working and scheming for the mere bodily
necessities, may be regarded as a species of second birth of the race,
without which its first birth to an existence that was but a burden
would forever have remained unjustified, but whereby it is now
abundantly vindicated. Since then, humanity has entered on a new phase
of spiritual development, an evolution of higher faculties, the very
existence of which in human nature our ancestors scarcely suspected. In
place of the dreary hopelessness of the nineteenth century, its
profound pessimism as to the future of humanity, the animating idea of
the present age is an enthusiastic conception of the opportunities of
our earthly existence, and the unbounded possibilities of human nature.
The betterment of mankind from generation to generation, physically,
mentally, morally, is recognized as the one great object supremely
worthy of effort and of sacrifice. We believe the race for the first
time to have entered on the realization of God's ideal of it, and each
generation must now be a step upward.

"Do you ask what we look for when unnumbered generations shall have
passed away? I answer, the way stretches far before us, but the end is
lost in light. For twofold is the return of man to God 'who is our
home,' the return of the individual by the way of death, and the return
of the race by the fulfillment of the evolution, when the divine secret
hidden in the germ shall be perfectly unfolded. With a tear for the
dark past, turn we then to the dazzling future, and, veiling our eyes,
press forward. The long and weary winter of the race is ended. Its
summer has begun. Humanity has burst the chrysalis. The heavens are
before it."



Chapter 27

I never could tell just why, but Sunday afternoon during my old life
had been a time when I was peculiarly subject to melancholy, when the
color unaccountably faded out of all the aspects of life, and
everything appeared pathetically uninteresting. The hours, which in
general were wont to bear me easily on their wings, lost the power of
flight, and toward the close of the day, drooping quite to earth, had
fairly to be dragged along by main strength. Perhaps it was partly
owing to the established association of ideas that, despite the utter
change in my circumstances, I fell into a state of profound depression
on the afternoon of this my first Sunday in the twentieth century.

It was not, however, on the present occasion a depression without
specific cause, the mere vague melancholy I have spoken of, but a
sentiment suggested and certainly quite justified by my position. The
sermon of Mr. Barton, with its constant implication of the vast moral
gap between the century to which I belonged and that in which I found
myself, had had an effect strongly to accentuate my sense of loneliness
in it. Considerately and philosophically as he had spoken, his words
could scarcely have failed to leave upon my mind a strong impression of
the mingled pity, curiosity, and aversion which I, as a representative
of an abhorred epoch, must excite in all around me.

The extraordinary kindness with which I had been treated by Dr. Leete
and his family, and especially the goodness of Edith, had hitherto
prevented my fully realizing that their real sentiment toward me must
necessarily be that of the whole generation to which they belonged. The
recognition of this, as regarded Dr. Leete and his amiable wife,
however painful, I might have endured, but the conviction that Edith
must share their feeling was more than I could bear.

The crushing effect with which this belated perception of a fact so
obvious came to me opened my eyes fully to something which perhaps the
reader has already suspected,--I loved Edith.

Was it strange that I did? The affecting occasion on which our intimacy
had begun, when her hands had drawn me out of the whirlpool of madness;
the fact that her sympathy was the vital breath which had set me up in
this new life and enabled me to support it; my habit of looking to her
as the mediator between me and the world around in a sense that even
her father was not,--these were circumstances that had predetermined a
result which her remarkable loveliness of person and disposition would
alone have accounted for. It was quite inevitable that she should have
come to seem to me, in a sense quite different from the usual
experience of lovers, the only woman in this world. Now that I had
become suddenly sensible of the fatuity of the hopes I had begun to
cherish, I suffered not merely what another lover might, but in
addition a desolate loneliness, an utter forlornness, such as no other
lover, however unhappy, could have felt.

My hosts evidently saw that I was depressed in spirits, and did their
best to divert me. Edith especially, I could see, was distressed for
me, but according to the usual perversity of lovers, having once been
so mad as to dream of receiving something more from her, there was no
longer any virtue for me in a kindness that I knew was only sympathy.

Toward nightfall, after secluding myself in my room most of the
afternoon, I went into the garden to walk about. The day was overcast,
with an autumnal flavor in the warm, still air. Finding myself near the
excavation, I entered the subterranean chamber and sat down there.
"This," I muttered to myself, "is the only home I have. Let me stay
here, and not go forth any more." Seeking aid from the familiar
surroundings, I endeavored to find a sad sort of consolation in
