
Carthoris blessed the chance that had caused Vas Kor to choose the
bowman of all others, for had it been another Dusarian there would
have been questions to answer as to the whereabouts of the warrior
who lay so quietly in the field beyond the residence of Hal Vas,
Dwar of the Southern Road; and Carthoris had no answer to that
question other than his sword point, which alone was scarce adequate
to convince the entire crew of the Thuria.

The journey to Dusar seemed interminable to the impatient Carthoris,
though as a matter of fact it was quickly accomplished.  Some
time before they reached their destination they met and spoke with
another Dusarian war flier.  From it they learned that a great
battle was soon to be fought south-east of Dusar.

The combined navies of Dusar, Ptarth and Kaol had been intercepted
in their advance toward Helium by the mighty Heliumitic navy--the
most formidable upon Barsoom, not alone in numbers and armament,
but in the training and courage of its officers and warriors, and
the zitidaric proportions of many of its monster battleships.

Not for many a day had there been the promise of such a battle.
Four jeddaks were in direct command of their own fleets--Kulan Tith
of Kaol, Thuvan Dihn of Ptarth, and Nutus of Dusar upon one side;
while upon the other was Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium.  With the
latter was John Carter, Warlord of Mars.

From the far north another force was moving south across the barrier
cliffs--the new navy of Talu, Jeddak of Okar, coming in response
to the call from the warlord.  Upon the decks of the sullen ships
of war black-bearded yellow men looked over eagerly toward the
south.  Gorgeous were they in their splendid cloaks of orluk and
apt.  Fierce, formidable fighters from the hothouse cities of the
frozen north.

And from the distant south, from the sea of Omean and the cliffs
of gold, from the temples of the therns and the garden of Issus,
other thousands sailed into the north at the call of the great man
they all had learned to respect, and, respecting, love.  Pacing the
flagship of this mighty fleet, second only to the navy of Helium,
was the ebon Xodar, Jeddak of the First Born, his heart beating
strong in anticipation of the coming moment when he should hurl his
savage crews and the weight of his mighty ships upon the enemies
of the warlord.

But would these allies reach the theatre of war in time to be of
avail to Helium?  Or, would Helium need them?

Carthoris, with the other members of the crew of the Thuria, heard
the gossip and the rumours.  None knew of the two fleets, the one
from the south and the other from the north, that were coming to
support the ships of Helium, and all of Dusar were convinced that
nothing now could save the ancient power of Helium from being wiped
for ever from the upper air of Barsoom.

Carthoris, too, loyal son of Helium that he was, felt that even
his beloved navy might not be able to cope successfully with the
combined forces of three great powers.

Now the Thuria touched the landing-stage above the palace of Astok.
Hurriedly the prince and Vas Kor disembarked and entered the drop
that would carry them to the lower levels of the palace.

Close beside it was another drop that was utilized by common
warriors.  Carthoris touched Kar Komak upon the arm.

"Come!" he whispered.  "You are my only friend among a nation of
enemies.  Will you stand by me?"

"To the death," replied Kar Komak.

The two approached the drop.  A slave operated it.

"Where are your passes?" he asked.

Carthoris fumbled in his pocket pouch as though in search of them,
at the same time entering the cage.  Kar Komak followed him, closing
the door.  The slave did not start the cage downward.  Every second
counted.  They must reach the lower level as soon as possible after
Astok and Vas Kor if they would know whither the two went.

Carthoris turned suddenly upon the slave, hurling him to the opposite
side of the cage.

"Bind and gag him, Kar Komak!" he cried.

Then he grasped the control lever, and as the cage shot downward
at sickening speed, the bowman grappled with the slave.  Carthoris
could not leave the control to assist his companion, for should
they touch the lowest level at the speed at which they were going,
all would be dashed to instant death.

Below him he could now see the top of Astok's cage in the parallel
shaft, and he reduced the speed of his to that of the other.  The
slave commenced to scream.

"Silence him!" cried Carthoris.

A moment later a limp form crumpled to the floor of the cage.

"He is silenced," said Kar Komak.

Carthoris brought the cage to a sudden stop at one of the higher
levels of the palace.  Opening the door, he grasped the still form
of the slave and pushed it out upon the floor.  Then he banged the
gate and resumed the downward drop.

Once more he sighted the top of the cage that held Astok and Vas
Kor.  An instant later it had stopped, and as he brought his car
to a halt, he saw the two men disappear through one of the exits
of the corridor beyond.




CHAPTER XIV

KULAN TITH'S SACRIFICE


The morning of the second day of her incarceration in the east tower
of the palace of Astok, Prince of Dusar, found Thuvia of Ptarth
waiting in dull apathy the coming of the assassin.

She had exhausted every possibility of escape, going over and over
again the door and the windows, the floor and the walls.

The solid ersite slabs she could not even scratch; the tough
Barsoomian glass of the windows would have shattered to nothing
less than a heavy sledge in the hands of a strong man.  The door
and the lock were impregnable.  There was no escape.  And they had
stripped her of her weapons so that she could not even anticipate
the hour of her doom, thus robbing them of the satisfaction of
witnessing her last moments.

When would they come?  Would Astok do the deed with his own hands?
She doubted that he had the courage for it.  At heart he was a
coward--she had known it since first she had heard him brag as, a
visitor at the court of her father, he had sought to impress her
with his valour.

She could not help but compare him with another.  And with whom
would an affianced bride compare an unsuccessful suitor?  With her
betrothed?  And did Thuvia of Ptarth now measure Astok of Dusar by
the standards of Kulan Tith, Jeddak of Kaol?

She was about to die; her thoughts were her own to do with as
she pleased; yet furthest from them was Kulan Tith.  Instead the
figure of the tall and comely Heliumite filled her mind, crowding
therefrom all other images.

She dreamed of his noble face, the quiet dignity of his bearing,
the smile that lit his eyes as he conversed with his friends, and
the smile that touched his lips as he fought with his enemies--the
fighting smile of his Virginian sire.

And Thuvia of Ptarth, true daughter of Barsoom, found her breath
quickening and heart leaping to the memory of this other smile--the
smile that she would never see again.  With a little half-sob
the girl sank to the pile of silks and furs that were tumbled in
confusion beneath the east windows, burying her face in her arms.

In the corridor outside her prison-room two men had paused in heated
argument.

"I tell you again, Astok," one was saying, "that I shall not do
this thing unless you be present in the room."

There was little of the respect due royalty in the tone of the
speaker's voice.  The other, noting it, flushed.

"Do not impose too far upon my friendship for you, Vas Kor," he
snapped.  "There is a limit to my patience."

"There is no question of royal prerogative here," returned Vas
Kor.  "You ask me to become an assassin in your stead, and against
your jeddak's strict injunctions.  You are in no position, Astok,
to dictate to me; but rather should you be glad to accede to my
reasonable request that you be present, thus sharing the guilt with
me.  Why should I bear it all?"

The younger man scowled, but he advanced toward the locked door,
and as it swung in upon its hinges, he entered the room beyond at
the side of Vas Kor.

Across the chamber the girl, hearing them enter, rose to her feet
and faced them.  Under the soft copper of her skin she blanched
just a trifle; but her eyes were brave and level, and the haughty
tilt of her firm little chin was eloquent of loathing and contempt.

"You still prefer death?" asked Astok.

"To YOU, yes," replied the girl coldly.

The Prince of Dusar turned to Vas Kor and nodded.  The noble drew
his short-sword and crossed the room toward Thuvia.

"Kneel!" he commanded.

"I prefer to die standing," she replied.

"As you will," said Vas Kor, feeling the point of his blade with
his left thumb.  "In the name of Nutus, Jeddak of Dusar!" he cried,
and ran quickly toward her.

"In the name of Carthoris, Prince of Helium!" came in low tones
from the doorway.

Vas Kor turned to see the panthan he had recruited at his son's
house leaping across the floor toward him. The fellow brushed past
Astok with an:  "After him, you--calot!"

Vas Kor wheeled to meet the charging man.

"What means this treason?" he cried.

Astok, with bared sword, leaped to Vas Kor's assistance.  The
panthan's sword clashed against that of the noble, and in the first
encounter Vas Kor knew that he faced a master swordsman.

Before he half realized the stranger's purpose he found the man
between himself and Thuvia of Ptarth, at bay facing the two swords of
the Dusarians.  But he fought not like a man at bay.  Ever was he
the aggressor, and though always he kept his flashing blade between
the girl and her enemies, yet he managed to force them hither and
thither about the room, calling to the girl to follow close behind
him.

Until it was too late neither Vas Kor nor Astok dreamed of that
which lay in the panthan's mind; but at last as the fellow stood
with his back toward the door, both understood--they were penned in
their own prison, and now the intruder could slay them at his will,
for Thuvia of Ptarth was bolting the door at the man's direction,
first taking the key from the opposite side, where Astok had left
it when they had entered.

Astok, as was his way, finding that the enemy did not fall immediately
before their swords, was leaving the brunt of the fighting to
Vas Kor, and now as his eyes appraised the panthan carefully they
presently went wider and wider, for slowly he had come to recognize
the features of the Prince of Helium.

The Heliumite was pressing close upon Vas Kor.  The noble was
bleeding from a dozen wounds.  Astok saw that he could not for long
withstand the cunning craft of that terrible sword hand.

"Courage, Vas Kor!" he whispered in the other's ear.  "I have a
plan.  Hold him but a moment longer and all will be well," but the
balance of the sentence, "with Astok, Prince of Dusar," he did not
voice aloud.

Vas Kor, dreaming no treachery, nodded his head, and for a moment
succeeded in holding Carthoris at bay.  Then the Heliumite and the
girl saw the Dusarian prince run swiftly to the opposite side of
the chamber, touch something in the wall that sent a great panel
swinging inward, and disappear into the black vault beyond.

It was done so quickly that by no possibility could they have
intercepted him.  Carthoris, fearful lest Vas Kor might similarly
elude him, or Astok return immediately with reinforcements, sprang
viciously in upon his antagonist, and a moment later the headless
body of the Dusarian noble rolled upon the ersite floor.

"Come!" cried Carthoris.  "There is no time to be lost.  Astok will
be back in a moment with enough warriors to overpower me."

But Astok had no such plan in mind, for such a move would have
meant the spreading of the fact among the palace gossips that the
Ptarthian princess was a prisoner in the east tower.  Quickly would
the word have come to his father, and no amount of falsifying could
have explained away the facts that the jeddak's investigation would
have brought to light.

Instead Astok was racing madly through a long corridor to reach
the door of the tower-room before Carthoris and Thuvia left the
apartment.  He had seen the girl remove the key and place it in
her pocket-pouch, and he knew that a dagger point driven into the
keyhole from the opposite side would imprison them in the secret
chamber till eight dead worlds circled a cold, dead sun.

As fast as he could run Astok entered the main corridor that led
to the tower chamber.  Would he reach the door in time?  What if
the Heliumite should have already emerged and he should run upon
him in the passageway?  Astok felt a cold chill run up his spine.
He had no stomach to face that uncanny blade.

He was almost at the door.  Around the next turn of the corridor
it stood.  No, they had not left the apartment.  Evidently Vas Kor
was still holding the Heliumite!

Astok could scarce repress a grin at the clever manner in which he
had outwitted the noble and disposed of him at the same time.  And
then he rounded the turn and came face to face with an auburn-haired,
white giant.

The fellow did not wait to ask the reason for his coming; instead
he leaped upon him with a long-sword, so that Astok had to parry a
dozen vicious cuts before he could disengage himself and flee back
down the runway.

A moment later Carthoris and Thuvia entered the corridor from the
secret chamber.

"Well, Kar Komak?" asked the Heliumite.

"It is fortunate that you left me here, red man," said the bowman.
"I but just now intercepted one who seemed over-anxious to reach
this door--it was he whom they call Astok, Prince of Dusar."

Carthoris smiled.

"Where is he now?" he asked.

"He escaped my blade, and ran down this corridor," replied Kar
Komak.

"We must lose no time, then!" exclaimed Carthoris.  "He will have
the guard upon us yet!"

Together the three hastened along the winding passages through which
Carthoris and Kar Komak had tracked the Dusarians by the marks of
the latter's sandals in the thin dust that overspread the floors
of these seldom-used passage-ways.

They had come to the chamber at the entrances to the lifts before
they met with opposition.  Here they found a handful of guardsmen,
and an officer, who, seeing that they were strangers, questioned
their presence in the palace of Astok.

Once more Carthoris and Kar Komak had recourse to their blades,
and before they had won their way to one of the lifts the noise of
the conflict must have aroused the entire palace, for they heard
