"Far too much."

Graham did not quite follow all this, but it seemed part of the
general inversion of the new age. He bowed condescendingly to his first
introduction. It was evident that subtle distinctions of class prevailed
even in this assembly, that only to a small proportion of the guests,
to an inner group, did Lincoln consider it appropriate to introduce him.
This first introduction was the Master Aeronaut, a man whose suntanned
face contrasted oddly with the delicate complexions about him. Just
at present his critical defection from the Council made him a very
important person indeed.

His manner contrasted very favourably, according to Graham's ideas, with
the general bearing. He made a few commonplace remarks, assurances of
loyalty and frank inquiries about the Master's health. His manner was
breezy, his accent lacked the easy staccato of latter-day English. He
made it admirably clear to Graham that he was a bluff "aerial dog"--he
used that phrase--that there was no nonsense about him, that he was
a thoroughly manly fellow and old-fashioned at that, that he didn't
profess to know much, and that what he did not know was not worth
knowing He made a manly bow, ostentatiously free from obsequiousness and
passed.

"I am glad to see that type endures," said Graham

"Phonographs and kinematographs," said Lincoln, a little spitefully. "He
has studied from the life." Graham glanced at the burly form again. It
was oddly reminiscent.

"As a matter of fact we bought him," said Lincoln. "Partly. And partly
he was afraid of Ostrog Everything rested with him."

He turned sharply to introduce the Surveyor-General of the Public School
Trust. This person was a willowy figure in a blue-grey academic gown, he
beamed down upon Graham through _pince-nez_ of a Victorian pattern, and
illustrated his remarks by gestures of a beautifully manicured hand.
Graham was immediately interested in this gentleman's functions, and
asked him a number of singularly direct questions. The Surveyor-General
seemed quietly amused at the Master's fundamental bluntness. He was a
little vague as to the monopoly of education his Company possessed; it
was done by contract with the syndicate that ran the numerous London
Municipalities, but he waxed enthusiastic over educational progress
since the Victorian times. "We have conquered Cram," he said,
"completely conquered Cram--there is not an examination left in the
world. Aren't you glad?"

"How do you get the work done?" asked Graham.

"We make it attractive--as attractive as possible. And if it does not
attract then--we let it go. We cover an immense field."

He proceeded to details, and they had a lengthy conversation. The
Surveyor-General mentioned the names of Pestalozzi and Froebel
with profound respect, although he displayed no intimacy with their
epoch-making works. Graham learnt that University Extension still
existed in a modified form. "There is a certain type of girl, for
example," said the Surveyor-General, dilating with a sense of his
usefulness, "with a perfect passion for severe studies--when they are
not too difficult you know. We cater for them by the thousand. At
this moment," he said with a Napoleonic touch, "nearly five hundred
phonographs are lecturing in different parts of London on the influence
exercised by Plato and Swift on the love affairs of Shelley, Hazlitt,
and Burns. And afterwards they write essays on the lectures, and the
names in order of merit are put in conspicuous places. You see how your
little germ has grown? The illiterate middle-class of your days has
quite passed away."

"About the public elementary schools," said Graham. "Do you control
them?"

The Surveyor-General did, "entirely." Now, Graham, in his later
democratic days, had taken a keen interest in these and his questioning
quickened. Certain casual phrases that had fallen from the old man
with whom he had talked in the darkness recurred to him. The
Surveyor-General, in effect, endorsed the old man's words. "We have
abolished Cram," he said, a phrase Graham was beginning to interpret
as the abolition of all sustained work. The Surveyor-General became
sentimental. "We try and make the elementary schools very pleasant for
the little children. They will have to work so soon. Just a few simple
principles--obedience--industry."

"You teach them very little?"

"Why should we? It only leads to trouble and discontent. We amuse them.
Even as it is--there are troubles--agitations. Where the labourers get
the ideas, one cannot tell. They tell one another. There are socialistic
dreams--anarchy even! Agitators will get to work among them. I take
it--I have always taken it--that my foremost duty is to fight against
popular discontent. Why should people be made unhappy?"

"I wonder," said Graham thoughtfully. "But there are a great many things
I want to know."

Lincoln, who had stood watching Graham's face throughout the
conversation, intervened. "There are others," he said in an undertone.

The Surveyor-General of schools gesticulated himself away. "Perhaps,"
said Lincoln, intercepting a casual glance, "you would like to know some
of these ladies?"

The daughter of the Manager of the Piggeries of the European Food Trust
was a particularly charming little person with red hair and animated
blue eyes. Lincoln left him awhile to converse with her, and she
displayed herself as quite an enthusiast for the "dear old times,"
as she called them, that had seen the beginning of his trance. As
she talked she smiled, and her eyes smiled in a manner that demanded
reciprocity.

"I have tried," she said, "countless times--to imagine those old
romantic days. And to you they are memories. How strange and crowded the
world must seem to you! I have seen photographs and pictures of the old
times, the little isolated houses built of bricks made out of burnt mud
and all black with soot from your fires, the railway bridges, the simple
advertisements, the solemn savage Puritanical men in strange black
coats and those tall hats of theirs, iron railway trains on iron bridges
overhead, horses and cattle, and even dogs running half wild about the
streets. And suddenly, you have come into this!"

"Into this," said Graham.

"Out of your life--out of all that was familiar."

"The old life was not a happy one," said Graham. "I do not regret that."

She looked at him quickly. There was a brief pause. She sighed
encouragingly. "No?"

"No," said Graham. "It was a little life--and unmeaning. But this--.
We thought the world complex and crowded and civilised enough. Yet I
see--although in this world I am barely four days old--looking back on
my own time, that it was a queer, barbaric time--the mere beginning of
this new order. The mere beginning of this new order. You will find it
hard to understand how little I know."

"You may ask me what you like," she said, smiling at him.

"Then tell me who these people are. I'm still very much in the dark
about them. It's puzzling. Are there any Generals?"

"Men in hats and feathers?"

"Of course not. No. I suppose they are the men who control the great
public businesses. Who is that distinguished looking man?"

"That? He's a most important officer. That is Morden. He is managing
director of the Antibilious Pill Company. I have heard that his workers
sometimes turn out a myriad myriad pills a day in the twenty-four hours.
Fancy a myriad myriad!"

"A myriad myriad. No wonder he looks proud," said Graham. "Pills! What a
wonderful time it is! That man in purple?"

"He is not quite one of the inner circle, you know. But we like him. He
is really clever and very amusing. He is one of the heads of the
Medical Faculty of our London University. All medical men, you know, are
shareholders in the Medical Faculty Company, and wear that purple. You
have to be--to be qualified. But of course, people who are paid by fees
for doing something--" She smiled away the social pretensions of all
such people.

"Are any of your great artists or authors here?"

"No authors. They are mostly such queer people--and so preoccupied about
themselves. And they quarrel so dreadfully! They will fight, some of
them, for precedence on staircases! Dreadful isn't it? But I think
Wraysbury, the fashionable capillotomist, is here. From Capri."

"Capillotomist," said Graham. "Ah! I remember. An artist! Why not?"

"We have to cultivate him," she said apologetically. "Our heads are in
his hands." She smiled.

Graham hesitated at the invited compliment, but his glance was
expressive. "Have the arts grown with the rest of civilised things?" he
said. "Who are your great painters?"

She looked at him doubtfully. Then laughed. "For a moment," she said, "I
thought you meant--" She laughed again. "You mean, of course, those good
men you used to think so much of because they could cover great spaces
of canvas with oil-colours? Great oblongs. And people used to put the
things in gilt frames and hang them up in rows in their square rooms. We
haven't any. People grew tired of that sort of thing."

"But what did you think I meant?"

She put a finger significantly on a cheek whose glow was above
suspicion, and smiled and looked very arch and pretty and inviting. "And
here," and she indicated her eyelid.

Graham had an adventurous moment. Then a grotesque memory of a picture
he had somewhere seen of Uncle Toby and the Widow flashed across his
mind. An archaic shame came upon him. He became acutely aware that he
was visible to a great number of interested people. "I see," he remarked
inadequately. He turned awkwardly away from her, fascinating facility.
He looked about him to meet a number of eyes that immediately occupied
themselves with other things. Possibly he coloured a little. "Who is
that talking with the lady in saffron?" he asked, avoiding her eyes.

The person in question he learnt was one of the great organisers of the
American theatres just fresh from a gigantic production at Mexico. His
face reminded Graham of a bust of Caligula. Another striking looking
man was the Black Labour Master. The phrase at the time made no deep
impression, but afterwards it recurred;--the Black Labour Master? The
little lady, in no degree embarrassed, pointed out to him a charming
little woman as one of the subsidiary wives of the Anglican Bishop of
London. She added encomiums on the episcopal courage--hitherto there had
been a rule of clerical monogamy--"neither a natural nor an expedient
condition of things. Why should the natural development of the
affections be dwarfed and restricted because a man is a priest?"

"And, bye the bye," she added, "are you an Anglican?" Graham was on the
verge of hesitating inquiries about the status of a "subsidiary wife,"
apparently an euphemistic phrase, when Lincoln's return broke off this
very suggestive and interesting conversation. They crossed the aisle to
where a tall man in crimson, and two charming persons in Burmese costume
(as it seemed to him) awaited him diffidently. From their civilities he
passed to other presentations.

In a little while his multitudinous impressions began to organise
themselves into a general effect. At first the glitter of the gathering
had raised all the democrat in Graham; he had felt hostile and
satirical. But it is not in human nature to resist an atmosphere of
courteous regard. Soon the music, the light, the play of colours, the
shining arms and shoulders about him, the touch of hands, the transient
interest of smiling faces, the frothing sound of skillfully modulated
voices, the atmosphere of compliment, interest and respect, had woven
together into a fabric of indisputable pleasure. Graham for a time
forgot his spacious resolutions. He gave way insensibly to the
intoxication of the position that was conceded him, his manner became
less conscious, more convincingly regal, his feet walked assuredly, the
black robe fell with a bolder fold and pride ennobled his voice. After
all this was a brilliant interesting world.

His glance went approvingly over the shifting colours of the people,
it rested here and there in kindly criticism upon a face. Presently it
occurred to him that he owed some apology to the charming little person
with the red hair and blue eyes. He felt guilty of a clumsy snub. It
was not princely to ignore her advances, even if his policy necessitated
their rejection. He wondered if he should see her again. And suddenly
a little thing touched all the glamour of this brilliant gathering and
changed its quality.

He looked up and saw passing across a bridge of porcelain and looking
down upon him, a face that was almost immediately hidden, the face of
the girl he had seen overnight in the little room beyond the theatre
after his escape from the Council. And she was looking with much the
same expression of curious expectation, of uncertain intentness, upon
his proceedings. For the moment he did not remember when he had seen
her, and then with recognition came a vague memory of the stirring
emotions of their first encounter. But the dancing web of melody about
him kept the air of that great marching song from his memory.

The lady to whom he was talking repeated her remark, and Graham recalled
himself to the quasiregal flirtation upon which he was engaged.

But from that moment a vague restlessness, a feeling that grew to
dissatisfaction, came into his mind. He was troubled as if by some
half forgotten duty, by the sense of things important slipping from
him amidst this light and brilliance. The attraction that these bright
ladies who crowded about him were beginning to exercise ceased. He no
longer made vague and clumsy responses to the subtly amorous advances
that he was now assured were being made to him, and his eyes wandered
for another sight of that face that had appealed so strongly to his
sense of beauty. But he did not see her again until he was awaiting
Lincoln's return to leave this assembly. In answer to his request
Lincoln had promised that an attempt should be made to fly that
afternoon, if the weather permitted. He had gone to make certain
necessary arrangements.

Graham was in one of the upper galleries in conversation with a
bright-eyed lady on the subject of Eadhamite--the subject was his
choice and not hers. He had interrupted her warm assurances of personal
devotion with a matter-of-fact inquiry. He found her, as he had already
found several other latter-day women that night, less well informed
than charming. Suddenly, struggling against the eddying drift of nearer
melody, the song of the Revolt, the great song he had heard in the Hall,
hoarse and massive, came beating down to him.

He glanced up startled, and perceived above him an _oeil de boeuf_
through which this song had come, and beyond, the upper courses of
cable, the blue haze, and the pendant fabric of the lights of the public
ways. He heard the song break into a tumult of voices and cease. But now
he perceived quite clearly the drone and tumult of the moving platforms
and a murmur of many people. He had a vague persuasion that he could not
account for, a sort of instinctive feeling that outside in the ways a
huge crowd must be watching this place in which their Master amused
himself. He wondered what they might be thinking.

Though the song had stopped so abruptly, though the special music of
this gathering reasserted itself, the motif of the marching song, once
it had begun, lingered in his mind.

The bright-eyed lady was still struggling with the mysteries of
Eadhamite when he perceived the girl he had seen in the theatre again.
She was coming now along the gallery towards him; he saw her first
before she saw him. She was dressed in a faintly luminous grey, her dark
hair about her brows was like a cloud, and as he saw her the cold light
from the circular opening into the ways fell upon her downcast face.

The lady in trouble about the Eadhamite saw the change in his
expression, and grasped her opportunity to escape. "Would you care to
know that girl, Sire?" she asked boldly. "She is Helen Wotton--a niece
of Ostrog's. She knows a great many serious things. She is one of the
most serious persons alive. I am sure you will like her."

In another moment Graham was talking to the girl, and the bright-eyed
lady had fluttered away.

"I remember you quite well," said Graham. "You were in that little
room. When all the people were singing and beating time with their feet.
Before I walked across the Hall."

Her momentary embarrassment passed. She looked up at him, and her face
was steady. "It was wonderful," she said, hesitated, and spoke with
a sudden effort. "All those people would have died for you, Sire.
Countless people did die for you that night."

Her face glowed. She glanced swiftly aside to see that no other heard
her words.

Lincoln appeared some way off along the gallery, making his way through
the press towards them. She saw him and turned to Graham strangely
