is kept steady, and in a perpendicular position in the stick, and firmly
held without the use of springs or other attachment.

WASHING MACHINE.--J.S. Merchant, Hopedale, Ohio.--This invention relates
to new and useful improvements in machines for washing clothes.

PACKING CASES FOR OIL CANS.--John McLeod Murphy, New York city.--This
invention consists of an arrangement especially adapted for use with
cans provided with an improved cut off nozzle, which is the subject of
an application for a patent, made by the same inventor and bearing even
date herewith, which said improvement comprises the application to the
ordinary vertical nozzles of a lateral spout connected to the side, and
arranged to open an escape passage for the contents when the said spout
is turned with the right position, which position is that best adapted
for pouring from the can into another vessel, and in which the said
spout projects through a slot in the side of the packing case in closing
it, the said case being provided with an opening and a door for closing
the same adapted for it.

WASHING MACHINE.--Edward Heim, Pittsburgh, Pa.--This invention relates
to a new machine for washing clothes, and consists in the introduction
of several improvements whereby the machine is adapted to thoroughly
clean coarse as well as fine articles without injury to the same, and in
a comparatively short time.

PADLOCK--John S. Rankin, Ann Arbor, Mich.--The object of this invention
is to provide a simple, cheap, and efficient construction and
arrangement of the locking and operating parts of padlocks. The
invention consists in an improved and simple compound tumbler bolt and
relative arrangement thereof with the bow and bow spring.

GRAIN DRILL.--Jacob F. Gibson, Chestnut Level, Pa.--This invention
relates to a seed tube pivoted in its drag bars, in such manner that it
may yield to an immovable obstruction.

PROPELLING MACHINERY OF COTTON GINS.--Wm. L. May, Linwood, Ala.--This
invention has for its object to effect such arrangement of machinery as
will enable a cotton gin to be run at a materially reduced expense.

SNOW PLOW.--Thomas L. Shaw, Omaha, Nebraska.--This invention relates to
a snow plow, for a locomotive engine, which takes up a load of snow, is
then borne back out of the cut by the engine, and dumps its load when
arrived at a clear space.

BEEHIVE.--W.T. Kirkpatrick, Tamarva, Ill.--This invention relates to
improvements in beehives, and consists in the combination with beehives
in a peculiar way, of a moth box, and moth passage thereto, calculated
to entice the moths away from the bee passage and prevent them from
entering thereat.

SEEDING MACHINE.--M.F. Lowth and T.J. Howe, Owatonna, Minn.--This
invention relates to that class of seeders which employ a revolving
cylinder, having pockets in its periphery, and placed at the bottom of
the hopper which contains the seed, the function of the pockets being to
receive seed, when right side up, and drop it when inverted.

UPRIGHT PIANO.--Geo. C. Manner, New York city.--This invention consists
in placing the strings of an upright piano in an inclined position in
the frame instead of a perpendicular one, as heretofore, for the purpose
of enabling the hammer handle to be pivoted so near the strings that
when the hammer head is driven up against them, it shall necessarily
fall back again by its own weight.

CARPET CLEANER.--Alexander Stevenson, New York city.--This invention
relates to new and useful improvements in carpet cleaning devices,
having for its object to provide a simple and efficient apparatus
consisting of a yielding bed, brushing rollers, moving rollers, and a
beating apparatus, whereby the carpet, being bound upon a roller, or
rollers, may be moved along, from time to time, over the said yielding
bed and brushing rollers, and be beaten and brushed.

COTTON CULTIVATOR.--I.W. Burch, Fayette, Miss.--This invention comprises
a pair of plows suspended from the frame of a truck so as to work on
both sides of the row, for "barring off" or scraping the weeds and earth
away from the row, also, a pair of rotary cutters having oblique blades
for throwing away from the plants, and designed, also, to work on both
sides of the rows, and closer to the plants than the plows, both sets of
devices having vertical vibration.

WATER WHEEL--Geo. W. Cressman and Burt Pfleger, Barren Hill, Pa., and
Nice Keely Roxborough, Pa.--This invention relates to improvements in
turbine wheels designed to produce an arrangement of the gates within
the bucket rim (the water being secured from below, and the wheel being
made hollow, for the reception of the water, and to provide space for
the said gate), in a manner calculated to relieve the wheel of pressure
from the water, either in an upward or downward direction.

ATTACHING FLY AND MOSQUITO BARS TO WINDOWS, DOORS, ETC.--James Hebron,
Buffalo, N.Y.--This invention relates to improvements in attaching fly
and mosquito bars to window sashes or frames, doors, or other light
frames to be used in combination with window frames or doors, and
consists in attaching one edge of the cloth to a round or other shaped
bar or rod of wood or metal, by binding thereon and sewing, passing the
thread spirally around the bar or rod, and then securing the rod to the
sill or frame, either on the surface thereof, or in a groove formed
therein, then stretching the cloth across the window and securing it by
clamping another rod down upon it by staples, either in a groove or
not, and, in some cases, securing the ends in a similar way. It is also
proposed to stretch the cloth over or under these rods.

ADJUSTABLE STOVEPIPE THIMBLE.--H.N. Bill, Willimantic, Conn.--This
invention relates to improvements in thimbles for the passage of
stovepipes through the walls into flues, and consists in providing a
vertically-sliding thimble plate in a metallic frame, having a long
opening, and adapted for insertion in an opening through the wall, so as
to support the thin plate at or about the line of the face of the flue
wall, so that the plate may be drawn up or down to vary the hight of the
thimble for pipes of different vertical lengths. The invention, also,
comprises an improved mode of attaching the thimbles to this plate by
means of radial studs at the rim, separated from the main part of the
rim and bent inward so as to pass through slots in the thimble plate
around the hole, to engage behind the edge of the plate by turning the
thimbles on their axes a short distance after being passed through the
slots, while the main part of the rims of the said thimbles bear against
the front face of the thimble plate and cover the slots when so turned.

COMBINED HAY RAKE AND TEDDER.--John C. Mills, Palmyra, N.Y.--This
invention relates to a new and useful improvement in combining two
important agricultural machines in one (or combining a tedder with a
hay rake), and it consists in the construction of the tedder and the
arrangement of the same in combination with the rake. Patented Dec. 7,
1869.

POST-HOLE AUGER.--Geo. Seeger and Chas H. Shaffer, Clark's Hill,
Ind.--This invention relates to a post hole boring apparatus, mounted
upon a wheelbarrow, and the invention consists in providing the barrow
with legs that may be either turned up out of the way or adjusted at any
required angle so as to keep the barrow level when on uneven ground.

SELF-DROPPER FOR REAPERS.--T.F. Lippencott, Conemaugh, Pa.--This
invention has for its object to furnish an improved self-dropper for
reapers, which shall be so constructed as to operate automatically, to
fall and deposit the grain and to rise to receive another supply, making
the gavels all of about the same size.

PLOWING MACHINE.--Albert Bondeli, Philadelphia, Mo.--This invention has
for its object to furnish an improved machine for preparing the ground
to receive seed, and which shall be so constructed and arranged as to
prepare the ground more thoroughly and put it in better condition to
receive seed, and which shall be so constructed and arranged as to
prepare the ground more thoroughly and put it in better condition to
receive the seed than when the ordinary plows are used.

EXPANDING TRIPLE SHOVEL PLOWS.--Edward Wiard, Louisville, Ky.--This
invention has for its object to furnish an improved triple shovel plow,
which shall be so constructed and arranged that the shovels may be
conveniently expanded and contracted, or set at any desired pitch, and,
at the same time, in such a way as to be securely held in any desired
position.

SEWING MACHINE.--L.W. Lathrop, Nyack, N.Y.--This invention relates to
improvements in sewing machines, and consists in certain improvements
in mechanism for forming the loop, and for conveying the binding thread
through the same, in a manner to prevent the contact of the binding
thread spool, or its carrier, with the thread of the needle, and thereby
to avoid wearing the same, and to produce more easily operating parts;
also, a secure, permanent, and reliable arrangement of apparatus, and
calculated also to be more certain to form the stitch.

POETABLE DERRICK.--J.R. Hammond, Sedalia, Mo.--This invention has for
its object to furnish an improved derrick, simple in construction,
effective in operation, and easily moved from place to place, designed
especially for use in connection with the improved rake, thrasher,
loader, and stacker, patented by the same inventor Nov. 30, 1869, but
equally applicable for other uses.

WAGON SEAT FASTENER.--Charles Collins, Vernon Centre, N.Y.--This
invention relates to improvements in means for holding detachable wagon
or sleigh seats to the boxes, and consists in the application to the
seat risers of hooks with spring stops, adapted for engaging staples in
the boxes below the said hooks, and for being held in such engagement
by the spring stops, until disengaged by the operator for removing the
seats.

VELOCIPEDE.--William Volk, Buffalo, N.Y.--This invention relates to a
new three-wheeled velocipede, which is so arranged that the driving
wheels, although mounted on separate axles, will make equal numbers
of revolutions, as long as the machine is to be kept in a straight
direction, while they can be disconnected when the device is to be
turned in a circle.

COFFIN HANDLES.--Clark Strong, Winsted, Conn.--This invention relates
to new and useful improvements in coffin handles, and consists in the
construction, arrangement, and combination of parts.

LOOM.--Lyman Stone, Nelson, N.H.--This invention relates to improvements
in power looms, and has for its principal object to provide an
arrangement and construction of the same, calculated to furnish looms of
equal or greater efficiency than those now in use, but occupying very
much less space, so as to economize materially in room, where large
numbers are used on a floor, as is the case in factories; not only in
respect of the space occupied by the loom itself, but also in respect of
the space required for the passages or aisles between the rows of looms.
The invention also comprises improved let-off and take-up mechanisms,
also, an improvement in cloth beams; also, an improved picker motion,
inducing a novel adjusting arrangement for the picker operating cams,
also, an improved construction of treadle cams, whereby an equal
capacity of throw is obtained with less size and friction, and with
less power, and whereby they are guarded to prevent accidents to the
attendant while cleaning when the loom is in operation.

PAPER FILE.--C.W. West, Shiloh, N.J.--This invention relates to a new
paper file, which is a compound of two bars that can be tied together so
that the paper will be securely clasped between them; the strings for
tying them being arranged in a peculiar manner to draw them firmly
together.

ROLLING BLOTTER.--C.A. Gale, Demopolis, Ala.--This invention has for
its object to provide an improved rolling blotter, which shall be so
constructed and arranged that the blotting pads maybe conveniently
removed when required, and replaced with new ones.

DUMP WAGON.--Daniel Willson, Ishpeming, Mich.--This invention has for
its object to furnish a simple, strong, and convenient dump wagon, which
shall be so constructed and arranged that it maybe dumped when required,
by backing the team.

SEWING MACHINE SOAP HOLDER.--Mary Dewey, New Albany, Ind.--This
invention relates to a new device for soaping the cloth that is fed
under the needle of a sewing machine, and consists in the attachment of
a tubular soap holder to the presser foot of a sewing machine.

MONKEY WRENCH.--Samuel Zarley, Niantic, Ill.--This invention has for its
object to furnish an improved monkey wrench, which shall be simple in
construction, strong, durable, and easily and quickly adjusted to the
nut to be unscrewed.

ANIMAL TRAP.--Adam Brown, Bridgeport, Oregon.--This invention relates
to improvements in traps for rats, squirrels, and other animals, and
consists in the application through an opening in the side of a box,
of a detachable chute extending some distance into the box, forming
a passage thereinto the walls of which are armed with spring points
arranged in the usual way to permit ingress and prevent egress; the
floor of the passage is elevated to form a chamber below for inclosing
the bait, so that it cannot all be readily devoured. The invention also
comprises in connection with the above, the application to the side
walls of the box, which is open at the top, of projecting sheets of
metal to prevent the animals from climbing out; also the application to
the top of tilting shelves for discharging any animals that may climb up
the outside of the box, and on to the same.

SHINGLE PACKER.--Robert Taylor, West Pensaukie, Wis.--This invention
relates to improvements in apparatus for pressing and holding the
bunches of shingles for binding them, and consists of the arrangement on
a suitable bench, having end walls for gaging the piling of the shingles
at the thick ends, of a pair of vertically sliding bars, a transverse
passing bar, and a set of gear wheels, shaft, and hand lever, the said
wheels gearing with the vertically sliding bars which are toothed for
the purpose in such a way that the hand lever may be used to force the
transverse bar, which is connected to the upper end of the sliding bar
down upon the bundle of shingles across the center, pressing and holding
the bundle till fastened.

REGISTERING APPARATUS FOR VEHICLES.--Thomas Ollis, Netherfield road,
South Liverpool, England.--This invention consists in the application of
apparatus similar to that used for stamping or indorsing purposes for
registering or indicating the number of passengers that have traveled by
an omnibus or other vehicle.

STEAM AND CALORIC ENGINES.--Alexander Hendry, Victoria, British
Columbia.--This invention consists in an improved arrangement of
jacketed cylinders, and jacketed furnace, constituting a water space,
for generating steam by the radiating heat of the furnace, and arranged
to envelope the cylinders with water to prevent injury by the gases and
heat; also an improved arrangement of chambered pistons, for keeping the
same filled with water to counteract the action of the heat upon
the same, also, certain improvements in chambered valves, and valve
operating devices, the said chambered valves and rods being supplied
with water, also to prevent injury by the heat and the gases, and the
invention also comprises an arrangement of the furnace calculated
to separate and distribute the gases and effect the most perfect
combustion.

COTTON BASKETS.--R.S. Myers, Washington, N.C.--This invention relates to
improvements in baskets for carrying cotton, especially when ginned
and consists in providing the cotton baskets of the ordinary form and
construction with large holes through the center of the bottom, whereby
in emptying the said baskets the operator may insert his hand and
push the cotton out by one effort in a mass, whereas, by the present
arrangement it must be pulled out from the mouth, which takes much more
time, as in this way it only comes out in small quantities.

NOTE CASE.--Alphonzo Button, Dunkirk, N.Y.--This invention relates
to improvements in note or paper cases or files for inclosing notes,
papers, bills, etc., in a simple, cheap, and convenient portable
package for the use of bankers and other business men. It consists of a
cylindrical case of leather or other light suitable material having an
opening from end to end covered by a flap, a central revolving spool,
and a web of flexible substance connected to and wound on the spool so
as to be drawn out through the opening and wound up again, on which web
any suitable arrangement of narrow flaps folding over from the edges and
connected by elastic bands, in a way to secure papers, notes, etc., in
different and separate sections, may be arranged as now arranged in
pocket books.

PUMP.--A.C. Judson, Grand Rapids, Ohio.--This invention consists in the
arrangement of two dish shaped metal disks with a diaphragm of leather
between them, and another leather diaphragm above, adapted for the
better support of the water in lifting; it also consists of an
arrangement for operating the pump rod without lateral vibration, so
that it may be packed tightly in the tube to prevent foul matter and
vermin from getting in.

PANELING, MOLDING, AND CARVING MACHINE.--A.S. Gear, New Haven,
Conn.--This machine performs all of the work of the well known Variety
Molding Machine, and in addition molds and carves any desired pattern
of panel work, and simultaneously dovetails both mortise and tenon.
The wood to be carved is fastened firmly to the bed of the machine by
movable clamps adjustable to suit any required size of wood, and the
cutters are fastened to a spindle moved by a universal joint in any
direction upon the bed of the machine. The cutter is guided by hand,
the guide resting against the pattern. The carving can be gaged to any
required depth, and made to conform to any required pattern. A fan blows
away chips as fast as they are produced, leaving the work constantly in
view of the operator. The same tool which cuts the mortise also cuts the
tenon, the two pieces of work to be dovetailed being clamped together to
the end of the table. Every kind of finish hitherto made upon the edges
of lumber, and which has heretofore been mitered and glued upon the face
to create a finish, is planed, beaded, and molded upon the piece itself
by this machine.

WASHING BOILERS.--John P. Sherwood, Fort Edward, N.Y.--This invention
