lately included the whole chemical world, believed in the identity of
phlogiston in all bodies which would flame or calcine. The disciples of
Lavoisier pay homage to a plurality of phlogistons under the various
names of charcoal, sulphur, metals, &c. Whatever will unite with _pure_
air, and thence compose an acid, is esteemed in this ingenious theory to
be a different kind of phlogistic or inflammable body. At the same time
there remains a doubt whether these inflammable bodies, as metals,
sulphur, charcoal, &c. may not be compounded of the same phlogiston
along with some other material yet undiscovered, and thus an unity of
phlogiston exist, as in the theory of Stahl, though very differently
applied in the explication of chemical phenomena.

Some modern philosophers are of opinion that the sun is the great
fountain from which the earth and other planets derive all the
phlogiston which they possess; and that this is formed by the
combination of the solar rays with all opake bodies, but particularly
with the leaves of vegetables, which they suppose to be organs adapted
to absorb them. And that as animals receive their nourishment from
vegetables they also obtain in a secondary manner their phlogiston from
the sun. And lastly as great masses of the mineral kingdom, which have
been found in the thin crust of the earth which human labour has
penetrated, have evidently been formed from the recrements of animal and
vegetable bodies, these also are supposed thus to have derived their
phlogiston from the sun.

Another opinion concerning the sun's rays is, that they are not luminous
till they arrive at our atmosphere; and that there uniting with some
part of the air they produce combustion, and light is emitted, and that
an etherial acid, yet undiscovered, is formed from this combustion.

The more probable opinion is perhaps, that the sun is a phlogistic mass
of matter, whose surface is in a state of combustion, which like other
burning bodies emits light with immense velocity in all directions; that
these rays of light act upon all opake bodies, and combining with them
either displace or produce their elementary heat, and become chemically
combined with the phlogistic part of them; for light is given out when
phlogistic bodies unite with the oxygenous principle of the air, as in
combustion, or in the reduction of metallic calxes; thus in presenting
to the flame of a candle a letter-wafer, (if it be coloured with red-
lead,) at the time the red-lead becomes a metallic drop, a flash of
light is perceived. Dr. Alexander Wilson very ingeniously endeavours to
prove that the sun is only in a state of combustion on its surface, and
that the dark spots seen on the disk are excavations or caverns through
the luminous crust, some of which are 4000 miles in diameter. Phil.
Trans. 1774. Of this I shall have occasion to speak again.




                        NOTE VI.--CENTRAL FIRES.


     _Round her still centre tread the burning soil,
     And watch the billowy Lavas, as they boil._

                                            CANTO I. l. 139.


M. de Mairan in a paper published in the Histoire de l'Academie de
Sciences, 1765, has endeavoured to shew that the earth receives but a
small part of the heat which it possesses, from the sun's rays, but is
principally heated by fires within itself. He thinks the sun is the
cause of the vicissitudes of our seasons of summer and winter by a very
small quantity of heat in addition to that already residing in the
earth, which by emanations from the centre to the circumference renders
the surface habitable, and without which, though the sun was constantly
to illuminate two thirds of the globe at once, with a heat equal to that
at the equator, it would soon become a mass of solid ice. His reasonings
and calculations on this subject are too long and too intricate to be
inserted here, but are equally curious and ingenious and carry much
conviction along with them.

The opinion that the center of the earth consists of a large mass of
burning lava, has been espoused by Boyle, Boerhave, and many other
philosophers. Some of whom considering its supposed effects on
vegetation and the formation of minerals have called it a second sun.
There are many arguments in support of this opinion, 1. Because the
power of the sun does not extend much beyond ten feet deep into the
earth, all below being in winter and summer always of the same degree of
heat, viz. 48, which being much warmer than the mildest frost, is
supposed to be sustained by some internal distant fire. Add to this
however that from experiments made some years ago by Dr. Franklin the
spring-water at Philadelphia appeared to be of 52 deg. of heat, which seems
further to confirm this opinion, since the climates in North America are
supposed to be colder than those of Europe under similar degrees of
latitude. 2. Mr. De Luc in going 1359 feet perpendicular into the mines
of Hartz on July the 5th, 1778, on a very fine day found the air at the
bottom a little warmer than at the top of the shaft. Phil. Trans. Vol.
LXIX. p. 488. In the mines in Hungary, which are 500 cubits deep, the
heat becomes very troublesome when the miners get below 480 feet depth.
_Morinus de Locis subter_. p. 131. But as some other deep mines as
mentioned by Mr. Kirwan are said to possess but the common heat of the
earth; and as the crust of the globe thus penetrated by human labour is
so thin compared with the whole, no certain deduction can be made from
these facts on either side of the question. 3. The warm-springs in many
parts of the earth at great distance from any Volcanos seem to originate
from the condensation of vapours arising from water which is boiled by
subterraneous fires, and cooled again in their passage through a certain
length of the colder soil; for the theory of chemical solution will not
explain the equality of their heat at all seasons and through so many
centuries. See note on Fucus in Vol. II. See a letter on this subject in
Mr. Pilkinton's View of Derbyshire from Dr. Darwin. 4. From the
situations of volcanos which are always found upon the summit of the
highest mountains. For as these mountains have been lifted up and lose
several of their uppermost strata as they rise, the lowest strata of the
earth yet known appear at the tops of the highest hills; and the beds of
the Volcanos upon these hills must in consequence belong to the lowest
strata of the earth, consisting perhaps of granite or basaltes, which
were produced before the existance of animal or vegetable bodies, and
might constitute the original nucleus of the earth, which I have
supposed to have been projected from the sun, hence the volcanos
themselves appear to be spiracula or chimneys belonging to great central
fires. It is probably owing to the escape of the elastic vapours from
these spiracula that the modern earthquakes are of such small extent
compared with those of remote antiquity, of which the vestiges remain
all over the globe. 5. The great size and height of the continents, and
the great size and depth of the South-sea, Atlantic, and other oceans,
evince that the first earthquakes, which produced these immense changes
in the globe, must have been occasioned by central fires. 6. The very
distant and expeditious communication of the shocks of some great
earthquakes. The earthquake at Lisbon in 1755 was perceived in Scotland,
in the Peak of Derbyshire, and in many other distant parts of Europe.
The percussions of it travelled with about the velocity of sound, viz.
about thirteen miles in a minute. The earthquake in 1693 extended 2600
leagues. (Goldsmith's History.) These phenomena are easily explained if
the central parts of the earth consist of a fluid lava, as a percussion
on one part of such a fluid mass would be felt on other parts of its
confining vault, like a stroke on a fluid contained in a bladder, which
however gentle on one side is perceptible to the hand placed on the
other; and the velocity with which such a concussion would travel would
be that of sound, or thirteen miles in a minute. For further information
on this part of the subject the reader is referred to Mr. Michell's
excellent Treatise on Earthquakes in the Philos. Trans. Vol. LI. 7. That
there is a cavity at the center of the earth is made probable by the
late experiments on the attraction of mountains by Mr. Maskerlyne, who
supposed from other considerations that the density of the earth near
the surface should be five times less than its mean density. Phil.
Trans. Vol. LXV. p. 498. But found from the attraction of the mountain
Schehallien, that it is probable, the mean density of the earth is but
double that of the hill. Ibid. p. 532. Hence if the first supposition be
well founded there would appear to be a cavity at the centre of
considerable magnitude, from whence the immense beds and mountains of
lava, toadstone, basaltes, granite, &c. have been protruded. 8. The
variation of the compass can only be accounted for by supposing the
central parts of the earth to consist of a fluid mass, and that part of
this fluid is iron, which requiring a greater degree of heat to bring it
into fusion than glass or other metals, remains a solid, and the vis
inertiae of this fluid mass with the iron in it, occasions it to perform
fewer revolutions than the crust of solid earth over it, and thus it is
gradually left behind, and the place where the floating iron resides is
pointed to by the direct or retrograde motions of the magnetic needle.
This seems to have been nearly the opinion of Dr. Halley and Mr. Euler.




                      NOTE VII.--ELEMENTARY HEAT.


     _Or sphere on sphere in widening waves expand,
     And glad with genial warmth the incumbent land._

                                            CANTO I. l. 143.


A certain quantity of heat seems to be combined with all bodies besides
the sensible quantity which gravitates like the electric fluid amongst
them. This combined heat or latent heat of Dr. Black, when set at
liberty by fermentation, inflammation, crystallization, freezing, or
other chemical attractions producing new _combinations_, passes as a
fluid element into the surrounding bodies. And by thawing, diffusion of
neutral salts in water, melting, and other chemical _solutions_, a
portion of heat is attracted from the bodies in vicinity and enters into
or becomes combined with the new solutions.

Hence a _combination_ of metals with acids, of essential oils and acids,
of alcohol and water, of acids and water, give out heat; whilst a
_solution_ of snow in water or in acids, and of neutral salts in water,
attract heat from the surrounding bodies. So the acid of nitre mixed
with oil of cloves unites with it and produces a most violent flame; the
same acid of nitre poured on snow instantly dissolves it and produces
the greatest degree of cold yet known, by which at Petersburgh
quicksilver was first frozen in 1760.

Water may be cooled below 32 deg. without being frozen, if it be placed on a
solid floor and secured from agitation, but when thus cooled below the
freezing point the least agitation turns part of it suddenly into ice,
and when this sudden freezing takes place a thermometer placed in it
instantly rises as some heat is given out in the act of congelation, and
the ice is thus left with the same _sensible_ degree of cold as the
water had possessed before it was agitated, but is nevertheless now
combined with less _latent_ heat.

A cubic inch of water thus cooled down to 32 deg. mixed with an equal
quantity of boiling water at 212 deg. will cool it to the middle number
between these two, or to 122. But a cubic inch of ice whose sensible
cold also is but 32, mixed with an equal quantity of boiling water, will
cool it six times as much as the cubic inch of cold water
above-mentioned, as the ice not only gains its share of the sensible or
gravitating heat of the boiling water but attracts to itself also and
combines with the quantity of latent heat which it had lost at the time
of its congelation.

So boiling water will acquire but 212 deg. of heat under the common pressure
of the atmosphere, but the steam raised from it by its expansion or by
its solution in the atmosphere combines with and carries away a
prodigious quantity of heat which it again parts with on its
condensation; as is seen in common distillation where the large quantity
of water in the worm-tub is so soon heated. Hence the evaporation of
ether on a thermometer soon sinks the mercury below freezing, and hence
a warmth of the air in winter frequently succeeds a shower.

When the matter of heat or calorique is set at liberty from its
combinations, as by inflammation, it passes into the surrounding bodies,
which possess different capacities of acquiring their share of the loose
or sensible heat; thus a pint measure of cold water at 48 deg. mixed with a
pint of boiling water at 212 deg. will cool it to the degree between these
two numbers, or to 154 deg., but it requires two pint measures of
quicksilver at 48 deg. of heat to cool one pint of water as above. These and
other curious experiments are adduced by Dr. Black to evince the
existance of combined or latent heat in bodies, as has been explained by
some of his pupils, and well illustrated by Dr. Crawford. The world has
long been in expectation of an account of his discoveries on this
subject by the celebrated author himself.

As this doctrine of elementary heat in its fluid and combined state is
not yet universally received, I shall here add two arguments in support
of it drawn from different sources, viz. from the heat given out or
absorbed by the mechanical condensation or expansion of the air, and
perhaps of other bodies, and from the analogy of the various phenomena
of heat with those of electricity.

I. If a thermometer be placed in the receiver of an air-pump, and the
air hastily exhausted, the thermometer will sink some degrees, and the
glass become steamy; the same occurs in hastily admitting a part of the
air again. This I suppose to be produced by the expansion of part of the
air, both during the exhaustion and re-admission of it; and that the air
so expanded becomes capable of attracting from the bodies in its
vicinity a part of their heat, hence the vapours contained in it and the
glass receiver are for a time colder and the steam is precipitated. That
the air thus parts with its moisture from the cold occasioned by its
rarefaction and not simply by the rarefaction itself is evident, because
in a minute or two the same rarefied air will again take up the dew
deposited on the receiver; and because water will evaporate sooner in
rare than in dense air.

There is a curious phenomenon similar to this observed in the fountain
of Hiero constructed on a large scale at the Chemnicensian mines in
Hungary. In this machine the air in a large vessel is compressed by a
column of water 260 feet high, a stop-cock is then opened, and as the
air issues out with great vehemence, and thus becomes immediately
greatly expanded, so much cold is produced that the moisture from this
stream of air is precipitated in the form of snow, and ice is formed
adhering to the nosel of the cock. This remarkable circumstance is
described at large with a plate of the machine in Philos. Trans. Vol.
LII. for 1761.

The following experiment is related by Dr. Darwin in the Philos. Trans.
Vol. LXXVIII. Having charged an air-gun as forcibly as he well could the
air-cell and syringe became exceedingly hot, much more so than could be
ascribed to the friction in working it; it was then left about half an
hour to cool down to the temperature of the air, and a thermometer
having been previously fixed against a wall, the air was discharged in a
continual stream on its bulb, and it sunk many degrees. From these three
experiments of the steam in the exhausted receiver being deposited and
re-absorbed, when a part of the air is exhausted or re-admitted, and the
snow produced by the fountain of Hiero, and the extraordinary heat given
out in charging, and the cold produced in discharging an air-gun, there
is reason to conclude that when air is mechanically compressed the
elementary fluid heat is pressed out of it, and that when it is
mechanically expanded the same fluid heat is re-absorbed from the common
mass.

It is probable all other bodies as well as air attract heat from their
neighbours when they are mechanically expanded, and give it out when
they are mechanically condensed. Thus when a vibration of the particles
of hard bodies is excited by friction or by percussion, these particles
mutually recede from and approach each other reciprocally; at the times
of their recession from each other, the body becomes enlarged in bulk,
and is then in a condition to attract heat from those in its vicinity
with great and sudden power; at the times of their approach to each
other this heat is again given out, but the bodies in contact having in
the mean while received the heat they had thus lost, from other bodies
behind them, do not so suddenly or so forcibly re-absorb the heat again
from the body in vibration; hence it remains on its surface like the
electric fluid on a rubbed glass globe, and for the same reason, because
there is no good conductor to take it up again. Hence at every vibration
more and more heat is acquired and stands loose upon the surface; as in
filing metals or rubbing glass tubes; and thus a smith with a few
strokes on a nail on his anvil can make it hot enough to light a
brimstone-match; and hence in striking flint and steel together heat
enough is produced to vitrify the parts thus strucken off, the quantity
of which heat is again probably increased by the new chemical
combination.

II. The analogy between the phenomena of the electric fluid and of heat
furnishes another argument in support of the existence of heat as a
gravitating fluid. 1. They are both accumulated by friction on the
excited body. 2. They are propagated easily or with difficalty along the
same classes of bodies; with ease by metals, with less ease by water;
and with difficulty by resins, bees-wax, silk, air, and glass. Thus
glass canes or canes of sealing-wax may be melted by a blow-pipe or a
candle within a quarter of an inch of the fingers which hold them,
without any inconvenient heat, while a pin or other metallic substance
applyed to the flame of a candle so readily conducts the heat as
immediately to burn the fingers. Hence clothes of silk keep the body
warmer than clothes of linen of equal thickness, by confining the heat
upon the body. And hence plains are so much warmer than the summits of
mountains by the greater density of the air confining the acquired heat
upon them. 3. They both give out light in their passage through air,
perhaps not in their passage through a vacuum. 4. They both of them fuse
or vitrify metals. 5. Bodies after being electrized if they are
mechanically extended will receive a greater quantity of electricity, as
in Dr. Franklin's experiment of the chain in the tankard; the same seems
true in respect to heat as explained above. 6. Both heat and electricity
contribute to suspend steam in the atmosphere by producing or increasing
the repulsion of its particles. 7. They both gravitate, when they have
been accumulated, till they find their equilibrium.

If we add to the above the many chemical experiments which receive an
easy and elegant explanation from the supposed matter of heat, as
employed in the works of Bergman and Lavoisier, I think we may
reasonably allow of its existence as an element, occasionally combined
with other bodies, and occasionally existing as a fluid, like the
electric fluid gravitating amongst them, and that hence it may be
propagated from the central fires of the earth to the whole mass, and
contribute to preserve the mean heat of the earth, which in this country
is about 48 degrees but variable from the greater or less effect of the
sun's heat in different climates, so well explained in Mr. Kirwan's
Treatise on the Temperature of different Latitudes. 1787, Elmsly.
London.




                       NOTE VIII.--MEMNON'S LYRE.


    _So to the sacred Sun in Memnon's fane
    Spontaneous concords quired the matin strain._

                                            CANTO I. l. 183.


The gigantic statue of Memnon in his temple at Thebes had a lyre in his
hands, which many credible writers assure us, sounded when the rising
sun shone upon it. Some philosophers have supposed that the sun's light
possesses a mechanical impulse, and that the sounds abovementioned might
be thence produced. Mr. Michell constructed a very tender horizontal
balance, as related by Dr. Priestley in his history of light and
colours, for this purpose, but some experiments with this balance which
I saw made by the late Dr. Powel, who threw the focus of a large
reflector on one extremity of it, were not conclusive either way, as the
copper leaf of the balance approached in one experiment and receded in
another.

There are however methods by which either a rotative or alternating
motion may be produced by very moderate degrees of heat. If a straight
glass tube, such as are used for barometers, be suspended horizontally
before a fire, like a roasting spit, it will revolve by intervals; for
as glass is a bad conductor of heat the side next the fire becomes
heated sooner than the opposite side, and the tube becomes bent into a
bow with the external part of the curve towards the fire, this curve
then falls down and produces a fourth part of a revolution of the glass
tube, which thus revolves with intermediate pauses.

Another alternating motion I have seen produced by suspending a glass
tube about eight inches long with bulbs at each end on a centre like a
scale beam. This curious machine is filled about one third part with
purest spirit of wine, the other two thirds being a vacuum, and is
called a pulse-glass, if it be placed in a box before the fire, so that
either bulb, as it rises, may become shaded from the fire, and exposed
to it when it descends, an alternate libration of it is produced. For
spirit of wine in vacuo emits steam by a very small degree of heat, and
this steam forces the spirit beneath it up into the upper bulb, which
therefore descends. It is probable such a machine on a larger scale
might be of use to open the doors or windows of hot-houses or mellon-
frames, when the air within them should become too much heated, or might
be employed in more important mechanical purposes.

On travelling through a hot summer's day in a chaise with a box covered
with leather on the fore-axle-tree, I observed, as the sun shone upon
the black leather, the box began to open its lid, which at noon rose
above a foot, and could not without great force be pressed down; and
which gradually closed again as the sun declined in the evening. This I
suppose might with still greater facility be applied to the purpose of
opening melon-frames or the sashes of hot-houses.

The statue of Memnon was overthrown and sawed in two by Cambyses to
discover its internal structure, and is said still to exist. See
Savary's Letters on Egypt. The truncated statue is said for many
centuries to have saluted the rising sun with chearful tones, and the
setting sun with melancholy ones.




                      NOTE IX.--LUMINOUS INSECTS.


     _Star of the earth, and diamond of the night._

                                            CANTO I. l. 196.


There are eighteen species of Lampyris or glow-worm, according to
Linneus, some of which are found in almost every part of the world. In
many of the species the females have no wings, and are supposed to be
discovered by the winged males by their shining in the night. They
become much more lucid when they put themselves in motion, which would
seem to indicate that their light is owing to their respiration; in
which process it is probable phosphoric acid is produced by the
combination of vital air with some part of the blood, and that light is
given out through their transparent bodies by this slow internal
combustion.

There is a fire-fly of the beetle-kind described in the Dict. Raisonne
under the name of Acudia, which is said to be two inches long, and
inhabits the West-Indies and South America; the natives use them instead
of candles, putting from one to three of them under a glass. Madam
Merian says, that at Surinam the light of this fly is so great, that she
saw sufficiently well by one of them to paint and finish one of the
figures of them in her work on insects. The largest and oldest of them
are said to become four inches long, and to shine like a shooting star
as they fly, and are thence called Lantern-bearers. The use of this
light to the insect itself seems to be that it may not fly against
objects in the night; by which contrivance these insects are enabled to
procure their sustenance either by night or day, as their wants may
require, or their numerous enemies permit them; whereas some of our
beetles have eyes adapted only to the night, and if they happen to come
abroad too soon in the evening are so dazzled that they fly against
every thing in their way. See note on Phosphorus, No. X.

In some seas, as particularly about the coast of Malabar, as a ship
floats along, it seems during the night to be surrounded with fire, and
to leave a long tract of light behind it. Whenever the sea is gently
agitated it seems converted into little stars, every drop as it breaks
emits light, like bodies electrified in the dark. Mr. Bomare says, that
when he was at the port of Cettes in Languedoc, and bathing with a
companion in the sea after a very hot day, they both appeared covered
with fire after every immersion, and that laying his wet hand on the arm
of his companion, who had not then dipped himself, the exact mark of his
hand and fingers was seen in characters of fire. As numerous microscopic
insects are found in this shining water, its light has been generally
ascribed to them, though it seems probable that fish-slime in hot
countries may become in such a state of incipient putrefaction as to
give light, especially when by agitation it is more exposed to the air;
otherwise it is not easy to explain why agitation should be necessary to
produce this marine light. See note on Phosphorus No. X.




                          NOTE X.--PHOSPHORUS.
