"Well, I guess that's all for now.  Give my love to Mama, and God
bless."





This bullet-pouch was not, however, the first word that Stone had heard
of the massacre.  The day before he had received a tele-communication
from Soviet Premier Denisov, short and to the point.





"Mr. President.  Is it war you want?"

At this point Stone motioned in his Vice-President, Jordan Plant, who
was standing by the door.  The visual screens of both powers remained
blank.

"No, Premier Denisov.  That's the last thing I want."

"Then why does your Secretary of State continue to murder in your name?
 I am sure you have heard what happened in East German Cerberus?"

Stone turned a helpless look toward Plant, who first lifted his hands
(he didn't know), then moved closer and whispered in his ear:
"Whatever Hayes has done, now more than ever we have to tell him."

Stone took a deep breath.

"Secretary Hayes is no longer acting under my orders.  And I did not
order the attack on Athena."

There was no pause on the part of Denisov.  "Now you must tell me
something I do not already know.  But I ask you plainly, Mr. Stone.
What do you plan to do about it?"

Plant quickly wrote a reply on his note-board and handed it to the
president, who read it with all the gravity he could muster.

"I have not yet given up hope that General Hayes can be peacefully
dissuaded from his present course.  But be assured, one way or the
other, he will be brought to justice."

"And let me assure YOU, Mr. President, that our patience is at an end.
You have thirteen days to return me a better answer, or the Soviet
Space Republics will deal with the Third Fleet ourselves."

Stone paused, but the words were his own.  "You know I can't let you do
that."

Whether these last words were heard or not, there was no reply.  The
channel was closed.  Luther Bacon, White House Chief-of-Staff, was then
brought in and apprised of the situation.

The next day, after receiving Hayes' bullet and trying (unsuccessfully)
to keep its contents from the press, the three held their council.
Bacon paced thoughtfully.  Plant, seated, touched his fingertips
lightly together while Stone, disconsolate, felt the walls crumbling
around him.  Half an hour before, despite all their efforts, he had
received a phone call from a member of the New York Press Corps
friendly to the administration, informing him that a duplicate pouch
had been received by its members, and that the news was spreading like
wildfire.

Finally the President exploded.  "What are we going to DO?  We have
less than two weeks to answer the Russians, and it will take nearly
that long to send and receive one more message from Hayes."

"Quite right," said Plant, the unspoken leader of the three.  "Luther,
if you'll come with me to my office, we'll begin work on our reply to
General Hayes.  I'm afraid it's time to take strong measures against
him."

"That son of a bitch!" fumed Stone, hurling a vase at the wall.  "That
son of a BITCH."

"That won't help this time," said Bacon.  "Believe me."

"Gentlemen," said Plant seriously.  "I suggest we get to work.  Try to
calm yourself, Edgar.  We'll meet here again in an hour's time."

When the two men returned to the Oval Office with the drafted document,
they found Stone in an attitude of despair.  He listened blankly as
Bacon read the finished product, signed it where and when he was asked.

"Just words," he said listlessly.  "Like all the words I've been
spouting for twenty years, they don't mean a thing.  Hayes does his
talking with a gun, and soon Denisov will do the same.  What now,
Jordan?  What of the Joint Chiefs---will they betray us, too?"

"I don't know," said Plant levelly.  "But as to your first question,
I'd say we have to send our communication to the Secretary, then
prepare a full statement to the press.  We've got to get this thing out
in the open.  We've got to tell the truth, then let the people decide."

"Of course you're right."  Stone paused, then said simply.  "Should I
resign, Jordan?  You're much more qualified to handle this---"

Plant stood up and waved his hands in desperate denial.  For though his
life's whole ambition could there be suddenly realized, he saw in the
sharp clarity of his mind, heightened and given truer perspective by
the crisis which hung thick all around them, that it would be wrong,
and possibly disastrous, to assume the Presidency now.  And though much
that was good in him lay fallen by the way, discarded and forgotten
among the endless compromises needed to keep him on the road to his one
desire, he too had a line he would not cross.

TOO MANY FAIRY TALES AS A CHILD, he told himself.  But once made, his
decision was final.  He could not sell all that he was, for any price.

"No, Edgar.  Don't resign.  The last thing we need now is added
instability.  We may find ourselves in the midst of a Constitutional
crisis soon.....  Don't you see?"  He felt a strange passion rising
inside him.  "It's not just you or I that are under attack, but the
whole system.  The work of Jefferson and Adams, and so many others, is
receiving probably the toughest challenge it's ever faced.  But it's
never cracked before, and believe me, there've been plenty of chances.
You," he said slowly, emphatically, "are the duly elected President of
the United Commonwealth.  Hayes is no more than a crazed demagogue with
a gun.  We've got to hold on to that.  We've got to hold on....."

And then suddenly, incredulously, he laughed.  And in that momentary
freeing of the heart, so long caged and disciplined toward a single
end, he felt a childish joy, and release so pure that warm tears
started at his eyes.  Stone looked at him, bewildered.

"Don't you see it, Edgar?  Don't you really?  The only difference
between us is that you never let yourself play the hero in schoolyard
games, thinking you weren't good enough, or just being bitter about
your father, or some other damned thing.  You're no worse than I am,
believe me."  Slowly he mastered his mirth, though the feeling of
defiant freedom lingered.  "We're neither one of us heroes, my friend;
but it seems we're all we've got.  You need more illusions,
Edgar---they keep you longer from the void.  Try on the mask of virtue
next.  It may save our asses yet."

"But what about the Soviets?  What can we possibly do in thirteen days?"

"We'll cross that bridge when we come to it."

"Or find it washed out."

"Maybe.  But for now we've got to deal with Hayes.  'Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof.'"

Stone thought for a moment.  "Who said that, Jordan?"

"Jesus Christ."

"I didn't know you were a believer."

"I'm not."

The three summoned in Press Secretary Miller, who could no longer be
fed bits and pieces of the truth.  Robert Weiss, Stone's other top
adviser (and firmly in General Hayes' camp) continued to demand to see
the President.  Bacon continued to deny the request.

The message was sent to Hayes, who now made no secret of his
whereabouts:  ten days from the limits of Soviet Space.  Unreachable by
stealth, yet tantalizingly close.

The pieces continued to move across the board.  The middle-game, which
wasn't a game at all, had begun.





VII


The trouble and damage caused by the rift within the Commonwealth, and
the subsequent break in relations with Moscow, were in no way limited
to the lesser and intermediate socialist powers that came under Soviet
influence, nor did they wholly end with the eventual cessations of
those hostilities.

The growing instability of a dozen far-reaching theatres, had first
cautiously, and then more freely, burst into expansionist violence.  It
was almost as if the perpetrators of these lesser conflicts had
simultaneously realized that Law along the frontiers was diminished,
and waited only long enough to be sure they were not caught alone in
the looting and thievery.  And a riot, once begun, is very difficult to
bring under control.

Choose a metaphor.  The Marshall of an Old West mining community gunned
down, and the town taken over by outlaws.  The blackout of a large
metropolis, with bands of looters roaming the streets.  The sudden
collapse of an Empire, or the death of an heirless king.  By any name
the resulting darkness, the anarchy of violence, remained the same.
With this exception only.  The Law was not wholly diminished, as two of
the four Superpowers remained largely unaffected.  And the chief
pirateers were now nations, and there were, therefore, (supposedly)
higher motives, and diplomatic niceties involved.

Because respectable governments, if they want to stay in power, don't
call themselves outlaws; and to their collective mind the words
'occupation' and 'theft', 'war' and 'murder', are not interchangeable.
Though the difference might have been hard to explain to those on the
wrong side of the gun.

That the Belgians and Swiss struck again, and first, was perhaps not
surprising.  That the Arabs and Israelis had yet one more go at each
other, perhaps little more so.  That the German States continued to
sell arms to nearly anyone with the money to buy---they had taken that
job over from the Americans and Soviets---was, after all, only to be
expected.  And if the Dutch lost nearly all they had in the outlying
sectors, bitter and friendless but for help from Sweden which arrived
too late, it was not, to some, considered a lasting tragedy.

In fact it was quite extraordinary how the moral judgments of those not
directly involved (and not wanting trouble themselves) were able to
bend to accommodate the bloodshed all around them.  Not that some
didn't mourn, and all weren't scared and angry.  But at such times the
Neville Chamberlains and Arthur Vandenberg's of the world are always
found in great abundance; and when was the last time YOU tried to break
up a fight while others watched, or came to the aid of a lesser
acquaintance clearly wronged?

Man's new life among the cold, distant stars, whatever other effects it
might have had upon humanity, had not, as the romantic had hoped at the
dawn of the Space Age, brought people closer together, or taught us
once and for all the need for brotherhood, peace, and mutual
understanding.  For human nature is nothing if not stubborn, and where
there is a will to be ignorant, somehow a way will be found.

Like a tiny blaze of ignorance, prejudice and Fear:  fanned by the
wind, the fire had spread.





VIII


Edgar Stone strode down the aisle of the House of Representatives, the
papers of the speech rolled into a tight scroll in his hand.  The
applause customary at such an entrance struck him now as feeble, and
utterly beside the point.

He was not the only one to feel this.  There was an odd note of
hollowness and uncertainty in the sound, and those who clapped could
not have said themselves why they did so.  Had Stone come to ask for a
Declaration of War?  Against whom?  What was the meaning of this
gathering, with legislators of both House and Senate alike standing
tense and erect, and cameras poking this way and that?  The very wood
of that chamber seemed suddenly old and darkling, and in the air a
thick tension brooded like the coming of a storm.  All talk and
speculation lay dead and in the past.  The gathering was seated with a
rustling sound that echoed dully and impatiently.

Stone reached the podium and paused, looking frightened.  Surely the
pretense of enlightenment and self-importance in which he
characteristically wrapped his 'fellow Americans' would ring false in
those halls, sullen and filled with ghosts.

He laid down his papers, despairing to speak.  Never before had he felt
himself so plainly laid out on the surgeon's table, under the
unblinking eye of the camera, waiting for the knife.  He wrestled back
the lump in his throat.  He spoke.

"'You will know the truth, and the truth will make you free.'  These
words were spoken long ago by the man whom many of us profess to be the
Son of God.  His ideals were ever kept in the minds of those who shaped
this nation, who lived and died---"  He nearly sobbed, though he could
not have said why.  "Who fought for this country in its darkest
hours.....  It is in His name that we are now asked to go to war."  His
voice grew stronger, though again he could not have said why.

"And yet this same truth He spoke of, and that many so-called patriots
now trumpet so loudly, has been denied us, buried beneath a flood of
half-truths and propaganda.  You.....  WE have been deceived, and made
to commit murder in the name of the things we hold most dear."

A murmur of astonishment ran through the crowd, and those who watched
from every corner of the Commonwealth, whether live or distance
delayed, felt strange and conflicting emotions stir inside them.

"This very night, July 15, the time of our self-deception, our imagined
safety, is over.  A dreadful choice lies before us."  Again the murmur
started, but Stone cut it short, fearing at any moment to lose his
courage.

"The Secretary of State of the United Commonwealth, Charles William
Hayes, has attempted to blackmail his President, and force us all into
a war that can only result in the loss of millions of lives, if not the
utter collapse of galactic civilization as we know it."  He forced
himself to go on.  "And there are some within the military
establishment. . .within this very room, who may stand behind him in
the attempt.....

"I did not order the attack on Athena.  I did not authorize, and flatly
condemn, the ruthless slaughter at the Battle of Schiller."

At this point Stone grew angry, and felt a deep swelling of the heart
that astonished him:  the throb of genuine righteousness.  Or so it
seemed to him then.  He glared at the assembly, placed his hands firmly
on the lip of
the podium, and continued in a voice he could hardly believe was his
own.

"This - is - the UNITED COMMONWEALTH OF AMERICA, created by some of the
ablest minds in history, founded in courage, and dedicated to the dream
of freedom for ALL.  This - is - MY HOME!  This is NOT Nazi Germany.
And so help me God, I will not let it become a slaughter-house for the
obsessions of a madman!  This is not a nation run by generals, or ruled
at the point of a gun."  He realized he had strayed from the speech,
and he felt himself waver.  But stubbornly he pushed on.

"The Constitution established three branches of government, to insure a
system of check and balances:  to insure that no man, or group of men,
became so powerful as to override all others, and manipulate or destroy
the common decency of the people.

"And yet FORMER General Hayes would change all that, to say that if the
President was not to his liking, or the Congress would not give him
what he wanted, he could break away, and make war on his own.  He has
done it.  And to be sure that we will follow him, he has struck the
Soviets across the face, and challenged them to a duel to the death.

"Even now I cannot tell you how events will turn....."  He paused,
looked down at the speech before him.  Ten pages at least remained.
But his passion and energies were spent.  He wondered then briefly if
he had done the right thing.  He told himself the question was
irrelevant:  he had done all he could.

"My Vice President will now tell you the details, and how we plan to
deal with this crisis."  He stepped down, and strode out of the silent
room.

Plant, stunned but not yet daunted, stepped down from his seat beside
the Speaker of the House, and took up the papers left for him.
Omitting the passages and emotional phrases now rendered superfluous by
Stone's barrage, he read evenly, and after a time, calmly and clearly.
He relayed the pertinent facts behind the rift, including, in full, the
letters of Hayes to the President.  He also spoke, as dispassionately
as he could, of the threat of war with the Soviets, hoping this added
danger would not tip the scales against them.  He concluded with the
following:

"It seems to me that the last line of our National Anthem is especially
relevant now.  For its undying question, asks not only IF we stand, but
how we stand, and why.  To that we MUST answer yes:  our flag still
waves, over the land of the FREE, and the home of the BRAVE.  And not
just brave enough to die in a war that accomplishes nothing, but to
face up to our mistakes, and put an end to the bloodshed that neither
side wants.  We must have the courage to cast aside folly and reckless
pride, and say NO to a would-be dictator, who would leave us no such
choice.

"As of this moment, and by direct order of the President and
Commander-in-Chief, Charles William Hayes is no longer Secretary of
State.  He is no longer a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, nor a
ranking member of the military establishment.  He is hereby ordered to
return at once with the forces he has commandeered; and any who choose
to further defy the Constitution of the United Commonwealth, Mr. Hayes
included, will be brought to trial for treason."

Here he felt the same trepidation that Stone had experienced.  Had they
gone too far?  Or would this forced reasoning break through?

"We regret the necessity for this order, and that we have not been able
to be more forthcoming until now.  But quite obviously, matters of the
gravest national security are involved.  We must deal with former
Secretary Hayes at once, then turn our attention to Moscow.  We will
continue to seek a peaceful means of ending both disputes.  But let no
one doubt our resolve.

"May God be with us in this just endeavor.  Thank you."

Plant left the chamber, to the same, deafening silence.





IX


On the morning of the day after, Stone, Plant and Bacon sat at a curved
table facing a viewscreen connected by direct phone-link to the
Kremlin.  For their own part they sent a visual projection.  After
exchanging terse formalities, Denisov did the same.  His square face
with its black hair and thick eyebrows appeared, the dark clear eyes
beneath, scrutinizing each face carefully.  On one side of him sat the
Chairman of the Presidium, on the other, the Minister of Defense.
Denisov did not wait to be asked.

"A pretty speech, to be sure, and an eloquent letter to our ambassador
in Washington.  It is too bad that General Hayes will never hear of it.
 He might have made an even prettier speech in return."

"And why shouldn't he hear of it?" asked Stone, unwisely.  "The
