                                 [Table]

*The Central Division.*--This division of the nervous system lies within
the cranial and spinal cavities, and consists of the brain and the spinal
cord. The brain occupying the cranial cavity and the spinal cord in the
spinal cavity connect with each other through the large opening at the
base of the skull to form one continuous structure. The brain and cord are
the most complicated portions of the nervous system, and the ones most
difficult to understand.

                                [Fig. 130]


                Fig. 130--*Diagram of divisions of brain.*


*The Brain.*--The brain, which is the largest mass of nervous tissue in the
body, weighs in the average sized man about 50 ounces, and in the average
sized woman about 44 ounces.(98) It may be roughly divided into three
parts, which are named from their positions (in lower animals) the
forebrain, the midbrain, and the hindbrain (Fig. 130). The forebrain
consists almost entirely of a single part, known as

*The Cerebrum.*--The cerebrum comprises about seven eighths of the entire
brain, and occupies all the front, middle, back, and upper portions of the
cranial cavity, spreading over and concealing, to a large extent, the
parts beneath. The surface layer of the cerebrum is called the _cortex_.
This is made up largely of cell-bodies, and has a grayish appearance.(99)
The cortex is greatly increased in area by the presence everywhere of
ridge-like _convolutions_, between which are deep but narrow depressions,
called _fissures_. The interior of the cerebrum consists mainly of nerve
fibers, or axons, which give it a whitish appearance. These fibers connect
with the cell-bodies in the cortex (Fig. 131).

The cerebrum is a double organ, consisting of two similar divisions,
called the _cerebral hemispheres_. These are separated by a deep groove,
extending from the front to the back of the brain, known as the _median
fissure_. The hemispheres, however, are closely connected by a great band
of underlying nerve fibers, called the _corpus callosum_.

                                [Fig. 131]


Fig. 131--*Microscope drawing* of a neuron from cerebral cortex. _a._ Short
          segment of the axis cylinder with collateral branches.


At the base of the cerebrum three large masses of cell-bodies are to be
found. One of these, a double mass, occupies a central position between
the hemispheres, and is called the _optic thalami_. The other two occupy
front central positions at the base of either hemisphere, and are known as
the _corpora striata_, or the striate bodies.

*The Midbrain* is a short, rounded, and compact body that lies immediately
beneath the cerebrum, and connects it with the hindbrain. On account of
the great size of the cerebrum, the midbrain is entirely concealed from
view when the other parts occupy their normal positions. However, if the
cerebrum is pulled away from the hindbrain, it is brought into view
somewhat as in Fig. 130.

The midbrain carries upon its back and upper surface four small rounded
masses of cell-bodies, called the _corpora quadrigemina_. The upper two of
these bodies are connected with the eyes; the lower two appear to have
some connection with the organs of hearing. On the front and under
surface, the midbrain separates slightly as if to form two pillars, which
are called the _crura cerebri_, or cerebral peduncles. These contain the
great bundles of nerve fibers that connect the cerebrum with the parts of
the nervous system below.

*The Hindbrain* lies beneath the back portion of the cerebrum, and
occupies the enlargement at the base of the skull. It forms about one
eighth of the entire brain, and is composed of three parts--the cerebellum,
the pons, and the bulb.

*The Cerebellum* is a flat and somewhat triangular structure with its
upper surface fitting into the triangular under surface of the back of the
cerebrum. It is divided into three lobes--a central lobe and two lateral
lobes--and weighs about two and one half ounces. In its general form and
appearance, as well as in the arrangement of its cell-bodies and axons,
the cerebellum resembles the cerebrum. It differs from the cerebrum,
however, in being more compact, and in having its surface covered with
narrow, transverse ridges instead of the irregular and broader
convolutions (Fig. 132).

*The Pons*, or pons Varolii, named from its supposed resemblance to a
bridge, is situated in front of the cerebellum, and is readily recognized
as a circular expansion which extends forward from that body. It consists
largely of bands of nerve fibers, between which are several small masses
of cell-bodies. The fibers connect with different parts of the cerebellum
and with parts above.

                                [Fig. 132]


Fig. 132--*Human brain* viewed from below. _C._ Cerebrum. _Cb._ Cerebellum.
       _M._ Midbrain. _P._ Pons. _B._ Bulb. I-XII. Cranial nerves.


*The Bulb*, or medulla oblongata, is, properly speaking, an enlargement of
the spinal cord within the cranial cavity. It is somewhat triangular in
shape, and lies immediately below the cerebellum. It contains important
clusters of cell-bodies, as well as the nerve fibers that pass from the
spinal cord to the brain.

*The Spinal Cord.*--This division of the central nervous system is about
seventeen inches in length and two thirds of an inch in diameter. It does
not extend the entire length of the spinal cavity, as might be supposed,
but terminates at the lower margin of the first lumbar vertebra.(100) It
connects at the upper end with the bulb, and terminates at the lower
extremity in a number of large nerve roots, which are continuous with the
nerves of the hips and legs (Fig. 133). Two deep fissures, one in front
and the other at the back, extend the entire length of the cord, and
separate it into two similar divisions. These are connected, however,
along their entire length by a central band consisting of both gray and
white matter.

                                [Fig. 133]


 Fig. 133--*Spinal cord*, showing on one side the nerves and ganglia with
    which it is closely related in function. _A._ Bulb. _B._ Cervical
enlargement. _C._ Lumbar enlargement. _D._ Termination of cord. _E._ Nerve
  roots that occupy the spinal cavity below the cord. _P._ Pons. _D.G._
  Dorsal root ganglia. _S.G._ Sympathetic ganglia. _N._ Nerve trunks to
                       upper and lower extremities.


The arrangement of the neurons of the spinal cord is just the reverse of
that in the cerebrum--the center being occupied by a double column of
cell-bodies, which give it a grayish appearance, while the fibers occupy
the outer portion of the cord, giving it a whitish appearance.

The spinal cord is not uniform in thickness, but tapers slightly, though
not uniformly, from the upper toward the lower end. At the places where
the nerves from the arms and legs enter the cord two enlargements are to
be found, the upper being called the _cervical_ and the lower the _lumbar
enlargement_. These, on account of the difference in length between the
cord and the spinal cavity, are above--the lower one considerably above--the
places where the limbs which they supply join the trunk (Fig. 133).

*Arrangement of the Neurons of the Brain and Cord.*--The cell-bodies in the
brain and spinal cord are collected into groups, and their fibers extend
from these groups to places that may be near or remote. Guided by the
white and gray colors of the nervous tissue, and also by the structures
revealed by the microscope, physiologists have made out three general
schemes in the grouping of cell-bodies, as follows:

1. _That of surface distribution_, the cell-bodies forming a thin but
continuous layer over a given surface. This is the plan in the cerebrum
and cerebellum, and here are found devices for increasing the surface: the
cerebrum having convolutions, the cerebellum transverse ridges.

2. _That of collections of cell-bodies into rounded masses._ Such masses
are found in the bulb, the pons, the midbrain, and the base of the
cerebrum.

3. _That of arrangement in a continuous column._ This is the plan in the
spinal cord. It matters not at what place the spinal cord be cut, a
central area of gray matter, resembling in form the capital letter H, is
always found.

The fibers connecting with the cell-bodies in the brain and spinal cord
are gathered into bundles or tracts, and these pass through different
parts somewhat as follows:

1. _In the cerebrum_ they extend in three general directions, forming
three classes of fibers. The first connect different localities in the
same hemisphere, and are known as _association_ fibers (_A_, Fig. 134).
The second make connection between the two hemispheres, and form the
corpus callosum. These are known as _commissural_ fibers (_C_, Fig. 134).
The third connect the cerebrum with the parts of the nervous system below,
and are called _projection_ fibers (_P_, Fig. 134).

2. _In the cerebellum_ both association and commissural fibers are found.
Bands of fibers, passing upward toward the cerebrum and downward toward
the cord, connect this part of the brain with other parts of the nervous
system.

                                [Fig. 134]


Fig. 134--*Semi-diagrammatic representation of a section through the right
cerebral hemisphere*, showing fiber tracts. _A._ Association fibers. _C._
Commissural fibers. _P._ Projection fibers. The cell-bodies with which the
        fiber bundles connect are in the surface layer or cortex.


3. _In the midbrain, bulb, and spinal cord_ fibers are found: first, that
connect these parts with the cerebrum(101) and cerebellum above; second,
that pass into and become a part of the nerves of the body; and third,
that connect the opposite sides of these parts together.

*The Peripheral Division.*--The peripheral division of the nervous system
includes all the nervous structures found outside of the brain and spinal
cord. These consist of the cranial, spinal, and sympathetic nerves, and of
various small ganglia, all of which are closely connected with the central
system.

*Spinal Nerves and Dorsal-root Ganglia.*--The spinal nerves comprise a
group of thirty-one pairs, which connect the spinal cord with different
parts of the trunk, with the upper, and with the lower extremities. Each
nerve joins the cord by two roots, these being named from their positions
the _ventral_, or anterior, root and the _dorsal_, or posterior, root. The
two roots blend together within the spinal cavity to form a single nerve
trunk, which passes out between the vertebrae. On the dorsal root of each
spinal nerve is a small ganglion which is named, from its position, the
_dorsal-root ganglion_. (Consult Figs. 133 and 135, and also Fig. 125.)

*Double Nature of Spinal Nerves.*--Charles Bell, in 1811, made the
remarkable discovery that each spinal nerve is double in function. He
found the portion connecting with the cord by the dorsal root to be
concerned in the _production of feeling_ and the portion connecting by the
ventral root to be concerned in the _production of motion_. In keeping
with these functions, the two divisions of the nerve are made up of
different kinds of fibers, as follows:

1. The dorsal-root divisions, of the fibers of di-axonic neurons, the
cell-bodies of which form the dorsal-root ganglia (Fig. 135).

2. The ventral-root divisions, of the fibers of mon-axonic neurons, the
cell-bodies of which are in the gray matter of the cord.

The first convey impulses to the cord and are called _afferent_
neurons;(102) the second convey impulses from the cord and are known as
_efferent_ neurons. Thus, by forming a part of the nerve pathways between
the skin and the brain, the dorsal divisions of these nerves aid in the
production of feeling; and by completing pathways to the muscles, the
ventral divisions aid in the production of motion (Figs. 129, 135, and
141).

                                [Fig. 135]


  Fig. 135--*Connection of spinal nerves with the cord.* On the right is
  shown a nerve pathway from the skin to the muscle. A division of this
                        pathway reaches the brain.


*The Cranial Nerves.*--From the under front surface of the brain, twelve
pairs of nerves emerge and pass to the head, neck, and upper portions of
the trunk. These, the cranial nerves, have names suggestive of their
function or distribution and, in addition, are given numbers which
indicate the order in which they leave the brain (Fig. 136). Unlike the
spinal nerves, the cranial nerves present great variety among themselves,
scarcely any two of them being alike in function or in their connection
with different parts of the body. Several of them have to do with the
special senses, and are for this reason very important. They connect the
brain with the different parts of the head, neck, and trunk, as follows:

1. The first pair (_olfactory_ nerves; nerves of smell; afferent) connect
with the mucous membrane of the nostrils (Fig. 136).

2. The second pair (_optic_ nerves; nerves of sight; afferent) connect
with the retina of the eyes.

3. The third, fourth, and sixth pairs (_motores oculi;_ control muscles of
the eyes; efferent) connect with the internal and external muscles of the
eyeballs (Fig. 136).

                                [Fig. 136]


Fig. 136--*Diagram suggesting the distribution and functions of the cranial
                   nerves* (Colton). See also Fig. 132.


4. The fifth pair (_trigeminal_ nerves; nerves of feeling to the face, of
taste to the front of the tongue, and of control of muscles of
mastication; afferent and efferent) connect with the skin of the face, the
mucous membrane of the mouth, the teeth, and the muscles of mastication.

5. The seventh pair (_facial_ nerves; control muscles that give the facial
expressions; efferent) connect with the muscles just beneath the skin of
the face.

6. The eighth pair (_auditory_ nerves; nerves of hearing; afferent)
connect with the internal ear.

7. The ninth pair (_glossopharyngeal_ nerves; nerves of taste to back of
tongue and of muscular control of pharynx; afferent and efferent) connect
with the back surface of the tongue and with the muscles of the pharynx.

8. The tenth pair (_vagus_, or pneumogastric, nerves; nerves of feeling
and of muscular control; afferent and efferent) connect with the heart,
larynx, lungs, and stomach. They have the widest distribution of any of
the cranial nerves.

9. The eleventh pair (_spinal accessory_ nerves; control muscles of neck;
efferent) connect with the muscles of the neck.

10. The twelfth pair (_hypoglossal_ nerves; control muscles of the tongue;
efferent) connect with the muscles of the tongue.

*Sympathetic Ganglia and Nerves.*--The sympathetic ganglia are found in
different parts of the body, and vary in size from those which are half an
inch in diameter to those that are smaller than the heads of pins. The
largest and most important ones are found in two chains which lie in
front, and a little to either side, of the spinal column, and extend from
the neck to the region of the pelvis (Figs. 125 and 133). The number of
ganglia in each of these chains is about twenty-four. They are connected
on either side by the right and left sympathetic nerves which extend
vertically from ganglion to ganglion. In addition to the ganglia forming
these chains, important ones are found in the head (outside of the cranial
cavity) and in the plexuses of the thorax and the abdomen.

The sympathetic ganglia receive nerves from the central division of the
nervous system, but connect with glands, blood vessels, and the intestinal
walls through fibers from their own cell-bodies. Some of these latter
fibers join the spinal nerves, and some blend with each other to form
small sympathetic nerves.

*Protection of Brain and Spinal Cord.*--On account of their delicate
structure, the brain and spinal cord require the most complete protection.
In the first place, they are surrounded by the bones of the head and
spinal column; these not only shield them from the direct effects of
physical force, but by their peculiar construction prevent, to a large
degree, the passage of jars and shocks to the parts within. In the second
place, they are surrounded by three separate membranes, as follows:

1. The _dura_, or dura mater, a thick, dense, and tough membrane which
lines the bony cavities and forms supporting partitions.

2. The _pia_, or pia mater, a thin, delicate membrane, containing numerous
blood vessels, that covers the surface of the brain and cord.

3. The _arachnoid_, a membrane of loose texture, that lies between the
dura and the pin.

Finally, within the spaces of the arachnoid is a lymph-like liquid which
completely envelops the brain and the cord, and which, by serving as a
watery cushion, protects them from jars and shocks. Thus the brain and
cord are directly shielded by bones, by membranes, and by the liquid which
surrounds them. They are also protected from jars resulting from the
movements of the body by the general elasticity of the skeleton.

*Summary.*--The nervous system establishes connections between all parts of
the body, and provides a stimulus by means of which they are controlled.
It is made up of a special form of cells, called neurons. The neurons form
the different divisions of the nervous system, and also serve as the
active agents in carrying on its work. Through a side-by-side method of
joining they form the nerves, ganglia, spinal cord, and brain; and by a
method of end-to-end joining they connect places remote from each other,
and provide for nervous movements through the body. The nervous system,
may in some respects be compared to a complicated system of telephony, in
which the chains of neurons correspond to the wires, and the brain and
spinal cord to the central station.

Exercises.--1. Give the meaning of the term "cooerdination." Supply
illustrations.

2. What two general conditions are supplied in the body by the nervous
system?

3. Compare the skeleton outline of the nervous system with the bony
skeleton.

4. Sketch outlines of mon-axonic and di-axonic neurons.

5. Give two differences between the neurons and the other cells of the
body.

6. Describe the two general methods of connecting neurons in the body.
What purpose is accomplished by each method?

7. Name and locate the principal divisions of the nervous system.

8. Draw an outline of the brain (side view), locating each of its
principal divisions.

9. If a pencil were placed over the ear, what portions of the brain would
be above it and what below?

10. Describe briefly the cerebrum, the cerebellum, the midbrain, the pons,
and the bulb.

11. Locate and describe the cortex. State purpose of the convolutions.

12. State the general differences between the cranial and the spinal
nerves.

13. Locate and give the number of the dorsal-root ganglia. Locate and give
the approximate number of the sympathetic ganglia.

14. Show how the two portions of the spinal nerves are formed--the one from
the mon-axonic and the other from the di-axonic neurons.

15. Enumerate the different agencies through which the brain and spinal
cord are protected.

16. What cranial nerves contain afferent fibers? What ones contain
efferent fibers? What ones contain both afferent and efferent fibers?

17. In what respects is the nervous system similar to a system of
telephony? In what respects is it different?



PRACTICAL WORK


Examine a model of the brain, identifying the different divisions and
noting the position and relative size of the different parts (Fig. 137).
Observe the convolutions of the cerebrum and compare these with the
parallel ridges of the cerebellum. If the model is dissectible, study the
arrangement of the cell-bodies (gray matter) and the distribution of the
fiber bundles (white matter). Note the connection of the cranial nerves
with the under side.

                                [Fig. 137]


        Fig. 137--Model for demonstrating the brain (dissectible).


A prepared nervous system of a frog (such as may be obtained from supply
houses) should also be examined. Observe the appearance and general
distribution of the nerves and their connection with the brain and spinal
cord. If such a preparation is not at hand, some small animal may be
dissected to show the main divisions of the nervous system, as follows:

*Dissection of the Nervous System* (by the teacher).--For this purpose a
half-grown cat is generally the best available material. This should be
killed with chloroform and secured to a board as in the dissection of the
abdomen (page 169). Open the abdominal cavity and remove the contents,
tying the alimentary canal where it is cut, and washing out any blood
which may escape. Dissect for the nervous system in the following order:

1. Cut away the front of the chest, exposing the heart and lungs. Find on
each side of the heart a nerve which passes by the side of the pericardium
to the diaphragm. These nerves assist in controlling respiration and are
called the _phrenic_ nerves. Find other nerves going to different parts of
the thorax.

2. Remove the heart and lungs. Find in the back part of the thoracic
cavity, on each side of the spinal column, a number of small "knots" of
nervous matter joined together by a single nerve. These are sympathetic
ganglia. Where the neck joins the thorax, find two sympathetic ganglia
much larger than the others.

3. Cut away the skin from the shoulder and upper side of the fore leg. By
separating the muscles and connective tissue where the leg joins the
thorax, find several nerves of considerable size. These connect with each
other, forming a network called the _brachial plexus_. From here nerves
pass to the thorax and to the fore leg.

4. From the brachial plexus trace out the nerves which pass to different
parts of the fore leg. In doing this separate the muscles with the fingers
and use the knife only where it is necessary to expose the nerves. Note
that some of the branches pass into the muscles, while others connect with
the skin.

5. Remove the skin from the upper portion of one of the hind legs and
separate the muscles carefully until a large nerve is found. This is one
of the divisions of the _sciatic_ nerve. Carefully trace it to the spinal
cord, cutting away the bone where necessary, and find the connections of
its branches with the cord. Then trace it toward the foot, discovering its
branches to different muscles and to the skin.

6. Unjoint the neck and remove the head. Examine the spinal cord where
exposed. Cut away the bone sufficiently to show the connection between the
cord and one of the spinal nerves. On the dorsal root of one of the nerves
find a small ganglion. What is it called?

7. Fasten the head to a small board and remove the scalp. Saw through the
skull bones in several directions. Pry off the small pieces of bones,
exposing the upper surface of the brain. Study its membranes,
convolutions, and divisions.

8. With a pair of bone forceps, or nippers, break away the skull until the
entire brain can be removed from the cavity. Examine the different
divisions, noting the relative position and size of the parts.

9. With a sharp knife cut sections through the different parts, showing
the positions of the "gray matter" and of the "white matter."

NOTE.--If the entire class is to examine one specimen, it is generally
better to have the dissecting done beforehand and the parts separated and
tacked to small boards. This will permit of individual examination.
Sketches of the sciatic nerve, brachial plexus, and of sections through
the brain and spinal cord should be made.

*Location of Nerves in the Body.*--Several of the nerves of the body lie
sufficiently near the surface to be located by pressure and are easily
recognized as sensitive cords. Slight pressure from the fingers reveals
the presence of nerves in the grooves of the elbow (the crazy bone),
between the muscles on the inner side of the arm near the shoulder, and in
the hollow part of the leg back of the knee. These are all large nerves.
Small nerves may be located in the same manner in the face and neck.




CHAPTER XVIII - PHYSIOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM


In the preceding chapter was pointed out the method by which the different
parts of the body are brought into communication by the neurons or nerve
cells. We are now to study the means whereby the neurons are made to
control and cooerdinate the different parts of the body and bring about the
necessary adjustment of the body to its surroundings. This work of the
neurons naturally has some relation to their properties.

*Properties of Neurons.*--The work of the neurons seems to depend mainly
upon two properties--the property of irritability and the property of
conductivity. _Irritability_ was explained, in the study of the muscles
(page 243), as the ability to respond to a stimulus. It has the same
meaning here. The neurons, however, respond more readily to stimuli than
do the muscles and are therefore more irritable. Moreover, they are
stimulated by all the forces that induce muscular contraction and by many
others besides. They are by far the most irritable portions of the body.

_Conductivity_ is the property which enables the effect of a stimulus to
be transferred from one part of a neuron to another. On account of this
property, an excitation, or disturbance, in any part of a neuron is
conducted or carried to all the other parts. Thus a disturbance at the
distant ends of the dendrites causes a movement toward the cell-body and,
reaching the cell-body, the disturbance is passed through it into the
axon. This movement through the neuron is called the _nervous impulse_.

*Purpose of the Impulse. *--Though the nature of the nervous impulse is not
understood, (103) its purpose is quite apparent. It is the means employed
by the nervous system for controlling and cooerdinating the different parts
of the body. The arrangement of the neurons enables impulses to be started
in certain parts of the nervous system, and the property of conductivity
causes them to be passed _as stimuli _to other parts. This enables
excitation at one place to bring about action at another place.

Acting as stimuli, the impulses seem able to produce two distinct effects:
first, to throw resting organs into action and to increase the activity of
organs already at work; and second, to diminish the rate, or check
entirely, the activity of organs. Impulses producing the first effect are
called _excitant_ impulses; those producing the second effect,
_inhibitory_ impulses.

*Functions of the Parts of Neurons.*--The _cell-body_ serves as a nutritive
center from which the other parts derive nourishment. Proof of this is
found in the fact that when any part of the neuron is separated from the
cell-body, it dies, while the cell-body and the parts attached to the
cell-body may continue to live. In addition to this the cell-body probably
reenforces the nervous impulse.

The _dendrites_ serve two purposes: first, they extend the surface of the
cell-body, thereby enabling it to absorb a greater amount of nourishment
