
"Rupert," Charity glanced at him, "are you going to see Creighton?"

"Since all has been discovered," he misquoted, "I suppose that that is
all there is left for me to do."

"Then you had better do it today; he's planning to leave for the North
tonight," she informed him.

Rupert came to life. For all his pose of unconcern, he was excited. In
the long days Val had been tied to the cot hurriedly set up in a corner
of the drawing-room on the night of the rescue--it had been thought
wiser to move him no farther than necessary--he had found again the real
Rupert they had known of old. There was little he could conceal from his
younger brother now--or so Val thought.

"Sam has the roadster," Rupert said. "There's something wrong with the
brakes and I told him to take it to town and have it looked over.
Goodness only knows what time he'll be back."

"See here, Ralestone," Holmes looked at his wrist-watch, "I've the car I
hired here with me. Let me drive you in. Charity has to go, anyway, and
see about sending off those sketches of hers."

"Oh, but we were going together," protested Ricky. "I have some shopping
to do."

"Very simple," Val suggested. "Why don't you all go?"

"But that would leave you alone." Rupert shook his head.

"No. There's Jeems."

"I don't know," Rupert hesitated doubtfully.

"It doesn't require more than one person to wait on me at present," Val
said firmly. "Now all of you go. But remember, I shall expect the Greeks
to return bearing gifts."

Holmes saluted. "Right you are, my hearty. Well, ladies, the chariot
awaits without."

In spite of their protests, Val at last got rid of them. Since he had a
project of his own, he was only too glad to see the last of his
oversolicitous family for awhile.

Val had never been able to understand why broken ribs or a fractured
collar-bone should chain one to the bed. And since he had recovered from
his wrenched back he was eager to be up and around. In private, with the
protesting assistance of Sam Two, he had made a pilgrimage across the
room and back. And now it was his full intention to be seated on the
terrace when the family came home.

It was Lucy of all people who aided fortune to give him his opportunity.

"Mistuh Val," she announced from the doorway as the sound of the car
pulling out of the drive signaled the departure of the city-bound party,
"dem lights is out agin."

"Another fuse gone? That's the second this week. Who's been playing
games?" he asked.

"Dis heah no-'count!" She dragged out of hiding from behind her
voluminous skirts her second son, a chocolate-brown infant who rejoiced
in the name of Gustavus Adolphus and was generally called "Doff." At
that moment he was sobbing noisily and eyeing Val as if the boy were the
Grand High Executioner of Tartary. "Yo'all tell Mistuh Val whats yo' bin
a-doin'!" commanded his mother, emphasizing her order with a shake.

"Ain't done nothin'," wailed Doff. "Sam, he give me de penny an' say,
'Le's hab fun.' Den Ah puts de penny in de lil' hole an' den Mammy cotch
me."

"Doff seems to be the victim, Lucy," Val observed. "Where's Sam?"

"Ah don' know. But I'se a-goin' to fin' out!" she stated with ominous
determination. "How's Ah a-goin' to git mah ironin' done when dere ain't
no heat fo' de iron? Ah asks yo' dat!"

"There are some fuses in the pantry and Jeems will put one in for you,"
Val promised.

With a sniff Lucy withdrew, her fingers still hooked in the collar of
her tearful son. Jeems glanced at Val as he went by the boy's cot. And
Val didn't care for what he read into that glance. Had the swamper by
any foul chance come to suspect Val's little plan?

But it all turned out just as he had hoped. Val made that most momentous
trip in four easy stages, resting on the big chair where Rupert had
spent so many hours, on the bench by the window, in the first of the
deck-chairs by the side of the French doors leading to the terrace, and
then he reached the haven of the last deck-chair and settled down just
where he had intended. And when Jeems returned there was nothing he
could do but accept the fact that Val had fled the cot.

"Miss Ricky won't like this," he prophesied darkly. "Nor Mr. Rupert
neither. Yo' wouldn't've tried it if they'd been heah."

"Oh, stop worrying. If you'd been tied to that cot the way I've been,
you'd be glad to get out here, too. It's great!"

The sun was warm but the afternoon shadow of an oak overhung his seat so
that Val escaped the direct force of the rays. A few feet away Satan
sprawled full length, giving a fine imitation of a cat that had rid
himself of all nine lives, or at least of eight and a half.

Never had the garden shown so rich a green. Ricky's care had sharpened
the lines of the flower-beds and had set shrubs in their proper places.
And the plants had repaid her with a riot of blossoms. A breeze set the
gray moss to swaying from the branches of the oak. And a green
grasshopper crossed the terrace in four great leaps, almost scraping
Satan's ear in a fashion which might easily have been fatal to the
insect. Val sighed and slipped down lower in his chair. "It's great," he
murmured again.

"Sure is," Jeems echoed. He dropped down cross-legged beside Val,
disdaining the other chair.

Satan stretched without opening his eyes and yawned, gaping to the
fullest extent of his jaws and curling his tongue upward so that it
seemed pointed like a snake's. Then he rolled over on his other side and
curled up with his paws under his chin. A bumblebee blundered by Val's
head on its way to visit the morning-glories. He suddenly discovered it
difficult to keep his eyes open.

"Someone's comin'," observed Jeems. "Ah just heard a car turn in from
the road."

"But the folks have been gone such a short time," Val protested.

However, the car which came almost noiselessly down the drive was not
the one in which the family had departed. It had the shape of a sleek
gray beetle, rounded so that it was difficult to tell at first glance
the hood from the rear. It glided to a stop before the steps and after a
moment four passengers disembarked.

Val simply stared, but Jeems got to his feet in one swift movement.

For, coming purposefully up the terrace steps, were four men they had
seen before and had very good cause to remember for the rest of their
lives.

In the lead strutted the rival, a tight smile rendering his unlovely
features yet more disagreeable. Behind him trotted the red-faced
counselor who had accompanied him on his first visit. But matching the
rival step for step was the "Boss," while "Red" brought up the rear in a
tidy fashion.

"Swell place, ain't it?" demanded the rival, taking no notice of Val or
Jeems. "Make yourselves to home, boys; the place is yours."

Val gripped the arm of his chair. Sam, Rupert, Holmes--they were all
beyond call. It was left to him to meet this unbelievable invasion
alone. There was a stir beside him. Val glanced up to meet the slightest
of reassuring nods from the swamper. Jeems was with him.

"Whatcha gonna do with the joint, Brick?" asked Red, tossing his
cigarette down on the flagstones and grinding it to powder with his
heel.

"I dunno yet." The rival strode importantly toward the front door.

"You might tell us when you find out," Val suggested quietly.

With an exaggerated start of surprise the rival turned toward the boy.

"Oh, so it's you, kid?"

"Perhaps," Val said softly, "you had better introduce your friends.
After all, I like to know the names of my guests."

The Boss smiled sardonically and Red grinned. Only the red-faced lawyer
shuffled his feet uneasily and looked from one to another of his
companions with an expression of pleading. But the rival came directly
to the point.

"Where's that high and mighty brother of yours?" he demanded.

"Mr. Ralestone will doubtless be very glad to see you," Val evaded,
having no desire for the visitors to discover just how slender his
resources were. "Jeems, you might go and tell him that we have visitors.
Go through the Long Hall, it's nearer that way." He dug the fingernails
of his sound hand into the soft wood of the chair arm. Could Jeems
interpret that hint? Someone must remove and hide the Luck before these
men saw it.

"Right." The swamper turned on his heel and padded toward the French
windows.

"No, you don't!" the rival snarled as he moved into line between Jeems
and his objective. "When we want that guy, we'll hunt him out ourselves.
When we're good and ready!"

"If you don't wish to see my brother, just why did you come?" Val asked
feverishly. He must keep them talking there until he had time to think
of some way of getting that slender blade of steel into hiding.

"We're movin' in," Red answered casually for them all.

"How interesting. I think that the police will enjoy hearing that," Val
commented.

"It's perfectly legal," bleated the lawyer. "We possess a court order to
view the place with the purpose of appraising it for sale." He drew a
stiff paper from the inside pocket of his coat and waved it toward the
boy.

"Bunk! I don't know much about the law but I do know that you could have
obtained nothing of the kind without our being notified. And just which
one of you has been selected to do the appraising?"

"Him," answered Red laconically and jerked his thumb at the Boss.

"So," Jeems stared at him, "since yo' couldn't git what yo' want by
thievin' at night, yo're goin' to try and git it by day."

"But what are you really after? I'm curious to know. You certainly don't
want a sugar plantation which hasn't been paying its way since the Civil
War. That just isn't reasonable. And you ought to know that we can't
afford to buy you off. We must be living over a gold-mine that we
haven't discovered. Come on, tell us where it is," Val prodded.

"Cut the cackle," advised Red, "an' le's git down to it."

"I would advise you to get back in your car and drive out." Val wondered
if his face looked as stiff as it felt. "This visit isn't going to get
you anywhere."

"We ain't goin' any place, kid," remarked the rival. "You don't seem to
understand. We're stayin' right here. I got rights and the judge has
recognized them. I'm top guy here now."

"Yeah. Yuh ain't so smart as yuh think yuh are," contributed Red,
scowling at Val. "We ain't gonna leave."

It wasn't Red's speech, however, that straightened the boy's back and
made Jeems shift his position an inch or two. There was another car
coming up the drive. And since their enemies were all gathered before
them, they could only be receiving friends, or at the worst neutrals.

But the car which came from between the live-oaks to park behind the
first contained only two passengers. LeFleur and Creighton got out,
stopped in surprise to view the party on the terrace, and then came up,
shoving by Red.

"Quite a party," Val observed. "But how did you manage to arrive so
opportunely?"

"We have made a discovery," panted the Creole lawyer; "a very important
discovery. What are these men doing here?"

"We got a court order to view this house for sale." The rival was
truculent. "An' it's all legal. The mouthpiece says so," he indicated
his counselor.

"Perhaps," Creighton's cool tones cut through, "you had better introduce
us." There was a decided change in his manner. Gone was his shy
nervousness, his slightly hesitant reserve. It was a keen business man
who stood there now.

Val grinned. "You see before you the family skeleton. May I introduce
Mr. Ralestone, who firmly believes that he is the Ralestone of Pirate's
Haven? And three other--shall we say gentlemen--whom I myself have never
met formally. Though I did have the pleasure, I believe," he addressed
the Boss directly, "of blackening your eye."

"Yeah, I'm Ralestone, and I'm gonna have my rights," stated the rival
briskly.

"You are a descendant of Roderick Ralestone?" asked LeFleur.

"Yuh know I am. I got proofs!"

"The man is a liar," Creighton said calmly.

As they stared at him, LeFleur nodded. Val saw an ugly grin begin to
curve Red's thick lips.

"Yeah? An how do yuh know that, wise guy?" he asked.

"Because there is only one Roderick Ralestone in this generation and he
is standing right there. Permit me to introduce Roderick St. Jean
Ralestone!"

The person he turned to was Jeems!




CHAPTER XVII

THE RETURN OF RICK RALESTONE


Val ventured to break the sudden silence which resulted from Creighton's
astonishing statement.

"But how--why--"

"Yeah," the rival had collected a measure of his scattered wits, "whatta
yuh mean, wise guy?"

"Just this--" LeFleur drew himself up and faced the invaders sternly--"I
have only this very morning deposited with the probate court certain
documents making very plain the identity of this young man. Without the
shadow of a doubt he is the only living descendant of Roderick Ralestone
and his wife, Valerie St. Jean de Roche. I have also sworn out a
complaint--"

Then the Boss took a hand in the game. "The boy's a minor," he observed.

"Through me," LeFleur returned, "Mr. Rupert Ralestone as nearest of kin
has applied for guardianship and there will be no difficulty in the
settlement of that matter."

"Yeah!" The rival threw his gloves on the terrace and glared not at
LeFleur but at his own backing. Having stared at the lawyer of his party
until that unfortunate man lost all assurance, he attacked the Boss.
"So, wise guy, what now? We ain't got such a snap as yuh said we were
gonna have. We were gonna move right in and take over the joint, were
we? We didn't have anything to worry about. For once we was playin' with
the law. Yeah, we were. We are nothin' but a gang of mugs. Whatta we
gonna do now, huh? You oughta know. Ain't yuh been doin' our thinkin'
for us all along? We can't grab the land and run. We gotta camp right
here if we're gonna git anything. And how are we gonna--"

"Simpson!" the Boss's voice was sharp. "Be quiet! You are becoming
wearisome. Gentlemen," he bowed slightly toward LeFleur and Creighton,
"one cannot fight bad luck, and this time Fate smiles upon you. It was a
good idea if it had worked," he added musingly. "Young Ralestone seems
to have gathered all the aces into his hand. Even," the drawl became a
sneer, "even the guardianship of the missing heir, which will mean a
nice sum in the bank for the happy guardian, if all reports are true."

"What _did_ you want here?" Val asked for the last time.

The Boss smiled. "I shall leave that mystery for you to unravel, my
wounded hero. It should occupy an idle moment or two. Doubtless all will
be made clear in the fullness of time. As for you," he turned upon
LeFleur, "there is no use in your entertaining any foolish idea of
calling the police. For our invasion today we have a court order;
unhappily it is no longer of use. But we did come here in good faith, as
we are prepared to prove. And all other evidence of any lawbreaking upon
our part rests, I believe, upon the word of two boys, evidence which
might be twisted by a clever lawyer. You may prosecute Simpson for
perjury, of course. But I think that Simpson will not be in this part of
the country long. Yes," he looked about him once more at garden and
house, "it was a very good idea. A pity it did not work. Well, I must be
going before I begin to curse my luck. When a man does that, he
sometimes loses it. You must have found yours, I think."

"We did," Val answered, but the Boss did not hear him, for he had turned
on his heel and was striding down the terrace. For a moment his
followers hesitated uncertainly and then they were after him. Back into
their sinister beetle-car went the invaders and then they were gone down
the drive, leaving the Ralestones in possession of the victorious field.

"Now," Val said plaintively, "will somebody please tell me just what
this is all about? Who is Jeems, really?"

"Just who I said," answered Creighton promptly. "Roderick St. Jean
Ralestone, the only descendant of your pirate ancestor."

"Bettah tell us the story," suggested the swamper quietly. "Yo' ain't
foolin', are yo', Mistuh Creighton?"

The New Yorker shook his head. "No, I'm not fooling. But you are not the
first one to question my story." He smiled reminiscently. "Judge Henry
Lane had to see every line of written proof this morning before he would
admit that the tale might be true."

"But where did you find this 'proof'?" Val demanded as Jeems pulled up
chairs for the lawyer and Creighton.

"In that chest of Jeems' which you brought out of the swamp on the night
of the storm," he replied promptly. "And, young man," he said to Jeems
indignantly, "if you had let me see those papers of yours a month ago,
instead of waiting until last week, we would have had this matter
cleared up then--"

"But then we might never have found the Luck!" Val protested.

"Humph, that piece of steel is historically interesting, no doubt,"
conceded Creighton, "but hardly worth risking your life for."

"No? Well, you heard what that man said just now--that we had found our
luck. It's so; we have had good luck since. But I'm sorry; do get on
with the story of Jeems' box."

"Ah gave it to him Monday," said the swamper slowly. "But, Mistuh
Creighton, there weren't nothin' in that chest but some books full of
handwritin'--most in some funny foreign stuff--an' a French
prayer-book."

"Plenty to establish your right to the name and a quarter interest in
the estate," snapped LeFleur. Val thought the lawyer rather resented the
fact that it was Creighton and not he who had found the way out of their
difficulties.

"Two of those books were ships' logs, kept in the fashion of diaries,
