"What is that supposed to mean?" snapped Roger.

"You'll find out, squirt," sneered Quent Miles.

"Wait a minute, Quent," said Ross. "I just thought of something. No one
knows there are two of us, except these two punks here. We can't work
the old gag. We can only use one of them."

"How do you mean?"

"Simple. The Solar Guard thinks Manning took it on the lam from
Ganymede, right?"

Quent nodded.

"Well, we take Manning, dress him up in one of our outfits and stick him
aboard the empty ship alongside. The ship blows up, and should they find
anything of Manning, he'll be dressed like you, or me, and that will end
the situation right there. Later, we can dump Corbett out in a space
suit with a little oxygen, and write a note, sticking it in his glove.
When they find him, they'll think he got away from Quent Miles, and when
his oxygen gave out, wrote the note giving all the details. And who can
say No, since Quent Miles, as such, will be dead?"

"End to the affair!" shouted Quent. "That's perfect."

The audioceiver behind them crackled into life, and there was a clear,
piercing signal, a sign that an emergency transmission was taking over
all channels. The signal continued until the clear, strong voice of
Commander Walters flooded the control deck of the ship.

"Attention! Attention! This is Commander Walters of the Solar Guard!
Attention all Solar Guard units in space quadrants one through
seven--repeat, all ships in quadrants one through seven. This is
emergency alert for the rocket ship _Space Knight_, believed to be
heading for the asteroid belt. All ships are to institute an immediate
search of quadrants one through seven for the _Space Knight_ and arrest
any and all persons aboard. Repeat. All ships...."

Ross Miles rose up and snapped off the audioceiver. "Come on. We've got
to get out of here!"

"What about them?" asked Quent, pointing to Roger and Tom. "Will we have
time to--?"

"Plenty of time," said Ross coldly. "Blast 'em now."

"With pleasure," replied Quent Miles, taking his gun from his holster.

"Jump, Roger!" shouted Tom.

Both boys threw themselves sideways as Miles leveled his gun.

Tom plunged headlong through the hatch door and scrambled down the
ladder. Roger tried to follow, but Quent fired as Roger started to jump
feet first through the hatch. His body became rigid as he tumbled
through the hatch. Tom looked up just in time to break his unit mate's
fall, but seeing that it would be useless to stay with him, left him on
the deck and turned to flee through the depths of the black ship.




CHAPTER 19


"Never mind, Manning!" shouted Quent Miles as he jumped past Roger's
body. "We've got to find Corbett. Take the starboard ladder; I'll take
the port. Search all the way aft to the exhaust tubes if you have to!"

Ross nodded quickly, hefted his ray gun, and moved down the opposite
ladder.

Tom watched both of them come down like twin devils, hands holding the
ray guns as steady as rocks. The cadet hid behind the open door leading
to the lower cargo holds. Ross was the nearer of the two, walking like a
cat, slowly, ready to spring or fire at the slightest movement. Tom
quickly saw that if he jumped Ross, Quent would be on him in seconds.
His only chance lay in their passing him, giving him the opportunity to
return to the control deck and search for a ray gun for himself. And if
that failed, at least he could call Commander Walters.

Ross crept closer. Tom crouched tensely. Should Ross see him, Tom would
have to make an attempt to knock him out and get the ray gun before
Quent could do anything.

"Careful, Quent!" called Ross as he moved toward the open hatch.

"You too," replied his brother. "This kid is plenty smart."

Tom breathed a silent prayer. Ross was now opposite the door. Should the
black-suited spaceman decide to look behind it, Tom would be at his
mercy.

Ross stopped beside the door and hesitated a moment.

"Hey, Ross!" Quent called, and Ross turned away from the door. "I think
I hear something down inside the hold. Slip down the ladder a little way
and cover me. I'll go down inside and look around. He must be down here
somewhere, and if you guard the door, he can't get out."

Ross grinned. "Like flushing quail in Venus jungles," he said, moving
away from the door and down into the hold where the lead boxes filled
with uranium pitchblende were stored.

Tom could scarcely suppress a loud sigh of relief at his narrow escape.
After a moment he peered cautiously around the edge of the door, and
seeing the way clear to the control deck, ran back to the ladder. He
paused at Roger's inert form and bent over, his lips close to the
paralyzed cadet's ear.

"I'm going to try and find a ray gun," he whispered quickly. "If I
can't, then I'm going to try and get in touch with Commander Walters or
the Solar Guard patrols."

He patted the blond-haired cadet on the shoulder and raced up the
ladder to the control deck. Once inside, he barred the door to the rest
of the ship and began a frantic search of the many lockers and drawers.
But it was fruitless. He could find no ray gun or weapon of any kind.
Desperate, knowing that Ross and Quent would return to the control deck
when they had searched the rest of the ship, Tom turned and scrambled up
the ladder to the radar deck.

Again, barring the door behind him, he sat before the audioceiver and
began calling the _Polaris_.

"This is Cadet Corbett aboard rocket ship _Space Knight_ in quadrant
four, chart C for Charley. Corbett aboard spaceship _Space Knight_ in
quadrant four, chart C for Charley! Come in, Commander Walters! Come
in!"

Tom spun the dials on the audioceiver desperately, ranging over every
circuit and repeating his cry. "This is Cadet Corbett! I am being held
prisoner with Cadet Roger Manning aboard the spaceship _Space Knight_ in
space quadrant four, chart C for Charley...."

Suddenly the hum of the generators stopped and the glow of the tubes in
the audioceiver died. Without a second's hesitation, Tom spun around and
lunged for the door leading back to the control deck.

"They must have shut off the power," he decided. "When they didn't find
me down below, they guessed that I came this way."

He raced through the control deck and down the ladder to the starboard
companionway. If he could only get to the ship alongside!

He chided himself for not thinking of it before and darted toward the
air lock that coupled the two ships together in space.

He turned a corner in the companionway and saw the door to the coupling
chamber ahead. It was open. He dashed inside.

"Greetings, Corbett!" sneered Ross Miles. He stood just inside the
doorway, the ray gun leveled at Tom.

"We figured you'd get around to thinking about the other ship sooner or
later," said Quent behind him, jamming the ray gun in his back. "So we
just came here and waited for you."

"Go get the other one, Quent," said Ross. Jerking Tom sideways into the
coupling chamber, he rammed his gun into the curly-haired cadet's
stomach. "I'll get this guy fixed aboard the other ship, and then set
the firing chambers so they'll blow up."

"What are we going to do with Manning?" asked Quent.

"We'll figure that out later. Hurry up! Corbett probably called the
Solar Guard."

"That's right, I did, Miles," said Tom. "They're probably closing in on
you right now."

"Is that so?" snarled Quent. "Well, it's too bad you won't be alive to
say hello to them."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I want every pound of thrust you have on that power deck, Astro,"
roared Commander Walters into the intercom. "We just received word from
a freighter that picked up an S O S from Tom aboard the _Space Knight_."

Steve Strong and Kit Barnard sat in the pilot and copilot's chairs on
the control deck of the _Polaris_ and watched the needle of the
accelerometer climb as Astro poured on the power in answer to Walters'
command.

"If I know Astro," said Strong, "you'll probably get the fastest ride
you've ever had short of hyperdrive, Kit."

Kit Barnard gulped as he watched the needle. "I see what you mean," he
said.

Walters strode up and down the deck behind the two veteran spacemen, a
scowl on his face. "By the stars," he rumbled, "this is the most
incredible thing I've run up against in all my years in space!"

He paced up and down several times silently. "To think that two men
could--_would_--jeopardize the safety and lives of thousands of people
for--a--a uranium mine! It's beyond my comprehension."

"Excuse me, sir," said Sid, Kit Barnard's young assistant, coming down
the radar-bridge ladder. "This report just came in from Titan spaceport
control."

Walters took the message and read it quickly. He grunted and handed it
to Strong. "They've found the mine and the leak," he said. "The screens
are working again."

"Then you'll call off the evacuation operations, sir?" asked Strong.

"Right." Walters turned to Sid. "Son, send a message back to Titan
control and tell Captain Howard to stop all evacuations as soon as he
has enough oxygen to provide for the citizens of Titan. And then stand
by for a general order to all units in this area."

"Yes, sir," said Sid, climbing back up to the radar bridge quickly.

The three men on the control deck fell silent as the ship hurtled
through space. Each of them prayed silently for Tom and Roger's safety.

On the power deck below, Astro opened every valve and adjusted the
firing chambers to their emergency maximum, forcing the giant ship
faster and faster through space. And when he had done all he could, he
paced up and down the deck, snapping a greasy wiping rag against his
thigh again and again. His face showed the concern he felt for Tom and
Roger, and at the same time, there was a questioning look in his eye.
The auxiliary loud-speaker of the audioceiver overhead spluttered with
static. He stopped to listen.

"This is Lieutenant Frazer aboard the Solar Guard cruiser _Hydra_ to
Commander Walters!" crackled an unfamiliar voice. "Come in, Commander
Walters!"

Astro stared at the loud-speaker and held his breath.

"This is Walters on the _Polaris_. Go ahead, Frazer!"

"I am in command of a squadron of ships on space maneuvers in quadrant
five, sir. Shall I abandon my orders and proceed under your general
emergency alert to search quadrant four?"

"How many ships do you have with you, Lieutenant?" asked Walters.

"Three heavy cruisers and a rocket destroyer, sir," replied the voice
across the gulf of space. "And I am fully armed, sir."

"Proceed to quadrant four, Lieutenant, and seize the vessel _Space
Knight_." There was a pause, and then Astro's blood ran cold as he heard
the words, "and if necessary open fire!"

On the control deck, Captain Strong turned to Walters quickly. "But Tom
and Roger, sir," he protested.

Commander Walters glared at Strong and turned back to the audioceiver.
"Proceed to quadrant four," he said coldly. "Seize the vessel _Space
Knight_, and if there is any resistance, open fire!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Did'ja hear that!" yelled Quent on the control deck of the _Space
Knight_.

[Illustration: "_Proceed to quadrant four and seize the_ Space Knight!"]

"I heard," replied Ross grimly. "With a whole squadron sweeping this
quadrant we won't make it."

"What are we going to do?" asked Quent.

"We're staying right here."

"What?"

"Right here," said Ross. "Get Corbett off the other ship and set the
fuses in the firing chambers to blow up after we cast off."

"But I don't see--"

"Don't ask questions!" snapped Ross. "Do as I tell you."

"O.K." Quent spun away and headed for the coupling locks that held the
two ships together. Ross turned back to the ladder and flipped his ray
gun on neutralizing charge, releasing Roger from the effects of the
paralo ray.

The blond-haired cadet staggered to his feet shakily. "Where's Tom?" he
said, clenching his teeth to keep them from rattling. "If you've done
anything to him--!"

"Take it easy, Manning," growled Ross. "Just get up on the control deck
and behave."

Roger glared at the spaceman, and realizing it would be useless to jump
him in his weakened condition, started up the ladder. Ross followed at a
careful distance.

A few minutes later Quent appeared on the control deck, forcing Tom
ahead of him. "All right," he growled. "What do I do now?"

"Did you cast off the other ship?" asked Ross. And when Quent nodded, he
jerked his head toward Tom and Roger and barked, "Cover them!"

As Quent stood before the two cadets, his gun leveled, Ross strode to
the audioceiver and flipped it on. "This is Quent Miles to Commander
Walters aboard the _Polaris_," he called. "Come in, Walters."

Tom and Roger looked at each other, puzzled.

"If you can hear me, Walters, this is Quent Miles. I'm surrendering to
you. And you alone! Call off your squadrons and come alongside in the
_Polaris_ by yourself. If you hear me, Walters, you better do what I
say, or you'll never see Manning and Corbett again." He flipped the
audioceiver off and grinned at his brother. "When Walters comes aboard,
he's going to get a nice surprise."

"Like what?" demanded Tom.

Ross grinned wickedly, looking very much like the devil incarnate. "You
heard Walters' order to open fire, didn't you?" he said. "It seems that
Space Cadets aren't worth much as hostages. But what do you think it
will be like with a full-fledged commander in our hands, eh? And a
rocket cruiser like the _Polaris_ to run around in."

"You wouldn't dare kidnap Commander Walters!" exclaimed Tom.

"Oh, no." Ross laughed. "Listen, punk, with a murder charge hanging over
our heads, and a couple of million credits' worth of pitchblende in the
holds, both of us would do anything! And don't you forget it!" He turned
to his brother. "Come on over here, Quent, and I'll tell you what we're
going to do."

When the two spacemen were out of earshot, Tom turned to Roger. "How do
you feel, Roger?"

"As if I'm going to shake myself apart," replied the radar-deck cadet,
his teeth still chattering from the effects of the paralo ray.

"Well, hold on just a little bit longer, boy, because the next few
minutes might spell the difference between getting out of here and--"

Tom was cut off by a sudden blast from the loud-speaker of the
audioceiver.

"This is Commander Walters!" came a clear voice. "I accept your
proposal, Miles. But I warn you, if anything has happened to those
boys--"

"No, Commander!" yelled Tom. "It's a trap!"

