"Look out!" roared Connel. Behind them, five Nationalist guards had
suddenly appeared. But they were more surprised than Astro and Connel,
and the big cadet took advantage of it by charging right into them.

It was a short but vicious fight. There was no time to aim or fire a
paralo-ray gun. It was a matter of bare knuckles and feet and knees and
shoulders. One by one, the green-clad men were laid low, and finally,
Connel, out of breath, turned to grin at Astro.

"Feel better," he gasped, "than I've felt in weeks!"

Astro grinned. One of Connel's front teeth was missing. Astro leaned
against the wall and pointed to the canyon wall where the columns of
Solar Guard Marines were making their way down into the base under heavy
covering fire from above. "Won't be long now!"

"Come on," said Connel. "They'll probably send scouts out ahead of those
columns and we can make contact with them over there." He pointed toward
a high tangle of barbed wire set up in the middle of the near-by street.
Astro nodded, and exchanging his broken ray gun for one belonging to a
fallen Nationalist, raced to the edge of the barrier with the major.
They crouched and waited for the first contact by the Marines.

"They shouldn't be too long now," said Connel.

"No more than a minute, sir," said Astro, pointing to a running figure
darting from one protective position to another.

"You, there!" shouted a familiar voice. "Behind that barrier!"

Astro glanced at Connel. "Major, that sounds like--!"

"Come out with your hands in the air and nothing will happen to you!"
the voice called again.

"By the stars, you're right!" yelled Connel. "It's Corbett!"

Astro jumped up and yelled, "Tom! Tom! You big space-brained jerk! It's
me, Astro!"

Behind the corner of a house, Tom peered cautiously around the edge and
saw the big cadet scramble over the tangle of barbed wire with Connel
right behind him. Tom held up his hand for the squad in back of him to
hold their fire and stepped out to meet his friends. "Major! Astro!"

The three spacemen pounded each other on the back while the patrol of
Marines watched, grinning. "Where's Roger?" asked Tom finally.

Astro quickly told him of the heavily guarded administration building.

"Is he all right?" asked Tom.

"No one knows," replied Connel. "We haven't been able to get any news of
him at all."

"I'm going after him," said Tom, his jaw set. "No telling what they'll
try to do with him when they see their goose is cooked."

"I'll go with you," said Astro.

"No, you stay here with Major Connel," said Tom. "I think it would be
better if just one tried it, with the rest creating a diversion on the
other side."

"Good idea," said Connel. He turned to the rest of the patrol. "Men,
there's an injured Space Cadet in the sick bay of the main building.
He's the third member of the _Polaris_ unit and has contributed as much
to victory in this battle as any of us. We've got to get him out of the
hands of the Nationalists before something happens to him. Are you
willing to try?"

The Marines agreed without hesitation.

"All right," said Connel, "here's what we'll do." Quickly the major
outlined a plan whereby Tom would sneak through the lines of the
Nationalists around the administration building, while the rest of them
created a diversionary move. It was a daring plan that would require
split-second timing. When they were all agreed as to what they would do
and the time of the operation was set, they moved off toward the
administration building. The rebellion was over, defeated. Yet the
Nationalist leaders were still alive. They were desperate men and Roger
was in their hands. His life meant more to Tom Corbett and Astro than
the smashing victory of the Solar Guard, and they were prepared to give
their own lives to save his.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 19


"Ready?" asked Connel.

"All set, sir," replied Tom.

"Remember, we'll open up in exactly five minutes and we'll continue to
attack for another seven minutes. That's all the time you have to get
inside, find Roger, and get out again."

"I understand, sir," replied Tom.

"Move out," said Connel, "and spaceman's luck!"

With a last quick glance at Astro who gave him a reassuring nod, Tom
dropped to his knees and crawled out from behind their hidden position.
Dropping flat on his stomach, he inched forward toward the
administration building. All around him ray guns and blasters were
firing with regularity as the columns of Marines advanced from all sides
of the canyon toward the center, mopping up everything in front of them.
The roof of the administration building seemed a solid sheet of fire as
the Nationalist leaders fought back desperately.

He reached the side of the building that was windowless, and scrambled
toward the back door without interference. There he saw five green-clad
men, crouched behind sandbags, protecting the rear entrance. Glancing at
his watch he saw the sweeping hand tick off the last few seconds of his
allotted time. At the exact instant it hit the five-minute mark, there
was a sudden burst of activity at the front of the building. Connel and
the Marine patrol had opened fire in a mock attack. The men guarding the
rear left their barricade and raced into the building to meet the new
assault.

Without a second's hesitation, Tom jumped toward the door. He reached
up, found it unlocked, and then with his ray gun ready, kicked the door
open. He rushed in and dived to the floor, ray gun in his hand, ready to
freeze anything or anyone in sight.

The hall was empty. In the front, the firing continued and the halls of
the building echoed loudly with the frantic commands of the defenders.
Gliding along the near wall, Tom moved slowly forward. Before him, a
door was ajar and he eased toward it. On tiptoe the curly-haired cadet
inched around the edge of the door and glanced inside. He saw a
Nationalist guard on his hands and knees loading empty shock rifles. Tom
quickly stepped inside and jammed his gun in the man's back. "Freeze!"
he said between his teeth.

The trooper tensed, then relaxed, and slowly raised his hands.

"Where's the sick bay?" demanded Tom.

"On the second floor, at the end of the hall."

"Is that where you're keeping Cadet Manning?" demanded Tom.

"Yes," replied the man. "He's--"

Tom fired before the trooper could finish. It was rough, but he knew he
had to act swiftly if he was to help Roger. The trooper was frozen in
his kneeling position, and Tom scooped up a loaded shock rifle before
slipping back into the hall. It was still empty. The firing outside
seemed to be increasing.

He located the stairs, and after a quick but careful check, started up,
heart pounding, guns ready. On the second floor he glanced up and down
the hall, and jumped back into the stair well quickly. Firing from an
open window, three troopers were between him and the only door at the
end of the hall. Not sure if Roger was in that room or not, Tom had to
make sure by looking. And the only way he could do that was to eliminate
the men in his way. He dropped to one knee and took careful aim with the
ray pistol. It would be tricky at such long range, but should the
paralo-ray fail, the cadet was prepared to use the shock rifle. He
fired, and for a breathless second waited for the effects of the ray on
the troopers. Then he saw the men go rigid and he smiled. Three hundred
feet with a ray pistol was very fancy shooting!

He raced for the door. As he entered the room, he saw a figure stretched
out on the floor. He stopped still, cold fear clutching at his heart.

"Roger!" he called. The blond-haired cadet didn't move. Tom jumped to
his unit mate's side and dropped to one knee beside him. It was dark in
the room and he couldn't see very well, but there was no need for light
when he felt Roger's pulse.

"Frozen, by the stars!" he exclaimed. He stepped back, flipped the
neutralizer switch on his ray gun, and fired a short burst. Almost
immediately Roger groaned, blinked his eyes, and sat up.

"Roger! Are you all right?" asked Tom.

"Yeah--sure. I'm O.K.," mumbled his unit mate. "Those dirty space rats.
They didn't know what to do with me when the Marines landed, so they
froze me. They were scared to kill me. Afraid of reprisals."

"They sure used their heads that time," said Tom with a grin. "How's
your back?"

"Fine. I just wrenched it a little. It's better now. But never mind me.
What's going on? Where's Astro and Major Connel? And how did you get
here?"

Tom gave him a quick run-down on everything that had happened,
concluding with, "Major Connel and Astro, with a patrol of Solar Guard
Marines, are outside now drawing the Nationalist fire. Time's running
out on us fast. Think you can walk?"

"Spaceboy," replied Roger, "to get out of this place I'd crawl on my
hands and knees!"

"Then come on!" Tom gave the shock rifle to his unit mate and stepped
back into the hall. It was quiet. Tom waved at Roger to follow and
slipped down the hall toward the stairs. Outside, the Marine patrol
continued firing, never letting up for a second. The two boys reached
the stairs and had started down when Tom grabbed Roger by the arm.
"There's someone moving around down there!"

They hugged the wall and held their breath. Tom glanced at his watch.
Only forty-five seconds to go before the Marines would stop firing and
retire. They had to get out of the building!

"We'll have to take a chance, Roger," murmured Tom. "We'll try to rush
them and fight our way out."

"Don't bother!" said a harsh voice behind them. The two cadets spun
around and looked back toward the second floor. Standing at the top of
the stairs, Rex Sinclair scowled down at them, ray guns in each hand,
leveled at the two cadets.

"By the craters of Luna!" cried Roger. "You!"

"That's one of the things I forgot to tell you, Roger," said Tom wryly.
"Sinclair belongs to this outfit too!"

"Belongs!" roared Roger. "Look at that white uniform he's wearing! This
yellow rat is Lactu, the head of the whole Nationalist movement!"

Tom gaped at the white-clad figure at the head of the stairs. "The
leader!" he gasped.

"Quite right, Corbett," replied Sinclair quietly. "And if it hadn't been
for three nosy cadets, I would have been the leader of the whole planet.
But it's finished now. All that is left for me is escape. And you two
are going to help me do just that!"

Roger suddenly dropped to one knee and leveled the blaster. But the
Nationalist leader was too quick. His paralo-ray crackled and Roger was
frozen solid.

"Why, you--!" roared Tom.

"Drop your gun, Corbett," warned Sinclair, "and take that blaster away
from him."

"I'll get you, Sinclair," said Tom through clenched teeth, "and when I
do--"

"Stop the talk and get busy!" snapped Sinclair.

Tom took the blaster out of Roger's paralyzed hands and dropped it on
the floor. Still holding one ray gun on Tom, Sinclair flipped on the
neutralizer of the other gun and released Roger again.

"Now get moving down those stairs!" ordered Sinclair. "One more funny
move out of either of you and I'll do more than just freeze you."

"What are you going to do with us?" asked Roger.

"As I said, you are going to help me escape. This time the Solar Guard
has won. But there are other planets, other people who need strong
leadership and who like to put on uniforms and play soldier. People will
always find reason to rebel against authority, and I will be there to
channel their frustrations into my own plans. Perhaps it will be Mars.
Or Ganymede. Or even Titan. Another name, another plan, and once again
the Solar Guard will have to fight me. Only next time, I assure you, it
is I who will win!"

"There won't be any next time," growled Roger. "You're washed up now.
This base is swarming with Marines. How do you think you're going to get
out of here?"

"You shall see, my friend. You shall see!"

Sinclair motioned them toward a door on the ground floor. "Open it!"
demanded Sinclair. Tom opened it and stepped inside. It was a cleaner's
closet, crammed with old-fashioned mops and pails and dirty rags.
Sinclair pushed Roger inside and was about to follow when several
green-clad guards came running down the hall toward them.

"Lactu! Lactu!" they shouted frantically. "They're pouring into the
base! The Solar Guard--they've got us surrounded!"

"Keep fighting!" snapped Sinclair. "Don't surrender! Inflict as much
damage as possible!"

"Where--where are you going?" asked one of the men, looking at the
closet speculatively.

"Never mind me!" barked Sinclair. "Do as I tell you. Fight back!"

"It looks like we're losing a leader," observed another of the men
slowly. "You wouldn't be running out on us, would you, Lactu?"

Sinclair fired three quick blasts from the ray guns, freezing the men
solid, and then turned back to Tom and Roger. "Stay in that closet and
do as I tell you."

Inside the closet, Sinclair kicked a pail out of the way and barked,
"Remove the loose plank in the floor and drop it on the floor."

Tom felt around until he found the loose board and lifted it up.

"What's down there?" asked Roger.

"You'll see," said Sinclair. "Now step back, both of you!"

Tom and Roger backed up and watched while Sinclair bent over the hole
in the floor. He felt around inside with one hand and appeared to turn
something. Suddenly the wall opposite the two cadets slid back to reveal
a narrow flight of stairs leading down. Sinclair motioned with his gun
again. "Get going, both of you."

Tom stepped forward, followed by Roger, and they started down the
stairs. At the bottom they found themselves in a narrow tunnel about
four hundred feet underground. The floor of the tunnel slanted downward
sharply.

[Illustration]

"At the end of this tunnel," announced Sinclair, "is a clearing and in
that clearing is a spaceship. It is nearly three miles from the canyon.
By the time the Solar Guard learns of my absence, we shall be lost in
space."

"We?" asked Tom. "You're taking us with you?"

"But of course," said Sinclair. "How else would I assure myself that
the Solar Guard will not harm me unless I take two of their most honored
Space Cadets with me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's been fifteen minutes," announced Connel, "and they haven't come
out yet. There's only one thing to do. Take that building and find out
what's happened."

The major was crouched behind a wrecked jet car, staring at the
administration building.

"I can get that Marine captain over to our left to co-ordinate an attack
with us, sir," suggested Astro.

"It's risky," said Connel. "They still have a lot of men in there. But
if we wait for another column to reach us, it might be too late. All
right, Astro, tell him we're attacking in ten minutes and ask him to
give us all the help he can."

"Yes, sir," replied Astro, and flopped to the ground to worm his way
toward the head of the Marine column on the left.

It took the cadet nearly five minutes to cover the hundred yards between
the two Solar Guard positions. Several times the firing became so heavy
that the cadet was forced to remain still on the ground while rifle and
ray-gun fire crackled over his head. He made it finally, several Marines
coming out to help him over the top of the barrier. Gasping for breath,
the big cadet asked to see the commanding officer.

A grimy, tired-looking officer turned and walked over to the cadet.

"Astro!"

"Captain Strong!"

"Where's Tom and Roger and Major Connel?" demanded Strong.

Astro told the captain of Tom's attempt to save Roger and that nothing
had been heard from him since. "Major Connel wants us to attack
together," Astro continued. "He's jumping off in four minutes!"

"Right!" snapped Strong. He turned to a young Solar Guard officer
waiting respectfully near by. "You take them in, Ferris. Full frontal
attack. Don't use blasters unless you have to. Take as many prisoners as
