the vacant desolation of the Lunar emptiness. Through one of the
twisted, slanting dome windows a rocky spire was visible. The
_Planetara_ lay bow down, wedged in a jagged cradle of Lunar rock. A
miracle that the hull and dome had held together.

"Anita, we must get out of here!"

"Their helmets are in the forward storage room, Gregg."

She was staring at the fallen Miko and Moa. She shuddered and turned
away and gripped me. "In the forward storage room, by the port of the
emergency exit."

If only the exit locks would operate! We must find Snap and get out of
here. Good old Snap! Would we find him lying dead?

We climbed from the slanting, fallen turret, over the wreckage of the
littered deck. It was not difficult. A lightness was upon us. The
_Planetara's_ gravity-magnetizers were dead; this was only the light
Moon gravity pulling us.

"Careful, Anita. Don't jump too freely."

We leaped along the deck. The hiss of the escaping pressure was like a
clanging gong of warning to tell us to hurry. The hiss of death so
close!

"Snap--" I murmured.

"Oh, Gregg, I pray we may find him alive!"

With a fifteen foot leap we cleared a pile of broken deck chairs. A
man lay groaning near them. I went back with a rush. Not Snap! A
steward. He had been a brigand, but he was a steward to me now.

"Get up! This is Haljan. Hurry, we must get out of here The air is
escaping!"

But he sank back and lay still. No time to find if I could help him:
there was Anita and Snap to save.

We found a broken entrance to one of the descending passages. I flung
the debris aside and cleared it. Like a giant of strength with only
this Moon gravity holding me, I raised a broken segment of
superstructure and heaved it back.

Anita and I dropped ourselves down the sloping passage. The interior
of the wrecked ship was silent and dim. An occasional passage light
was still burning. The passage and all the rooms lay askew. Wreckage
everywhere but the double dome and hull shell had withstood the shock.
Then I realized that the Erentz system was slowing down. Our heat,
like our air, was escaping, radiating away, a deadly chill settling on
everything. The silence and the deadly chill of death would soon be
here in these wrecked corridors. The end of the _Planetara_.

We prowled like ghouls. We did not see Coniston. Snap had been by the
shifter pumps. We found him in the oval doorway. He lay sprawled.
Dead? No, he moved. He sat up before we could get to him. He seemed
confused, but his senses clarified with the movement of our figures
over him.

"Gregg! Why, Anita!"

"Snap! You're all right? We struck--the air is escaping."

He pushed me away. He tried to stand. "I'm all right. I was up a
minute ago. Gregg, it's getting cold. Where is she? I had her
here--she wasn't killed. I spoke to her."

Irrational!

"Snap!" I held him. Shook him. "Snap, old fellow!"

He said normally, "Easy, Gregg. I'm all right."

Anita gripped him. "Who, Snap?"

"She--there she is...."

Another figure was here! On the grid floor by the door oval. A figure
partly shrouded in a broken invisible cloak and hook. An invisible
cloak! I saw a white face with opened eyes regarding me.

"Venza!" I bent down. "You!"

Venza here? Why ... how ... my thoughts swept on. Venza here--dying?
Her eyes closed. But she murmured to Anita, "Where is he? I want him."

I murmured impulsively, "Here I am, Venza dear." Gently, as one would
speak with gentle sympathy to humor the dying. "Here I am, Venza."

But it was only the confusion of the shock upon her. And it was upon
us all. She pushed at Anita. "I want him." She saw me; this whimsical
Venus girl! Even here as we gathered, all of us blurred by shock,
confused in the dim, wrecked ship with the chill of death coming--even
here she could jest. Her pale lips smiled.

"You, Gregg. I'm not hurt--I don't think I'm hurt." She managed to get
herself up on one elbow. "Did you think I wanted you with my dying
breath? What conceit! Not you, Handsome Haljan! I was calling Snap."

He was down to her. "We're all right, Venza. It's over. We must get
out of the ship. The air is escaping."

We gathered in the oval doorway. We fought the confusion of panic.

"The exit port is this way."

Or was it? I answered Snap, "Yes, I think so."

The ship suddenly seemed a stranger to me. So cold. So vibrationless.
Broken lights. These slanting wrecked corridors. With the ventilating
fans stilled, the air was turning fetid. Chilling. And thinning, with
escaping pressure, rarefying so that I could feel the grasp of it in
my lungs and the pin-pricks in my cheeks.

We started off. Four of us, still alive in this silent ship of death.
My blurred thoughts tried to cope with it all. Venza here. I
remembered how she had bade me create a diversion when the women
passengers were landing on the asteroid. She had carried out her
purpose! In the confusion she had not gone ashore. A stowaway here.
She had secured the cloak. Prowling, to try and help us, she had come
upon Hahn. Had seized his ray cylinder and struck him down, and been
herself knocked unconscious by his dying lunge, which also had broken
the tubes and wrecked the _Planetara_. And Venza, unconscious, had
been lying here with the mechanism of her cloak still operating, so
that we did not see her when we came and found why Hahn did not answer
my signals.

"It's here, Gregg."

Snap and I lifted the pile of Moon equipment to which she referred.
We located four suits and helmets and the mechanisms to operate them.

"More are in the chart room," Anita said.

But we needed no others. I robed Anita and showed her the mechanisms.
Snap was helping Venza. We were all stiff from the cold; but within
the suits and their pulsing currents, the blessed warmth came again.

The helmets had ports through which food and drink could be taken. I
stood with my helmet ready. Anita, Venza and Snap were bloated and
grotesque beside me. We had found food and water here, assembled in
portable cases which the brigands had prepared. Snap lifted them, and
signaled to me he was ready.

My helmet shut out all sounds save my own breathing, my pounding
heart, and the murmur of the mechanism. The warmth and pure air were
good.

We reached the hull port locks. They operated! We went through in the
light of the headlamps over our foreheads.

I closed the locks after us: an instinct to keep the air in the ship
for the other trapped humans lying in there.

We slid down the sloping side of the _Planetara_. We were unweighted,
irrationally agile with this slight gravity. I fell a dozen feet and
landed with barely a jar.

We were out on the Lunar surface. A great sloping ramp of crags
stretched down before us. Gray-black rock tinged with Earthlight. The
Earth hung amid the stars in the blackness overhead like a huge
section of a glowing yellow ball.

This grim, desolate, silent landscape! Beyond the ramp, fifty feet
below us, a tumbled naked plain stretched away into blurred distance.
But I could see mountains off there. Behind us, the towering, frowning
rampart-wall of Archimedes loomed against the sky.

I had turned to look back at the _Planetara_. She lay broken, wedged
between spires of upstanding rock. A few of her lights still gleamed.
The end of the _Planetara_!

The three grotesque figures of Anita, Venza and Snap had started off.
Hunchback figures with the tanks mounted on their shoulders. I bounded
and caught them. I touched Snap. We made audiphone contact.

"Which way do you think?" I demanded.

"I think this way, down the ramp. Away from Archimedes, toward the
mountains. It shouldn't be too far."

"You run with Venza. I'll hold Anita."

He nodded. "But we must keep together, Gregg."

We could soon run freely. Down the ramp, out over the tumbled plain.
Bounding, grotesque, leaping strides. The girls were more agile, more
skillful. They were soon leading us. The Earth shadows of their
figures leaped beside them. The _Planetara_ faded into the distance
behind us. Archimedes stood back there. Ahead, the mountains came
closer.

An hour perhaps. I lost track of time. Occasionally we stopped to
rest. Were we going toward the Grantline camp? Would they see our tiny
waving headlights?

Another interval. Then far ahead of us on the ragged plain, lights
showed! Moving, tiny spots of light! Headlights on helmeted figures!

We ran, monstrously leaping. A group of figures were off there.
Grantline's party? Snap gripped me.

"Grantline! We're safe, Gregg! Safe!"

He took his bulb light from his helmet; we stood in a group while he
waved it. A semaphore signal.

"_Grantline?_"

And the answer came, "_Yes. You, Dean?_"

Their personal code. No doubt of this--it was Grantline, who had seen
the _Planetara_ fall and had come to help us.

I stood then with my hand holding Anita. And I whispered, "It's
Grantline! We're safe, Anita, my darling!"

Death had been so close! Those horrible last minutes on the
_Planetara_ had shocked us, marked us. We stood trembling. And
Grantline and his men came bounding up, weird, inflated figures.

A helmeted figure touched me. I saw through the helmetpane the visage
of a stern-faced, square-jawed young man.

"Grantline? Johnny Grantline?"

"Yes," said his voice at my ear-grid. "I'm Grantline. You're Haljan?
Gregg Haljan?"

They crowded around us. Gripped us, to hear our explanations.

Brigands! It was amazing to Johnny Grantline. But the menace was over
now, over as soon as Grantline realized its existence.

We stood for a brief time discussing it. Then I drew apart, leaving
Snap with Grantline. And Anita joined me. I held her arm so that we
had audiphone contact.

"Anita, mine."

"Gregg--dear one!"

Murmured nothings which mean so much to lovers!

As we stood in the fantastic gloom of Lunar desolation, with the
blessed Earthlight on us, I sent up a prayer of thankfulness. Not that
the enormous treasure was saved. Not that the attack upon Grantline
had been averted. But only that Anita was given back to me. In moments
of greatest emotion the human mind individualizes. To me, there was
only Anita.

Life is very strange! The gate to the shining garden of our love
seemed swinging wide to let us in. Yet I recall that a vague fear
still lay on me. A premonition?

I felt a touch on my arm. A bloated helmet visor was thrust near my
own. I saw Snap's face peering at me.

"Grantline thinks we should return to the _Planetara_. Might find some
of them alive."

Grantline touched me. "It's only human--"

"Yes," I said.

We went back. Some ten of us--a line of grotesque figures bounding
with slow, easy strides over the jagged, rock-strewn plain. Our lights
danced before us.

The _Planetara_ came at last into view. My ship. Again that pang swept
me as I saw her. This, her last resting place. She lay here, in her
open tomb, shattered, broken, unbreathing. The lights on her were
extinguished. The Erentz system had ceased to pulse--the heart of the
dying ship, for a while beating faintly, but now at rest.

We left the two girls with some of Grantline's men at the admission
port. Snap, Grantline and I, with three others, went inside. There
still seemed to be air, but not enough so that we dared remove our
helmets.

It was dark inside the wrecked ship. The corridors were black. The
hull control rooms were dimly with Earthlight straggling through the
windows.

This littered tomb. Cold and silent with death. We stumbled over a
fallen figure. A member of the crew. Grantline straightened from
examining it.

"Dead," he said.

Earthlight fell on the horrible face. Puffed flesh, bloated red from
the blood which had oozed from its pores in the thinning air. I looked
away.

We prowled further. Hahn lay dead in the pump room. The body of
Coniston should have been near here. We did not see it. We climbed up
to the slanting, littered deck. The air up here had all almost hissed
away.

Again Grantline touched me. "That the turret?"

No wonder he asked me! The wreckage was all so formless.

"Yes."

We climbed after Snap into the broken turret room. We passed the body
of that steward who just at the end had appealed to me and I had left
dying. The legs of the forward lookout still poked grotesquely up from
the wreckage of the observatory tower where it lay smashed down
against the roof of the chart room.

We shoved ourselves into the turret. What was this? No bodies here!
The giant Miko was gone! The pool of blood lay congealed into a frozen
dark splotch on the metal grid.

And Moa was gone! They had not been dead. Had dragged themselves out
of here, fighting desperately for life. We would find them somewhere
around here.

But we did not. Nor Coniston. I recalled what Anita had said: other
suits and helmets had been here in the nearby chart room. The brigands
had taken them, and food and water doubtless, and escaped from the
ship, following us through the lower admission ports only a few
minutes after we were gone.

We made careful search of the entire ship. Eight of the bodies which
should have been here were missing: Miko, Moa, Coniston and five of
the crew.

We did not find them outside. They were hiding near here, no doubt,
more willing to take their chances than to yield to us now. But how,
in all this Lunar desolation, could we hope to locate them?

"No use," said Grantline. "Let them go. If they want death, well, they
deserve it."

But we were saved. Then, as I stood there, realization leaped at me.
Saved? Were we not indeed fatuous fools?
