"Baleku!"

The Rover pulled himself up to his feet and stood swaying. Ross reached
him quickly to catch him as he slumped forward.

"Loketh?" the Terran asked.

"The women-killers took him." Somehow the Rover got that out as Ross
half supported, half led him to where the Foanna were gathering those
they had been able to revive. "They wanted to learn"--Baleku was
obviously making a great effort to tell his story--"about ... about
where we came from ... where we got the packs."

"So now they will know of us, or will if they get the story out of
Loketh." Ashe worked with Ross to splint the Rover's broken arm. "How
many of them were here, Baleku?"

The Rover's head moved slowly from side to side. "I do not know in
truth. It is--was--like a dream. I was in the water swimming through the
sea gate. Then suddenly I was in another place where those from the
stars waited about me. They had our packs and belts and these they
showed us, demanding to know whereof these were. Loketh was like one
deep in sleep and they left him so when they questioned me. Then there
came a great noise and the floor under us shook, lightning flashed
through the air. Two of the women-killers ran from the room and all of
them were greatly excited. They took up Loketh and carried him away,
with him the packs and other things. And I was left alone, though I
could not move--as if they had left me in a net I could not see.

"More and more were the flashes. Then one of those slayers of women
stood in the doorway. He raised his hand, and my feet were free, but I
could not move otherwise than to follow after him. We came along a hall
and into this court where men stood unstirring, although stones fell
from the walls upon some of them and the ground shook--"

Baleku's voice grew shriller, his words ran together. "The one who
pulled me after him by his will--he cried out and put his hands to his
head. Back and forth he ran, bumping into the standing men, and once
running into a wall as if he were blinded. And then he was gone and I
was alone. There was more falling stone and one struck my shoulder so I
was thrown to the ground. There I lay until you came."

"So few--out of many so few--" One of the Foanna stood beside them, her
cloak streaming with the falling rain. "And for these"--she faced the
lines of those they had not revived--"there was no chance. They died as
helplessly as if they went into a meeting of swords with their arms
bound to their sides! Evil have we wrought here."

Ashe shook his head. "Evil has been wrought here, Ynlan, but not by your
seeking. And those who died here helplessly may be only a small portion
of those yet to be sacrificed. Have you forgotten the slaughter at Kyn
Add and those other fairings where women and children were also struck
down to serve some purpose we do not even yet know?"

"Lady, Great One--" Baleku struggled to sit up and Ross slipped an arm
behind him in aid. "She for whom I made a bride-cup was meat for them at
Kyn Add, along with many others. If these slayers are not put to the
sword's edge, there will be other fairings so used. And these Shadow
ones possess a magic to draw men to them helplessly to be killed. Great
One, you have powers; all men know that wind and wave obey your call. Do
you now use your magic! It is better to fall with a power we know, than
answer such spells as those killers have netted about the men here!"

"This is one weapon which they shall not use again." Ynvalda rose from a
stone block where she had been sitting. "And perhaps in its way it was
one of the most dangerous. But in defeating it we have by so much
weakened ourselves also. And the strong place of these star men lies not
on the coast, but inland. They will be warned by those who fled this
place. Wind and wave, yes, those have served our purpose in the past.
But now perhaps we have found that which our power will not best!
Only--for this"--her gesture was for the ruins of the citadel and the
dead--"there shall be a payment exacted--to the height of our desire!"

Whether the Foanna did have any control over the storm winds or not, the
present deluge appeared not to accommodate them. The dazed, injured
survivors of the courtyard were brought to shelter in some of the
underground passages.

There appeared to be no other reminders of the Wrecker force which had
earlier besieged the keep than those survivors. But within hours some of
those who had served the Foanna for generations returned. And the Foanna
themselves opened the sea gates so that the Rover cruisers anchored in
the small bay below their ruined walls.

A small force, and one ill-equipped to go up against the Baldies. Some
five star men's bodies had been found in the citadel, but the ship had
gone off to warn their base. To Ross's thinking the advantage still lay
with the invaders.

But the Hawaikans refused to accept the idea that the odds were against
them. As soon as the storm blew out its force Ongal's cruiser headed
northwest to other clan fairings where the Rovers could claim kinship.
And Afrukta sailed on the same errand south. While some of the Wreckers
were released to carry the warning to their lords. Just how great a
force could be gathered through such means and how effective it would
be, was a question to make the Terrans uneasy.

Karara disappeared with the Foanna into the surviving inner
cliff-burrows below the citadel. But Ashe and Ross remained with Torgul
and his officers, striving to bring organization out of the chaos about
them.

"We must know just where their lair lies," Torgul stated the obvious.
"The mountains you believe, and they can fly in sky ships to and from
that point. Well"--he spread out a chart--"here are the mountains on
this island, running so. An army marching hither could be sighted from
sky ships. Also, there are many mountains. Which is the one or ones we
must seek? It may take many tens of days to find that place, while they
will always know where we are, watch us from above, prepare for our
coming--"

Again Ross mentally paid tribute to the Captain's quick grasp of
essentials.

"You have a solution, Captain?" Ashe asked.

"There is the river--here--" Torgul said reflectively. "Perhaps I think
in terms of water because I am a sailor. But here it does run, and for
this far along it our cruisers may ascend." He pointed with his finger
tip. "This lies, however, in Glicmas's land, and he is now the mightiest
of the Wrecker lords, his sword always drawn against us. I do not
believe that we could talk him into----"

"Glicmas!" Ross interrupted. They both looked at him inquiringly, and he
repeated Loketh's story of the Wrecker lord who had had dealings with a
"voice from the mountain" and so gained the wrecking devices to make him
the dominant lord of the district.

"So!" Torgul exclaimed. "That is the evil of this Shadow in the
mountains! No, under those circumstances I do not think we shall talk
Glicmas into furthering any raid against those who have made him great
over his fellows. Rather will he turn against us in their cause."

"And if we do not use the cruisers up the river"--Ashe conned the
map--"then perhaps a small party or parties working overland could
strike the stream here, nearer to the uplands."

Torgul frowned at the map. "I do not think so. Even small parties moving
in that direction would be sighted by Glicmas's people. The more so if
they headed inland. He will not wish to share his secrets with others."

"But, say--a party of Foanna."

The Captain glanced up swiftly to favor Ashe with a keen regard. "Then
he would not dare. No, I am sure he would not dare to interfere. Not yet
has he risen high enough to turn the hook of his sword against them. But
would the Foanna do so?"

"If not the Foanna, then others wearing like robes," Ashe said slowly.

"Others wearing like robes?" repeated Torgul. Now his frown was heavy.
"No man would take on the guise of the Foanna; he would be blasted by
their power for so doing. If the Foanna will lead us in their persons,
then we shall follow gladly, knowing that their magic will be with us."

"There is also this," Ross broke in. "The Baldies have the gill-packs
they took from Baleku and Loketh, and they have Loketh. They will want
to learn more about us. We hoped that the citadel would provide bait to
draw them and it did. That our plan for a trap there was spoiled was ill
fortune. But I am sure that if the Baldies believe we are coming to
them, they will hold off an all-out attack against our march, hoping to
gather us in intact. They'd risk that."

Ashe nodded. "I agree. We are the unknown they must solve now. And this
much I am sure of--the future of this world and her people balances on a
very narrow line of choice. It is my hope that such a choice is still to
be made."

Torgul smiled thinly. "We live in perilous times when the Shades require
our swords to go up against the Shadow!"




18

World in Doubt?


The day was dully overcast as all days had been since they had begun
this sulk-and-march penetration into the mountain territory. Ross could
not accept the idea that the Foanna might actually command wind and
wave, storm and sun, as the Hawaikans firmly believed, but the gloomy
weather _had_ favored them so far. And now they had reached the last
breathing point before they took the plunge into the heart of the enemy
country. About the way in which they were to make that plunge, Ross had
his own plan. One he did not intend to share with either Ashe or Karara.
Though he had had to outline it to the one now waiting here with him.

"This is still your mind, younger brother?"

He did not turn his head to look at the cloaked figure. "It is still my
mind!" Ross could be firm on that point.

The Terran backed out of the vantage place from which he had been
studying the canyonlike valley cupping the Baldy spaceship. Now he got
to his feet and faced Ynlan, his own gray cloak billowing out in the
wind to reveal the Rover scale armor underneath.

"You can do it for me?" he asked in turn. During the past days the
Foanna had admitted that the weird battle within the citadel had
weakened and limited their "magic." Last night they had detected a force
barrier ahead and to transport the whole party through that by
telaporting was impossible.

"Yes, you alone. Then my wand would be drained for a space. But what can
you do within their hold, save be meat for their taking?"

"There can not be too many of them left there. That's a small ship. They
lost five at the citadel, and the Rovers have three prisoners. No sign
of the scout ship we know they have--so more of them must be gone in it.
I won't be facing an army. And what they have in the way of weapons may
be powered by installations in the ship. A lot of damage done there. Or
even if the ship lifted--" He was not sure of what he could do; this was
a venture depending largely on improvisation at the last moment.

"You propose to send off the ship?"

"I don't know whether that is possible. No, perhaps I can only attract
their attention, break through the force shield so the rest may attack."

Ross knew that he must attempt this independent action, that in order to
remain the Ross Murdock he had always been, he must be an actor not a
spectator.

The Foanna did not argue with him now. "Where--?" Her long sleeve
rippled as she gestured to the canyon. Dull as the skies were overhead,
there was light here--too much of it for his purpose as the ground about
the ship was open. To appear there might be fatal.

Ross was grasped by another and much more promising idea. The Foanna had
transported them all to the deck of Torgul's cruiser after asking him to
picture it for her mentally. And to all outward appearances the Baldy
ship before them now was twin to the one which had taken him once on a
fantastic voyage across a long-vanished stellar empire. Such a ship he
knew!

"Can you put me in the ship?"

"If you have a good memory of it, yes. But how know you these ships?"

"I was in one once for many days. If these are alike, then I know it
well!"

"And if this is unlike, to try such may mean your death."

He had to accept her warning. Yet outwardly this ship was a duplicate.
And before he had voyaged on the derelict he had also explored a Wrecker
freighter on his own world thousands of years before his own race had
evolved. There was one portion of both ships which had been
identical--save for size--and that part was the best for his purpose.

"Send me--here!"

With closed eyes, Ross produced a mental picture of the control cabin.
Those seats which were not really seats but webbing support swinging
before banks of buttons and levers; all the other installations he had
watched, studied, until they were as known to him as the plate bulkheads
of the cabin below in which he had slept. Very vivid, that memory. He
felt the touch of the Foanna's cool fingers on his forehead--then it was
gone. He opened his eyes.

No more wind and gloom, he stood directly behind the pilot's web-sling,
facing a vista-plate and rows of controls, just as he had stood so many
times in the derelict. He had made it! This was the control cabin of the
spacer. And it was alive--the faint thrumming in the air, the play of
lights on the boards.

Ross pulled the cowl of his Foanna cloak up over his head. He had had
days to accustom himself to the bulk of the robe, but still its
swathings were sometimes a hindrance rather than a help. Slowly he
turned. There were no Baldies here, but the well door to the lower
levels was open, and from it came small sounds echoing up the
communication ladder. The ship was occupied.

Not for the first time since he had started on this venture Ross wished
for more complete information. Doubtless several of those buttons or
levers before him controlled devices which could be the greatest aid to
him now. But which and how he did not know. Once in just such a cabin he
had meddled and, in activating a long silent installation, had called
the attention of the Baldies to their wrecked ship, to the Terrans
looting it. Only by the merest chance had the vengeance of the stellar
spacemen fallen then on the Russian investigators and not on his own
people.

He knew better than to touch anything before the pilot's station, but
the banks of controls to one side were concerned with the inner
well-being of the ship--and they tempted him. To go it blind was,
however, more of a risk than he dared take. There was one future
precaution for him.

From a very familiar case beside the pilot's seat Ross gathered up a
collection of disks, sorted through them hastily for one which bore a
certain symbol on its covering. There was only one of those. Slapping
the rest back into their container, Ross pressed a button on the control
board.

Again his guess paid off! Another disk was exposed as a small panel slid
back. Ross clawed that out of the holder, put in its place the one he
had found. Now, if his choice had been correct, the crew who took off in
this ship, unless they checked their route tape first, would find
themselves heading to another primitive planet and not returning to
base. Perhaps exhaustion of fuel might ground them past hope of ever
regaining their home port again. Next to damaging the ship, which he
could not do, this was the best thing to assure that any enemy leaving
Hawaika would not speedily return with a second expeditionary force.

Ross dropped the route disk he had taken out into a pocket on his belt,
to be destroyed when he had the chance. Now he catfooted across the deck
to look into the well and listen.

The walls glowed with a diffused light. From here the Terran could count
at least four levels under him, with perhaps another. The bottom two
ought to be supplies and general storage. Then the engine room, tech
labs above, and next to the control cabin the living quarters.

Through the fabric of the ship, shivering up his body from the soles of
his feet, he could feel the vibration of engines at work. One such must
control the force field which ringed this canyon, perhaps even powered
the weapons the invaders could turn against any assault.

Ross whirled about, his Foanna cloak in a wide swing. There was one
control which he knew. Yes, again the board was the same as the one he
was familiar with. His hand plunged out and down, raking the lever from
one measure point to the very end of the slit in which it moved. Then he
planted himself with his back to the wall. Whoever came up the well
hunting the cause for the failure would be facing the other way. Ross
crouched a little, pushing the cape well back on his shoulders to free
his arms. There was a feline suppleness in his stance just as a jungle
cat might wait coming of its prey.

What he heard was a shout below, the click of foot-gear on the rungs of
the level ladder. Ross's lips drew back in a snarl which was also
feline. He thought that would do it! Spacemen were ultra-sensitive to
any failure in air flow.

White head, bare of any hair, thin shoulders a little hunched under the
blue-green-lavender stuff of the Baldies' uniforms.... Head turning now
so that the eyes could see the necessary switch. An exclamation from the
alien and--

But the Baldy never had a chance to complete that turn, look behind him.
Ross sprang and struck with the side of his hand. The hairless head
snapped forward. His hands already hooked in the other's armpits, the
Terran heaved the alien up and over onto the deck of the control cabin.
It was only when he was about to bind his captive that Ross discovered
the Baldy was dead. A blow calculated to stun the alien had been too
severe. Breathing a little faster, the Terran rolled the body back and
hoisted it into the navigator's swing-seat, fastening it with the
take-off belts. One down--how many left?

He had little time to wonder, for before he could reach the well once
again there was a call from below--sharp and demanding. The Terran
searched his victim, but the Baldy was unarmed.

Again a shout. Then silence--too complete a silence. How could they have
guessed trouble so quickly. Unless, unless the Baldies' mental
communication had been at work ... they might even now know their fellow
was dead.
