=Habit.=--A small tree, 15-20 feet high, often attaining in the woods of
northern Maine and on the slopes of the White mountains a height of
25-30 feet, with a trunk diameter of 12-15 inches; reduced at its
extreme altitudes to a low shrub; head, in open ground, pyramidal or
roundish; branches spreading and slender.

=Bark.=--Closely resembling bark of _P. sambucifolia_.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.,=--Buds more or less scythe-shaped, acute,
smooth, glutinous. Leaves pinnately compound, alternate; stem grooved,
enlarged at base, reddish-brown above; stipules deciduous; leaflets
11-19, 2-4 inches long, bright green above, paler beneath, smooth,
narrow-oblong or lanceolate, the terminal often elliptical, finely and
sharply serrate above the base; apex acuminate; base roundish to acute
and unequally sided; sessile or nearly so, except in the odd leaflet.

=Inflorescence.=--In terminal, densely compound, large and flattish
cymes; calyx 5-lobed; petals 5, white, roundish, short-clawed; stamens
numerous; ovary inferior; styles 3.

=Fruit.=--Round, bright red, about the size of a pea, lasting into
winter.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a good,
well-drained soil; rate of growth slow and nearly uniform. It is readily
transplanted and would be useful on the borders of woods, in plantations
of low trees, and in seaside exposures. Rare in nurseries and seldom for
sale by collectors. The readily obtainable and more showy European _P.
aucuparia_ is to be preferred for ornamental purposes.

[Illustration: PLATE LVII.--Pyrus Americana.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4. Petal.
  5. Fruiting branch.


=Pyrus sambucifolia, Cham. & Schlecht.=

_Sorbus sambucifolia, R[oe]m._

MOUNTAIN ASH.

=Habitat and Range.=--Mountain slopes, cool woods, along the shores of
rivers and ponds, often associated with _P. Americana_, but climbing
higher up the mountains.

From Labrador and Nova Scotia west to the Rocky mountains, then
northward along the mountain ranges to Alaska.

Maine,--abundant in Aroostook county, Piscataquis county, Somerset
county at least north to the Moose river, along the boundary mountains,
about the Rangeley lakes and locally on Mount Desert Island; New
Hampshire,--in the White mountain region; Vermont,--Mt. Mansfield,
Willoughby mountain (Pringle); undoubtedly in other sections of these
states; to be looked for along the edges of deep, cool swamps and at
considerable elevations.

     South of New England, probably only as an escape from cultivation;
     west through the northern tier of states to the Rocky mountains,
     thence northward along the mountain ranges to Alaska and south to
     New Mexico and California.

=Habit.=--A shrub 3-10 feet high, or small tree rising to a height of
15-25 feet, reaching its maximum in northern New England, where it
occasionally attains a height of 30-35 feet, with a trunk diameter of 15
inches. It forms an open, wide-spreading, pyramidal or roundish head,
resembling the preceding species in the color of bark, in foliage and
fruit. Whether these are two distinct species is at the present
problematical, as there are many intermediate forms, and the same tree
sometimes furnishes specimens that would indubitably be referred to
different species.

=Bark.=--On old trees light brown and roughish on the trunk, separating
into small scales curling up on one side; large limbs light-colored,
smoothish, often conspicuously marked with coarse horizontal blotches
and leaf-scars; season's shoots light brown, smooth, silvery dotted.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Terminal bud 1 inch long, lateral 1/2 inch,
appressed, brownish, scythe-shaped, acute, more or less glutinous.
Leaves pinnately compound, alternate, stems grooved and reddish above,
enlarged at base; stipules deciduous; leaflets 7-15, the odd one
stalked, 1-3 inches long, 1/2-1 inch wide, bright green above, paler
beneath, smooth, mostly ovate-oblong, serrate above the base; apex
rounded or more usually tapering suddenly to a short point, or rarely
acuminate; base inequilateral.

=Inflorescence.=--In broad, compound cymes at the ends of the branches;
flowers white and rather larger than those of _P. Americanus_; calyx
5-lobed; petals 5, ovate, short-clawed; stamens numerous; pistil
3-styled.

=Fruit.=--In broad cymes; berries bright red, roundish, rather larger
than those of _P. Americana_, holding on till winter.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England, though of shrub-like
proportions in the southern sections; grows in exposed situations
inland, and along the seashore. The dwarf habit, graceful foliage, and
showy fruit give it an especial value in artificial plantations; but it
is seldom for sale in nurseries and only occasionally by collectors. It
is readily transplanted and is propagated by seed.

=Note.=--In the European mountain ash, _P. aucuparia_, the leaves have a
blunter apex than is usually found in either of the American species,
and have a more decided tendency to double serration.

[Illustration: PLATE LVIII.--Pyrus sambucifolia.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4. Fruiting branch.


=Pyrus communis, L.=

PEAR TREE.

The common pear, introduced from Europe; a frequent escape from
cultivation throughout New England and elsewhere; becomes scraggly and
shrubby in a wild state.


=Pyrus Malus, L.=

_Malus Malus, Britton_.

APPLE TREE.

The common apple; introduced from Europe; a more or less frequent escape
wherever extensively cultivated, like the pear showing a tendency in a
wild state to reversion.


=Amelanchier Canadensis, Medic.=

SHADBUSH. JUNE-BERRY.

=Habitat and Range.=--Dry, open woods, hillsides.

     Newfoundland and Nova Scotia to Lake Superior.

New England,--throughout.

     South to the Gulf of Mexico; west to Minnesota, Kansas, and
     Louisiana.

=Habit.=--Shrub or small tree, 10-25 feet high, with a trunk diameter of
6-10 inches, reaching sometimes a height of 40 feet and trunk diameter
of 18 inches; head rather wide-spreading, slender-branched, open;
conspicuous in early spring, while other trees are yet naked, by its
profuse display of loose spreading clusters of white flowers, and the
delicate tints of the silky opening foliage.

=Bark.=--Trunk and large branches greenish-gray, smooth; branchlets
purplish-brown, smooth.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, oblong-conical, pointed. Leaves
2-3-1/2 inches long, about half as wide, slightly pubescent when young,
dark bluish-green above at maturity, lighter beneath; outline varying
from ovate to obovate, finely and sharply serrate; apex pointed or
mucronate, often abruptly so; base somewhat heart-shaped or rounded;
leafstalk about 1 inch long; stipules slender, silky, ciliate, soon
falling.

=Inflorescence.=--April to May. Appearing with the leaves at the end of
the branchlets in long, loose, spreading or drooping, nearly glabrous
racemes; flowers large; calyx 5-cleft, campanulate, pubescent to nearly
glabrous; segments lanceolate, acute, reflexed; petals 5, whole,
narrow-oblong or oblong-spatulate, about 1 inch long, two to three times
the length of the calyx; stamens numerous: ovary with style deeply
5-parted.

=Fruit.=--June to July. In drooping racemes, globose, passing through
various colors to reddish, purplish, or black purple, long-stemmed,
sweet and edible without decided flavor.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in all soils
and situations except in wet lands, but prefers deep, rich, moist loam;
very irregular in its habit of growth, sometimes forming a shrub, at
other times a slender, unsymmetrical tree, and again a symmetrical tree
with well-defined trunk. Its beautiful flowers, clean growth, attractive
fruit and autumn foliage make it a desirable plant in landscape
plantations where it can be grouped with other trees. Occasionally in
nurseries; procurable from collectors.

[Illustration: PLATE LIX.--Amelanchier Canadensis.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4. Fruiting branch.


CRATAEGUS.

A revision of genus _Crataegus_ has long been a desideratum with
botanists. The present year has added numerous new species, most of
which must be regarded as provisional until sufficient time has elapsed
to note more carefully the limits of variation in previously existing
species and to eliminate possible hybrids. During the present period of
uncertainty it seems best to exclude most of the new species from the
manuals until their status has been satisfactorily established by
raising plants from the seed, or by prolonged observation over wide
areas.


=Crataegus Crus-Galli, L.=

COCKSPUR THORN.

Rich soils, edge of swamps.

     Quebec to Manitoba.

Found sparingly in western Vermont (_Flora of Vermont_, 1900); southern
Connecticut (C. H. Bissell).

     South to Georgia; west to Iowa.

A small tree, 10-25 feet in height and 6-12 inches in trunk diameter;
best distinguished by its thorns and leaves.

Thorns numerous, straight, long (2-4 inches), slender; leaves thick,
smooth, dark green, shining on the upper surface, pale beneath, turning
dark orange red in autumn; outline obovate-oblanceolate, serrate above,
entire or nearly so near base; apex acute or rounded; base decidedly
wedge-shaped shaped; leafstalks short.

Fruit globose or very slightly pear-shaped, remaining on the tree
throughout the winter.

Hardy throughout southern New England; used frequently for a hedge
plant.


=Crataegus punctata, Jacq.=

Thickets, hillsides, borders of forests.

     Quebec and Ontario.

Small tree, common in Vermont (Brainerd) and occasional in the other New
England states.

     South to Georgia.

Thorns 1-2 inches long, sometimes branched; leaves 1-2-1/2 inches long,
smooth on the upper surface, finally smooth and dull beneath; outline
obovate, toothed or slightly lobed above, entire or nearly so beneath,
short-pointed or somewhat obtuse at the apex, wedge-shaped at base;
leafstalk slender, 1-2 inches long; calyx lobes linear, entire; fruit
large, red or yellow.


=Crataegus coccinea, L.=

In view of the fact of great variation in the bark, leaves,
inflorescence, and fruit of plants that have all passed in this country
as _C. coccinea_, and in view of the further uncertainty as to the plant
on which the species was originally founded, it seems "best to consider
the specimen in the Linnaean herbarium as the type of _C. coccinea_ which
can be described as follows:

     "Leaves elliptical or on vigorous shoots mostly semiorbicular,
     acute or acuminate, divided above the middle into numerous acute
     coarsely glandular-serrate lobes, cuneate and finely
     glandular-serrate below the middle and often quite entire toward
     the base, with slender midribs and remote primary veins arcuate
     and running to the points of the lobes, at the flowering time
     membranaceous, coated on the upper surface and along the upper
     surface of the midribs and veins with short soft white hairs, at
     maturity thick, coriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper
     surface, paler on the lower surface, glabrous or nearly so, 1-1/2-2
     inches long and 1-1-1/2 inches wide, with slender glandular
     petioles 3/4-1 inch long, slightly grooved on the upper surface,
     often dark red toward the base, and like the young branchlets
     villous with pale soft hairs; stipules lanceolate to oblanceolate,
     conspicuously glandular-serrate with dark red glands, 1/2-3/4 inch
     long. Flowers 1/2-3/4 inch in diameter when fully expanded, in
     broad, many-flowered, compound tomentose cymes; bracts and
     bractlets linear-lanceolate, coarsely glandular-serrate, caducous;
     calyx tomentose, the lobes lanceolate, glandular-serrate, nearly
     glabrous or tomentose, persistent, wide-spreading or erect on the
     fruit, dark red above at the base; stamens 10; anthers yellow;
     styles 3 or 4. Fruit subglobose, occasionally rather longer than
     broad, dark crimson, marked with scattered dark dots, about 1/2
     inch in diameter, with thin, sweet, dry yellow flesh; nutlets 3 or
     4, about 1/4 inch long, conspicuously ridged on the back with high
     grooved ridges.

     "A low, bushy tree, occasionally 20 feet in height with a short
     trunk 8-10 inches in diameter, or more frequently shrubby and
     forming wide dense thickets, and with stout more or less zigzag
     branches bright chestnut brown and lustrous during their first
     year, ashy-gray during their second season and armed with many
     stout, chestnut-brown, straight or curved spines 1-1-1/2 inches
     long. Flowers late in May. Fruit ripens and falls toward the end of
     October, usually after the leaves.

     "Slopes of hills and the high banks of salt marshes usually in
     rich, well-drained soil, Essex county, Massachusetts, John
     Robinson, 1900; Gerrish island, Maine, J. G. Jack, 1899-1900;
     Brunswick, Maine, Miss Kate Furbish, May, 1899; Newfoundland, A. C.
     Waghorne, 1894."[1]

[Footnote 1: Prof. C. S. Sargent in _Bot. Gaz._, XXXI, 12. By permission
of the publishers.]


=Crataegus mollis, Scheele.=

