
"Don't _worry_. All of a sudden I freeze under pressure and he says,
'Don't worry.'"

"I meant it. This is no ordinary man. It wasn't buck fever at all. I
couldn't have faced him myself if I hadn't rattled him with that lucky
shot."

The patrolman wanted to believe. He most pathetically wanted to believe.
"Honest?"

"It's the God's honest truth. No man could have stood in front of that
killer and pulled a trigger. He's a master hypnotist. You're all right.
We won't say a word about what happened in here. And you'll have no
trouble in the future."

The patrolman shook his head. "Still, I gotta do something about it."

"Talk to your psychiatrist," Taber said. "In the meantime, keep that
crowd out there from spilling in here."

Taber pushed out through the choked entrance to the areaway and went
back up the street. It was alive with activity now and he passed
unnoticed. No one recognized him as the man who had given chase in the
bloody business that would make headlines that evening in every New York
newspaper.

And yet the radio and TV news commentators gave it no special attention.
It went in along with other items of the day's news as a more or less
routine big-city happening.

One national-hookup headliner stated: "In New York City today, a man
identified as John Dennis, address unknown, went berserk in a
fashionable Upper East Side apartment. Dennis, wielding a knife, killed
a man and a woman, and seriously wounded another man before he was cut
down by police bullets.

"A jet airliner, down in the North Atlantic today, imperiled the lives
of seventy-six ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Corson lay propped on two pillows in a private room of the Park
Hill Hospital. Rhoda Kane sat in a chair beside the bed. She was pale
and very beautiful. The fire was now gone from her body and the fever
from her eyes.

"They say he wasn't human. They say he was an android." She shuddered,
looked down quickly, then slowly raised her head.

"Yes."

"I'll--I'll never understand. I get sick thinking about it. I'll just
never understand."

"He was human and yet not human. He had extraordinary powers that we
don't begin to understand, so that what happened to you is no disgrace."

"It's a terrible disgrace."

"It happened to me, too. When he told me to sit down I had to do it. I
was helpless."

"But you fought! You overcame it."

Frank Corson smiled wryly. "No, I didn't. It was just that he'd had
little time to work on me. It was a single mental blow, so to speak,
that laid me out. Like one punch in the ring. Gradually, I came out of
it."

"I think I _tried_ to fight."

"Of course, you did. The disgrace was mine. I acted like a child. I
should have realized that something extraordinary had happened. But I
nursed my miserable little ego like a three-year-old."

"How could you know? My cruelty to you--"

"Don't talk like that! I knew about the ninth android, and I met the
tenth one in front of your apartment that second morning. I should have
associated. Brent Taber did, otherwise we might both be dead."

"It's all over now. It doesn't make any difference."

"No, it doesn't make any difference."

She looked at him in silence for several moments. "You've changed,
Frank."

"Yes, I guess I have. I guess we all grow up eventually. We all face
reality and live with it."

"Frank--I think I'm going to cry."

He could not turn his eyes in her direction. He looked straight ahead
but his voice was soft. "Go ahead, Rhoda. I understand."

They were silent for a time, then Rhoda began to cry quietly into her
handkerchief. After a while even that sound was stilled.

He turned to look at her. She was standing beside the bed. He almost
reached out and took her hand, but drew his own back at the last minute.

"How soon will you be leaving?" she asked.

"The wound was superficial. I really didn't need to be hospitalized. I'm
being released tomorrow morning. I'll probably leave immediately."

"You'll make a fine doctor, Frank."

"Thank you, I'll try."

"Good-bye, Frank."

"Good-bye--darling."

She turned and fled.

And judging by the deep sadness in his soul, he knew he had hit bottom.

There was no place to go but up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brent Taber's phone rang.

"Hello, Taber. Halliday here."

"How are you, Halliday."

"Tops, old man. Ragged by the stress of it all, of course, but tops."

Taber waited. Halliday waited. Seeing that he would get no help, he
said, "By the way, that little ... misunderstanding we had, the Senator
Crane thing, I'm sure you realized that our talk was ... well, the words
were put into my mouth. I felt the same way about the oaf as you did.
But sometimes, in the line of duty, old man ... well, I know you were
reading between my lines all the time."

"I'm pretty good at that."

"I knew we understood each other."

"Is that what you called about?"

"Yes, but I've got a little tip for you. They want to see you upstairs.
I happen to know they liked the way things turned out. Just between you
and me, the humiliation of Crane made certain high officials pretty
happy. I was queried and I gave you all the credit."

"Before or after the good Senator fell on his face?"

Halliday laughed. "Okay, pal. You're entitled to your little dig. But
you know this--I'm with you and I always will be."

"And I'm with you, too, pal," Brent said wearily and hung up.

The phone rang again. Automatically, Brent picked up the receiver.

"Brent? Porter on this end. How is it with you, old man?"

"Ducky. Just ducky."

Porter laughed. "Just called to say, 'Good job well done.'"

"Thanks."

"Want to give you a little tip, too. They want you upstairs. A
commendation. Not generally known, though. And you deserve it. You'll be
called up tomorrow."

"You never know the day or the hour."

The laugh came again. "You're humor is priceless, old man."

"Isn't it?"

"Another thing--I got pretty hot when I got wind of how the ground was
being cut out from under you. I made it my business to do something
about it. I hate to see a good man pushed around. Of course I okayed the
orders cutting you down--a matter of routine--I had to follow through.
But then I got busy. A thing like that won't happen again."

"Thanks, Porter. It warms a man to know he's got a friend--a friend like
you."

"Just between us, old man, I'm one of your admirers." Porter laughed and
sprayed charm through the phone like perfume from an atomizer. "But if
you quote me, I'll deny it."

"Oh, I wouldn't think of quoting you, old man," Taber replied in a
kindly voice and put down the phone.

He sat back and closed his eyes. Three people dead. One person maimed.
Blood in the streets.

Good job well done.

He opened a drawer of his desk and reached for the Scotch bottle.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the Newark Airport he would not trust his suitcase to a porter
because the leather loop holding one side of the handle was very thin
and he was afraid it would break.

Once he had been ashamed of the shabbiness of the bag and had planned to
buy a new one, but now there was an affinity between them, a kind of
warmth.

Were they companions in misery?

He asked the question with a quick smile and then realized he was not
miserable. A little bleak of mind, perhaps, with Minnesota and what lay
ahead affording no glow of anticipation in his mind. But that would
pass. No, he had relegated the hurt to a mental pigeonhole; maybe he
would bring it out and look at it once in a while, after enough time had
passed.

But he was not miserable.

He went to the counter, checked in, and they told him his plane would
take off on time. He glanced at his watch. Thirty-two minutes.

He went back to the bench and found Rhoda Kane sitting beside his
suitcase.

She wore a plain, black suit with a ridiculous little black hat and she
was so beautiful he was angry with her. He hated her. This good-bye
wasn't necessary. Why had she come?

Her face was pale and drawn; her smile was as abstract as the mystery on
the lips of the Mona Lisa. She laid a hand on the suitcase.

"We had our first quarrel over it, remember? We went to Puerto Rico for
that week and I wanted to use mine but you said, 'Goddamn it, if you're
ashamed of my suitcase you're ashamed of me, so the hell with it.'"

"I remember."

He sat down beside her, lit a cigarette, and then dropped it on the
floor and stepped on it. They both looked straight ahead.

"Take me with you, Frank."

"That's impossible."

"I know, but take me with you."

"There will be no money. I'll live in a stuffy room somewhere."

"What difference does that make? Take me."

"You have your job. You're on the way up. It would be unthinkable."

"I don't have any job. I quit. I was halfway through a piece of
copy--very important copy--and I got up and walked into Mr. Frankel's
office. I said, 'Mr. Frankel, it's been very nice working for you. I
appreciate all you've done but I'm leaving now. The pencils are all
sharpened on my desk and the next girl can have the new leather-bound
address book in the lower right hand drawer that I bought but never
used! That was a silly thing to say, wasn't it?"

"I suppose so."

"And the way I phrased it. I actually said I'd bought the lower right
hand drawer and hadn't used it--take me with you, Frank."

"Rhoda, I was so wrong in--"

"_I_ was wrong, Frank. I was trying to mold you into my way of life. I
wanted you, but only as a part of my own eager little world. I had money
so I furnished my apartment. I put this here and that there, and hung a
toothbrush over the sink as necessarily functional, and then I decided I
needed a man in the same way and so I picked you.

"But I found out that the man in the bed was the most important part of
it and without him there wasn't anything. Without him I didn't want any
of the other. Now ... I want to be a wife. A wife is a person who goes
where her husband goes and lives where he lives and shares what he has.
You don't barter and trade--this for that--give up this part to get
that. You give up everything and yet it isn't like that at all because
you're really getting everything."

He took out another cigarette.

"Oh, Frank, it's all mixed up and I'm going to cry, I think."

"It's not mixed up at all," he said quietly. He turned to look at her,
half frowning, half smiling. "Now why in the hell couldn't you have
given me a little notice? Twenty minutes to plane time and I've got to
get another reservation."

"I'm sorry, Frank."

"Maybe there isn't a seat."

"Wouldn't that be terrible?"

"Then we'll have to wait over."

"Why don't you go and see?"

Five minutes later they were walking down the west tunnel to gate
twenty-six.

Frank Corson grinned. "Come on, woman, I'm going to take you across
state lines for immoral purposes."

"How wonderful," she breathed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brent Taber was human and his triumph had been a thing of satisfaction
to him--but only momentarily. Now it had a slightly sour taste.

Not that he was unhappy. He was content and almost relaxed as he sat in
Doctor Entman's patio and worked on a Scotch and soda.

"A nice night," Entman said.

"Beautiful. Those stars are about ready to fall into our laps."

"Menace out there? It seems unthinkable."

"Doesn't it?"

"The human animal is a strange creature. He's so capable of refusing to
believe what he doesn't want to believe."

"Maybe he's smarter than we think. Maybe there's no point in looking at
a pending disaster from every angle. The what-will-be-will-be attitude
isn't necessarily like that of the ostrich which sticks its head in the
sand."

"Do the people inside really believe?" Entman asked.
