he asked.

Harkaman and Valkanhayn agreed; Valkanhayn thought the _Viking's
Gift_ of Beowulf would go along, and Harkaman was almost sure of
the _Black Star_ and _Queen Flavia_. He turned to Bentrik.

"Start that pinnace off for Gimli at once; within the hour if
possible. We don't know how many ships will be gathered there,
but we don't want them wasted in detail-attacks. Tell whoever's
in command there that ships from Tanith are on the way, and to
wait for them."

Fifteen hundred hours, less the five hundred Bentrik was in space
from Marduk. He hadn't time to estimate voyage-time to Gimli from
the other Mardukan trade-planets, and nobody could estimate how many
ships would respond.

"It may take us a little time to get an effective fleet together.
Even after we get through arguing about it. Argument," he told
Bentrik, "is not exclusively a feature of democracies."

       *       *       *       *       *

Actually, there was very little argument, and most of that among
the Mardukans. Prince Bentrik insisted that Crown Princess Myrna
would have to be taken along; King Mikhyl would be either dead or
brainwashed into imbecility by now, and they would have to have
somebody to take the throne. Lady Valerie Alvarath, Sir Thomas
Kobbly, the tutor, and the nurse Margot refused to be separated
from her. Prince Bentrik was equally firm, with less success, on
leaving his wife and son on Tanith. In the end, it was agreed that
the entire Mardukan party would space out on the _Nemesis_.

The leader of the Bigglersport delegation attempted an impassioned
tirade about going to the aid of strangers while their own planet
was being enslaved. He was booed down by everybody else and informed
that Tanith was being defended where a planet ought to be, on
somebody else's real estate. When the Bigglersporters emerged
from the meeting, they found that their own space-yacht had been
commandeered and sent off to Amaterasu and Beowulf for assistance,
that the regiment of local infantry they had enlisted from the King
of Tradetown had been taken over by the Rivington authorities, and
that the Gilgamesh freighter they had chartered to transport them
to Gram would now take them to Marduk.

The problem broke into two halves: the purely naval action that
would be fought to relieve the Moon of Marduk, if it still held out,
and to destroy the Dunnan and Makann ships, and the ground-fighting
problem of wiping out Makann's supporters and restoring the Mardukan
monarchy. A great many of the people of Marduk would be glad of
a chance to turn on Makann, once they had arms and were properly
supported. Combat weapons were almost unknown among the people,
however, and even sporting arms uncommon. All the small arms and
light artillery and auto-weapons available were gathered up.

The _Grendelsbane_ came in from Beowulf, and the _Sun Goddess_ from
Amaterasu. Three independent Space Viking ships were still in orbit
on Tanith; they joined the expedition. There would be trouble with
them on Marduk; they'd want to loot. Let the Mardukans worry about
that. They could charge it off as part of the price for letting
Zaspar Makann get into power in the first place.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were twelve spacecraft in line outside the Moon of Tanith,
counting the three independents and the forcibly chartered
Gilgamesher troop-transport; that was the biggest fleet Space
Vikings had ever assembled in their history. Alvyn Karffard said
as much while they were checking the formation by screen.

"It isn't a Space Viking fleet," Prince Bentrik differed. "There
are only three Space Vikings in it. The rest are the ships of three
civilized planets. Tanith, Beowulf and Amaterasu."

Karffard was surprised. "You mean _we're_ civilized planets? Like
Marduk, or Baldur or Odin, or...?"

"Well, aren't you?"

Trask smiled. He'd begun to suspect something of the sort a couple
of years ago. He hadn't really been sure until now. His most junior
staff officer, Count Steven of Ravary, didn't seem to appreciate
the compliment.

"We _are_ Space Vikings!" he insisted. "And we are going to battle
with the Neobarbarians of Zaspar Makann."

"Well, I won't argue the last half of it, Steven," his father told him.

"Are you people done yakking about who's civilized and who isn't?"
Guatt Kirbey asked. "Then give the signal. All the other ships are
ready to jump."

Trask pressed the button on the desk in front of him. A light went
on over Kirbey's control panel as one would on each of the other
ships. He said, "Jumping," around the stem of his pipe, and twisted
the red handle and shoved it in.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Four hundred and fifty hours, in the private universe that was the
_Nemesis_; outside, nothing else existed, and inside there was
nothing to do but wait, as each hour carried them six trillion miles
nearer to Gimli. At first, the ruthless and terrible Space Viking,
Steven, Count of Ravary, was wildly excited, but before long he
found that there was nothing exciting going on; it was just a
spaceship, and he'd been on ships before. Her Highness the Crown
Princess, or maybe her Majesty the Queen of Marduk, stopped being
excited about the same time, and she and Steven and Mopsy played
together. Of course, Myrna was only a girl, and two years younger
than Steven, but she was, or at least might be, his sovereign, and
beside, she had been in a space action, if you call what lies
between a planet and its satellite space and if you call being shot
at without being able to shoot back an action, and Relentless
Ravary, the Interstellar Terror, had not. This rather made up
for being a girl and a mere baby of going-on-ten.

One thing, there were no lessons. Sir Thomas Kobbly fancied himself
as a landscape-painter and spent most of his time arguing techniques
with Vann Larch, and Steven's tutor, Captain Rainer was a normal-space
astrogator and found a kindred spirit in Sharll Renner. This left
Lady Valerie Alvarath at a loose end. There were plenty of volunteers
to help her fill in the time, but Rank Hath Its Privileges; Trask
undertook to see to it that she did not suffer excessively from
shipboard ennui.

Sharll Renner and Captain Rainer approached him, during the cocktail
hour before dinner, some hundred hours short of emergence.

"We think we've figured out where Dunnan's base is," Renner said.

"Oh, good!" Everybody else had, on a different planet. "Where's yours?"

"Abaddon," the Count of Ravary's tutor said. When he saw that the
name meant nothing to Trask, he added, "The ninth, outer, planet of
the Marduk system." He said it disgustedly.

"Yes; remember how you had Boake and Manfred out with their ships,
checking our outside planets to see if Prince Viktor might be hiding
on one of them? Well, what with the time element, and the way the
_Honest Horris_ was shuttling back and forth from Marduk to some
place that wasn't Gimli, and the way Dunnan was able to bring his
ships in as soon as the shooting started on Marduk, we thought he
must be on an uninhabited outer planet of the Marduk system."

"I don't know why we never thought of that, ourselves," Rainer put
in. "I suppose because nobody ever thinks of Abaddon for any reason.
It's only a small planet, about four thousand miles in diameter, and
it's three and a half billion miles from primary. It's frozen solid.
It would take almost a year to get to it on Abbot drive, and if your
ship has Dillinghams, why not take a little longer and go to a good
planet? So nobody bothered with Abaddon."

But for Dunnan's purpose, it would be perfect. He called Prince
Bentrik and Alvyn Karffard to him; they found the idea instantly
convincing. They talked about it through dinner, and held a general
discussion afterward. Even Guatt Kirbey, the ship's pessimist, could
find no objection to it. Trask and Bentrik began at once making
battle plans. Karffard wondered if they hadn't better wait till they
got to Gimli and discuss it with the others.

"No," Trask told him. "This is the flagship; here's where the
strategy is decided."

"Well, how about the Mardukan Navy?" Captain Rainer asked. "I think
Fleet Admiral Bargham's in command at Gimli."

Prince Simon Bentrik was silent for a moment, as though he realized,
with reluctance, that the big decision was no longer avoidable.

"He may be, at present, but he won't be when I get there. I will be."

"But ... Your Highness, he's a fleet admiral; you're just a
commodore."

"I am not just a commodore. The King is a prisoner, and for all we
know dead. The Crown Prince is dead. The Princess Myrna is a child.
I am assuming the position of Regent and Prince-Protector of the Realm."




XXVI


There was a little difficulty on Gimli with Fleet Admiral Bargham.
Commodores didn't give orders to fleet admirals. Well, maybe regents
did, but who gave Prince Bentrik authority to call himself regent?
Regents were elected by the Chamber of Delegates, on nomination of
the Chancellor.

"That's Zaspar Makann and his stooges you're talking about?" Bentrik
laughed.

"Well, the Constitution...." He thought better of that, before
somebody asked him what Constitution. "Well, a Regent has to be
chosen by election. Even members of the Royal Family can't just
make themselves Regent by saying they are."

"I can. I just have. And I don't think there are going to be many
more elections, at least for the present. Not till we make sure the
people of Marduk can be trusted with the control of the government."

"Well, the pinnace from Moonbase reported that there were six Royal
navy battleships and four other craft attacking them," Bargham
objected. "I only have four ships here; I sent for the ones on the
other trade-planets, but I haven't heard from any of them. We can't
go there with only four ships."

"Sixteen ships," Bentrik corrected. "No, fifteen and one Gilgamesher
we're using for a troopship. I think that's enough. You'll remain
here on Gimli, in any case, admiral; as soon as the other ships come
in, you'll follow to Marduk with them. I am now holding a meeting
aboard the Tanith flagship _Nemesis_. I want your four ship-commanders
aboard immediately. I am not including you because you're remaining
here to bring up the late comers and as soon as this meeting is over
we are spacing out."

Actually, they spaced out sooner; the meeting lasted the whole three
hundred and fifty hours to Abaddon. A ship's captain, if he has a
good exec, as all of them had, needs only sit at his command-desk
and look important while the ship is going into and emerging from
a long jump; the rest of the time he can study ancient history or
whatever his shipboard hobby is. Rather than waste three hundred and
fifty hours of precious time, each captain turned his ship over to
his exec and remained aboard the _Nemesis_; even on so spacious a
craft the officers' country north of the engine rooms was crowded
like a tourist hotel in mid-season. One of the four Mardukans was
the Captain Garravay who had smuggled Bentrik's wife and son off
Marduk, and the other three were just as pro-Bentrik, pro-Tanith,
and anti-Makann. They were, on general principles, also anti-Bargham.
There must be something wrong with any fleet admiral who remained
in his command after Zaspar Makann came to power.

So, as soon as they spaced out, there was a party. After that,
they settled down to planning the Battle of Abaddon.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no Battle of Abaddon.

It was a dead planet, one side in night and the other in dim
twilight from the little speck of a sun three and a half billion
miles away, jagged mountains rising out of the snow that covered it
from pole to pole. The snow on top would be frozen CO_2; according
to the thermocouples, the surface temperature was well below
minus-100 Centigrade. No ships on orbit circled it; there was
a little faint radiation, which could have been from naturally
radioactive minerals; there was no electrical discharge detectable.

There was considerable bad language in the command room of the
_Nemesis_. The captains of the other ships were screening in,
wanting to know what to do.

"Go on in," Trask told them. "Englobe the planet, and go down to
within a mile if necessary. They could be hiding somewhere on it."

"Well, they're not hiding at the bottom of any ocean, that's for
sure," somebody said. It was one of those feeble jokes at which
everybody laughs because nothing else is laughable about the
situation.

Finally, they found it, at the north pole, which was no colder than
anywhere else on the planet. First radiation leakage, the sort that
would come from a closed-down nuclear power plant. Then a modicum of
electrical discharge. Finally the telescopic screens picked up the
spaceport, a huge oval amphitheater excavated out of a valley
between two jagged mountain ranges.

The language in the command room was just as bad, but the tone had
changed. It was surprising what a wide range of emotions could be
expressed by a few simple blasphemies and obscenities. Everybody
who had been deriding Sharll Renner were now acclaiming him.

But it was lifeless. The ships came crowding in; air-locked
landing-craft full of space-armored ground-fighters went down.
Screens in the command room lit as they transmitted in views.
Depressions in the carbon-dioxide snow where the hundred-foot
pad-feet of ships' landing-legs had pressed down. Ranks of
cargo-lighters that had plied to and from other ships or orbit.
And, all around the cliff-walled perimeter, air-locked doors to
caverns and tunnels. A great many men, with a great deal of equipment,
had been working here in the estimated five or six years since
Andray Dunnan--or somebody--had constructed this base.

Andray Dunnan. They found his badge, the crescent, blue on black, on
things. They found equipment that Harkaman recognized as having been
part of the original cargo stolen with the _Enterprise_. They even
found, in his living quarters, a blown-up photoprint picture of
Nevil Ormm, draped in black. But what they did not find was a single
vehicle small enough to be taken aboard a ship, or a single scrap of
combat equipment, not even a pistol or a hand grenade.

Dunnan had gone, but they knew whither, and where to find him.
The conquest of Marduk had moved into its final phase.

       *       *       *       *       *

Marduk was on the other side of the sun from Abaddon with
ninety-five million miles--close, but not inconveniently so, Trask
thought--to spare. Guatt Kirbey and the Mardukan astrogator who was
helping him made it within a light-minute. The Mardukan thought that
was fine; Kirbey didn't. The last microjump was aimed at the Moon of
Marduk, which was plainly visible in the telescopic screen. They
came out within a light-second and a half, which Kirbey admitted was
reasonably close. As soon as the screens cleared, they saw that they
weren't too late. The Moon of Marduk was under fire and firing back.

They'd have detection, and he knew what they were detecting--a clump
of sixteen rending distortions of the fabric of space-time, as
sixteen ships came into sudden existence in the normal continuum.
Beside him, Bentrik had a screen on; it was still milky-white,
and he was speaking into a radio hand-phone.

"Simon Bentrik, Prince-Protector of Marduk, calling Moonbase."
Then, slowly, he repeated his screen-combination twice. "Come in,
Moonbase; this is Simon Bentrik, Prince-Protector, speaking."

He waited ten seconds, and was about to start again, when the screen
flickered. The man who appeared in it wore the insignia of a
Mardukan navy commodore. He needed a shave, but he was grinning
happily. Bentrik greeted him by name.

"Hello, Simon; glad to see you. Your Highness, I mean; what is this
Prince-Protector thing?"

"Somebody had to do it. Is the King still alive?"

The grin slid off the commodore's face, starting with his eyes.

"We don't know. At first, Makann had him speaking by screen--you
know what it was like--urging everybody to obey and co-operate
with 'our trusted Chancellor.' Makann always appeared on the screen
with him."

Bentrik nodded. "I remember."

"Before you left, Makann kept quiet, and let the King make the
speech. After a while, the King wasn't able to speak coherently;
he'd stammer, and repeat. So then Makann did all the talking; they
couldn't even depend on him to parrot what they were giving him with
an earplug phone. Then he stopped appearing entirely. I suppose
there were physical symptoms they couldn't allow to be seen."
Bentrik was cursing horribly under his breath; the officer
at Moonbase nodded. "I hope for his sake that he is dead."

Poor Goodman Mikhyl. Bentrik was saying, "So do I." Trask agreed,
mentally. The commodore at Moonbase was still talking:

"We got two more renegade RMN ships, within a hundred hours after
you left." He named them. "And we got one of the Dunnan ships, the
_Fortuna_. We blew out the Malverton Navy Yard. They're still using
the Antarctic Naval Base, but we've knocked out a good deal of that.
We got the _Honest Horris_. They made two attempts to land on us and
lost a couple of ships. Eight hundred hours ago, they were joined by
the rest of Dunnan's fleet, five ships. They made a landing on
Malverton while it was turned away from us. Makann announced that
they were RMN units from the trade-planets that had joined him. I
suppose the planet-side public swallowed that. He also announced that
their commander, Admiral Dunnan, was in command of the People's
Armed Forces."

Dunnan's ground-fighters would be in control of Malverton. By now,
the odds were that Makann was as much his prisoner as King Mikhyl
VIII had been Makann's.

"So Dunnan has conquered Marduk. All he has to do, now, is make it
stick," he said. "I see four ships off Moonbase; how many more have
they?"

"These are _Bolide_ and _Eclipse_, Dunnan's ships, and former Royal
Mardukan Navy ships _Champion_ and _Guardian_. There are five
orbiting off the planet: Ex-RMNS _Paladin_, and Dunnan ships
_Starhopper_, _Banshee_, _Reliable_ and _Exporter_. The last
two are listed as merchantmen, but they're performing like
regulation battlecraft."

The four that had been circling Moonbase broke orbit and started
toward the relieving fleet; one took a hit from a Moonbase missile,
which staggered her but did no evident damage. Two ships which had
been orbiting the planet also changed course and started out. The
command room was silent except for a subdued chuckling from a
computer which was estimating enemy intentions by observed data and
Games Theory. Three more came hurrying out from the planet, and the
two in the lead slowed to let them catch up. He wanted to be able
to engage the four from off the satellite before the five from the
planet joined them, but Karffard's computers said it couldn't be done.

"All right, we have to take all our bad eggs in one basket," he
said. "Try to hit them as soon after they join as possible."

       *       *       *       *       *

The computers began chuckling again. The serving-robots were doing
a rush business in hot coffee. Prince Bentrik's son, sitting beside
his father, had stopped being Ruthless Ravary the Demon of the
Spaceways and was a very young officer going into his first space
battle, more scared and at the same time happier than he had ever
been in his short life. Captain Garravay of the _Vindex_ was making
signal to the other ships from Gimli: "_Royal Navy; smash the
traitors first!_" He could understand and sympathize, even if
he couldn't approve of putting personal ahead of tactical
considerations, and made a quick sealed-beam call to Harkaman to be
prepared to plug any holes they left in formation if they broke away
in search of vengeance. He also ordered the _Black Star_ and the
_Sun Goddess_ to shepherd the lightly armed and troop-crammed
Gilgamesh freighter out of danger. The two clumps of Dunnan-Makann
ships were converging rapidly, and Alvyn Karffard was screaming into
a phone to somebody to get more speed.

At a thousand miles, the missiles started going out, and the two
groups of ships, four and five, were equidistant from each other and
from the allied fleet, at the points of a triangle that was growing
smaller by the second. The first fire-globes of intercepted missiles
spread from their seeds of brief white light. A red light flashed on
the damage-board. An enemy ship took a hit. The captain of the
_Queen Flavia_ was on a screen, saying that his ship was heavily
damaged. Three ships bearing the Mardukan dragon-and-planet circled
madly around each other at what looked, in the screen, like just
over pistol-range, two of them firing into the third, which was
replying desperately. The third one blew up, and somebody was
yelling out of a screenspeaker, "Scratch one traitor!"

Another ship blew up somewhere, and then another. He heard somebody
say, "There went one of ours," and wondered which one it was. Not
the _Corisande_, he hoped; no, it wasn't, he could see her rushing
after two other ships which were, in turn, speeding toward the
_Black Star_, the _Sun Goddess_ and the Gilgamesh freighter. Then
the _Nemesis_ and the _Starhopper_ were within gun-range, pounding
