limits."

He patted her cheek. "On you it would look cute."

She shook her head, aware of a small fluster of guilt. There had been
considerably less actual coverage in the Beldon costume than there was
in the minute two-piece counterpart to Brule's silver trunks she wore at
the moment. She'd have to tell Brule about the Beldon stunt, since it
was more than likely he'd hear about it from others--Nelauk Pluly, for
one.

But not now. Things were getting just a little delicate along that line
at the moment.

"Leave us change the subject, pig," she said cheerfully. "Tell me what
else you've been doing besides acquiring a gorgeous tan."

A couple of hours later, things began to get delicate again. Same
subject. Trigger had been somewhat startled at the spaceport when Brule
told her he had shifted his living quarters to a Center apartment, and
that a large number of Precol's executives were taking similar
liberties. Holati's stand-in, Acting Commissioner Chelly, apparently
hadn't been too successful at keeping up personnel discipline.

She hadn't said anything. It was true that Manon was still a precolonial
planet only as a technicality. They didn't know quite as much about it
as they had to know before it could be officially released for
unrestricted settling, but by now there was considerable excuse for
loosening up on many of the early precautionary measures. For one thing,
there were just so many Hub people around nowadays that it would have
been a practical impossibility to enforce all Precol rules.

What bothered her mainly about the business of Brule's Center apartment
was that it might make the end of the evening less pleasant than she
wanted it to be. Brule had become the least bit swacked. Not at all
offensively, but he tended to get pretty ambitious then. And during the
past few hours she'd noticed that something had changed in his attitude
toward her. He'd always been confident of himself when it came to women,
so it wasn't that. It was perhaps, Trigger thought, like an unspoken
ultimatum along those lines. And she'd felt herself freezing up a little
in response to the thought.

The apartment was very beautiful. Nelauk, she guessed. Or somebody else
like that. Brule's taste was good, but he simply wouldn't have thought
of a lot of the details here. Neither, Trigger conceded, would she. Some
of the details looked pretty expensive.

He came back into the living room in a dressing gown, carrying a couple
of drinks. It was going to get awkward, all right.

"Like it?" he asked, waving a hand around.

"It's beautiful," Trigger said honestly. She smiled. She sipped at the
drink and placed it on the arm of her chair. "Somebody like an interior
decorator help you with it?"

Brule laughed and sat down opposite her with his drink. The laugh had
sounded the least bit annoyed. "You're right," he said. "How did you
guess?"

"You never went in for art exactly," she said. "This room is a work of
art."

He nodded. He didn't look annoyed any more. He looked smug. "It is,
isn't it?" he said. "It didn't even cost so very much. You just have to
know how, that's all."

"Know how about what?" Trigger asked.

"Know how to live," Brule said. "Know what it's all about. Then it's
easy."

He was looking at her. The smile was there. The warm, rich voice was
there. All the old charm was there. It was Brule. And it wasn't. Trigger
realized she was twisting her hands together. She looked down at them.
The little jewel in the ring Holati Tate had given her to wear blinked
back with crimson gleamings.

Crimson!

She drew a long, slow breath.

"Brule," she said.

"Yes?" said Brule. At the edge of her vision she saw the smile turn
eager.

Trigger said, "Give me the plasmoid." She raised her eyes and looked at
him. He'd stopped smiling.

Brule looked back at her a long time. At least it seemed a long time to
Trigger. The smile suddenly returned.

"What's that supposed to mean?" he asked, almost plaintively. "If it's
a joke, I don't get it."

"I just said," Trigger repeated carefully, "give me the plasmoid. The
one you stole."

Brule took a swallow of his drink and put the glass down on the floor.
"Aren't you feeling well?" he asked solicitously.

"Give me the plasmoid."

"Honestly, Trigger." He shook his head. He laughed. "What _are_ you
talking about?"

"A plasmoid. The one you took. The one you've got here."

Brule stood up. He studied her face, blinking, puzzled. Then he laughed,
richly. "Trigger, I've fed you one drink too many! I never thought you'd
let me do it. Be sensible now--if I had a plasmoid here, how could you
tell?"

"I can tell. Brule, I don't know how you took it or why you took it. I
don't really care." And that was a lie, Trigger thought dismally. She
cared. "Just give it to me, and I'll put it back. We can talk about it
afterwards."

"Afterwards," Brule said. The laugh came again, but it sounded a little
hollow. He moved a step toward her, stopped again, hands on his hips.
"Trigger," he said soberly, "if I've ever done anything you mightn't
approve of, it was done for both of us. You realize that, don't you?"

"I think I do," Trigger said warily. "Yes. Give it to me, Brule."

Brule leaped forward. She slid sideways out of the chair to the floor as
he leaped. She was crying inside, she realized vaguely. Brule was going
to kill her now, if he could.

She caught his left foot with both hands as he came down, and twisted
viciously.

Brule shouted something. His red, furious face swept by above. He
thumped to the floor beside her, one leg flung across her thighs,
gripping.

In colonial school Brule had received the same basic training in unarmed
combat that Trigger had. He was close to eighty pounds heavier than
Trigger, and it was still mostly muscle. But it was nearly four years
now since he had bothered himself with drills.

And he hadn't been put through Mihul's advanced students' courses
lately.

He stayed conscious a little less than nine seconds.

The plasmoids were in a small electronic safe built into a music
cabinet. The stamp to the safe was in Brule's billfold.

There were three of them, about the size of mice, starfish-shaped lumps
of translucent, hard, colorless jelly. They didn't move.

Trigger laid them in a row on the polished surface of a small table, and
blinked at them for a moment from a streaming left eye. The right eye
was swelling shut. Brule had got in one wild wallop somewhere along the
line. She picked up a small jar, emptied some spicy-smelling, crumbly
contents out on the table, dropped the plasmoids inside, closed the jar
and left the apartment with it. Brule was just beginning to stir and
groan.

Commissioner Tate hadn't retired yet. He let her in without a word.
Trigger put the jar down on a table.

"Three of your nuts and bolts in there," she said.

He nodded. "I know."

"I thought you did," said Trigger. "Thanks for the quick cure. But right
at the moment I don't like you very much, Holati. We can talk about that
in the morning."

"All right," said the Commissioner. He hesitated. "Anything that should
be taken care of before then?"

"It's been taken care of," Trigger said. "One of our employees has been
moderately injured. I dialed the medics to go pick him up. They have.
Good night."

"You might let me do something for that eye," he said.

Trigger shook her head. "I've got stuff in my quarters."

She locked herself into her quarters, got out a jar of quick-heal and
anointed the eye and a few other minor bruises. She put the jar away,
made a mechanical check of the newly installed anti-intrusion devices,
dimmed the lights and climbed into her bunk. For the next twenty minutes
she wept violently. Then she fell asleep.

An hour or so later, she turned over on her side and said without
opening her eyes, "Come, Fido!"

The plasmoid purse appeared just above the surface of the bunk between
Trigger's pillow and the wall. It dropped with a small thump and stood
balanced uncertainly. Trigger slept on.

Five minutes after that, the purse opened itself. A little later again,
Trigger suddenly shifted her shoulder uneasily, frowned and made a
little half-angry, half-whimpering cry. Then her face smoothed out. Her
breathing grew quiet and slow.

Major Heslet Quillan of the Subspace Engineers came breezing into Manon
Planet's spaceport very early in the morning. A Precol aircar picked him
up and let him out on a platform of the Headquarters dome near
Commissioner Tate's offices. Quillan was handed on toward the offices
through a string of underlings and reached the door just as it opened
and Trigger Argee stepped through.

He grasped her cordially by the shoulders and cried out a cheery hello.
Trigger made a soft growling sound in her throat. Her left hand chopped
right, her right hand chopped left. Quillan grunted and let go.

"What's the matter?" he inquired, stepping back. He rubbed one arm, then
the other.

Trigger looked at him, growled again, walked past him, and disappeared
through another door, her back very straight.

"Come in, Quillan," Commissioner Tate said from within the office.

Quillan went in and closed the door behind him. "What did I do?" he
asked bewilderedly.

"Nothing much," said Holati. "You just share the misfortune of being a
male human being. At the moment, Trigger's against 'em. She blew up the
Brule Inger setup last night."

"Oh!" Quillan sat down. "I never did like that idea much," he said.

The Commissioner shrugged. "You don't know the girl yet. If I'd hauled
Inger in, she would never have really forgiven me for it. I had to let
her handle it herself. Actually she understands that."

"How did it go?"

"Her cover reported it was one hell of a good fight for some seconds. If
you'd looked closer, you might have just spotted the traces of the
shiner Inger gave her. It was a beaut last night."

Quillan went white.

"But if you're thinking of having a chat with Inger re that part of it,"
the Commissioner went on, "forget it." He glanced at a report from the
medical department on his desk. "Dislocated shoulder ... broken thumb
... moderate concussion. And so on. It was the throat punch that
finished the matter. He can't talk yet. We'll call it square."

Quillan grunted. "What are you going to do with him now?"

"Nothing," Holati said. "We know his contacts. Why bother? He'll resign
end of the month."

Quillan cleared his throat and glanced at the door. "I suppose she'll
want him put up for rehabilitation--seemed pretty fond of him."

"Relax, son," said the Commissioner. "Trigger's an individualist. If
Inger goes up for rehabilitation, it will be because he wants it. And he
doesn't, of course. Being a slob suits him fine. He's just likely to be
more cautious about it in future. So we'll let him go his happy way.
Now--let's get down to business. How does Pluly's yacht harem stack up?"

A reminiscent smile spread slowly over Quillan's face. He shook his
head. "Awesome, brother!" he said. "Plain awesome!"

"Pick up anything useful?"

"Nothing definite. But whenever Belchy comes out of the esthetic
trances, he's a worried man. Count him in."

"For sure?"

"Yes."

"All right. He's in. Crack the Aurora yet?"

"No," said Quillan. "The girls are working on it. But the Ermetyne keeps
a mighty taut ship and a mighty disciplined crew. We'll have a couple of
those boys wrapped up in another week. No earlier."

"A week might be soon enough," said the Commissioner. "It also might
not."

"I know it," said Quillan. "But the Aurora does look a little bit
obvious, doesn't she?"

"Yes," Holati Tate admitted. "Just a little bit."




19


By lunchtime, Trigger was acting almost cordial again. "I've got the
Precol job lined up," she reported to Holati Tate. "I'll handle it like
I used to, whenever I can. When I can't, the kids will shift in
automatically." The kids were the five assistants among whom her duties
had been divided in her absence.

"Major Quillan called me up to Mantelish's lab around ten," she went on.
"They wanted to see Repulsive, so I took him up there. Then it turned
out Mantelish wanted to take Repulsive along on a field trip this
afternoon."

Holati looked startled. "He can't do that, and he knows it!" He reached
for the desk transmitter.

"Don't bother, Commissioner. I told Mantelish I'd been put in charge of
Repulsive, and that he'd lose an arm if he tried to walk out of the lab
with him."

Holati cleared his throat. "I see! How did Mantelish react?"

"Oh, he huffed a bit. Like he does. Then he calmed down and agreed he
could get by without Repulsive out there. So we stood by while he
measured and weighed the thing, and so on. After that he got friendly
and said you'd asked him to fill me in on current plasmoid theory."

"So I did," said Holati. "Did he?"

"He tried, I think. But it's like you say. I got lost in about three
sentences and never caught up." She looked curiously at the
Commissioner. "I didn't have a chance to talk to Major Quillan alone, so
I'm wondering why Mantelish was told the I-Fleets in the Vishni area are
hunting for planets with plasmoids on them. I thought you felt he was
too woolly-minded to be trusted."

"We couldn't keep that from him very well," Holati said. "He was the boy
who thought of it."

"You didn't have to tell him they'd found some possibles did you?"

"He did, unfortunately. He's had those plasmoid detectors of his for
about a month, but he didn't happen to think of mentioning them. The
reason he was to come back to Manon originally was to sort over the
stuff the Fleets have been sending back here. It's as weird a collection
of low-grade life-forms as I've ever seen, but not plasmoid. Mantelish
went into a temper and wanted to know why the idiots weren't using
detectors."

"Oh, Lord!" Trigger said.

"That's what it's like when you're working with him," said the
Commissioner. "We started making up detectors wholesale and rushing them
out there, but the new results haven't come in yet."

"Well, that explains it." Trigger looked down at the desk a moment, then
glanced up and met the Commissioner's eye. She colored slightly.

"Incidentally," she said, "I did take the opportunity to apologize to
Major Quillan for clipping him a couple this morning. I shouldn't have
done that."

"He didn't seem offended," said Holati.

"No, not really," she agreed.

"And I explained to him that you had a very good reason to feel
disturbed."

"Thanks," said Trigger. "By the way, was he really a smuggler at one
time? And a hijacker?"

"Yes--very successful at it. It's excellent cover for some phases of
Intelligence work. As I heard it, though, Quillan happened to scramble
up one of the Hub's nastier dope rings in the process, and was broken
two grades in rank."

"Broken?" Trigger said. "Why?"

