of age. Therefore, with us each generation covers one hundred years. The
first twenty-five years of a child's life are spent at home with his
parents, during which time he acquires his elementary education in the
common schools. Then boys and girls alike move to the Country of Youth,
where they spend another twenty-five years. There they develop their
brains and initiative by conducting any researches they choose. Most of
us, at that age, solve all the riddles of the Universe, only to discover
later that our solutions have been fallacious. However, much really
excellent work is done in the Country of Youth, primarily because of the
new and unprejudiced viewpoints of the virgin minds there at work. In
that country also each finds his life's companion, the one necessary to
round out mere existence into a perfection of living that no person, man
or woman, can ever know alone. I need not speak to you of the wonders of
love or of the completion and fullness of life that it brings, for all
four of you, children though you are, know love in full measure.

"At fifty years of age the man, now mentally mature, is recalled to his
family home, as his father's brain is now losing some of its vigor and
keenness. The father then turns over his work to the son by means of the
educator--and when the weight of the accumulated knowledge of a hundred
thousand generations of research is impressed upon the son's brain, his
play is over."

"What does the father do then?"

"Having made his brain record, about which I have told you, he and his
companion--for she has in similar fashion turned over her work to her
successor--retire to the Country of Age, where they rest and relax after
their century of effort. They do whatever they care to do, for as long
as they please to do it. Finally, after assuring themselves that all is
well with the children, they decide that they are ready for the Change.
Then, side by side as they have labored, they pass."

Now at the door of the observatory, Dorothy paused and shrank back
against Seaton, her eyes widening as she stared at Orlon.

"No, daughter, why should we fear the Change?" he answered her unspoken
question, calm serenity in every inflection of his quiet voice. "The
life-principle is unknowable to the finite mind, as is the
All-Controlling Force. But even though we know nothing of the sublime
goal toward which it is tending, any person ripe for the Change can, and
of course does, liberate the life-principle so that its progress may be
unimpeded."

       *       *       *       *       *

In a spacious room of the observatory, in which the Terrestrials and
their Norlaminian hosts had been long engaged in study and discussion,
Seaton finally rose and extended a hand toward his wife.

"Well, that's that, then, Orlon, I guess. We've been thirty hours
without sleep, and for us that's a long time. I'm getting so dopey I
can't think a lick. We'd better go back to the _Skylark_ and turn in,
and after we've slept nine hours or so I'll go over to Rovol's
laboratory and Crane'll come back here to you."

"You need not return to your vessel," said Orlon. "I know that its
somewhat cramped quarters have become irksome. Apartments have been
prepared here for you. We shall have a meal here together, and then we
shall retire, to meet again tomorrow."

As he spoke, a tray laden with appetizing dishes appeared in the air in
front of each person. As Seaton resumed his seat the tray followed him,
remaining always in the most convenient position.

Crane glanced at Seaton questioningly, and Satrazon, the First of
Chemistry, answered his thought before he could voice it.

"The food before you, unlike that which is before us of Norlamin, is
wholesome for you. It contains no copper, no arsenic, no heavy
metals--in short, nothing in the least harmful to your chemistry. It is
balanced as to carbohydrates, proteins, fats and sugars, and contains
the due proportion of each of the various accessory nutritional factors.
You will also find the flavors are agreeable to each of you."

"Synthetic, eh? You've got us analyzed," Seaton stated, rather than
asked, as with knife and fork he attacked the thick, rare, and
beautifully broiled steak which, with its mushrooms and other delicate
trimmings, lay upon his rigid although unsupported tray--noticing as he
did so that the Norlaminians ate with tools entirely different from
those they had supplied to their Earthly guests.

"Entirely synthetic," Satrazon made answer, "except for the sodium
chloride necessary. As you already know, sodium and chlorin are very
rare throughout our system, therefore the force upon the food-supply
took from your vessel the amount of salt required for the formula. We
have been unable to synthesize atoms, for the same reason that the
labors of so many others have been hindered--because of the lack of
Rovolon. Now, however, my science shall progress as it should; and for
that I join with my fellow scientists in giving you thanks for the
service you have rendered us."

"We thank you instead," replied Seaton, "for the service we have been
able to do you is slight indeed compared to what you are giving us in
return. But it seems that you speak quite impersonally of the force upon
the food supply. Did you yourself direct the preparation of these meats
and vegetables?"

"Oh, no. I merely analyzed your tissues, surveyed the food-supplies you
carried, discovered your individual preferences, and set up the
necessary integrals in the mechanism. The forces did the rest, and will
continue to do so as long as you remain upon this planet."

"Fruit salad always my favorite dish," Dorothy said, after a couple of
bites, "and this one is just too perfectly divine! It doesn't taste like
any other fruit I ever ate, either--I think it must be the same ambrosia
that the old pagan gods used to eat."

"If all you did was to set up the integrals, how do you know what you
are going to have for the next meal?" asked Crane.

"We have no idea what the form, flavor, or consistency of any dish will
be," was the surprising answer. "We know only that the flavor will be
agreeable and that it will agree with the form and consistency of the
substance, and that the composition will be well-balanced chemically.
You see, all the details of flavor, form, texture, and so on are
controlled by a device something like one of your kaleidoscopes. The
integrals render impossible any unwholesome, unpleasant, or unbalanced
combination of any nature, and everything else is left to the mechanism,
which operates upon pure chance."

"Some system, I'd rise to remark," and Seaton, with the others, resumed
his vigorous attack upon the long-delayed supper.

The meal over, the Earthly visitors were shown to their rooms, and fell
into a deep, dreamless sleep.




CHAPTER X

Norlaminian Science


Breakfast over, Seaton watched intently as his tray, laden with empty
containers, floated away from him and disappeared into an opening in the
wall.

"How do you do it, Orlon?" he asked, curiously. "I can hardly believe
it, even after seeing it done."

"Each tray is carried upon the end of a beam or rod of force, and
supported rigidly by it. Since the beam is tuned to the individual wave
of the instrument you wear upon your chest, your tray is, of course,
placed in front of you, at a predetermined distance, as soon as the
sending force is actuated. When you have finished your meal, the beam is
shortened. Thus the tray is drawn back to the food laboratory, where
other forces cleanse and sterilize the various utensils and place them
in readiness for the next meal. It would be an easy matter to have this
same mechanism place your meals before you wherever you may go upon this
planet, provided only that a clear path can be plotted from the
laboratory to your person."

"Thanks, but it wouldn't pay. No telling where we'd be. Besides, we'd
better eat in the _Skylark_ most of the time, to keep our cook
good-natured. Well, I see Rovol's got his boat here for me, so guess I'd
better turn up a few r. p. m. Coming along, Dot, or have you got
something else on your mind?"

"I'm going to leave you for a while. I can't really understand even a
radio, and just thinking about those funny, complicated rays and things
you are going after makes me dizzy in the head. Mrs. Orlon is going to
take us over to the Country of Youth--she says Margaret and I can play
around with her daughter and her bunch and have a good time while you
scientists are doing your stuff."

"All right. 'Bye till tonight," and Seaton stepped out into the grounds,
where the First of Rays was waiting.

The flier was a torpedo-shaped craft of some transparent, glassy
material, completely enclosed except for one circular opening or
doorway. From the midsection, which was about five feet in diameter and
provided with heavily-cushioned seats capable of carrying four
passengers in comfort, the hull tapered down smoothly to a needle point
at each end. As Seaton entered and settled himself into the cushions,
Rovol touched a lever. Instantly a transparent door slid across the
opening, locking itself into position flush with the surface of the
hull, and the flier darted into the air and away. For a few minutes
there was silence, as Seaton studied the terrain beneath them. Fields or
cities there were none; the land was covered with dense forests and vast
meadows, with here and there great buildings surrounded by gracious,
park-like areas. Rovol finally broke the silence.

"I understand your problem, I believe, since Orlon has transferred to me
all the thoughts he had from you. With the aid of the Rovolon you have
brought us, I am confident that we shall be able to work out a
satisfactory solution of the various problems involved. It will take us
some few minutes to traverse the distance to my laboratory, and if there
are any matters upon which your mind is not quite clear, I shall try to
clarify them."

"That's letting me down easy," Seaton grinned, "but you don't need to be
afraid of hurting my feelings--I know just exactly how ignorant and dumb
I am compared to you. There's a lot of things I don't get at all. First,
and nearest, this airboat. It has no power-plant at all. I assume that
it, like so many other things hereabouts, is riding on the end of a rod
of force?"

"Exactly. The beam is generated and maintained in my laboratory. All
that is here in the flier is a small sender, for remote control."

"How do you obtain your power?" asked Seaton. "Solar generators and tide
motors? I know that all your work is done by protelectricity, but Orlon
did not inform us as to the sources."

"We have not used such inefficient generators for many thousands of
years. Long ago it was shown by research that these rays were constantly
being generated in abundance in outer space, and that they could be
collected upon spherical condensers and transmitted without loss to the
surface of the planet by means of matched and synchronized crystals.
Several millions of these condensers have been built and thrown out to
become tiny satellites of Norlamin."

"How did you get them far enough out?"

"The first ones were forced out to the required distance upon beams of
force produced by the conversion of electricity, which was in turn
produced from turbines, solar motors, and tide motors. With a few of
them out, however, it was easy to obtain sufficient power to send out
more; and now, whenever one of us requires more power than he has at his
disposal, he merely sends out such additional collectors as he needs."

"Now about those fifth-order rays, which will penetrate a zone of force.
I am told that they are not ether waves at all?"

"They are not ether waves. The fourth order rays, of which the theory
has been completely worked out, are the shortest vibrations that can be
propagated through the ether; for the ether itself is not a continuous
medium. We do not know its nature exactly, but it is an actual
substance, and is composed of discrete particles of the fourth order.
Now the zone of force, which is itself a fourth-order phenomenon, sets
up a condition of stasis in the particles composing the ether. These
particles are relatively so coarse, that rays and particles of the fifth
order will pass through the fixed zone without retardation. Therefore,
if there is anything between the particles of the ether--this matter is
being debated hotly among us at the present time--it must be a
sub-ether, if I may use that term. We have never been able to
investigate any of these things experimentally, not even such a coarse
aggregation as is the ether; but now, having Rovolon, it will not be
many thousands of years until we shall have extended our knowledge many
orders farther, in both directions."

"Just how will Rovolon help you?"

"It will enable us to generate a force of the ninth magnitude--that much
power is necessary to set up what you have so aptly named a zone of
force--and will give us a source of fourth, fifth, and probably higher
orders of rays which, if they are generated in space at all, are beyond
our present reach. The zone of force is necessary to shield certain
items of equipment from ether vibrations; as any such vibration inside
the controlling fields of force renders observation or control of the
higher orders of rays impossible."

"Hm ... m, I see--I'm learning something," Seaton replied cordially.
"Just as the higher-powered a radio set is, the more perfect must be its
shielding?"

"Yes. Just as a trace of any gas will destroy the usefulness of your
most sensitive vacuum tubes, and just as imperfect shielding will allow
interfering waves to enter sensitive electrical apparatus--in that same
fashion will even the slightest ether vibration interfere with the
operation of the extremely sensitive fields and lenses of force which
must be used in controlling forces of the higher orders."

"You haven't tested the theory of the fourth order yet, have you?"

"No, but that is unnecessary. The theory of the fourth order is not
really theory at all--it is mathematical fact. Although we have never
been able to generate them, we know exactly the forces you use in your
ship of space, and we can tell you of some thousands of others more or
less similar and also highly useful forces which you have not yet
discovered, but are allowing to go to waste. We know exactly what they
are, how to liberate and control them, and how to use them. In fact, in
the work which we are to begin today, we shall use but little ordinary
power: almost all our work will be done by fourth-order forces,
liberated from copper by means of the Rovolon you have given me. But
here we are at my laboratory. You already know that the best way to
learn is by doing, and we shall begin at once."

       *       *       *       *       *

The flier alighted upon a lawn quite similar to the one before the
observatory of Orlon, and the scientist led his Earthly guest through
the main entrance of the imposing structure of vari-colored marble and
gleaming metal and into the vast, glass-lined room that was his
laboratory. Great benches lined the walls, and there were hundreds of
dials, meters, tubes, transformers and other instruments, whose uses
Seaton could not even guess.

Rovol first donned a suit of transparent, flexible material, of a deep
golden color, instructing Seaton to do the same; explaining that much of
the work would be with dangerous frequencies and with high pressures,
and that the suits were not only absolute insulators against
electricity, heat, and sound, but were also ray-filters proof against
any harmful radiations. As each helmet was equipped with radiophones,
conversation was not interfered with in the least.

Rovol took up a tiny flash-pencil, and with it deftly cut off a bit of
Rovolon, almost microscopic in size. This he placed upon a great block
of burnished copper, and upon it played a force. As he manipulated two
levers, two more beams of force flattened out the particle of metal,
spread it out over the copper, and forced it into the surface of the
block until the thin coating was at every point in molecular contact
with the copper beneath it--a perfect job of plating, and one done in
the twinkling of an eye. He then cut out a piece of the treated copper
the size of a pea, and other forces rapidly built around it a structure
of coils and metallic tubes. This apparatus he suspended in the air at
the extremity of a small beam of force. The block of copper was next cut
in two, and Rovol's fingers moved rapidly over the keys of a machine
which resembled slightly an overgrown and exceedingly complicated
book-keeping machine. Streams and pencils of force flashed and crackled,
and Seaton saw raw materials transformed into a complete power-plant, in
its center the two-hundred-pound lump of plated copper, where an instant
before there had been only empty space upon the massive metal bench.
Rovol's hands moved rapidly from keys to dials and back, and suddenly a
zone of force, as large as a basketball appeared around the apparatus
poised in the air.

"But it'll fly off and we can't stop it with anything," Seaton
protested, and it did indeed dart rapidly upward.

The old man shook his head as he manipulated still more controls, and
Seaton gasped as nine stupendous beams of force hurled themselves upon
that brilliant spherical mirror of pure energy, seized it in mid-flight,
and shaped it resistlessly, under his bulging eyes, into a complex
geometrical figure of precisely the desired form.

Lurid violet light filled the room, and Seaton turned towards the bar.
That two-hundred-pound mass of copper was shrinking visibly, second by
