sound the magter folded and fell to the ground. Before the body hit,
Ulv crouched low and rushed in. There was the sudden scuffling of
feet on the floor, then silence.

Brion walked in, gun ready and alert, not knowing what he would
find. His toe pushed against a body on the ground and from the
darkness Ulv whispered, "There were only two. We can go on now."

Finding their way through the cave was a maddening torture. They had
no light, nor would they dare use one if they had. There were no
wheel marks to follow on the stone floor. Without Ulv's sensitive
nose they would have been completely lost. The cave branched and
rejoined and they soon lost all sense of direction.

Walking was almost impossible. They had to grope with their hands
before them like blind men. Stumbling and falling against the rock,
their fingers were soon throbbing and raw from brushing against the
rough walls. Ulv followed the scent of the magter that hung in the
air where they had passed. When it grew thin he knew they had left
the frequently used tunnels and entered deserted ones. They could
only retrace their steps and start again in a different direction.

More maddening than the walking was the way time was running out.
Inexorably the glowing hands crept around the face of Brion's watch
until they stood at fifteen minutes before twelve.

"There is a light ahead," Ulv whispered, and Brion almost gasped
with relief. They moved slowly and silently until they stood,
concealed by the darkness, looking out into a domed chamber brightly
lit by glowing tubes.

"What is it?" Ulv asked, blinking in the painful wash of
illumination after the long darkness.

Brion had to fight to control his voice, to stop from shouting.

"The cage with the metal webbing is a jump-space generator. The
pointed, silver shapes next to it are bombs of some kind, probably
the cobalt bombs. We've found it!"

His first impulse was to instantly send the radio call that would
stop the waiting fleet of H-bombers. But an unconvincing message
would be worse than no message at all. He had to describe exactly
what he saw here so the Nyjorders would know he wasn't lying. What
he told them had to fit exactly with the information they already
had about the launcher and the bombs.

The launcher had been jury-rigged from a ship's jump-space
generator; that was obvious. The generator and its controls were
neatly cased and mounted. Cables ran from them to a roughly
constructed cage of woven metal straps, hammered and bent into shape
by hand. Three technicians were working on the equipment. Brion
wondered what sort of blood-thirsty war-lovers the magter had found
to handle the bombing for them. Then he saw the chains around their
necks and the bloody wounds on their backs.

He still found it difficult to have any pity for them. They had
obviously been willing to accept money to destroy another planet--or
they wouldn't have been working here. They had probably rebelled
only when they had discovered how suicidal the attack would be.

Thirteen minutes to midnight.

Cradling the radio against his chest, Brion rose to his feet. He had
a better view of the bombs now. There were twelve of them, alike as
eggs from the same deadly clutch. Pointed like the bow of a spacer,
each one swept smoothly back for its two metres of length, to a
sharply chopped-off end. They were obviously incomplete, the war
heads of rockets. One had its base turned towards him, and he saw
six projecting studs that could be used to attach it to the missing
rocket. A circular inspection port was open in the flat base of the
bomb.

This was enough. With this description, the Nyjorders would know he
couldn't be lying about finding the bombs. Once they realized this,
they couldn't destroy Dis without first trying to neutralize them.

Brion carefully counted fifty paces before he stopped. He was far
enough from the cavern so he couldn't be heard, and an angle of the
cave cut off all light from behind him. With carefully controlled
movements he turned on the power, switched the set to transmit,
and checked the broadcast frequency. All correct. Then slowly and
clearly, he described what he had seen in the cavern behind him. He
kept his voice emotionless, recounting facts, leaving out anything
that might be considered an opinion.

It was six minutes before midnight when he finished. He thumbed
the switch to receive and waited.

There was only silence.

Slowly, the empty quality of the silence penetrated his numbed mind.
There were no crackling atmospherics nor hiss of static, even when
he turned the power full on. The mass of rock and earth of the
mountain above was acting as a perfect grounding screen, absorbing
his signal even at maximum output.

They hadn't heard him. The Nyjord fleet didn't know that the cobalt
bombs had been discovered before their launching. The attack would
go ahead as planned. Even now, the bomb-bay doors were opening;
armed H-bombs hung above the planet, held in place only by their
shackles. In a few minutes the signal would be given and the
shackles would spring open, the bombs drop clear....

"Killers!" Brion shouted into the microphone. "You wouldn't listen
to reason, you wouldn't listen to Hys, or me, or to any voice that
suggested an alternative to complete destruction. You are going to
destroy Dis, and _it's not necessary!_ There were a lot of ways you
could have stopped it. You didn't do any of them, and now it's too
late. You'll destroy Dis, and in turn this will destroy Nyjord.
Ihjel said that, and now I believe him. You're just another damned
failure in a galaxy full of failures!"

He raised the radio above his head and sent it crashing into
the rock floor. Then he was running back to Ulv, trying to run away
from the realization that he too had tried and failed. The people
on the surface of Dis had less than two minutes left to live.

"They didn't get my message," Brion said to Ulv. "The radio won't
work this far underground."

"Then the bombs will fall?" Ulv asked, looking searchingly at
Brion's face in the dim reflected light from the cavern.

"Unless something happens that we know nothing about, the bombs
will fall."

They said nothing after that--they simply waited. The three
technicians in the cavern were also aware of the time. They were
calling to each other and trying to talk to the magter. The
emotionless, parasite-ridden brains of the magter saw no reason to
stop work, and they attempted to beat the men back to their tasks.
In spite of the blows, they didn't go; they only gaped in horror as
the clock hands moved remorselessly towards twelve. Even the magter
dimly felt some of the significance of the occasion. They stopped
too and waited.

The hour hand touched twelve on Brion's watch, then the minute hand.
The second hand closed the gap and for a tenth of a second the three
hands were one. Then the second hand moved on.

Brion's immediate sensation of relief was washed away by the
chilling realization that he was deep underground. Sound and seismic
waves were slow, and the flare of atomic explosions couldn't be seen
here. If the bombs had been dropped at twelve they wouldn't know it
at once.

A distant rumble filled the air. A moment later the ground heaved
under them and the lights in the cavern flickered. Fine dust drifted
down from the roof above.

Ulv turned to him, but Brion looked away. He could not face the
accusation in the Disan's eyes.




XVIII


One of the technicians was running and screaming. The magter knocked
him down and beat him into silence. Seeing this, the other two men
returned to work with shaking hands. Even if all life on the surface
of the planet was dead, this would have no effect on the magter.
They would go ahead as planned, without emotion or imagination
enough to alter their set course.

As the technicians worked, their attitude changed from shocked
numbness to anger. Right and wrong were forgotten. They had been
killed--the invisible death of radiation must already be penetrating
into the caves--but they also had the chance for vengeance. Swiftly
they brought their work to completion, with a speed and precision
they had concealed before.

"What are those offworlders doing?" Ulv asked.

Brion stirred from his lethargy of defeat and looked across the
cavern floor. The men had a wheeled handtruck and were rolling one
of the atomic warheads onto it. They pushed it over to the
latticework of the jump-field.

"They are going to bomb Nyjord now, just as Nyjord bombed Dis. That
machine will hurl the bombs in a special way to the other planet."

"Will you stop them?" Ulv asked. He had his deadly blowgun in his
hand and his face was an expressionless mask.

Brion almost smiled at the irony of the situation. In spite of
everything he had done to prevent it, Nyjord had dropped the bombs.
And this act alone may have destroyed their own planet. Brion had it
within his power now to stop the launching in the cavern. Should he?
Should he save the lives of his killers? Or should he practice the
ancient blood-oath that had echoed and destroyed down through the
ages: _An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth._ It would be so
simple. He literally had to do nothing. The score would be even, and
his and the Disans' death avenged.

Did Ulv have his blowgun ready to kill Brion with, if he should try
to stop the launchings? Or had he misread the Disan entirely?

"Will _you_ stop them, Ulv?" he asked.

How large was mankind's sense of obligation? The caveman first had
this feeling for his mate, then for his family. It grew until men
fought and died for the abstract ideas of cities and nations, then
for whole planets. Would the time ever come when men might realize
that the obligation should be to the largest and most encompassing
reality of all--mankind? And beyond that to life of all kinds.

Brion saw this idea, not in words but as a reality. When he posed
the question to himself in this way he found that it stated clearly
its inherent answer. He pulled his gun out, and as he did he
wondered what Ulv's answer might be.

"Nyjord is _medvirk_," Ulv said, raising his blowgun and sending a
dart across the cavern. It struck one of the technicians, who gasped
and fell to the floor.

Brion's shots crashed into the control board, shorting and
destroying it, removing the menace to Nyjord for all time.

_Medvirk_, Ulv had said. A life form that cooperates and aids other
life forms. It may kill in self-defense, but it is essentially not
a killer or destroyer. Ulv had a lifetime of knowledge about the
interdependency of life. He grasped the essence of the idea and
ignored all the verbal complications and confusions. He had
killed the magter, who were his own people, because they were
_umedvirk_--against life. And he had saved his enemies because
they were _medvirk_.

With this realization came the painful knowledge that the planet
and the people that had produced this understanding were dead.

In the cavern the magter saw the destruction of their plans, and
the cave mouth from which the bullets had come. Silently they rushed
to kill their enemy--a concerted wave of emotionless fury.

Brion and Ulv fought back. Even the knowledge that he was doomed no
matter what happened could not resign Brion to death at the hands
of the magter. To Ulv, the decision was much easier. He was simply
killing _umedvirk_. A believer in life, he destroyed the anti-life.

They retreated into the darkness, still firing. The magter had
lights and ion rifles, and were right behind them. Knowing the
caverns better than the men they chased, the pursuers circled.
Brion saw lights ahead and dragged Ulv to a stop.

"They know their way through these caves, and we don't," he said.
"If we try to run they'll just shoot us down. Let's find a spot
we can defend and settle into it."

"Back here"--Ulv gave a tug in the right direction--"there is a cave
with only one entrance, and that is very narrow."

"Let's go!"

Running as silently as they could in the darkness, they reached
the deadend cavern without being seen. What noise they made was lost
in other footsteps that sounded and echoed through the connecting
caves. Once inside, they found cover behind a ridge and waited.
The end was certain.

       *       *       *       *       *

The magter ran swiftly into their cave, flashing his light into all
the places of concealment. The beam passed over the two hidden men,
and at the same instant Brion fired. The shot boomed loudly as the
magter fell--a shot that would surely have been heard by the others.

Before anyone else came into the cave, Brion ran over and grabbed
the still functioning light. Propping it on the rocks so it shone on
the entrance, he hurried back to shelter beside Ulv. They waited for
the attack.

It was not long in coming. Two magter rushed in, and died. More were
outside, Brion knew, and he wondered how long it would be before
they remembered the grenades and rolled one into their shelter.

An indistinct murmur sounded outside, and sharp explosions. In their
hiding place, Brion and Ulv crouched low and wondered why the attack
didn't come. Then one of the magter came in the entrance, but Brion
hesitated before shooting.

The man had _backed_ in, firing behind him as he came.

Ulv had no compunctions about killing, only his darts couldn't
penetrate the magter's thick clothing. As the magter turned, Ulv's
breath pulsed once and death stung the back of the other man's hand.
He collapsed into a crumpled heap.

"Don't shoot," a voice called from outside the cave, and a man
stepped through the swirling dust and smoke to stand in the beam
from the light.

Brion clutched wildly at Ulv's arm, dragging the blowgun from
the Disan's mouth.

The man in the light wore a protective helmet, thick boots and
a pouch-hung uniform.

He was a Nyjorder.

The realization was almost impossible to accept. Brion had heard
the bombs fall. Yet the Nyjord soldier was here. The two facts
couldn't be accepted together.

"Would you keep a hold on his arm, sir, just in case," the soldier
said, glancing warily at Ulv's blowpipe. "I know what those darts
can do." He pulled a microphone from one of his pockets and spoke
into it.

More soldiers crowded into the cave, and Professor-Commander Krafft
came in behind them. He looked strangely out of keeping in the dusty
combat uniform. The gun was even more incongruous in his blue-veined
hand. After giving the pistol to the nearest soldier with an air of
relief, he stumbled quickly over to Brion and took his hand.

"It is a profound and sincere pleasure to meet you in person,"
he said. "And your friend Ulv as well."

"Would you kindly explain what is going on?" Brion said thickly. He
was obsessed by the strange feeling that none of this could possibly
be happening.

"We will always remember you as the man who saved us from ourselves,"
Krafft said, once again the professor instead of the commander.

"What Brion wants are facts, Grandpa, not speeches," Hys said. The
bent form of the leader of the rebel Nyjord army pushed through the
crowd of taller men until he stood next to Krafft. "Simply stated,
Brion, your plan succeeded. Krafft relayed your message to me--and
as soon as I heard it I turned back and met him on his ship. I'm
sorry that Telt's dead--but he found what we were looking for. I
couldn't ignore his report of radioactive traces. Your girl friend
arrived with the hacked-up corpse at the same time I did, and we all
took a long look at the green leech in its skull. Her explanation of
what it is made significant sense. We were already carrying out
landings when we had your call about something having been stored
in the magter tower. After that it was just a matter of following
tracks--and the transmitter you planted."

"But the explosions at midnight?" Brion broke in. "I heard them!"

"You were supposed to," Hys laughed. "Not only you, but the magter
in this cave. We figured they would be armed and the cave strongly
