The Chemist glanced at his friends who sat astonished by this flow of
eager, impassioned words. Then he turned again to Lylda's intent,
pleading face, regarding her tenderly. "You are very fine, little mother
of my son," he said gently, lapsing for a moment into her own style of
speech. "It could do no harm," he added thoughtfully "and perhaps----"

"Let her try it," said the Doctor. "No harm could come to her."

"No harm to me could come," said Lylda quickly. "And I shall make them
believe. I can, because I am a woman, and they will know I tell the
truth. Ah, you will let me try, my husband--please?"

The Chemist appealed to the others. "They will believe her, many of
them," he said. "They will leave Orlog as she directs. But those in
other cities will still hold to Targo, they will simply remain silent
for a time. What their feelings will be or are we cannot tell. Some will
leave and go to Orlog of course, for Lylda will offer freedom of their
leader and to secure that they will seem to agree to anything.

"But after all, they are nothing but children at heart, most of them.
To-day, they might believe in Lylda; to-morrow Targo could win them
again."

"He won't get a chance," put in the Very Young Man quickly. "If she says
we kill anybody who talks for Targo outside of Orlog, that goes. It's
the only way, isn't it?"

"And she might really convince them--or most of them," added the Doctor.

"You will let me try?" asked Lylda softly. The Chemist nodded.

Lylda sprang to her feet. Her frail little body was trembling with
emotion; on her face was a look almost of exaltation.

"You _will_ let me try," she cried. "Then I shall make them believe.
Here, now, this very hour, I shall make them know the truth. And they,
my own people, shall I save from sorrow, misery and death."

She turned to the Chemist and spoke rapidly.

"My husband, will you send Oteo now, up into the city. Him will you tell
to have others spread the news. All who desire an end to Targo's rule,
shall come here at once. And all too, who in him believe, and who for
him want freedom, they shall come too. Let Oteo tell them magic shall be
performed and Lylda will speak with them.

"Make haste, my husband, for now I go to change my dress. Not as the
Master's woman will I speak, but as Lylda--Oroid woman--woman of the
people." And with a flashing glance, she turned and swiftly left the
balcony.




CHAPTER XXIV

LYLDA ACTS


"She'll do it," the Very Young Man murmured, staring at the doorway
through which Lylda had disappeared. "She can do anything."

The Chemist rose to his feet. "I'll send Oteo. Will you wait here
gentlemen? And will you have some of the drugs ready for Lylda? You have
them with you?" The men nodded.

"How about Lylda carrying the drugs?" asked the Very Young Man. "And
what about her clothes?"

"I have already made a belt for Lylda and for myself--some time ago,"
the Chemist answered. "During the first year I was here I made several
experiments with the drugs. I found that almost anything within the
immediate--shall I say influence of the body, will contract with it.
Almost any garment, even a loose robe will change size. You found that
to be so to some extent. Those belts you wore down--"

"That's true," agreed the Doctor, "there seems to be considerable
latitude----"

"I decided," the Chemist went on, "that immediately after your arrival
we should all wear the drugs constantly. You can use the armpit pouches
if you wish; Lylda and I will wear these belts I have made."

Oteo, the Chemist's personal servant, a slim youth with a bright,
intelligent face, listened carefully to his master's directions and then
left the house hurriedly, running up the street towards the center of
the city. Once or twice he stopped and spoke to passers-by for a moment,
gathering a crowd around him each time.

The Chemist rejoined his friends on the balcony. "There will be a
thousand people here in half an hour," he said quietly. "I have sent a
message to the men in charge of the government workshops; they will have
their people cease work to come here."

Lylda appeared in a few moments more. She was dressed as the Chemist had
seen her first through the microscope--in a short, grey skirt reaching
from waist to knees. Only now she wore also two circular metal discs
strapped over her breasts. Her hair was unbound and fell in masses
forward over her shoulders. Around her waist was a broad girdle of
golden cloth with small pouches for holding the chemicals. She took her
place among the men quietly.

"See, I am ready," she said with a smile. "Oteo, you have sent him?" The
Chemist nodded.

Lylda turned to the Doctor. "You will tell me, what is to do with the
drugs?"

They explained in a few words. By now a considerable crowd had gathered
before the house, and up the street many others were hurrying down.
Directly across from the entrance to Lylda's garden, back of the bluff
at the lake front, was a large open space with a fringe of trees at its
back. In this open space the crowd was collecting.

The Chemist rose after a moment and from the roof-top spoke a few words
to the people in the street below. They answered him with shouts of
applause mingled with a hum of murmured anger underneath. The Chemist
went back to his friends, his face set and serious.

As he dropped in his chair Lylda knelt on the floor before him, laying
her arms on his knees. "I go to do for our people the best I can," she
said softly, looking up into his face. "Now I go, but to you I will come
back soon." The Chemist tenderly put his hand upon the glossy smoothness
of her hair.

"I go--now," she repeated, and reached for one of the vials under her
arm. Holding it in her hand, she stared at it a moment, silently, in
awe. Then she shuddered like a frightened child and buried her face in
the Chemist's lap, huddling her little body up close against his legs as
if for protection.

The Chemist did not move nor speak, but sat quiet with his hand gently
stroking her hair. In a moment she again raised her face to his. Her
long lashes were wet with tears, but her lips were smiling.

"I am ready--now," she said gently. She brushed her tears from her eyes
and rose to her feet. Drawing herself to her full height, she tossed
back her head and flung out her arms before her.

"No one can know I am afraid--but you," she said. "And I--shall forget."
She dropped her arms and stood passive.

"I go now to take the drug--there in the little garden behind, where no
one can notice. You will come down?"

The Big Business Man cleared his throat. When he spoke his voice was
tremulous with emotion.

"How long will you be gone--Lylda?" he asked.

The woman turned to him with a smile. "Soon will I return, so I
believe," she answered. "I go to Orlog, to Raito, and to Tele. But never
shall I wait, nor speak long, and fast will I walk.... Before the time
of sleep has descended upon us, I shall be here."

In the little garden behind the house, out of sight of the crowd on the
other side, Lylda prepared to take the drug. She was standing there,
with the four men, when Loto burst upon them, throwing himself into his
mother's arms.

"Oh, _mamita_, _mamita_," he cried, clinging to her. "There in the
street outside, they say such terrible things----of you _mamita_. 'The
master's woman' I heard one say, 'She has the evil magic.' And another
spoke of Targo. And they say he must not die, or there will be death for
those who kill him."

Lylda held the boy close as he poured out his breathless frightened
words.

"No matter, little son," she said tenderly. "To _mamita_ no harm can
come--you shall see. Did my father teach you well to-day?"

"But _mamita_, one man who saw me standing, called me an evil name and
spoke of you, my mother Lylda. And a woman looked with a look I never
saw before. I am afraid, _mamita_."

With quivering lips that smiled, Lylda kissed the little boy tenderly
and gently loosening his hold pushed him towards his father.

"The Master's son, Loto, never can he be afraid," she said with gentle
reproof. "That must you remember--always."

The little group in the garden close up against the house stood silent
as Lylda took a few grains of the drug. The noise and shouts of the
crowd in front were now plainly audible. One voice was raised above the
others, as though someone were making a speech.

Loto stood beside his father, and the Chemist laid his arm across the
boy's shoulder. As Lylda began visibly to increase in size, the boy
uttered a startled cry. Meeting his mother's steady gaze he shut his
lips tight, and stood rigid, watching her with wide, horrified eyes.

Lylda had grown nearly twice her normal size before she spoke. Then,
smiling down at the men, she said evenly, "From the roof, perhaps, you
will watch."

"You know what to do if you grow too large," the Doctor said huskily.

"I know, my friend. I thank you all. And good-bye." She met the
Chemist's glance an instant. Then abruptly she faced about and walking
close to the house, stood at its further corner facing the lake.

After a moment's hesitation the Chemist led his friends to the roof. As
they appeared at the edge of the parapet a great shout rolled up from
the crowd below. Nearly a thousand people had gathered. The street was
crowded and in the open space beyond they stood in little groups. On a
slight eminence near the lake bluff, a man stood haranguing those around
him. He was a short, very thickset little man, with very long arms--a
squat, apelike figure. He talked loudly and indignantly; around him
perhaps a hundred people stood listening, applauding at intervals.

When the Chemist appeared this man stopped with a final phrase of
vituperation and a wave of his fist towards the house.

The Chemist stood silent, looking out over the throng. "How large is she
now?" he asked the Very Young Man softly. The Very Young Man ran across
the roof to its farther corner and was back in an instant.

"They'll see her soon--look there." His friends turned at his words. At
the corner of the house they could just see the top of Lylda's head
above the edge of the parapet. As they watched she grew still taller and
in another moment her forehead appeared. She turned her head, and her
great eyes smiled softly at them across the roof-top. In a few moments
more (she had evidently stopped growing) with a farewell glance at her
husband, she stepped around the corner of the house into full view of
the crowd--a woman over sixty feet tall, standing quietly in the garden
with one hand resting upon the roof of the house behind her.

A cry of terror rose from the people as she appeared. Most of those in
the street ran in fright back into the field behind. Then, seeing her
standing motionless with a gentle smile on her face, they stopped,
irresolute. A few held their ground, frankly curious and unafraid.
Others stood sullen and defiant.

When the people had quieted a little Lylda raised her arms in greeting
and spoke, softly, yet with a voice that carried far away over the
field. As she talked the people seemed to recover their composure
rapidly. Her tremendous size no longer seemed to horrify them. Those who
obviously at first were friendly appeared now quite at ease; the others,
with their lessening terror, were visibly more hostile.

Once Lylda mentioned the name of Targo. A scattered shout came up from
the crowd; the apelike man shouted out something to those near him, and
then, leaving his knoll disappeared.

As Lylda continued, the hostile element in the crowd grew more
insistent. They did not listen to her now but shouted back, in derision
and defiance. Then suddenly a stone was thrown; it struck Lylda on the
breast, hitting her metal breastplate with a thud and dropping at her
feet.

As though at a signal a hail of stones flew up from the crowd, most of
them striking Lylda like tiny pebbles, a few of the larger ones bounding
against the house, or landing on its roof.

At this attack Lylda abruptly stopped speaking and took a step forward
menacingly. The hail of stones continued. Then she turned towards the
roof-top, where the men and the little boy stood behind the parapet,
sheltering themselves from the flying stones.

"Only one way there is," said Lylda sadly, in a soft whisper that they
plainly heard above the noise of the crowd. "I am sorry, my husband--but
I must."

A stone struck her shoulder. She faced the crowd again; a gentle look of
sorrow was in her eyes, but her mouth was stern. In the street below at
the edge of the field the squat little man had reappeared. It was from
here that most of the stones seemed to come.

"That man there--by the road----" The Chemist pointed. "One of
Targo's----"

In three swift steps Lylda was across the garden, with one foot over the
wall into the street. Reaching down she caught the man between her huge
fingers, and held him high over her head an instant so that all might
see.

The big crowd was silent with terror; the man high in the air over their
heads screamed horribly. Lylda hesitated only a moment more; then she
threw back her arm and, with a great great sweep, flung her screaming
victim far out into the lake.




CHAPTER XXV

THE ESCAPE OF TARGO


"I am very much afraid it was a wrong move," said the Chemist gravely.

They were sitting in a corner of the roof, talking over the situation.
Lylda had left the city; the last they had seen of her, she was striding
rapidly away, over the country towards Orlog. The street and field
before the house now was nearly deserted.

"She had to do it, of course," the Chemist continued, "but to kill
Targo's brother----"

"I wonder," began the Big Business Man thoughtfully. "It seems to me
this disturbance is becoming far more serious than we think. It isn't so
much a political issue now between your government and the followers of
Targo, as it is a struggle against those of us who have this magic, as
they call it."

"That's just the point," put in the Doctor quickly. "They are making the
people believe that our power of changing size is a menace that----"

"If I had only realized," said the Chemist. "I thought your coming would
help. Apparently it was the very worst thing that could have happened."

"Not for you personally," interjected the Very Young Man. "We're
perfectly safe--and Lylda, and Loto." He put his arm affectionately
around the boy who sat close beside him. "You are not afraid, are you,
Loto?"

"Now I am not," answered the boy seriously. "But this morning, when I
left my grandfather, coming home----"

"You were afraid for your mother. That was it, wasn't it?" finished the
Very Young Man. "Does your grandfather teach you?"

"Yes--he, and father, and mother."

"I want you to see Lylda's father," said the Chemist. "There is nothing
we can do now until Lylda returns. Shall we walk up there?" They all
agreed readily.

"I may go, too?" Loto asked, looking at his father.

"You have your lessons," said the Chemist.

"But, my father, it is so very lonely without mother," protested the
boy.

The Chemist smiled gently. "Afraid, little son, to stay with Oteo?"

"He's not afraid," said the Very Young Man stoutly.

The little boy looked from one to the other of them a moment silently.
Then, calling Oteo's name, he ran across the roof and down into the
house.

"Five years ago," said the Chemist, as the child disappeared, "there was
hardly such an emotion in this world as fear or hate or anger. Now the
pendulum is swinging to the other extreme. I suppose that's natural,
but----" He ended with a sigh, and, breaking his train of thought, rose
to his feet. "Shall we start?"

Lylda's father greeted them gravely, with a dignity, and yet obvious
cordiality that was quite in accord with his appearance. He was a man
over sixty. His still luxuriant white hair fell to his shoulders. His
face was hairless, for in this land all men's faces were as devoid of
hair as those of the women. He was dressed in a long, flowing robe
similar to those his visitors were wearing.

"Because--you come--I am glad," he said with a smile, as he shook hands
in their own manner. He spoke slowly, with frequent pauses, as though
carefully picking his words. "But--an old man--I know not the language
of you."

He led them into a room that evidently was his study, for in it they saw
many strange instruments, and on a table a number of loosely bound
sheets of parchment that were his books. They took the seats he offered
and looked around them curiously.

"There is the clock we spoke of," said the Chemist, indicating one of
the larger instruments that stood on a pedestal in a corner of the room.
"Reoh will explain it to you."

Their host addressed the Chemist. "From Oteo I hear--the news to-day is
bad?" he asked with evident concern.

"I am afraid it is," the Chemist answered seriously.

"And Lylda?"

The Chemist recounted briefly the events of the day. "We can only wait
until Lylda returns," he finished. "To-morrow we will talk with the
king."

"Bad it is," said the old man slowly; "very bad. But--we shall see----"

The Very Young Man had risen to his feet and was standing beside the
clock.

"How does it work?" he asked. "What time is it now?"

Reoh appealed to his son-in-law. "To tell of it--the words I know not."

The Chemist smiled. "You are too modest, my father. But I will help you
out, if you insist." He turned to the others, who were gathered around
him, looking at the clock.

"Our measurement of our time here," he began, "like yours, is based
on----"

"Excuse me," interrupted the Very Young Man. "I just want to know first
what time it is now?"

