His smile was wistful. "We must choose the lesser evil."

Still gently, almost sorrowfully, but with a directness and clarity of
thought which amazed me, he plunged into a detailed account of what
Georg was to do in command of our forces. My own part in it, already
planned by him in detail. Maida's part. Elza's. The division of _Rhaal_
maidens.

Girlhood in war! It seemed very strange. Yet the _Rhaal_ maidens were
going as a matter of course, since there were some activities for which
they were more fitted than the men. With all the _Rhaal_ maidens going,
Elza and Maida would not stay behind. And though Maida--a wife--was
objected to by Rhaalton, he had yielded finally to her pleading.

I will not now detail our plans or our armament. We had, in general, one
thousand unmarried men, in five divisions of two hundred each. They were
largely _Rhaals_, with the few Earth men previously sent us; fifty
perhaps of the most loyal _slaans_; and a scattering of the other races
of the Venus Central State. A few--thirty perhaps--of the Little People
of Mars. In addition, another hundred men, individually in charge of the
larger apparatus and the vehicles. And the division of two hundred
girls.

Our journey to the Cold Country was to be made on flying platforms and
vehicles of various sizes; some large to carry fifty passengers or more;
others so small that only one person could be carried. These latter, the
girls were to use. I call them platforms. In this size they were not,
literally speaking, much more than the transporting mechanism fastened
to the girl's waist.

There were also heavier vehicles carrying the larger apparatus; and
several of fairly large size with food, clothing, housing
equipment--supplies of all kinds for our maintenance abroad. A dozen
vehicles also carrying huge skeleton towers, encircled at the top with
ray projectors. A vehicle with a single room--an instrument room fully
equipped by means of which Geno-Rhaalton at his desk would be in contact
with our every move. And largest vehicle of all--in aspect a solid,
squat affair almost of a size for inter-planetary travel--our power
plant.

We started at dawn of the second morning after my own arrival in
Industriana. The girls were to travel to the borders of the Cold Country
on the larger vehicles, but they wished to start flying individually for
the first few helans of the journey for practice. Georg, Maida, Elza and
I were to travel in the instrument room.

We massed upon a broad hilltop near the city. In the grey twilight of
dawn with a flush of pink in the sky where the sun in a few moments
would rise, I stood in the outer doorway of the instrument vehicle.
Around me was the confusion of departure. Eager young men; laughing
girls, flushed with excitement. The gayety of youth going to war! Young
as I was myself, I was struck with the drama, the pathos of it. What
would the home-coming be?

Georg, Maida and Elza were with me. Geno-Rhaalton stepped up to us.
Bare-headed. A solemn little man, heavy-hearted.

"Good-by," he said simply. "I know you will do your best."

"Jac! Look there!"

I followed Elza's startled gesture to the soft, white clouds which were
massed in the sky above us. By what magic of science the thing was
accomplished, I know not; but up there in the clouds a gigantic image of
Tarrano was materializing! His head and shoulders. Arms folded; his face
with a sardonic smile leering down at us! Lips moving. And out of the
air about us came his audible, broadcasting words.

_"Do your best, my friends!"_ Ironic mockery! _"Coming to conquer
Tarrano? Hasten! You are keeping Tarrano waiting most impatiently!"_

The giant voice died away into silence; the huge image melted into the
clouds and vanished.

Rhaalton looked at us again, expressionless. "Good-by," he repeated. "Do
your best."

He turned away abruptly. And then as he walked with a despondent droop,
I saw his shoulders suddenly straighten. He flung a hand into the air.
The signal to start! From a tower in Industriana a puff of violet light
shot up to magnify the signal.

The girls, all in their places, rose into the air. Draperies fluttering,
like graceful birds they rose, circled over us in an arc; and then in a
long, single line, with officers apart to one side marking them in
squads of twenty, they sped into the dimness of distance.

The tower vehicles now were rising. Then the larger platform; the power
plant, like a floating building sailing majestically up.

"Come, Jac."

Elza and Maida were inside the instrument room gazing through one of its
windows; and Georg drew me within, closing the transparent door after
us. Through the windows I could see the line of vehicles following after
the girls. Then our instrument room rose quietly, soundlessly. The
ground dropped slowly away, then faster; and as we swung about I saw the
hilltop beneath us. Its sides were lined with waving spectators;
stricken momentarily with awe at the apparition of Tarrano, they had
already forgotten it; from every vantage point of Industriana they were
frantically waving.

But the hilltop was empty, save for one lone figure--Geno-Rhaalton
standing sorrowfully gazing after us.




CHAPTER XXXIII

_First Assault_


Our spies had informed us that of recent weeks there had arisen about
the City of Ice a huge wall behind which Tarrano would make his stand.
It was our plan to approach within range of this and establish our power
plant as a base from which to direct our offensive. The trip from the
Great City was not long. After a few helans our girls ceased flying
individually and boarded their appointed vehicles.

In a long single line, armament platforms, the towers, our instrument
room, with the power plant bringing up the rear, we sailed forward.
There were in our instrument vehicle, Maida, Georg, Elza and myself, the
vehicle manned by two pilots and two mechanicians--a _slaan_, a Mars
man, and two Earth men. We were in constant communication with
Geno-Rhaalton. And though he enjoined upon us all the necessity for
sleeping or resting during the trip, himself sat alert at his desk,
unrelaxing. The little mirror on our table showed him sitting there,
watching every move we made.

We laid down to rest, but sleep was impossible. Through the panelled
transparent floor, I watched the country changing as we advanced;
vegetation dwindling; the soil changing to rocky barrenness at the
border of the Cold Country. And then the snow-plains, the mute frozen
rivers of ice, the mountains.

In the twilight of the Cold Country autumn, we sailed up to the
mountains and approached to the City of Ice. Alert, all of us now, as at
an altitude of a few thousand feet we circled about, marking time until
the power plant had selected its base and landed to make ready for the
battle.

Throughout the trip we had expected--had anticipated the possibility--of
a surprise attack by Tarrano; an ambush in the open air, perhaps
by some means strange to us. But the vision magnifiers, the
microphones--encompassing every known range of sight and sound--showed
us nothing. Especially at the mountains we had thought to meet
opposition. But at first none came. It seemed somehow ominous, this lack
of action from Tarrano; and when the leader of our line--a tower
vehicle--rose sharply to scale the jagged peaks of the Divide, the flare
of a hostile electronic bomb rising came almost as a relief. From the
instrument room--forewarned an instant by the hiss of our microphones--I
saw the bomb start upward. Slowly as a rocket it mounted--a blurred ball
of glowing violet light, quite plain in the dim twilight. I knew that
the tower platform at which it was directed would have time to throw out
its insulation; I knew that the insulation would doubtless be
effective--yet my heart leaped nevertheless. At my hand was a projector;
but in those few seconds the tower just in advance of us in the line was
quicker. Its ray darted at the violet ball; the soundless explosion
threw a wave of sparks about the menaced tower, like a puff--a pricked
bubble of soap-film--the violet ball was dissipated. But I saw the
menaced tower rock a trifle from the shock.

Geno-Rhaalton's face in the mirror beside me was very solemn. I heard
him murmuring something to the other towers, saw their light flash
downward, searching the mountain defiles. And as I watched that little
image of Rhaalton, I chanced to notice a mirror on Rhaalton's desk.
Rhaalton himself was looking at it--a mirror which had been dark, but
which now flashed on. An outlaw circuit! The mirror imaged the face of
Tarrano. Tarrano grinning ironically!




CHAPTER XXXIV

_Invisible Assailants_


We did not locate the source of the bomb, and no others rose to assail
us. The mountain defiles, so far as our lights could illuminate them,
seemed deserted. We passed over the Divide, and on the plateau beyond,
we landed. A region of rolling country beneath its snow and ice. The
mountains came down sharply to the inner plain--a crescent of mountain
range stretching off into the dimness of distance, half encircling this
white plateau in the center of which stood the City of Ice. We could
just see it at the horizon, the glittering spires of its Ice Palace.

Around the city, completely enveloping it, was a thick circular wall of
ice twenty times the height of a man. We were too far away to see it
plainly--a turreted wall doubtless armed with projectors throughout its
circular length. Our finders would not show it, for it was insulated
against them. It stood there grey-white, bleak and apparently deserted.

Georg said: "It's the man's accursed inactivity! Is he going to do
nothing?... Our power plant has landed, Jac--there in the foothills--see
it drop?" A call from Rhaalton took his attention.

We landed our entire force in the foothills of the mountains. The power
plant was there; it looked like a squat industrial building set upon a
ledge of ice--a shining cliff-face behind it, a precipice in front. At
the foot of the precipice our other vehicles were clustered.

We were there throughout three entire times of sleep, hours strangely
the same in that unaltered polar twilight. During them, with the tower
platforms set in a ring about us to make an armed camp, we unloaded our
apparatus, erected our power controls, prepared the individual circuits,
making ready for our offensive. And still--though we, were alert for
it--no move from Tarrano.

They were hours during which, with my lack of technical knowledge, I
found myself often with nothing to do. Our camp was bustling with
activity, but among the now idle girls and many of the young men, there
was an air of gayety. They laughed, shouted, played games amid the rocks
from which we had long since melted the snow. Once, in what would have
been early evening had not the Sun in these latitudes held level like a
burned-out ball near the horizon, Elza and I wandered from the camp to
climb the cliffs nearby.

Beyond the circle of the camp's heat, the deadly cold of the region
assailed us. We had not wished to equip with the individual heating,
which for battle would leave us free of heavy garments; instead we
swathed ourselves in furs, with the exercise of climbing to aid us in
keeping warm.

It was wonderful to be again alone with Elza. Even with what was
impending we were young enough to put it momentarily from our minds.
Like young lovers clandestinely stealing away to a tryst, we left the
camp and hand in hand, climbed up amid the crags. A few hundred feet to
one side of the power house, and about the same distance above it, we
sat down at last to rest.

The scene from here was picturesque in the extreme. Across the flat,
shadowless snowy plain was the wall of ice with the city behind it. All
in the far distance, this city wherein our enemy was entrenched; and
there were no lights, no movement that we could see. In that drab
twilight, it seemed almost unreal.

The plain too, was empty. A few palpably deserted huts, nothing else.
Beneath us, snugly anchored there on the ledge, was our power house. No
unreality here. Its aerials were mounted; its external dynamos were
visibly revolving; from its windows blue shafts of light slanted out;
and from it rose the low hum of active power.

Below it, spread over the slightly sloping area of foothill beneath us,
lay our encampment. A ring of our tower vehicles, with their projectors
mounted and ready, their colored search-beams slowly sweeping the white
plain and the dead grey sky. Within their ring, the camp itself. Lighted
by the blue-white tubes set upon quadrupeds at intervals; heated by
strings of red-glowing wire and the red wire-balls used on Venus. The
snow and ice on the ground within the camp had melted, exposing the
naked rock.

A scene of blue and red lights and shifting shadows; bustling with
activity--figures, tiny from this height, hurrying about. The sounds
from it rose to us; the low hum and snap of the weapons being tested;
the shouted commands; and sometimes, mingled with it, the laughing shout
of a light-hearted girl.

Elza clung close to me. "Everything will be ready soon."

I nodded. "They're going to mount a ray up here on the cliff. Grolier
was telling me, for permanent protection--to stay here with the power
house when we go out to the attack."

Silent with her thoughts she did not answer me. Sidewise, I regarded her
solemn little face encased in its hood of fur. And then clumsily, for
our furs were heavy and awkward, I put my arm about her.

"I love you, Elza. It's worth a great deal to be here alone with you."

"Jac, what will he do?" Her gaze was to the far-off City of Ice. "It
seems so--so sinister, Jac, this silence from him. This inactivity. It
is not like him to be inactive."

"He's there," I said. "Rolltar the Mars man--boastful fellow,
blow-hard--he was telling some of us that in his opinion Tarrano had
already run away."

"Never!" she exclaimed. "This is his last stand. He'll make it
here--defeat us here--"

"Elza!"

She glanced momentarily at me, smiled a queer smile, and then gazed once
more over the distant plain. "I do not mean I think he'll defeat us,
Jac. I mean, that is his reasoning--make his last stand here--"

"He hasn't run away," I repeated. "I told Rolltar so. We got an outlaw
connection into the Ice Palace today. For a moment only, and then it was
discovered and broken off. But we had the image for a moment--it chanced
to show Tarrano himself. But he's isolated now. Bretan said his
isolation power--around the Ice Palace and the wall anyway--is greater
than any image-ray we can send against it."

My heart leaped suddenly, for I saw Elza's eyes widen, fear spring to
her face; heard the sharp intake of her breath, and felt her hand grip
my arm.

"Jac! There's something wrong! See there? And you hear it?"

From the instrument room I heard a vague drumming. A hiss, and then a
drumming growing louder. It was not a new sound, for now I remembered I
had been conscious of it for several moments past. Our encampment was
awake to it! A confusion down there; people running about; a figure
dashing wildly into the instrument room. And the aerials on the power
house began to snap viciously.

"Jac! What is it?"

"I don't know. See there, Elza? The sub-ray lights!"

The search-beams from our towers were inordinately active. Sweeping the
empty snow-plain and the empty sky. Empty? To my fevered imagination
they were peopled with enemies. And then one of the towers flashed on a
sub-ray--the dull infra-red for envisaging the slow rays below the power
of human sight. And another tower with its faint purple beam was using
the ultra-violet.

"That drumming, Elza! That's a microphone--the big one they just erected
near the instrument room. There's something coming! That's the magnified
sound of some distant rush of air. Very faint sound, but they must have
heard it on the ear-phones long ago. That microphone must have just been
connected--"

Something coming? We could see nothing.

"Let's go down, Jac! We must get back--"

"I've got infra-red glasses--" I fumbled beneath my furs. But I did not
have them.

"Jac--"

"Wait, Elza."

My glasses would have been useless, for the sub and ultra beams from the
towers were disclosing nothing. I could tell that by the hasty searching
sweeps they made. And then from the big Wilton tower, the newly
connected Zed-ray flashed on, I could hear the load of it in the
deepened, throaty hum from the power house. Its dirty brown beam sprayed
out over the plain; then swung to the sky, caught something, hung
motionless, narrowed into great intensity. The powerful Zed-ray,
capturing the visibility of dense solids only.[24]

[Footnote 24: Similar doubtless to our present-day X-ray.]

There was something up there in the sky! The Zed-ray met resistance; we
could see the sparks, and hear the snap of them coming like a roar from
the microphone above the drumming. Met the resistance and conquered it;
gradually the snapping roar died away.

"Jac! I see something! Something there--don't you see it?"

A luminous blur became visible in the nearer sky--moving blobs of silver
luminosity in the mud-brown light of the Zed-ray. A hundred or more
moving silver blobs. They were taking form. The silvery phosphorescent
look faded, became grey-white. Took definite shape. Waving arms and
legs! Bones bereft of flesh. Human skeletons! Limbs waving rhythmically.
Bony arms, with fingers clutching metal weapons. Assailants coming at us
through the air, stripped by the Zed-ray of clothing, skin, flesh,
organs, to the naked bone. Skeletons with skulls of empty eye-sockets
and set jaw-bones to make the travesty of human faces grim with menace!




CHAPTER XXXV

_Attack on the Power House_


Stricken with surprise and awe, Elza and I sat there motionless. Our
encampment was in a turmoil of confusion--chaos, out of which very soon
order came. The skeleton figures in the air--I saw now that there were
nearer two hundred than one hundred--were perhaps two thousand feet
away, and at an altitude of about the cliff-ledge where Elza and I were
sitting.

They swept forward, bathed in the Zed-ray with all our other
search-beams darkened to give it full sway. Momentarily I saw them
clearer; metallic cylinders in bony fingers, and a metal mechanism of
flight encasing, yet not touching the ribs.

"Jac! Why don't our rays--"

As though to answer Elza's unfinished question, one of our towers turned
a disintegrating ray upon them. A narrow pencil-point of light, barely
visible in this flat daylight. It swung up into our Zed-ray, searched
and clung to one of the skeleton figures. Had it penetrated, the man
would have been dissipated like a puff of vapor. But it did not; and
then I knew that for that distance at least, this enemy's isolation
power--individual barrage--was too great.

Yet the assailed figure wavered! Our amplifier gave out his shout--half
fear, half admonition. The line of skeletons swung upward. Came on, but
mounted so that I saw that they were making for the summit of the cliff
above us--above our power house.

Their defense--invisibility, and a mere isolation barrage so that we
could not harm them with our tower rays while they kept beyond range.
But what was their means of attack? Why would Tarrano....

"The power house," Elza answered; and I realized then that she had read
my thoughts. The power house, if they could demolish it....

Our thoughts, questions and answers unspoken, flew fast; but the drama
before us unfolded faster. With the knowledge that we could see them,
these invaders cast aside a portion of their equipment to give them
greater freedom. We could see the metal portions of the trappings
falling like plummets. The skeleton images faded; and then as our tower
withdrew the Zed-ray and our search-beams picked them up, we saw our
enemies as they really were. Men clothed in a casing of cylindrical
garments with the flying mechanisms strapped to their chests; some with
visors and headpieces, nearly all with small weapons in their hands.

Keeping well away, they continued to mount. They were striving for the
pinnacle of cliff-tops above us; but as our rays darted at them they
halted, wavered; and now when nearly above the camp, they began mounting
straight up.

"Jac! Look there!"
