given on a leather strap, but it must be done skilfully, otherwise it
is better omitted.

The necessity for providing exceptionally keen and sharp edges arose
in the manufacture of phonographs, where the knife used to turn up the
wax cylinders must leave a perfectly smooth surface.  In 1889 this was
being accomplished on an ivory lap fed with a trace of very fine
diamond dust.

I have had this method in mind as a possible solution of the
difficulty of razor-grinding, but have not tried it.  I imagine one
would use a soft steel or ivory slip rubbed over with fine diamond
dust and oil by means of an agate.  The lap used in the phonograph
works was rotated at a high speed.

Sec. 80.  On the Production of Quartz Threads.

[Footnote: Since this was written an article on the same subject by
Mr. Boys appeared in the Electrician for 1896.  The instructions
therein given are in accordance with what I had written, and I have
made no alteration in the text.]

In 1887 the important properties of fused quartz were discovered by
Mr. Vernon Boys (Philosophical Magazine, June 1887, p.  489, "On the
Production, Properties, and Some Suggested Uses of the Finest
Threads").  A detailed study of the properties of quartz threads was
made by Mr. Boys and communicated to the Society of Arts in 1889
(Journal of the Society of Arts, 1889).  An independent study of the
subject was made by the present writer in 1889 (Philosophical
Magazine, July 1890, "On the Elastic Constants of Quartz Threads ").

There is also a paper in the Philosophical Magazine for 1894 (vol.
xxxvii.  p.  463), by Mr. Boys, on "The Attachment of Quartz Fibres."
This paper also appeared in the Journal of the Physical Society at
about the same date, together with an interesting discussion of the
matter.  In the American Journal, Electric Power, for 1894, there is a
series of articles by Professor Nichols on "Galvanometers," in which a
particular method of producing quartz threads is recommended.  The
method was originally discovered by Mr. Boys, but he seems to have
made no use of it.  A hunt through French and German literature on the
subject has disclosed nothing of interest--nothing indeed which
cannot be found in the papers mentioned.

Sec. 81.  Quartz fibres have two great advantages over other forms of
suspension when employed for any kind of torsion balance, from an
ordinary more or less "astatic" galvanometer to the Cavendish
apparatus.  In the first place the actual strength of the fibres under
longitudinal stress is remarkably high, ranging from fifty to seventy
tons weight per square inch of section, and even more than this in the
case of very fine threads;  the second and more important point in
favour of quartz depends on the wide limits within which cylindrical
threads of this material obey the simplest possible law of torsion,
i.e.  the law that for a given thread carrying a given weight at a
given temperature and having one end clamped, the twist about the axis
of figure produced by a turning moment applied at the free end is
proportional simply to the moment of the twisting forces, and is
independent of the previous history of the thread.

It is to be noted, however, that the torsional resilience of quartz as
tested by the above law is not so perfect but that our instrumental
means allow us to detect its imperfections, and thus to satisfy
ourselves that threads made of quartz are not things standing apart
from all other materials, except in the sense that the limits within
which they may be twisted without deviating in their behaviour from
the law of strict proportionality by more than some unassigned small
quantity, are phenomenally wide.

A torsion balance--if we except the case of certain spiral
springs--is almost always called upon for information as to the magnitude
of very small forces, and for this purpose it is not essential merely
that some law of twisting should be exactly obeyed, but also that the
resistance to twisting of the suspension should be small.

Now, regarded merely as a substance possessing elastic rigidity,
quartz is markedly inferior to the majority of materials, for it is
very stiff indeed;  its utility depends as much as anything upon its
great strength, for this allows us to, use threads of exceeding
fineness.  In addition to this it must be possible, and moreover
readily possible, to obtain threads of uniform section over a
sufficient length, or the rate of twist per unit length of the thread
will vary in practice from point to point, so that the limits of
allowable twist averaged over the whole thread may not be exceeded,
and yet they may be greatly overpassed at particular points of the
thread.

It is interesting to note that in the case of quartz we not only have
a means for readily producing very uniform cylindrical threads, but
that the limits of allowable rate of twist are so wide that a small
departure from uniformity of section produces much less inconvenience
than in the case of any other known substance.

Sec. 82.  There are three methods generally in use for drawing quartz
fibres, all depending on the fact that quartz when fused is so viscous
that it may be drawn into threads of great length, without these
threads breaking up into drops, or indeed without their showing any
sign of doing so.  The surface tension of the melted quartz must,
however, be very considerable, as may be seen by examining the shape
of a drop of the molten material, and this suffices to impress a
rigidly cylindrical form upon the thread, the great viscosity
apparently damping down all oscillation.

The first method is the one originally employed by Mr. Boys.  A needle
of quartz is melted somewhere in its length and is then drawn out
rapidly by a light arrow, to which one end of the needle is attached,
and which is projected from a kind of crossbow.

A modification of this method, which the writer has found of service
when very thick threads are required, is to replace the bow and arrow
by a kind of catapult.

The third method, which yields threads of almost unmanageable
fineness, depends on the experimental fact that when a fine point of
quartz is held in a high pressure oxygen gas blow-pipe flame, the
friction of the flame gases suffices to overcome the tendency of the
capillary forces to produce a spherical drop, and actually causes a
fine thread to be projected outwards in the direction of the flame.

Sec. 83.  A preliminary operation to any method is the production of a
stick of fused quartz.  This is managed as follows.  A rock crystal or
quartz pebble is selected and examined.  It must be perfectly white,
transparent, and free from dirt.  Surface impurity can of course be
got rid of by means of a grindstone.  The crystal is placed in a
perfectly clean Stourbridge clay crucible, furnished with a cover, and
heated to bright redness for about an hour in a clean fire or in a
Fletcher's gas furnace.  The contents of the crucible are turned out
when sufficiently cool on to a clean brick or bit of slate.  It will
be found that the crystal is completely broken up and the fragments
must be examined in case any of them have become contaminated by the
crucible, but this will not have happened if the temperature did not
rise beyond a bright red heat.

The heap of fragments being found satisfactory, the next thing is to
fuse some of the pieces together.  Unless the preliminary heating has
been efficiently carried out this will prove an annoying task, because
a rock crystal generally contains so much water that it splinters
under the blow-pipe in a very persistent manner.  There are two ways
of assembling the fragments.  One is to place two tiles or bricks on
edge about the heap of quartz lying upon a third tile, so that the
heap occupies the angular corner or nook formed by the tiles (Fig.
64).

The oxygas blow-pipe previously described is adjusted to give its
hottest flame, the bags being weighted by at least two hundredweight,
if of the size described (see Sec. 15).

The tip of the inner cone of the blow-pipe is brought to bear directly
upon one of the fragments, and if the operation is performed boldly it
will be found that the surface of the fragment can be fused, and the
fragment thus caused to hold together before the lower side gets hot
enough to suffer any contamination from the tile or brick.  A second
fragment may be treated in the same way, and then a third, and so on.

Finally, the fragments may be fused together slightly at the corners,
and a stick may thus be formed.  Of course a good deal of cracking and
splitting of the fragments takes place in the process;  the best
pieces to operate upon are those which are well cracked to begin with,
and that in such a way that the little fragments are interlocked.

An alternative method which has some advantages is to arm a pair of
forceps with two stout platinum jaws, say an inch and a half long, and
flattened a little at the ends.  The fragments are held in these
platinum forceps and the blow-pipe applied as before.  This method
works very well in adding to a rod which has already been partly
formed, but the jaws require constant renewals.  The first fragment
which is fused sufficiently to cohere may also be fused to a bit of
tobacco pipe, or hard glass tube or rod, and the quartz stick
gradually built up by fusing fresh pieces on to the one already in
position.

Fig. 64.

Since the glass or pipeclay will contaminate the quartz which has been
fused on to it, it is necessary to discard the end pieces at the close
of the operation.  A string of fragments having been collected and
stuck together, the next step is to fuse them down into a uniform rod.
This is easily done by holding the string in the blow-pipe flame and
allowing it to fuse down.  Twisting the fused part has a good effect
in assisting the operation.  It is desirable to use a large jet and as
powerful a flame as can be obtained during this part of the operation.

The final result should be a rod, say two or three inches long and
one-eighth of an inch thick, which will in most cases contain a large
number of air bubbles.  Since the presence of drawn-out bubbles cannot
be advantageous, it is often desirable to get rid of them, and this
can conveniently be done at the present  stage.  The process at best
is rather tedious;  it  consists in drawing the quartz down very fine
before an intense flame, in order to allow the bubbles to get close
enough to the surface to burst.  A considerable loss of material
invariably occurs during the process;  for whenever the thin rod
separates into two bits the process of flame-drawing of threads goes
on, and entails a certain waste; moreover, the quartz in fine
filaments is probably partially volatilised.

Sooner or later, however, a sufficient length of bubble-free quartz
can be obtained.  It must not be supposed that it is always necessary
to eliminate bubbles as perfectly as is contemplated in the foregoing
description of the treatment, but for special purposes it may be
essential to do so, and in any case the reader's attention is directed
to a possible source of error.

It may be mentioned in connection with this matter that crystals of
quartz may look perfectly white and clear, and yet contain impurity.
For instance, traces of sodium are generally present, and lithium was
found in large spectroscopic quantity in five out of six samples of
the purest crystals in my laboratory.  The presence of lithium in rock
crystal has also been detected by Tegetmeier (Vied.  Ann, xli.  p.
19, 1890).

After some practice in preparing rods and freeing them of bubbles the
operator will notice a distinct difference in the fusibility of the
samples of quartz he investigates, though all may appear equally pure
to the unaided eye.  It should be mentioned, however, that high
infusibility cannot always be taken as a test of purity, for the most
infusible, or rather most viscous, sample examined by the writer
contained more lithium than some less viscous samples.

Fig.  65.

During the process of freeing the quartz from bubbles the lithium and
sodium will be found to burn away, or at all events to disappear.

A rod of quartz, say three inches long, one-sixteenth of an inch in
diameter, and free from bubbles for half an inch of its length, even
when examined by a strong lens, is suitable for drawing into threads.
The rod is manipulated exactly in the manner described under
glass-blowing, and is finally drawn down at the bubble free part into
a needle, say 0.02 inch in diameter (No.  25 on the Birmingham wire
gauge), and 2 inches long.

Fig.  66.

There is one peculiarity about fused quartz which renders its
manipulation easier than that of glass--it is impossible to break
fused quartz, however suddenly it be thrust into the blow-pipe flame.
A rod having a diameter of three-sixteenths of an inch--and perhaps
much more--may be brought right up to the tip of the inner cone of
the oxy-gas flame and held there-till one side fuses, the other being
comparatively cool, without the slightest fear of precipitating a
smash.  In seven years' experience I have never seen a bit of once
fused quartz broken by sudden heating;  whether it might be done if
sufficient precautions were taken I do not know.

The reason of the fortunate peculiarity of quartz in this respect is,
I presume, to be found in the fact that quartz once it has been fused
is really a very strong material indeed, and is also probably the
least expansible substance known.  From some experiments of the writer
upon the subject, it may be concluded that at the most quartz which
has been fused expands only about one-fifth as fast as flint-glass, at
all events between 20 deg. and 70 deg. C.

Sec. 84.  Drawing Quartz Threads.

The thick end of the rod of quartz is held in the fingers or
occasionally in a clip.  The end of the fine point is attached to a
straw arrow by means of a little sealing-wax.  The arrow is laid on
the stock of a crossbow in the proper position for firing.    See
Figs.  67 and 68, which practically explain themselves.

The needle is heated by the blow-pipe till a minute length is in a
state of uniform fusion;  the arrow is then let fly, when it draws a
thread out with it.  The arrow is preferably allowed to strike a
wooden target placed, say, 30 feet away from the bow, and a width of
black glazed calico is laid under the line of fire to catch the thread
or arrow if it falls short.  The general arrangements will be obvious
from the figure.

The bow is of pine in the case where very long thin threads are
required, though for ordinary purposes I have found a bow of
lance-wood succeed quite as well.  The trigger of the bow consists of
a simple pin passing through the stock and fastened at its lower end
to a string connected with a board which can be depressed by foot.  In
the figure an ordinary trigger is shown, but the pin does just as
well.

Fig 67.

The arrow is made out of about 6 inches of straw, plugged up aft by a
small plug of pine or willow fastened in with sealing-wax, and
projecting backwards one-eighth of an inch.  This projection serves a
double purpose:  it gives a point of attachment for the quartz needle,
and on firing the bow it forms a resisting anvil on which the string
of the bow impinges.  The head of the arrow is formed by a large
needle stuck in with sealing-wax, and heavy enough to bring the centre
of gravity of the arrow forward of one-third of its length, the
condition of stability in flight.

Fig.  68.

It is not necessary to employ any feathering for these arrows;  though
I have occasionally used feathers or mica to "wing the shaft" no
advantage has resulted therefrom.

To get fine threads a high velocity is essential.  This is obtained by
considering (and acting upon) the principles involved.  The bow may be
regarded as a doubly-tapering rod clamped at the middle.  After
deflection it returns towards its equilibrium position at a rate
depending in general terms on the elastic forces brought into play,
directly, and on the effective moment of inertia of the rod, inversely
(see Rayleigh, Sound, vol.  ii.  chap.  viii.)  If the mass of the
arrow is negligible compared with the bow, the rate at which the arrow
moves is practically determined by that attained by the end of the
bow, which is a maximum in crossing its equilibrium position.

The extent to which the arrow profits by this velocity depends on the
way the bow is strung.  It will be greatest when the string is
perpendicular to the bow when passing its equilibrium position;  or in
other words, when the string is infinitely long.  Since the string has
mass, however, it is not permissible to make it too long, or its
weight begins to make itself felt, and a point is soon reached at
which the geometrical gain in string velocity is compensated for by
the total loss of velocity due to the inertia of the string.  In
practice it is sufficient to use a string 10 per cent longer than the
bow.

It is well to use a light fiddle string, served with waxed silk at the
trigger catch;  if this be omitted the gut gets worn through very
quickly.  In order to decide how far it is permissible to bend the
bow, the quickest way is to make a rough experiment on a bit of the
same plank from which the bow is to be cut, and then to allow a small
factor of safety.  In the figure the bow is of lance-wood and is more
bent than would be suitable for pine.

The bow itself is tapered from the middle outwards just like any other
bow.  If thick threads are required, the above considerations are
modified by the fact that quartz opposes a considerable resistance to
drawing, and that consequently the arrow must not only have a high
velocity, but a fair supply of energy as well;  in other words, it
must be heavy.  A thin pine arrow instead of a straw generally does
very well, but in this case the advantage of using pine for the bow
vanishes;  and in fact lance-wood does better, owing to the greater
displacement which it will stand without breaking.  This of course
only means that a greater store of energy can be accumulated at one
bending.

I had occasion to investigate whether the unavoidable spin of an arrow
about its axis produces any effect on the thread, and for this purpose
made arrows with inertia bars thrust through the head, i.e.  an arrow
with a bit of wire run through it, perpendicular to its
length--forming a cross in fact--the arms of the cross being weighted
at the extreme ends by shot.  This form of arrow has a considerable
moment of inertia about its longer axis, and consequently rotates less
than a mere straw, provided that the couples tending to produce rotation
are not increased by the cross arm, or the velocity too much reduced.
Shooting one of these arrows slowly, I could see that it did not
rotate, and when fired at a high velocity, it generally arrived at the
target (placed at varying distances front bow) with the arms nearly
horizontal, thus showing that it probably did not rotate much.

I did not succeed in this at the first trial, by any means.  The
threads got in this way were no better than those made with a single
straw, whence we may conclude very provisionally that the spin of the
