
"I'll be damned," he muttered.

He came to a dead stop in the middle of the street. In one sudden
flash of insight, all the pieces of the case he'd been looking at for
so long fell together and formed one consistent picture. The pattern
was complete.

Malone blinked.

In that second, he knew exactly who the spy was.

A jeep honked raucously and swerved around him. The driver leaned out
to curse and Malone waved at him, dimly recognizing a private eye he
had once known, a middle-aged man named Archer. Wondering vaguely what
Archer was doing this far East, and in a jeep at that, Malone watched
the vehicle disappear down the street. There were more cars coming,
but what difference did that make? Malone didn't care about cars.
After all, he had the answer, the whole answer....

"I'll be damned," he said again, abruptly, and wheeled around to head
back to the offices.

On the way, he stopped in at another small office, this one inhabited
by the two FBI men from Las Vegas. He gave a series of quick orders,
and got the satisfaction, as he left, of seeing one of the FBI men
grabbing for a phone in a hurry.

It was good to be _doing_ things again, important things.

Burris, Boyd and Dr. Gamble were still talking as Malone entered.

"That," Burris said, "was one hell of a quick lunch. What's Her
Majesty doing now--running a diner?"

Malone ignored the bait, and drew himself to his full height.
"Gentlemen," he said solemnly, "Her Majesty has asked that all of us
attend her in audience. She has information of the utmost gravity to
impart, and wishes this audience at once."

Dr. Gamble made a puzzled, circular gesture with one hand. "What's the
matter?" he asked. "Is something--"

The hand dropped--"wrong?"

Burris barely glanced at him. A startled expression came over his
features. "Has she--" he began, and stopped, leaving his mouth open
and the rest of the sentence unfinished.

Malone nodded gravely and drew in a breath. Elizabethan periods were
hard on the lungs, he had begun to realize: you needed a lot of air
before you embarked on a sentence. "I believe, gentlemen," he said,
"that Her Majesty is about to reveal the identity of the spy who has
been battening on Project Isle."

The silence lasted no more than three seconds. Dr. Gamble didn't even
make a gesture during that time. Then Burris spoke.

"Let's go," he snapped. He wheeled and headed for the door. The others
promptly followed.

"Gentlemen!" Malone said, sounding, as far as he could tell, properly
shocked and offended. "Your dress!"

"What?" Dr. Gamble said, throwing up both hands.

"Oh, _no_," Boyd chimed in. "Not now."

Burris simply said: "You're quite right. Get dressed, Boyd--I mean, of
course, Sir Thomas."

While they were dressing, Malone put in a call to Dr. O'Connor's
office. The scientist was as frosty as ever.

"Yes, Mr. Malone?" The sound of that voice, Malone reflected, was
enough to give anybody double revolving pneumonia with knobs on.

"Dr. O'Connor," he said, "Her Majesty wants you in her court in ten
minutes--and in full court dress."

O'Connor merely sighed, like Boreas. "What is this," he asked, "more
tomfoolery?"

"I really couldn't say," Malone told him coyly. "But I'd advise you to
be there. It might interest you."

"Interest me?" O'Connor stormed. "I've got work to do here--important
work. You simply do not realize, Mr. Malone--"

"Whatever I realize," Malone cut in, feeling brave, "I'm passing on
orders from Her Majesty."

"That insane woman," O'Connor stated flatly, "is not going to order me
about. Good Lord, do you know what you're saying?"

Malone nodded. "I certainly do," he said cheerfully. "If you'd rather,
I can have the orders backed up by the United States Government. But
that won't be necessary, will it?"

"The United States Government," O'Connor said, thawing perceptibly
about the edges, "ought to allow a man to do his proper work, and not
force him to go chasing off after the latest whims of some insane old
lady."

"You will be there, now, won't you?" Malone asked. His own voice
reminded him of something, and in a second he had it: the cooing,
gentle persuasion of Dr. Andrew Blake of Rice Pavilion, who had locked
Malone in a padded cell. It was the voice of a man talking to a mental
case.

It sounded remarkably apt. Dr. O'Connor went slightly purple, but
controlled himself magnificently. "I'll be there," he said.

"Good," Malone told him, and snapped the phone off.

Then he put in a second call to the psychiatrists from St. Elizabeths
and told them the same thing. More used to the strange demands of
neurotic and psychotic patients, they were readier to comply.

Everyone, Malone realized with satisfaction, was now assembling.
Burris and the others were ready to go, sparklingly dressed and
looking impatient. Malone put down the phone and took one great breath
of relief.

Then, beaming, he led the others out.

                              * * * * *

Ten minutes later, there were nine men in Elizabethan costume standing
outside the room which had been designated as the Queen's Court. Dr.
Gamble's costume did not quite fit him; his sleeve-ruffs were half way
up to his elbows and his doublet had an unfortunate tendency to creep.
The St. Elizabeths men, all four of them, looked just a little like
moth-eaten versions of old silent pictures. Malone looked them over
with a somewhat sardonic eye. Not only did he have the answer to the
whole problem that had been plaguing them, but _his_ costume was a
stunning, perfect fit.

"Now, I want you men to let me handle this," Malone said. "I know just
what I want to say, and I think I can get the information without too
much trouble."

One of the psychiatrists spoke up. "I trust you won't disturb the
patient, Mr. Malone," he said.

"Sir Kenneth," Malone snapped.

The psychiatrist looked both abashed and worried. "I'm sorry," he said
doubtfully.

Malone nodded. "That's all right," he said. "I'll try not to disturb
Her Majesty unduly."

The psychiatrists conferred. When they came out of the huddle one of
them--Malone was never able to tell them apart--said: "Very well,
we'll let you handle it. But we will be forced to interfere if we feel
you're--ah--going too far."

Malone said: "That's fair enough, gentlemen. Let's go."

He opened the door.

It was a magnificent room. The whole place had been done over in
plastic and synthetic fibers to look like something out of the
Sixteenth Century. It was as garish, and as perfect, as a Hollywood
movie set--which wasn't surprising, since two stage designers had been
hired away from color-TV spectaculars to set it up. At the far end of
the room, past the rich hangings and the flaming chandeliers, was a
great throne, and on it Her Majesty was seated. Lady Barbara reclined
on the steps at her feet.

Malone saw the expression on Her Majesty's face. He wanted to talk to
Barbara--but there wasn't time. Later, there might be. Now, he
collected his mind and drove one thought at the Queen, one single
powerful thought:

_Read me! You know by this time that I have the truth_--_but read
deeper!_

The expression on her face changed suddenly. She was smiling a sad,
gentle little smile. Lady Barbara, who had looked up at the approach
of Sir Kenneth and his entourage, relaxed again, but her eyes remained
on Malone. "You may approach, my lords," said the Queen.

Sir Kenneth led the procession, with Sir Thomas and Sir Andrew close
behind him. O'Connor and Gamble came next, and bringing up the rear
were the four psychiatrists. They strode slowly along the red carpet
that stretched from the door to the foot of the throne. They came to a
halt a few feet from the steps leading up to the throne, and bowed in
unison.

"You may explain, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said.

"Your Majesty understands the conditions?" Malone asked.

"Perfectly," said the Queen. "Proceed."

Now the expression on Barbara's face changed, to wonder and a kind of
fright. Malone didn't look at her. Instead, he turned to Dr. O'Connor.

"Dr. O'Connor, what are your plans for the telepaths who have been
brought here?" He shot the question out quickly, and O'Connor was
caught off-balance.

"Well--ah--we would like their cooperation in further research which
we--ah--plan to do into the actual mechanisms of telepathy. Provided,
of course--" He coughed gently--"provided that they become--ah--
accessible. Miss--I mean, of course, Her Majesty has already been a
great deal of help." He gave Malone an odd look. It seemed to say:
_What's coming next?_

Malone simply gave him a nod, and a "Thank you, Doctor," and turned to
Burris. He could feel Barbara's eyes on him, but he went on with his
prepared questions. "Chief," he said, "what about you? After we nail
our spy, what happens--to Her Majesty, I mean? You don't intend to
stop giving her the homage due her, do you?"

Burris stared, openmouthed. After a second he managed to say: "Why,
no, of course not, Sir Kenneth. That is--" and he glanced over at the
psychiatrists--"if the doctors think...."

There was another hurried consultation. The four psychiatrists came
out of it with a somewhat shaky statement to the effect that
treatments which had been proven to have some therapeutic value ought
not to be discontinued, although of course there was always the chance
that....

"Thank you, gentlemen," Malone said smoothly. He could see that they
were nervous, and no wonder; he could imagine how difficult it was for
a psychiatrist to talk about a patient in her presence. But they'd
already realized that it didn't make any difference; their thoughts
were an open book, anyway.

Lady Barbara said: "Sir--I mean Ken--are you going to--"

"What's this all about?" Burris snapped.

"Just a minute, Sir Andrew," Malone said. "I'd like to ask one of the
doctors here--or all of them, for that matter--one more question." He
whirled and faced them. "I'm assuming that not one of these persons is
legally responsible for his or her actions. Is that correct?"

Another hurried huddle. The psych boys were beginning to remind Malone
of a semi-pro football team in rather unusual uniforms.

Finally one of them said: "You are correct. According to the latest
statutes, all of these persons are legally insane--including Her
Majesty." He paused and gulped. "I except the FBI, of course--and
ourselves." Another pause. "And Dr. O'Connor and Dr. Gamble."

"And," said Lady Barbara, "me." She smiled sweetly at them all.

"Ah," the psychiatrist said. "Certainly. Of course." He retired into
his group with some confusion.

Malone was looking straight at the throne. Her Majesty's countenance
was serene and unruffled.

Barbara said suddenly: "You don't mean--but she--" and closed her
mouth. Malone shot her one quick look, and then turned to the Queen.

"Well, Your Majesty?" he said. "You have seen the thoughts of every
man here. How do they appear to you?"

Her voice contained both tension and relief. "They are all good men,
basically--and kind men," she said. "And they believe us. That's the
important thing, you know. Their belief in us.... Just as you said
that first day we met. We've needed belief for so long ... for so
long...." Her voice trailed off; it seemed to become lost in a
constellation of thoughts. Barbara had turned to look up at Her
Majesty.

Malone took a step forward, but Burris interrupted him. "How about the
spy?" he said.

Then his eyes widened. Boyd, standing next to him, leaned suddenly
forward. "That's why you mentioned all that about legal immunity
because of insanity," he whispered. "Because--"

"No," Barbara said. "No. She couldn't--she's not--"

They were all looking at Her Majesty, now. She returned them stare for
stare, her back stiff and straight and her white hair enhaloed in the
room's light. "Sir Kenneth," she said--and her voice was only the
least bit unsteady--"they all think _I'm_ the spy."

Barbara stood up. "Listen," she said. "I didn't like Her Majesty at
first--well, she was a patient, and that was all, and when she started
putting on airs ... but since I've gotten to know her I do like her.
I like her because she's good and kind herself, and because--because
she wouldn't be a spy. She couldn't be. No matter what any of you
think--even you--Sir Kenneth!"

There was a second of silence.

"Of course she's not," Malone said quietly. "She's no spy."

"Would I spy on my own subjects?" she said. "Use your reason!"

"You mean--" Burris began, and Boyd finished for him:

"--she isn't?"

"No," Malone snapped. "She isn't. Remember, you said it would take a
telepath to catch a telepath?"

"Well--" Burris began.

"Well, Her Majesty remembered it," Malone said. "And acted on it."

