"True. It will take much time. The fuel problem, however, is not a
serious one, since Fuel World is not unique. Think on, First Lord Ynos."

"We will attack in maximum force and with maximum violence. We will
blanket the planet. We will maintain maximum force and violence until
most or all of the enemy ships have been destroyed. We will then install
planetary drives on Ten and force it into collision orbit with Fuel
World, meanwhile exerting extreme precautions that not so much as a
spy-beam emerges above the enemy's screen. Then, still maintaining
extreme precaution, we will guard both planets until the last possible
moment before the collision. Brain, it cannot fail!"

"You err. It can fail. All we actually know of the abilities of this
postulated neo-human race is what I have learned from the composition of
its defensive screen. The probability approaches unity that the Masters
continued to delve and to learn for millions of cycles while you
Stretts, reasonlessly certain of your supremacy, concentrated upon your
evolution from the material to a non-material form of life and performed
only limited research into armaments of greater and ever greater power."

"True. But that attitude was then justified. It was not and is not
logical to assume that any race would establish a fixed status at any
level of ability below its absolute maximum."

"While that conclusion could once have been defensible, it is now
virtually certain that the Masters had stores of knowledge which they
may or may not have withheld from the Omans, but which were in some way
made available to the neo-humans. Also, there is no basis whatever for
the assumption that this new race has revealed all its potentialities."

"Statistically, that is probably true. But this is the best plan you
have been able to formulate?"

"It is. Of the many thousands of plans I set up and tested, this one has
the highest probability of success."

"Then we will adopt it. We are Stretts. Whatever we decide upon will
be driven through to complete success. We have one tremendous advantage
in you."

[Illustration]

"Yes. The probability approaches unity that I can perform research on a
vastly wider and larger scale, and almost infinitely faster, than can
any living organism or any possible combination of such organisms."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nor was the Great Brain bragging. It scanned in moments the stored
scientific knowledge of over a million planets. It tabulated,
correlated, analyzed, synthesized, theorized and concluded--all in
microseconds of time. Thus it made more progress in one Terran week than
the Masters had made in a million years.

When it had gone as far as it could go, it reported its results--and the
Stretts, hard as they were and intransigent, were amazed and overjoyed.
Not one of them had ever even imagined such armaments possible. Hence
they became supremely confident that it was unmatched and unmatchable
throughout all space.

What the Great Brain did not know, however, and the Stretts did not
realize, was that it could not really think.

Unlike the human mind, it could not deduce valid theories or conclusions
from incomplete, insufficient, fragmentary data. It could not leap
gaps. Thus there was no more actual assurance than before that they had
exceeded, or even matched, the weaponry of the neo-humans of Fuel World.

Supremely confident, Ynos said: "We will now discuss every detail of the
plan in sub-detail, and will correlate every sub-detail with every
other, to the end that every action, however minor, will be performed
perfectly and in its exact time."

That discussion, which lasted for days, was held. Hundreds of thousands
of new and highly specialized mechs were built and went furiously and
continuously to work. A fuel-supply line was run to another
uranexite-rich planet.

Stripping machines stripped away the surface layers of soil, sand, rock
and low-grade ore. Giant miners tore and dug and slashed and refined and
concentrated. Storage silos by the hundreds were built and were filled.
Hundreds upon hundreds of concentrate-carriers bored their stolid ways
through hyperspace. Many weeks of time passed.

But of what importance are mere weeks of time to a race that has, for
many millions of years, been adhering rigidly to a pre-set program?

The sheer magnitude of the operation, and the extraordinary attention to
detail with which it was prepared and launched, explain why the Strett
attack on Ardvor did not occur until so many weeks later than Hilton and
Sawtelle expected it. They also explain the utterly incomprehensible
fury, the completely fantastic intensity, the unparalleled savagery, the
almost immeasurable brute power of that attack when it finally did come.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the _Orion_ landed on Ardane Field from Earth, carrying the first
contingent of immigrants, Hilton and Sawtelle were almost as much
surprised as relieved that the Stretts had not already attacked.

Sawtelle, confident that his defenses were fully ready, took it more or
less in stride. Hilton worried. And after a couple of days he began to
do some real thinking about it.

The first result of his thinking was a conference with Temple. As soon
as she got the drift, she called in Teddy and Big Bill Karns. Teddy in
turn called in Becky and de Vaux; Karns wanted Poynter and Beverly;
Poynter wanted Braden and the twins; and so on. Thus, what started out
as a conference of two became a full Ardan staff meeting; a meeting
which, starting immediately after lunch, ran straight through into the
following afternoon.

"To sum up the consensus, for the record," Hilton said then, studying a
sheet of paper covered with symbols, "the Stretts haven't attacked yet
because they found out that we are stronger than they are. They found
that out by analyzing our defensive web--which, if we had had this
meeting first, we wouldn't have put up at all. Unlike anything known to
human or previous Strett science, it is proof against any form of attack
up to the limit of the power of its generators. They will attack as soon
as they are equipped to break that screen at the level of power probable
to our ships. We can not arrive at any reliable estimate as to how long
that will take.

"As to the effectiveness of our cutting off their known fuel supply,
opinion is divided. We must therefore assume that fuel shortage will not
be a factor.

"Neither are we unanimous on the basic matter as to why the Masters
acted as they did just before they left Ardry. Why did they set the
status so far below their top ability? Why did they make it impossible
for the Omans ever, of themselves, to learn their higher science? Why,
if they did not want that science to become known, did they leave
complete records of it? The majority of us believe that the Masters
coded their records in such fashion that the Stretts, even if they
conquered the Omans or destroyed them, could never break that code;
since it was keyed to the basic difference between the Strett mentality
and the human. Thus, they left it deliberately for some human race to
find.

"Finally, and most important, our physicists and theoreticians are not
able to extrapolate, from the analysis of our screen, to the concepts
underlying the Masters' ultimate weapons of offense, the first-stage
booster and its final end-product, the Vang. If, as we can safely
assume, the Stretts do not already have those weapons, they will know
nothing about them until we ourselves use them in battle.

"These are, of course, only the principal points covered. Does anyone
wish to amend this summation as recorded?"

       *       *       *       *       *

No one did.

The meeting was adjourned. Hilton, however, accompanied Sawtelle and
Kedy to the captain's office. "So you see, Skipper, we got troubles," he
said. "If we don't use those boosters against their skeletons it'll boil
down to a stalemate lasting God only knows how long. It will be a war of
attrition, outcome dependent on which side can build the most and
biggest and strongest ships the fastest. On the other hand, if we _do_
use 'em on defense here, they'll analyze 'em and have everything worked
out in a day or so. The first thing they'll do is beef up their
planetary defenses to match. That way, we'd blow all their ships out of
space, probably easily enough, but Strett itself will be just as safe as
though it were in God's left-hand hip pocket. So what's the answer?"

"It isn't that simple, Jarve," Sawtelle said. "Let's hear from you,
Kedy."

"Thank you, sir. There is an optimum mass, a point of maximum efficiency
of firepower as balanced against loss of maneuverability, for any craft
designed for attack," Kedy thought, in his most professional manner. "We
assume that the Stretts know that as well as we do. No such limitation
applies to strictly defensive structures, but both the Strett craft and
ours must be designed for attack. We have built and are building many
hundreds of thousands of ships of that type. So, undoubtedly, are the
Stretts. Ship for ship, they will be pretty well matched. Therefore one
part of my strategy will be for two of our ships to engage
simultaneously one of theirs. There is a distinct probability that we
will have enough advantage in speed of control to make that tactic
operable."

"But there's another that we won't," Sawtelle objected. "And maybe they
can build more ships than we can."

"Another point is that they may build, in addition to their big stuff, a
lot of small, ultra-fast ones," Hilton put in. "Suicide jobs--crash and
detonate--simply super-missiles. How sure are you that you can stop such
missiles with ordinary beams?"

"Not at all, sir. Some of them would of course reach and destroy some of
our ships. Which brings up the second part of my strategy. For each one
of the heavies, we are building many small ships of the type you just
called 'super-missiles'."

"Superdreadnoughts versus superdreadnoughts, super-missiles versus
super-missiles." Hilton digested that concept for several minutes. "That
could still wind up as a stalemate, except for what you said about
control. That isn't much to depend on, especially since we won't have
the time-lag advantage you Omans had before. They'll see to that. Also,
I don't like to sacrifice a million Omans, either."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I haven't explained the newest development yet, sir. There will be no
Omans. Each ship and each missile has a built-in Kedy brain, sir."

"_What?_ That makes it infinitely worse. You Kedys, unless it's
absolutely necessary, are _not_ expendable!"

"Oh, but we are, sir. You don't quite understand. We Kedys are not
merely similar, but are in fact identical. Thus we are not independent
entities. All of us together make up the actual Kedy--that which is
meant when we say 'I'. That is, I am the sum total of all Kedys
everywhere, not merely this individual that you call Kedy One."

"You mean you're _all_ talking to me?"

"Exactly, sir. Thus, no one element of the Kedy has any need of, or any
desire for, self-preservation. The destruction of one element, or of
thousands of elements, would be of no more consequence to the Kedy than
... well, they are strictly analogous to the severed ends of the hairs,
every time you get a haircut."

"My God!" Hilton stared at Sawtelle. Sawtelle stared back. "I'm
beginning to see ... maybe ... I hope. What control that would be! But
just in case we _should_ have to use the boosters...." Hilton's voice
died away. Scowling in concentration, he clasped his hands behind his
back and began to pace the floor.

"Better give up, Jarve. Kedy's got the same mind you have," Sawtelle
began, to Hilton's oblivious back; but Kedy silenced the thought almost
in the moment of its inception.

"By no means, sir," he contradicted. "I have the brain only. The _mind_
is entirely different."

"Link up, Kedy, and see what you think of this," Hilton broke in. There
ensued an interchange of thought so fast and so deeply mathematical that
Sawtelle was lost in seconds. "Do you think it'll work?"

"I don't see how it can fail, sir. At what point in the action should it
be put into effect? And will you call the time of initiation, or shall
I?"

"Not until all their reserves are in action. Or, at worst, all of ours
except that one task-force. Since you'll know a lot more about the
status of the battle than either Sawtelle or I will, you give the signal
and I'll start things going."

"What are you two talking about?" Sawtelle demanded.

"It's a long story, chum. Kedy can tell you about it better than I can.
Besides, it's getting late and Dark Lady and Larry both give me hell
every time I hold supper on plus time unless there's a mighty good
reason for it. So, so long, guys."




XIII


For many weeks the production of Ardan warships and missiles had been
spiraling upward.

Half a mountain range of solid rock had been converted into fabricated
super-steel and armament. Superdreadnoughts Were popping into existence
at the rate of hundreds per minute. Missiles were rolling off the ends
of assembly lines like half-pint tin cans out of can-making machines.

The Strett warcraft, skeletons and missiles, would emerge into normal
space anywhere within a million miles of Ardvor. The Ardan missiles were
powered for an acceleration of one hundred gravities. That much the Kedy
brains, molded solidly into teflon-lined, massively braced steel
spheres, could just withstand.

To be certain of breaking the Strett screens, an impact velocity of
about six miles per second was necessary. The time required to attain
this velocity was about ten seconds, and the flight distance something
over thirty miles.

Since the Stretts could orient themselves in less than one second after
emergence, even this extremely tight packing of missiles--only sixty
miles apart throughout the entire emergence volume of space--would still
give the Stretts the initiative by a time-ratio of more than ten to one.

Such tight packing was of course impossible. It called for many billions
of defenders instead of the few millions it was possible for the Omans
to produce in the time they had. In fact, the average spacing was well
over ten thousand miles when the invading horde of Strett missiles
emerged and struck.

_How_ they struck!

There was nothing of finesse about that attack; nothing of skill or of
tactics: nothing but the sheer brute force of overwhelming superiority
of numbers and of over-matching power. One instant all space was empty.
The next instant it was full of invading missiles--a superb exhibition
of coordination and timing.

And the Kedy control, upon which the defenders had counted so heavily,
proved useless. For each Strett missile, within a fraction of a second
of emergence, darted toward the nearest Oman missile with an
acceleration that made the one-hundred-gravity defenders seem to be
standing still.

One to one, missiles crashed into missiles and detonated. There were no
solid or liquid end-products. Each of those frightful weapons carried so
many megatons-equivalent of atomic concentrate that all nearby space
blossomed out into superatomic blasts hundreds of times more violent
than the fireballs of lithium-hydride fusion bombs.

For a moment even Hilton was stunned; but only for a moment.

"Kedy!" he barked. "Get your big stuff out there! Use the boosters!" He
started for the door at a full run. "That tears it--that _really_ tears
it! Scrap the plan. I'll board the _Sirius_ and take the task-force to
Strett. Bring your stuff along, Skipper, as soon as you're ready."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ardan superdreadnoughts in their massed thousands poured out through
Ardvor's one-way screen. Each went instantly to work. Now the Kedy
control system, doing what it was designed to do, proved its full worth.
For the weapons of the big battle-wagons did not depend upon
acceleration, but were driven at the speed of light; and Grand Fleet
Operations were planned and were carried out at the almost infinite
velocity of thought itself.

Or, rather, they were not planned at all. They were simply carried out,
immediately and without confusion.

For all the Kedys were one. Each Kedy element, without any lapse of time
whatever for consultation with any other, knew exactly where every other
element was; exactly what each was doing; and exactly what he himself
should do to make maximum contribution to the common cause.

Nor was any time lost in relaying orders to crewmen within the ship.
There were no crewmen. Each Kedy element was the sole personnel of, and
was integral with, his vessel. Nor were there any wires or relays to
impede and slow down communication. Operational instructions, too, were
transmitted and were acted upon with thought's transfinite speed. Thus,
if decision and execution were not quite mathematically simultaneous,
they were separated by a period of time so infinitesimally small as to
be impossible of separation.

Wherever a Strett missile was, or wherever a Strett skeleton-ship
appeared, an Oman beam reached it, usually in much less than one second.
Beam clung to screen--caressingly, hungrily--absorbing its total energy
and forming the first-stage booster. Then, three microseconds later,
that booster went off into a ragingly incandescent, glaringly violent
burst of fury so hellishly, so inconceivably hot that less than a
thousandth of its total output of energy was below the very top of the
visible spectrum!

If the previous display of atomic violence had been so spectacular and
of such magnitude as to defy understanding or description, what of this?
When hundreds of thousands of Kedys, each wielding world-wrecking powers
as effortlessly and as deftly and as precisely as thought, attacked and
destroyed millions of those tremendously powerful war-fabrications of
the Stretts? The only simple answer is that all nearby space might very
well have been torn out of the most radiant layers of S-Doradus itself.

       *       *       *       *       *
