
"There's nothing marvelous about it," I told him a little irritably.
"It used to be really green, a bright, even color, but up here where
it's high and cold it doesnt look much different from ordinary
devilgrass--dirty and ugly." I thought his enthusiasm distinctly out of
place in the circumstances.

He did not seem to hear me, but went on dreamily, "And the sounds it
makes! My God, A W, a composer'd give half the years of his life to
reproduce those sounds. High and piercing; soft and muted; creating
tonepoems and etudes there in its lonely grandeur."

I have spoken before of the noise produced by the weed, a thunderous
crackling and snapping attributable to its extraordinary rate of growth.
During its dormancy the sound had ceased and, in the mountains at least,
was replaced by different notes and combinations of notes as the wind
blew through its culms and scraped the tough stems against each other.
Occasionally these ululations produced reflections extremely pleasing,
more often it hurt the ears with a shrieking discordance; but even at
its best it fell far short, to my mind--and I suppose I may say I'm as
sensitive to beauty as anybody--of meriting Joe's extravagant
rhapsodies.

But he was entranced beyond the soberness of commonsense. He filled
notebooks, those thick pulppapered volumes which children are supposed
to use in school but never do, with his reactions. In idle moments when
he was away, I glanced through them, but for the most part they were
incoherent. Meterless poems, lists of adjectives, strained
interpretations of the actions of the grass, and many musical notations
which seemed to get no farther than a repetitive and faltering start.

I reproduce a few pages of the less chaotic material for what it is
worth: "The iceage drove the Cromagnon from the caves which prophesied
Cnossus and Pithom and the Temple of Athena in the Acropolis. This
grass, twentiethcentury ice, drives magnates from their twentyroom
villas to their twentyroom duplexes. The loss was yesterday's. Walt
Whitman.

"For it is the animals. Cows and pigs, horses, goats, sheep and rabbits
abandoned by the husbandman, startled, puzzled; the clock with the
broken mainspring running backward. The small game: deer, antlered,
striped, and spotted; wildsheep, _ovis poli_, TeddyRooseveltshot and
Audubonprinted, mountaingoats leaping in terror to hazardous safety on
babel's top, upward to the pinpoint where no angels dance. But not
alone.

"Meat and meateater, food and feeder, predator and prey; foxes, lynx,
coyotes, wolves, wildcats, mountainlion (the passengerpigeon's gone, the
dung they pecked from herds thick as man born and man yet to be born
lies no more on the plains, _night and day we traveled, but the birds
overhead gave cover from the sun and the buffalo before us stretched
from the river to the hills_), driven by the ice not ice, but living
green, up and up. Pause here upon this little shelf to nibble bark, to
mate and bear; to snarl and claw and rend and suck hot blood from moving
jugularvein; and then move again upward with docile hoof or else retreat
with lashing tail and snarling fang. Biter and bitten transfused with
fear, the timberline behind, the snow alone welcoming, ironically the
glacier meets another glacier and only glacier gives refuge to glacier's
hunted.

"Here little islands on the peaks. Vegetation's sea is death creeping
upward to end at the beginning. The carnivores, whippedtailed, seek the
top, ambition's pinnacle, surveying nothing. Tomorrow is for man, the
lower mind is reasonable and ponders food and dung and lust, so
obstinate the padclaw prowls higher till nothing's left but pedestal and
would then wing, but being not yet man can only turn again.

"The ruminants, resigned, nibble at the edges of their death, converting
death to life, chewing, swallowing, digesting, regurgitating and
digesting again inescapable fate. Reluctant sustenance. Emptybellied,
the pointed teeth descend again to take their food at secondhand, to go
back sated, brown blood upon the snow and bits of hide and hair,
gnawedat bones, while fellows, forgetting fear, remaining stoic, eat,
stamp and stamp without impatience and eat again of that which has
condemned them.

"Learned doctor, your addingmachine gives you the answer: so many
carnivores, so many herbivores, the parallel dashes introduce
extinction. Confusedly the savor of Abel's sacrifice was sweet to His
nostrils, not Cain's fruits. So is the mind confounded. Turning and
devouring each other over prostrate antlers the snarlers die, their
furry hides bloat and then collapse on rigid bones to make a place for
curious sniffings and quick retreat in trampled snow. There is no
victory without harshness, no hope in triumph. The placid ruminants
live--the conquerors have conquered nothing.

"The grass comes to the edge of the snow; they eat and fill their meager
bellies, they chew the cud and mate and calve and live in wretched
unawareness of the heat of glory and death. So is justice done and mercy
and yet not justice and yet not mercy. Who was victor yesterday is not
victor today, but neither is he victim. Who was victim yesterday is not
victor, but neither is he victim...."


_49._ In all this confused rambling I thought there might be a curious
and interesting little observation about animal migration--if one could
trust the accuracy of an imagination more romantic than factual--and I
reduced it to some kind of coherence and added it not only to my report
for the Federal Disruptions Commission, but for the dispatches I found
time to send in to the _Intelligencer_. I hardly suppose it is necessary
to mention that by now my literary talents could no longer be denied or
ignored and that these items were not edited nor garbled but appeared
exactly as I had written them, boxed and doubleleaded on page one.
Though the matter was really trivial and in confessing it I don't mind
admitting all of us are subject to petty vanities I was gratified to
notice too that Le ffacase had the discernment to realize how much the
public appreciated my handling the news about the grass, for he
advertised my contributions lavishly.

In my news stories I could tell no less than the full truth, which was
that the grass, after remaining patriotically dormant throughout the war
except for the spurt northward to destroy the remnants of the invading
host, had once more set out upon the march. The loss of color I had
pointed out to Joe was less apparent each day of our stay as the old
vividness revived with its renewed energy and the sweet music which
entranced him gave place to the familiar crackling, growing louder with
each foot it advanced down the slope, culminating every so often in
thunderous explosions.

For down the thousand mile incline of the Mississippibasin it was
pouring with accelerating tempo, engulfing or driving everything before
it. It was the old story of the creeping stolons, the steppedup tangled
mass and the great, towering bulk behind; the falling forward and then
the continued headway. Once more the eastbound trains and highways
clogged with refugees.

My affairs not permitting a longer stay, I returned to New York, but I
could not pry Joe from his preoccupation. "A W," he argued, "I'd be no
more use to Consolidated Pemmican right now than groundglass in a ham
sandwich. My backside might be in a swivelchair, but my soul would be
right up here. It's Whitman translated visibly and tangibly, A W, 'Come
lovely and soothing death, undulate round and round.' Besides, youve got
the Old Man now, he's worth more to you than I ever will be; he loves
business. It's just like the army--without a doddering old generalstaff
to pull him back every time he gets enthusiastic."

If anyone else in my organization had talked like this I would have
fired him immediately, but I was sure down underneath his aesthetic
poses and artistic pretensions there was a foundation of good
commonsense inherited from the general. Give the boy his head, I
thought; let him stay here and rhapsodize till he gets sick of it; he'll
come back the better executive for having got it out of his system.
Also, as he himself pointed out, I had his father to rely on and he was
a man to whip up production if ever there was one.


_50._ The chief purpose of my visit to the grass was, at least
momentarily, a failure. There was little point sampling and analyzing
the weed for its possible use as an ingredient in a food concentrate if
it were impossible to set up a permanent place to gather and process it.
I won't say I considered my time wasted, but its employment had not been
profitable.

But even immersed in the everexpanding affairs of Consolidated Pemmican
and Allied Industries, as we now called the parent company, I could not
get away from the grass. Each hour's eastward thrust was reported in
detail by an hysterical radio and every day the newspapers printed maps
showing the newly overrun territory. Once more the grass was the most
prominent thought in men's minds, not only over the land of its being,
but throughout the world. Scientists of every nationality studied it at
firsthand and only strict laws and rigid searches by customs inspectors
prevented the importation of specimens for dissection in their own
laboratories.

The formula of Miss Francis, now at length revealed in its entirety, was
discussed by everyone. There was hardly a man, woman or child who did
not dream of finding some means to destroy or halt the grass and thereby
make of himself an unparalleled benefactor. A new crop of suggestions
was harvested by the _Intelligencer_; in addition to the old they
included such expedients as reinoculating the grass with the
Metamorphizer in the hope either of its cannibalistically feeding upon
itself or becoming so infected with giantism as to blow up and
burst--the failure of the experiment on the Russian steppes was ignored
or forgotten by these contributors; building barriers of dryice; and the
use of infrared lamps.

One of the proposals which tickled the popular imagination was a plan
for vast areas to be roofed and glassenclosed, giant greenhouses to
offer refuge for mankind in the very teeth of the grass. Artesian wells
could be sunk, it was argued, power harnessed to the tides of the sea
and piped underground, the populace fed by means of concentrates or
hydroponic farming. Everyone--except those in authority, the ones who
would have to approve the expenditure of the vast sums necessary--thought
there was something in the idea, but nothing was done about it.

Many, believing physical means could be of little avail, suggested
metaphysical ones, and these were always punctiliously printed by the
_Intelligencer_. They ranged from disregarding the existence of the weed
and carrying on ordinary life as though it presented no threat, through
Holding the Correct Thought, praying daily for its miraculous
disappearance, preferably at a simultaneous moment, to reorganizing the
spiritual concepts of the human totality.


_51._ But even without the newspapers George Thario would have kept me
informed. "Piteous if not too comprehensive for small emotions," he
wrote in a letter only a little more intelligible than the stuff in his
notebooks. "Yesterday I stopped by a small farm or ranch as local
grandiloquence everseeking purple justification has it here. Submarginal
land the tabulating minds of governmentofficials (spectacles precise on
nosebridge, daily ration of exlax safe in briefcase) would have labeled
it, sitting in expectant unease on hilltops and the uncomfortable slopes
between. Dryfarming; the place illegally acquired from cattlerange (more
proper and more profitable) by nester grandsire; surviving drought and
duststorm, locust, weevil, and straying herds; feeding rachitic kids,
dull women and helpless men for halfacentury.

"The Farm Resettlement Administration would have moved them to fatter
ground a hundred times, but blindly obstinate they held to what was
theirs and yet not theirs. In the frontseat the man and wife and what
remained of quick moments of dropjawed ecstasy, in back unwieldly
chickencoop, slats patched with bits of applebox and wire, weathered
gray; astonished cocks crowing out of time and hens heads down. Hitched
behind, the family cow, stiffribbed and emptyuddered. The grass, deaf
lover, had seized the shack, its fingers curled the solid door, body
pressed forward for joyful rape. The nesters don't look back but pant
ahead; the bumping of the car accommodates the cow.

"Ive had to leave the lodge of course and spend my nights in a thin
house with a roof shaped like two playingcards, with the misleading
sign, in punishment crippled, half fallen from its support, 'Tourists
Accommodated' (if accommodation be empty spaces with mottoes and
porcelain pisspots then punishment was unrighteous). I shall move on
soon, perhaps for the worse since there is green now, beneath the blue.

"If I can ever come away I shall, but I'd not miss this gladiator show,
this retiarii swing.

"Give my best to the Old Boy--tell him I'd write direct, but family
feeling makes it hard. Joe."

I showed the letter to the general, expecting him perhaps to be annoyed
by Joe's instability, but he merely said, "Boy shouldnt be wasting his
talents ... put it in sound ... orchestrate it."

Just as Joe's enthusiasm covered only one aspect of the grass so his
retreat from lodge to wayside hostel, to city hotel, embraced only a
minute sector of the great advance. Neither moral nor brute force slowed
the weed. It clutched the upper reaches of the Rio Grande and ran down
its course to the Gulf of Mexico like quicksilver in a broken
thermometer. It went through Colorado, Oklahoma and Kansas; it nibbled
at the forks of the Platte; it left behind the Great Salt Lake like a
chip diamond lost in an enormous setting.

There is no benefit to be derived from looking at the darker side of
things and indeed it is a universal observation that there is no
misfortune without its compensation. The loss of the great cattlegrazing
areas of the West increased the demand for our concentrated foods by the
hundredfold. We paid no duty on the products shipped in from our South
American factories for they competed only with ourselves and we did the
country the humanitarian service of preventing a famine by rushing
carload after carload westward, rising above all thoughts of petty gain
by making no increase whatever in our prices despite the expanding
demand.


_52._ About this time it became indisputable that Button Gwynnet Fles
was no longer of value to Consolidated Pemmican. His Yankee shrewdness
and caution which enabled him to run the corporation when it was merely
a name and a quotation on the stockmarket had the limits of its virtues.
He was extraordinarily provincial in outlook and quite unable to see the
concern on a world scale. In view of our vast expansion such narrowness
had become an unbearable hindrance.

I had permitted him to hold a limited number of shares and to act
nominally as secretary in order to comply with the regulations of the
Security and Exchange Commission, but now it was expedient to add to our
officers directors of other companies whose fields were complementary to
ours. Besides, in General Thario I had a much abler assistant and so,
perhaps reluctantly because of my oversensitivity, I displaced Fles and
making the general president of the corporation I accepted the post of
chairman of the board.

I must say he took a perfectly natural business move with unbecoming
illgrace. "It was mine, Mr Weener, you know it was mine and I did not
protest when you stole it; I worked loyally and unselfishly for you. It
isnt the money, Mr Weener, really it isnt--it's the idea of being thrown
out of my own business. At least let me stay on the Board of Directors;
youll never have any trouble from me, I promise you that."

It distressed me to reject his abject plea, but my hands were tied by my
devotion to the welfare of the company. Besides, he annoyed me by his
palpably untrue reference to what had been a legitimate transaction,
never giving a thought to my generosity in not exposing his chicanery,
nor the fact that the dummy he manipulated bore no resemblance whatever
to the firm I had brought by my own effort to its present size.

Leaving matters in the able hands of General Thario, after warning Joe
he had better soon return to his father's assistance, I went abroad to
arrange for wider European representation. There I found a curious
eagerness to be of help to me and almost fawning servility antipathetic
to my democratic American notions. Oddly enough, the Europeans looked
upon the United States as a doomed country, thinking I, like some
members of our wealthier classes, had come to escape disruption and
dislocation at home. Only in England did I find the belief prevalent
that the Americans would somehow muddle through because afterall theyre
the same sort of chaps we are, you know.

After a highly successful trip I returned home the same day the Grass
reached the headwaters of the Mississippi.


_53._ William Rufus Le ffacase astonished me, as well as every
newspaperman in the country by resigning as editor of the _Daily
Intelligencer_, a post he had held before many of its reporters were
born. When I phoned him to come to my office and explain himself he
refused, in tones and manner I had not heard from any man since the days
when I had wasted my talents as a subordinate. Having none of the
pettiness of pride which makes some men fearful of their position, since
he would not come to my office, I went to his. There he shocked me for
the third time: a high, glossy collar, a flowing and figured cravat
concealed the famous diamond stud, while instead of the snuffbox his
hands hovered over a package of cheap cigarettes.

"Weener," he rasped, jettisoning all those courtesies to which I had
become accustomed, "I never thought I'd be glad to see your vapid face
again, unless on a marble slab in some city morgue, but now youre here,
moneybags slapping the insides of your thighs in place of the scrotum
for which you could have no possible use, I am delighted to tell you in
person to take my paper--my paper, sir, note that well, for all your
dirty pawings could not make it anything but mine--and supposit it. I
hope it frets you, Weener, for the sake of your sniveling but immortal
soul, I sincerely hope it rasps you like a misplaced hairshirt. You will
get some miserable lickspittle to take my place, some mangy bookkeeping
pimp with a permanentwaved wife and three snottynosed brats, but the
spirit and guts of the _Intelligencer_ depart with W R Le ffacase."

I disregarded both his illmanners and his bombast. "What's the matter,
Bill?" I asked kindly, "Is it more money? You can write your own ticket,
you know. Within reason, of course."

His fingers looked for the snuffbox, but found only the cigarettes which
he inspected puzzledly. "Weener, no man could do you justice. You are
the bloody prototype of all the arselickers, panders, arsonists,
kidnapers, cutthroats, pickpockets, abortionists, pilferers, cheats,
forgers, sneakthieves, sharpers and blackmailers since Jacob swindled
his brother. Do not fawn upon me little man, I am too old to want women
or money. The sands are running out and I shall never now read the
immortable Hobbes, but I'll not die in your bloody harness. In me you do
not see the man who picked up the torch of Franklin and Greeley and Dana
where Henry Watterson dropped it. Loose of your gangrenous chains, you
behold the freelance correspondent of the North American Newspaper
Alliance, the man who will devote his declining years to reporting in
the terse and vivid prose for which he is justly famous the progress of
the grass which strangles the country as you have tried to strangle me."

Again I put personal feelings aside. "If your mind is really made up,
we'll want your stuff for the _Intelligencer_, Bill."

"Sir, you may want. I hope the condition persists."

There being no profit in arguing with a madman, I made arrangements to
replace him immediately. I reproduce here, not for selfjustification,
which would be superfluous, but merely for what amusement it may afford,
one of his accounts which appeared in the columns of so many third and
fourth rate newspapers. I won't say it shows the decay of a once
possibly great mind, but it certainly reveals that the _Intelligencer_
suffered no irreparable loss.

"Today at Dubuque, Iowa, the Mississippi was crossed. Not by redmen in
canoes, nor white on logs or clumsy rafts, nor yet by multiwheeled
locomotives gliding over steel bridges nor airplanes so high the wide
stream was a thread below. Nature and devastation, hand in hand, for the
moment one and the same, crossed it today as Quantrell or Kirby Smith or
Nathan Bedford Forrest crossed it, sabers glittering, so many forgotten
years ago. But if the men in gray and butternut raided a store or burned
a tavern they thought it a mighty victory and went home rejoicing; the
green invader is an occupier and colonizer, come to remain for all time,
leaving no town, no road, no farm where it has passed.

"A few weeks ago Dubuque was still here, quiet, old and pleasant, the
butt of affectionate jokes, the Grass still miles away, the population
still hopeful of salvation. And then, because of the panic, the frantic
scurry to save things once valuable and now only valued, no one noticed
when a betraying wind blew seeds beyond the town, over the river, to
find receptive soil on the Wisconsin side. The seeds germinated, the
clump flourished. It cut the highway and reached down the banks into the
Mississippi, waiting. And while it waited it built up greater bulk for
itself, behind and beside. Each day it pushed a little farther toward
midstream, drowning its own foremost runners so those behind might have
solidity to advance upon.

"Meanwhile from the west the continent imposed upon a continent came
closer. The other day Dubuque went, its weathered bricks and immature
stucco alike obliterated. The Grass ran out like a bather on a cold
morning, hastening to the water before timidity halts him. Although I
was watching I could not tell you at what exact instant the gap was
closed, at what moment the runners from one clump intertwined with those
of the other. But such a moment did occur, and shedding water like a
surfacing whale the united bodies rose from the riverbed to form a
verdant bridge.

"You could not walk across it, at least no man I know would want to try,
but it gives the illusion of permanency no work of man, stone or steel
or concrete, has ever given and it is a dismaying thing to see man's
trade taken over by nature in this fashion.

"The bridge is a dam also. All the debris from the upper reaches
collects against it and soon there will be floods to add to the other
distress the Grass has brought. More than half the country is gone now:
the territories pillaged from Mexico, argued from Britain, bought from
France, have all been lost. Only the original states and Florida remain.
Shall we be more successful in defending our basic land than all the
acquisitions of a century and a half?"

But why add any more? Dry, senile, without feeling, my only wonder was
that his stuff was printed, even in the obscure media where it appeared.


_54._ With twothirds of the country absorbed and a hundred fifty million
people squeezed into what was left, economic conditions became worse
than ever. No European ghetto was as crowded as our cities and no
overpopulated countryside farmed so intensively to so little purpose. An
almost complete cessation of employment except in the remnant of the
export trade, valueless money--English shillings and poundnotes
illegally circulated being the prized medium of exchange--starvation
only irritated rather than relieved by the doles of food seized from the
farmers and grudgingly handed out to the urban dwellers.

Each election saw another party in power, the sole demand of the voters
being for an administration capable of stopping the Grass. Since none
was successful, the dissatisfaction and anger grew together with the
panic and dislocation. Messiahs and fuehrers sprang up thickly. Riots in
all cities were daily occurrences, rating no more than obscure
paragraphs, while in many areas gangs of hoodlums actually maintained
themselves in power for weeks at a time, ruling their possessions like
feudal baronies and exacting tribute from all travelers through their
domain.

Immigration had long ago been stopped, but now the government, in order
to preserve what space was left for genuine Americans, canceled the
naturalization of all foreignborn and ordered them immediately deported.
All Jews who had been in the country less than three generations were
shipped to Palestine and the others deprived of political rights in
order to encourage them to leave also. The Negroes, who except for a
period less than a decade in length had never had any political or civil
rights, planned a mass migration to Africa, a project enthusiastically
spurred by such elder statesmen as the learned Maybank and the judicious
Rankin. This movement proved abortive when statisticians showed there
were not enough liquid assets among the colored population to pay a
profit on their transportation.

An attempt to oust all Catholics failed also, for the rather odd reason
that many of the minor Protestant sects joined in a body to oppose it.
The Latterday Saints--now busy building New Deseret in Central
Australia--and the Church of Christ, Scientist, as well as the
Episcopalians, Doweyites, Shakers, Christadelphians, and the
congregation of the Chapel of the Former and Latter Rains presented a
united front for tolerance and equity.

An astonishing byproduct of the national despair and turmoil was the
feverish activity in all fields of creative endeavor. Novels streamed
from the presses, volumes of poetry became substantial items on
publishers' lists and those which failed to find a publisher were
mimeographed and peddled to a receptive public, while painters working
with Renascence enthusiasm turned out great canvases as fast as their
brushes could spread the oils. We had suddenly become a nation madly
devoted to the arts. When Orpheus Crisodd's Devilgrass Symphony was
first played in Carnegie Hall an audience three times as great as that
admitted had to be accommodated outside with loudspeakers and when the
awesome crescendo of horns, drums, and broken crockery rubbed over slate
surfaces announced the climax of the sixth movement, the crowds wept.
Even for Mozart the hall was full, or practically full.
