
And then, he remembered falling, and falling, and falling. Somewhere
there was a voice: "Where are they? They've disappeared for good."

And then, for long seconds, nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

He woke up with a headache, but it wasn't too bad. Surprisingly, not
much time had passed; he got up and dusted off his trousers, looking
around at the battlefield. Wounded and groaning cops were all over. The
room was a shambles; the walking wounded--which comprised the rest of
the force--were stumbling around in a slow, hopeless sort of fashion.

Lynch was standing next to him. "Malone," he said, "I'm sorry. I hit
you, didn't I?"

"Uh-huh," Malone said. "You seemed to be hitting everybody."

"I was _trying_ for the kids," Lynch said.

"So was I," Malone said. "I got the cuffs on one and yanked him
along--but he disappeared and left me with the cuffs."

"Great," Lynch said. "Hell of a raid."

"Very jolly," Malone agreed. "Fun and games were had by all."

A cop stumbled up, handed Lynch his cap and disappeared without a word.
Lynch stared mournfully at it. The emblem was crushed and the cap looked
rather worn and useless. He put it on his head, where it assumed the
rakish tilt of a hobo's favorite tam-o'-shanter, and said: "I hope
you're not thinking of blaming _me_ for this fiasco."

"Not at all," Malone said nobly. He hurt all over, but on reflection he
thought that he would probably live. "It was nobody's fault." Except, he
thought, his own. If he'd only told Lynch to come in when called
for--and under no other circumstances--this wouldn't have happened. He
looked around at the remains of New York's Finest, and felt guilty.

The lieutenant from the local precinct limped up, rubbing a well-kicked
shin and trying to disentangle pieces of floor lamp from his hair.
"Listen, Lynch," he said, "What's with these kids? What's going on here?
Look at my men."

"Some days," Lynch said, "it just doesn't pay to get up."

"Sure," the local man said, "but what do I do now?"

"Make your reports."

"But--"

"To the Commissioner," Lynch said, "and to nobody else. If this gets
into the papers, heads will roll."

"My head is rolling right now," the local man said. "Know what one of
those kids did? Stood in front of a floor lamp. I swung at him and he
vanished. Vanished. I hit the lamp, and then the lamp hit me."

"Just see that this doesn't get out," Lynch said.

"It can't," the local man said. "Anybody who mentioned this to a
reporter would just be laughed out of town. It's not possible." He
paused thoughtfully, and added: "We'd all be laughed out of town."

"And probably replaced with the FBI," Lynch said morosely. He looked at
Malone. "Nothing personal, you understand," he said.

"Of course," Malone said. "We can't do any more here, can we?"

"I don't think we can do any more anywhere," Lynch said. "Let's lock the
place up and leave and forget all about it."

"Fine," Malone said. "I've got work to do." He looked round, found
Dorothea and signaled to her. "Come on, Dorothea. Where's Boyd?"

"Here I am," Boyd said, walking slowly across the big room to Malone. He
had one hand held to his chin.

"What's the matter with you?" Malone asked.

Boyd took his hand away. There was a bald spot the size of a quarter on
the point of his chin. "One of those kids," he said sadly, "has a hell
of a strong grip. Come on, Miss Fueyo. Come on, Malone. Let's get out of
here."




XV.


It is definitely not usual for the Director of the FBI to come stalking
into a local office of that same FBI without so much as an advance
warning or a by-your-leave. Such things are simply not done.

Andrew J. Burris, however, was doing them.

Three days after the Great Warehouse Fiasco, a startled A-in-C looked up
to see the familiar Burris figure stalk by his office, growling under
its breath. The A-in-C leaped to the interoffice phone, wondered whom he
ought to call first, and subsided, staring dully at the telephone screen
and thinking about retiring.

The next appearance of the head of the FBI was in the office assigned to
Malone and Boyd. Burris came through the doorway without warning, his
countenance that of a harried and unhappy man.

Malone looked up, blinked, and then readjusted his features to what he
imagined was a nice, bright smile. "Oh," he said. "Hello, chief. I've
been sort of expecting you."

"I'll bet you have," Burris said. He set his brief case on Malone's desk
and pulled a sheaf of papers from it. "Do you see these?" he said,
waving them. "Inquiries. Complaints. Demands. From everybody. I've been
getting them for three days."

"Sure are a lot of them," Malone said at random.

"From Police Commissioner Fernack," Burris said. "From the mayor. From
the governor, in Albany. From everybody. And they all want an
explanation. They demand one."

He sat down suddenly on Malone's desk, his anger gone.

"Well--" Malone began.

"Malone," Burris said plaintively, "I can stall them off for a while. I
can tell them all kinds of fancy stories. I don't mind. They don't
really need any explanation. But--" He paused, and then added: "I do!"

Malone closed his eyes, decided things looked even worse that way, and
opened them again. "Just what sort of an explanation did you have in
mind, chief?" he said.

"Any kind," Burris said instantly, "so long as it explains. I ... no."

"No?"

"No," Burris said. "I want the truth! Even if it doesn't explain
anything! Preferably, I want both--the truth and some explanations. If
possible. For three days, now, this area has been haunted by the Silent
Spooks. They've been stealing everything they could carry off! They've
got the whole city in an uproar!"

"Well," Malone said. "Not exactly. The papers--"

"I know," Burris said. "You've kept it out of the news. That's fine, and
I appreciate it, Malone. I really do. But I can't sit around and
appreciate it much longer. You've got to get those boys!" He bounced off
the desk and stood up again. "The longer they keep this up," he said,
"the harder it's going to be to square everything with the courts. Those
kids may end up getting killed! And how would that be?"

"Terrible," Malone said honestly.

"Something," Burris summed up, "has to be done."

Malone thought for a second. "Chief," he said at last, "if you can think
of any way to nab them, I'll certainly be grateful."

"Oh," Burris said. "Oh. No. No, Malone. This is your baby." He leaned
over and clapped Malone on the shoulder. "I have faith in you," he said.
"You cleared up that nutty telepath case and you can clear this one up,
too. But you've got to do it soon!"

"I'm working on it," Malone said helplessly. "We might get a lead any
time now."

"Good," Burris said. "Meanwhile, let's sit down and see if we can't
figure out a way to pacify the local bigwigs."

Malone sighed wearily.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, he was even more tired. Letting himself into his room at
the hotel, he felt completely exhausted. He had spent most of the hour
tactfully trying to get away from Burris. It had not been the world's
easiest job.

Dorothea Fueyo was sitting on the couch, waiting for him.

Immediately, he felt much better.

"You're late," Dorothea said accusingly. "I had to come up with the
duplicate key you gave me. And what are the bellboys going to think?"

"They're going to think you had a duplicate key," Malone said. "Anyhow,
I'm sorry. I got delayed at the office. Burris came to town--delivering
seventeen ultimatums, forty-nine conflicting sets of orders and a
rousing lecture."

"I could have come up to your office, then," Dorothea said, "instead of
compromising my reputation by sneaking up to your hotel room."

"And what about _my_ reputation?" Malone said. "Besides, the office is
no place for what I have in mind."

"Why, Mr. Malone!"

Malone ignored the comment. "Did you bring the notebook?" he said.

"Certainly." Dorothea handed a black, plastic-bound notebook over to
Malone. "But what's all this with a notebook? Going to keep score?"

"Not exactly," Malone said. He took the notebook and leafed through it
idly. It was not Mike Fueyo's book; the boy himself had that now, and
there was little chance of getting it back again. This one belonged to
Dorothea--but, Malone thought, it could serve the same purpose.

"What I have in mind," he said, "is something Mike said the other night,
just before the cops barged in. He said something about having tried to
teach you the Vanish. And that's why I asked you to come here. Did he
teach you?"

"Well, he tried," Dorothea said. "But I couldn't do anything with it. I
haven't got the Talent, Mike says." She paused. "Is that why you figured
I had a notebook like his?"

"Sure," Malone said. "It's the only thing that makes sense. Mike's
notebook was full of symbols--and that was all they could be. Symbols.
If you see what I mean."

"Not exactly," Dorothea said.

"Symbolism--anyhow, that's what Dr. O'Connor says--is one of the
primary factors in psionics."

"Dr.... oh, yes," Dorothea said. "Westinghouse. I've heard about him."

"Good," Malone said. "Anyhow, I decided the pictures in Mike's notebook
were just that--symbols. Things he wanted. And the little squiggles
after the names were symbols, too. You know," Malone said, "the boy's
pretty smart. Nobody else that I know of has ever figured out a way to
teach psionics--at least, not on that level. But Mike has."

"He's a good boy," Dorothea said. "Basically."

"Fine," Malone said. "Anyhow, if that were true, then the notebook was
some sort of guide. And if he tried to teach you the technique, then you
had to have a notebook, too. Clear?"

"Perfectly," Dorothea said, "so what do you want me to do?"

"Teach me," Malone said.

There was a silence.

"That's silly," Dorothea said. "How can I teach you something I can't do
myself? Besides, how do you know you have the Talent?"

"As far as the second question goes, I don't know. But I can try, can't
I? And as far as the first question goes, that might not be so simple.
But I think it can be done--if you remember what Mike tried to teach
you."

"Oh, I can remember all of that," she said, "but it's just that it
didn't do me any good. I couldn't use it."

"A man who's paralyzed from the waist," Malone said hopefully, "can't
play football. But if he knows how the game's played, he can teach
others--anyhow, he can teach the fundamentals. Want to try?"

Dorothea smiled. "All right, Ken," she said. "It's a great idea, at
that: the blind teaching the possibly-blind to read. Give me the
notebook, and I'll explain the first principles. Later, you'll have to
get a notebook of your own, because these symbols are very
personalized."

Malone grinned and pulled a black book from his pocket. "I thought they
might be," he said. "I've already got one. Let's go."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Sweating, Malone stared grimly at the picture he had drawn on a page of
his notebook. He'd been trying the stunt for four days, and so far all
he had achieved was a nice profusion of perspiration. He was beginning
to feel like an ad for a Turkish bath.

"No, Ken," Dorothea said patiently. "No. You can't do it that way.
You've got to _visualize_ it. That's how Mike could find red Cadillacs
so easily. All he had to do was--"

"I know," Malone said, impatiently. "That's what the pictures are for.
But I'm no artist. This doesn't even look much _like_ my office."

"It doesn't have to, Ken," Dorothea said. "All it has to do is give you
enough details to enable you to visualize your destination. The better
your memory is, the less detail you need. But you've got to grasp the
whole area in your mind."

Malone lifted his eyes from the book and stared into the darkness
outside the window without seeing it. Midnight had come and gone a long
time ago, and he was still working.

"If I don't crack this case pretty soon," he muttered, "Burris is going
to find a special new assignment for me--like investigating the social
life of a deserted space station."

"Now, that's just what's bothering you," Dorothea said. "Get your mind
off Burris. You can't teleport when your mind is occupied with other
things."

"Then how did the kids hop around so much during the fight at the
warehouse?"

"Plenty of practice," Dorothea said. "They've been doing it longer than
you have. It's like playing the piano. The beginner has to concentrate,
but the expert can play a piece he's familiar with and hold a
conversation at the same time. Now stop worrying--and start
concentrating."

Malone looked at the book again. With an effort, he forced everything
out of his mind except the picture. Burris' face came back once or
twice, but he managed to get rid of it. He looked at the lopsided
drawings that represented various items in the room, and made himself
concentrate solely on visualizing the objects themselves and their
surroundings.

Then, as the picture became clearer and achieved more reality, he began
going over the other mental exercises that Dorothea had taught him.

He heard a clock tick.

It was gone.

There was nothing but the picture, and the room it stood for ... nothing
... nothing....

The lights went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone blinked and jerked his head up from the notebook. "What hap--" he
began.

And then he stopped.

He was no longer in his hotel room at the Statler-Hilton. He was
standing in the middle of his office at FBI headquarters, Washington,
D.C.

It had worked!

Malone walked over to the wall switch and turned on the lights in the
darkened room. He looked around. He was definitely in his office.

He was a teleport.

He blinked and wondered briefly if he were dreaming. He pinched himself,
said: "Ow," and decided that the pain offered no certain proof.

But he didn't feel like part of a dream.

He felt real. So did the office.

Just as he had promised Dorothea, he went to the phone and dialed the
Statler-Hilton.

It took a minute for the long-distance circuits to connect him with
Manhattan. Then the pretty operator at the hotel was smiling at him from
the screen. "Statler-Hilton Hotel," she said. "May we help you?"

"Ring Room 814," Malone said. "I'm probably asleep in it."

"What?" the operator said.

"Never mind," Malone said. "Just ring it."

"Yes, sir." The screen went blank.

The screen stayed blank for a long time.

And then the operator was back. "I'm sorry, sir," she said. "That room
doesn't answer."

"You're sure?" Malone said.

"Certainly."

"Try it again," Malone said.

The operator did so. She returned with the same answer.

Malone frowned and hung up. It didn't sound right. Even a dream was
supposed to make more sense than this was making. There was something
wrong.

He had to get back to the hotel room.

There was only one trouble. He didn't have a picture of the room in his
notebook.

Dorothea had said that it was almost impossible to go to a place one
hadn't been to before. Mike Fueyo had been able to pick up any red
Cadillac in the city because he'd concentrated solely on the symbol of a
red Cadillac. But he never knew which Cadillac he'd end up at.

Malone closed his eyes and tried to remember the hotel room. He
half-wished he had a photograph of it, but Dorothea had told him that
photos wouldn't work. They were too complete; they required no effort of
the mind. Only a symbol would do.

