EMILY.

I am surprised that it is so perfectly clear; it does not at all partake
of the whiteness of the lime.

MRS. B.

Have you forgotten that, in solutions, the solid body is so minutely
subdivided by the fluid as to become invisible, and therefore will not
in the least degree impair the transparency of the solvent?

I said that the attraction of lime for carbonic acid was so strong, that
it would absorb it from the atmosphere. We may see this effect by
exposing a glass of lime-water to the air; the lime will then separate
from the water, combine with the carbonic acid, and re-appear on the
surface in the form of a white film, which is carbonat of lime, commonly
called _chalk_.

CAROLINE.

Chalk is, then, a compound salt! I never should have supposed that those
immense beds of chalk, that we see in many parts of the country, were a
salt. --Now, the white film begins to appear on the surface of the
water; but it is far from resembling hard solid chalk.

MRS. B.

That is owing to its state of extreme division; in a little time it will
collect into a more compact mass, and subside at the bottom of the
glass.

If you breathe into lime-water, the carbonic acid, which is mixed with
the air that you expire, will produce the same effect. It is an
experiment very easily made; --I shall pour some lime-water into this
glass tube, and, by breathing repeatedly into it, you will soon perceive
a precipitation of chalk--

EMILY.

I see already a small white cloud formed.

MRS. B.

It is composed of minute particles of chalk; at present it floats in the
water, but it will soon subside.

Carbonat of lime, or chalk, you see, is insoluble in water, since the
lime which was dissolved re-appears when converted into chalk; but you
must take notice of a very singular circumstance, which is, that chalk
is soluble in water impregnated with carbonic acid.

CAROLINE.

It is very curious, indeed, that carbonic acid gas should render lime
soluble in one instance, and insoluble in the other!

MRS. B.

I have here a bottle of Seltzer water, which, you know, is strongly
impregnated with carbonic acid:-- let us pour a little of it into a
glass of lime-water. You see that it immediately forms a precipitation
of carbonat of lime?

EMILY.

Yes, a white cloud appears.

MRS. B.

I shall now pour an additional quantity of the Seltzer water into the
lime-water--

EMILY.

How singular! The cloud is re-dissolved, and the liquid is again
transparent.

MRS. B.

All the mystery depends upon this circumstance, that carbonat of lime is
soluble in carbonic acid, whilst it is insoluble in water; the first
quantity of carbonic acid, therefore, which I introduce into the
lime-water, was employed in forming the carbonat of lime, which remained
visible, until an additional quantity of carbonic acid dissolved it.
Thus, you see, when the lime and carbonic acid are in proper proportions
to form chalk, the white cloud appears, but when the acid predominates,
the chalk is no sooner formed than it is dissolved.

CAROLINE.

That is now the case; but let us try whether a further addition of
lime-water will again precipitate the chalk.

EMILY.

It does, indeed! The cloud re-appears, because, I suppose, there is now
no more of the carbonic acid than is necessary to form chalk; and, in
order to dissolve the chalk, a superabundance of acid is required.

MRS. B.

We have, I think, carried this experiment far enough; every repetition
would but exhibit the same appearances.

Lime combines with most of the acids, to which the carbonic (as being
the weakest) readily yields it; but these combinations we shall have an
opportunity of noticing more particularly hereafter. It unites with
phosphorus, and with sulphur, in their simple state; in short, of all
the earths, lime is that which nature employs most frequently, and most
abundantly, in its innumerable combinations. It is the basis of all
calcareous earths and stones; we find it likewise in the animal and the
vegetable creations.

EMILY.

And in the arts is not lime of very great utility?

MRS. B.

Scarcely any substance more so; you know that it is a most essential
requisite in building, as it constitutes the basis of all cements, such
as mortar, stucco, plaister, &c.

Lime is also of infinite importance in agriculture; it lightens and
warms soils that are too cold, and compact, in consequence of too great
a proportion of clay. --But it would be endless to enumerate the various
purposes for which it is employed; and you know enough of it to form
some idea of its importance; we shall, therefore, now proceed to the
third alkaline earth, MAGNESIA.

CAROLINE.

I am already pretty well acquainted with that earth; it is a medicine.

MRS. B.

It is in the state of carbonat that magnesia is usually employed
medicinally; it then differs but little in appearance from its simple
form, which is that of a very fine light white powder. It dissolves in
2000 times its weight of water, but forms with acids extremely soluble
salts. It has not so great an attraction for acids as lime, and
consequently yields them to the latter. It is found in a great variety
of mineral combinations, such as slate, mica, amianthus, and more
particularly in a certain lime stone, which has lately been discovered
by Mr. Tennant to contain it in very great quantities. It does not
attract and solidify water, like lime: but when mixed with water and
exposed to the atmosphere, it slowly absorbs carbonic acid from the
latter, and thus loses its causticity. Its chief use in medicine is,
like that of lime, derived from its readiness to combine with, and
neutralise, the acid which it meets with in the stomach.

EMILY.

Yet, you said that it was taken in the state of carbonat, in which case
it has already combined with an acid?

MRS. B.

Yes; but the carbonic is the last of all the acids in the order of
affinities; it will therefore yield the magnesia to any of the others.
It is, however, frequently taken in its caustic state as a remedy for
flatulence. Combined with sulphuric acid, magnesia forms another and
more powerful medicine, commonly called _Epsom salt_.

CAROLINE.

And properly, _sulphat of magnesia_, I suppose? Pray why was it ever
called Epsom salt?

MRS. B.

Because there is a spring in the neighbourhood of Epsom which contains
this salt in great abundance.

The last alkaline earth which we have to mention is STRONTIAN, or
STRONTITES, discovered by Dr. Hope a few years ago. It so strongly
resembles barytes in its properties, and is so sparingly found in
nature, and of so little use in the arts, that it will not be necessary
to enter into any particulars respecting it. One of the remarkable
characteristic properties of strontites is, that its salts, when
dissolved in spirit of wine, tinge the flame of a deep red, or blood
colour.




CONVERSATION XVI.

ON ACIDS.


MRS. B.

We may now proceed to the acids. Of the metallic oxyds, you have already
acquired some general notions. This subject, though highly interesting
in its details, is not of sufficient importance to our concise view of
chemistry, to be particularly treated of; but it is absolutely necessary
that you should be better acquainted with the acids, and likewise with
their combinations with the alkalies, which form the triple compounds
called NEUTRAL SALTS.

The class of acids is characterised by very distinct properties. They
all change blue vegetable infusions to a red colour: they are all more
or less sour to the taste; and have a general tendency to combine with
the earths, alkalies, and metallic oxyds.

You have, I believe, a clear idea of the nomenclature by which the base
(or radical) of the acid, and the various degrees of acidification, are
expressed?

EMILY.

Yes, I think so; the acid is distinguished by the name of its base, and
its degree of oxydation, that is, the quantity of oxygen it contains, by
the termination of that name in _ous_ or _ic_; thus sulphure_ous_ acid
is that formed by the smallest proportion of oxygen combined with
sulphur; sulphur_ic_ acid that which results from the combination of
sulphur with the greatest quantity of oxygen.

MRS. B.

A still greater latitude may, in many cases, be allowed to the
proportions of oxygen than can be combined with acidifiable radicals;
for several of these radicals are susceptible of uniting with a quantity
of oxygen so small as to be insufficient to give them the properties of
acids; in these cases, therefore, they are converted into oxyds. Such is
sulphur, which by exposure to the atmosphere with a degree of heat
inadequate to produce inflammation, absorbs a small proportion of
oxygen, which colours it red or brown. This, therefore, is the first
degree of oxygenation of sulphur; the 2d converts it into sulphur_ous_
acid; the 3d into the sulphur_ic_ acid; and 4thly, if it was found
capable of combining with a still larger proportion of oxygen, it would
then be termed _super-oxygenated sulphuric acid_.

EMILY.

Are these various degrees of oxygenation common to all the acids?

MRS. B.

No; they vary much in this respect: some are susceptible of only one
degree of oxygenation; others, of two, or three; there are but very few
that will admit of more.

CAROLINE.

The modern nomenclature must be of immense advantage in pointing out so
easily the nature of the acids, and their various degrees of
oxygenation.

MRS. B.

Till lately many of the acids had not been decomposed; but analogy
afforded so strong a proof of their compound nature, that I never could
reconcile myself to classing them with the simple bodies, though this
division has been adopted by several chemical writers. At present there
are only the muriatic and the fluoric acids, which have not had their
bases distinctly separated.

CAROLINE.

We have heard of a great variety of acids; pray how many are there in
all?

MRS. B.

I believe there are reckoned at present thirty-four, and their number is
constantly increasing, as the science improves; but the most important,
and those to which we shall almost entirely confine our attention, are
but few. I shall, however, give you a general view of the whole; and
then we shall more particularly examine those that are the most
essential.

This class of bodies was formerly divided into mineral, vegetable, and
animal acids, according to the substances from which they were commonly
obtained.

CAROLINE.

That, I should think, must have been an excellent arrangement; why was
it altered?

MRS. B.

Because in many cases it produced confusion. In which class, for
instance, would you place carbonic acid?

CAROLINE.

Now I see the difficulty. I should be at a loss where to place it, as
you have told us that it exists in the animal, vegetable, and mineral
kingdoms.

EMILY.

There would be the same objection with respect to phosphoric acid,
which, though obtained chiefly from bones, can also, you said, be found
in small quantities in stones, and likewise in some plants.

MRS. B.

You see, therefore, the propriety of changing this mode of
classification. These objections do not exist in the present
nomenclature; for the composition and nature of each individual acid is
in some degree pointed out, instead of the class of bodies from which it
is extracted; and, with regard to the more general division of acids,
they are classed under these three heads:

First, Acids of known or supposed simple bases, which are formed by the
union of these bases with oxygen. They are the following:

The _Sulphuric_
    _Carbonic_
    _Nitric_
    _Phosphoric_
    _Arsenical_  Acids, of known and simple bases.
    _Tungstenic_
    _Molybdenic_
    _Boracic_
    _Fluoric_
    _Muriatic_

This class comprehends the most anciently known and most important
acids. The sulphuric, nitric, and muriatic were formerly, and are still
frequently, called _mineral acids_.

2dly, Acids that have double or binary radicals, and which consequently
consist of triple combinations. These are the vegetable acids, whose
common radical is a compound of hydrogen and carbon.

CAROLINE.

But if the basis of all the vegetable acids be the same, it should form
but one acid; it may indeed combine with different proportions of
oxygen, but the nature of the acid must be the same.

MRS. B.

The only difference that exists in the basis of vegetable acids, is the
various proportions of hydrogen and carbon from which they are severally
composed. But this is enough to produce a number of acids apparently
very dissimilar. That they do not, however, differ essentially, is
proved by their susceptibility of being converted into each other, by
the addition or subtraction of a portion of hydrogen or of carbon. The
names of these acids are,

The _Acetic_
    _Oxalic_
    _Tartarous_
    _Citric_
    _Malic_     Acids, of double bases, being of vegetable origin.
    _Gallic_
    _Mucous_
    _Benzoic_
    _Succinic_
    _Camphoric_
    _Suberic_

The 3d class of acids consists of those which have triple radicals, and
are therefore of a still more compound nature. This class comprehends
the animal acids, which are,

The _Lactic_
    _Prussic_
    _Formic_  Acids, of triple bases, or animal acids.
    _Bombic_
    _Sebacic_
    _Zoonic_
    _Lithic_

I have given you this summary account or enumeration of the acids, as
you may find it more satisfactory to have at once an outline or a
general notion of the extent of the subject; but we shall now confine
ourselves to the first class, which requires our more immediate
attention; and defer the few remarks which we shall have to make on the
others, till we treat of the chemistry of the animal and vegetable
kingdoms.

The acids of simple and known radicals are all capable of being
decomposed by combustible bodies, to which they yield their oxygen. If,
for instance, I pour a drop of sulphuric acid on this piece of iron, it
will produce a spot of rust, you know what that is?

CAROLINE.

Yes; it is an oxyd, formed by the oxygen of the acid combining with the
iron.

MRS. B.

In this case you see the sulphur deposits the oxygen by which it was
acidified on the metal. And again, if we pour some acid on a compound
combustible substance, (we shall try it on this piece of wood,) it will
combine with one or more of the constituents of that substance, and
occasion a decomposition.

EMILY.

It has changed the colour of the wood to black. How is that?

MRS. B.

The oxygen deposited by the acid has burnt it; you know that wood in
burning becomes black before it is reduced to ashes. Whether it derives
the oxygen which burns it from the atmosphere, or from any other source,
the chemical effect on the wood is the same. In the case of real
combustion, wood becomes black, because it is reduced to the state of
charcoal by the evaporation of its other constituents. But can you tell
me the reason why wood turns black when burnt by the application of an
acid?

CAROLINE.

First, tell me what are the ingredients of wood?

MRS. B.

Hydrogen and carbon are the chief constituents of wood, as of all other
vegetable substances.

CAROLINE.

Well, then, I suppose that the oxygen of the acid combines with the
hydrogen of the wood, to form water; and that the carbon of the wood,
remaining alone, appears of its usual black colour.

MRS. B.

Very well indeed, my dear; that is certainly the most plausible
explanation.

EMILY.

Would not this be a good method of making charcoal?

MRS. B.

It would be an extremely expensive, and, I believe, very imperfect
method; for the action of the acid on the wood, and the heat produced by
it, are far from sufficient to deprive the wood of all its evaporable
parts.

CAROLINE.

What is the reason that vinegar, lemon, and the acid of fruits, do not
produce this effect on wood?

MRS. B.

They are vegetable acids, whose bases are composed of hydrogen and
carbon; the oxygen, therefore, will not be disposed to quit this
radical, where it is already united with hydrogen. The strongest of
these may, perhaps, yield a little of their oxygen to the wood, and
produce a stain upon it; but the carbon will not be sufficiently
uncovered to assume its black colour. Indeed, the several mineral acids
themselves possess this power of charring wood in very different
degrees.

EMILY.

Cannot vegetable acids be decomposed, by any combustibles?

MRS. B.

No; because their radical is composed of two substances which have a
greater attraction for oxygen than any known body.

CAROLINE.

And are those strong acids, which burn and decompose wood, capable of
producing similar effects on the skin and flesh of animals?

MRS. B.

Yes; all the mineral acids, and one of them more especially, possess
powerful caustic qualities. They actually corrode and destroy the skin
and flesh; but they do not produce upon these exactly the same
alteration they do on wood, probably because there is a great proportion
of nitrogen and other substances in animal matter, which prevents the
separation of carbon from being so conspicuous.




CONVERSATION XVII.

OF THE SULPHURIC AND PHOSPHORIC ACIDS; OR THE COMBINATIONS OF OXYGEN
WITH SULPHUR AND PHOSPHORUS; AND OF THE SULPHATS AND PHOSPHATS.


MRS. B.

In addition to the general survey which we have taken of acids, I think
you will find it interesting to examine individually a few of the most
important of them, and likewise some of their principal combinations
with the alkalies, alkaline earths, and metals. The first of the acids,
in point of importance, is the SULPHURIC, formerly called _oil of
vitriol_.

CAROLINE.

I have known it a long time by that name, but had no idea that it was
the same fluid as sulphuric acid. What resemblance or connection can
there be between oil of vitriol and this acid?

MRS. B.

Vitriol is the common name for sulphat of iron, a salt which is formed
by the combination of sulphuric acid and iron; the sulphuric acid was
formerly obtained by distillation from this salt, and it very naturally
received its name from the substance which afforded it.

CAROLINE.

But it is still usually called oil of vitriol?

MRS. B.

Yes; a sufficient length of time has not yet elapsed, since the
invention of the new nomenclature, for it to be generally disseminated;
but, as it is adopted by all scientific chemists, there is every reason
to suppose that it will gradually become universal. When I received this
bottle from the chemists, _oil of vitriol_ was inscribed on the label;
but, as I knew you were very punctilious in regard to the nomenclature,
I changed it, and substituted the words _sulphuric acid_.

EMILY.

This acid has neither colour nor smell, but it appears much thicker than
water.

MRS. B.

It is nearly twice as heavy as water, and has, you see, an oily
consistence.

CAROLINE.

And it is probably from this circumstance that it has been called an
oil, for it can have no real claim to that name, as it does not contain
either hydrogen or carbon, which are the essential constituents of oil.

MRS. B.

Certainly; and therefore it would be the more absurd to retain a name
which owed its origin to such a mistaken analogy.

Sulphuric acid, in its purest state, would probably be a concrete
substance, but its attraction for water is such, that it is impossible
to obtain that acid perfectly free from it; it is, therefore, always
seen in a liquid form, such as you here find it. One of the most
striking properties of sulphuric acid is that of evolving a considerable
quantity of heat when mixed with water; this I have already shown you.

EMILY.

Yes, I recollect it; but what was the degree of heat produced by that
mixture?

MRS. B.

The thermometer may be raised by it to 300 degrees, which is
considerably above the temperature of boiling water.

CAROLINE.

Then water might be made to boil in that mixture?

MRS. B.

Nothing more easy, provided that you employ sufficient quantities of
acid and of water, and in the due proportions. The greatest heat is
produced by a mixture of one part of water to four of the acid: we shall
make a mixture of these proportions, and immerse in it this thin glass
tube, which is full of water.

CAROLINE.

The vessel feels extremely hot, but the water does not boil yet.

MRS. B.

You must allow some time for the heat to penetrate the tube, and raise
the temperature of the water to the boiling point--

CAROLINE.

Now it boils--and with increasing violence.

MRS. B.

But it will not continue boiling long; for the mixture gives out heat
only while the particles of the water and the acid are mutually
penetrating each other: as soon as the new arrangement of those
particles is effected, the mixture will gradually cool, and the water
return to its former temperature.

You have seen the manner in which sulphuric acid decomposes all
combustible substances, whether animal, vegetable, or mineral, and burns
them by means of its oxygen?

CAROLINE.

I have very unintentionally repeated the experiment on my gown, by
letting a drop of the acid fall upon it, and it has made a stain, which,
I suppose, will never wash out.

MRS. B.

No, certainly; for before you can put it into water, the spot will
become a hole, as the acid has literally burnt the muslin.

CAROLINE.

So it has, indeed! Well, I will fasten the stopper, and put the bottle
away, for it is a dangerous substance. --Oh, now I have done worse
still, for I have spilt some on my hand!

MRS. B.

It is then burned, as well as your gown, for you know that oxygen
destroys animal as well as vegetable matters; and, as far as the
decomposition of the skin of your finger is effected, there is no
remedy; but by washing it immediately in water, you will dilute the
acid, and prevent any further injury.

CAROLINE.

It feels extremely hot, I assure you.

MRS. B.

You have now learned, by experience, how cautiously this acid must be
used. You will soon become acquainted with another acid, the nitric,
which, though it produces less heat on the skin, destroys it still
quicker, and makes upon it an indelible stain. You should never handle
any substances of this kind, without previously dipping your fingers in
water, which will weaken their caustic effects. But, since you will not
repeat the experiment, I must put in the stopper, for the acid attracts
the moisture from the atmosphere, which would destroy its strength and
purity.

EMILY.

Pray, how can sulphuric acid be extracted from sulphat of iron by
distillation?

MRS. B.

The process of distillation, you know, consists in separating substances
from one another by means of their different degrees of volatility, and
by the introduction of a new chemical agent, caloric. Thus, if sulphat
of iron be exposed in a retort to a proper degree of heat, it will be
decomposed, and the sulphuric acid will be volatilised.

EMILY.

But now that the process of forming acids by the combustion of their
radicals is known, why should not this method be used for making
sulphuric acid?

MRS. B.

This is actually done in most manufactures; but the usual method of
preparing sulphuric acid does not consist in burning the sulphur in
oxygen gas (as we formerly did by the way of experiment), but in heating
it together with another substance, nitre, which yields oxygen in
sufficient abundance to render the combustion in common air rapid and
complete.

CAROLINE.

This substance, then, answers the same purpose as oxygen gas?

MRS. B.

Exactly. In manufactures the combustion is performed in a leaden
chamber, with water at the bottom, to receive the vapour and assist its
condensation. The combustion is, however, never so perfect but that a
quantity of _sulphureous_ acid is formed at the same time; for you
recollect that the sulphureous acid, according to the chemical
nomenclature, differs from the sulphuric only by containing less oxygen.

From its own powerful properties, and from the various combinations into
which it enters, sulphuric acid is of great importance in many of the
arts.

It is used also in medicine in a state of great dilution; for were it
taken internally, in a concentrated state, it would prove a most
dangerous poison.

CAROLINE.

I am sure it would burn the throat and stomach.

MRS. B.

Can you think of any thing that would prove an antidote to this poison?

CAROLINE.

A large draught of water to dilute it.

MRS. B.

That would certainly weaken the caustic power of the acid, but it would
increase the heat to an intolerable degree. Do you recollect nothing
that would destroy its deleterious properties more effectually?

EMILY.

An alkali might, by combining with it; but, then, a pure alkali is
itself a poison, on account of its causticity.

MRS. B.

There is no necessity that the alkali should be caustic. Soap, in which
it is combined with oil; or magnesia, either in the state of carbonat,
or mixed with water, would prove the best antidotes.

EMILY.

In those cases then, I suppose, the potash and the magnesia would quit
their combinations to form salts with the sulphuric acid?

MRS. B.

Precisely.

We may now make a few observations on the sulphure_ous_ acid, which we
have found to be the product of sulphur slowly and imperfectly burnt.
This acid is distinguished by its pungent smell, and its gaseous form.

CAROLINE.

Its aeriform state is, I suppose, owing to the smaller proportion of
