
The spectrum of the great comet of 1882 was observed by Copeland and
Lohse on the 18th September in daylight, and, in addition to the sodium
line, they saw a number of other bright lines, which seemed to be due to
iron vapour, while the only line of manganese visible at the temperature
of a Bunsen burner was also seen. This very remarkable observation was
made less than a day after the perihelion passage, and illustrates the
wonderful activity in the interior of a comet when very close to the
sun.

[Illustration: PLATE XVII.

THE COMET OF 1882,

AS SEEN FROM STREATHAM, NOV. 4TH, 4 A.M.

FROM A DRAWING BY T.E. KEY.]

In addition to the bright lines comets generally show a faint
continuous spectrum, in which dark Fraunhofer lines can occasionally be
distinguished. Of course, this shows that the continuous spectrum is to
a great extent due to reflected sunlight, but there is no doubt that
part of it is often due to light actually developed in the comets. This
was certainly the case in the first comet of 1884, as a sudden outburst
of light in this body was accompanied by a considerable increase of
brightness of the continuous spectrum. A change in the relative
brightness of the three hydrocarbon bands indicated a considerable rise
of temperature, during the continuance of which the comet emitted white
light.

As comets are much nearer to the earth than the stars, it will
occasionally happen that the comet must arrive at a position directly
between the earth and a star. There is quite a similar phenomenon in the
movement of the moon. A star is frequently occulted in this way, and the
observations of such phenomena are familiar to astronomers; but when a
comet passes in front of a star the circumstances are widely different.
The star is indeed seen nearly as well through the comet as it would be
if the comet were entirely out of the way. This has often been noticed.
One of the most celebrated observations of this kind was made by the
late Sir John Herschel on Biela's comet, which is one of the periodic
class, and will be alluded to in the next chapter. The illustrious
astronomer saw on one occasion this object pass over a star cluster. It
consisted of excessively minute stars, which could only be seen by a
powerful telescope, such as the one Sir John was using. The faintest
haze or the merest trace of a cloud would have sufficed to hide all the
stars. It was therefore with no little interest that the astronomer
watched the progress of Biela's comet. Gradually the wanderer encroached
on the group of stars, so that if it had any appreciable solidity the
numerous twinkling points would have been completely screened. But what
were the facts? Down to the most minute star in that cluster, down to
the smallest point of light which the great telescope could show, every
object in the group was distinctly seen to twinkle right through the
mass of Biela's comet.

This was an important observation. We must recollect that the veil drawn
between the cluster and the telescope was not a thin curtain; it was a
volume of cometary substance many thousands of miles in thickness.
Contrast, then, the almost inconceivable tenuity of a comet with the
clouds to which we are accustomed. A cloud a few hundred feet thick
will hide not only the stars, but even the great sun himself. The
lightest haze that ever floated in a summer sky would do more to screen
the stars from our view than would one hundred thousand miles of such
cometary material as was here interposed.

The great comet of Donati passed over many stars which were visible
distinctly through its tail. Among these stars was a very bright
one--the well-known Arcturus. The comet, fortunately, happened to pass
over Arcturus, and though nearly the densest part of the comet was
interposed between the earth and the star, yet Arcturus twinkled on with
undiminished lustre through the thickness of this stupendous curtain.
Recent observations have, however, shown that stars in some cases
experience change in lustre when the denser part of the comet passes
over them. It is, indeed, difficult to imagine that a star would remain
visible if the nucleus of a really large comet passed over it; but it
does not seem that an opportunity of testing this supposition has yet
arisen.

As a comet contains transparent gaseous material we might expect that
the place of a star would be deranged when the comet approached it. The
refractive power of air is very considerable. When we look at the
sunset, we see the sun appearing to pass below the horizon; yet the sun
has actually sunk beneath the horizon before any part of its disk
appears to have commenced its descent. The refractive power of the air
bends the luminous rays round and shows the sun, though it is directly
screened by the intervening obstacles. The refractive power of the
material of comets has been carefully tested. A comet has been observed
to approach two stars; one of which was seen through the comet, while
the other could be observed directly. If the body had any appreciable
quantity of gas in its composition the relative places of the two stars
would be altered. This question has been more than once submitted to the
test of actual measurement. It has sometimes been found that no
appreciable change of position could be detected, and that accordingly
in such cases the comet has no perceptible density. Careful measurements
of the great comet in 1881 showed, however, that in the neighbourhood of
the nucleus there was some refractive power, though quite insignificant
in comparison with the refraction of our atmosphere.

[Illustration: PLATE C.

COMET A 1892, 1. SWIFT.

_Photographed by E.E. Barnard, 7th April, 1892._]

From these considerations it will probably be at once admitted that the
_mass_ of a comet must be indeed a very small quantity in comparison
with its bulk. When we attempt actually to weigh the comet, our efforts
have proved abortive. We have been able to weigh the mighty planets
Jupiter and Saturn; we have been even able to weigh the vast sun
himself; the law of gravitation has provided us with a stupendous
weighing apparatus, which has been applied in all these cases with
success, but the same methods applied to comets are speedily seen to be
illusory. No weighing machinery known to the astronomer is delicate
enough to determine the weight of a comet. All that we can accomplish in
any circumstances is to weigh one heavenly body in comparison with
another. Comets seem to be almost imponderable when estimated by such
robust masses as those of the earth, or any of the other great planets.
Of course, it will be understood that when we say the weight of a comet
is inappreciable, we mean with regard to the other bodies of our system.
Perhaps no one now doubts that a great comet must really weigh tons;
though whether those tons are to be reckoned in tens, in hundreds, in
thousands, or in millions, the total seems quite insignificant when
compared with the weight of a body like the earth.

The small mass of comets is also brought before us in a very striking
way when we recall what has been said in the last chapter on the
important subject of the planetary perturbations. We have there treated
of the permanence of our system, and we have shown that this permanence
depends upon certain laws which the planetary motions must invariably
fulfil. The planets move nearly in circles, their orbits are all nearly
in the same plane, and they all move in the same direction. The
permanence of the system would be imperilled if any one of these
conditions was not fulfilled. In that discussion we made no allusion to
the comets. Yet they are members of our system, and they far outnumber
the planets. The comets repudiate these rules of the road which the
planets so rigorously obey. Their orbits are never like circles; they
are, indeed, more usually parabolic, and thus differ as widely as
possible from the circular path. Nor do the planes of the orbits of
comets affect any particular aspect; they are inclined at all sorts of
angles, and the directions in which they move seem to be mere matters of
caprice. All these articles of the planetary convention are violated by
comets, but yet our system lasts; it has lasted for countless ages, and
seems destined to last for ages to come. The comets are attracted by the
planets, and conversely, the comets must attract the planets, and must
perturb their orbits to some extent; but to what extent? If comets moved
in orbits subject to the same general laws which characterise planetary
motion, then our argument would break down. The planets might experience
considerable derangements from cometary attraction, and yet in the lapse
of time those disturbances would neutralise each other, and the
permanence of the system would be unaffected. But the case is very
different when we deal with the actual cometary orbits. If comets could
appreciably disturb planets, those disturbances would not neutralise
each other, and in the lapse of time the system would be wrecked by a
continuous accumulation of irregularities. The facts, however, show that
the system has lived, and is living, notwithstanding comets; and hence
we are forced to the conclusion that their masses must be insignificant
in comparison with those of the great planetary bodies.

These considerations exhibit the laws of universal gravitation and their
relations to the permanence of our system in a very striking light. If
we include the comets, we may say that the solar system includes many
thousands of bodies, in orbits of all sizes, shapes, and positions, only
agreeing in the fact that the sun occupies a focus common to all. The
majority of these bodies are imponderable in comparison with planets,
and their orbits are placed anyhow, so that, although they may suffer
much from the perturbations of the other bodies, they can in no case
inflict any appreciable disturbance. There are, however, a few great
planets capable of producing vast disturbances; and if their orbits were
not properly adjusted, chaos would sooner or later be the result. By the
mutual adaptations of their orbits to a nearly circular form, to a
nearly coincident plane, and to a uniformity of direction, a permanent
truce has been effected among the great planets. They cannot now
permanently disorganise each other, while the slight mass of the comets
renders them incompetent to do so. The stability of the great planets is
thus assured; but it is to be observed that there is no guarantee of
stability for comets. Their eccentric and irregular paths may undergo
the most enormous derangements; indeed, the history of astronomy
contains many instances of the vicissitudes to which a cometary career
is exposed.

Great comets appear in the heavens in the most diverse circumstances.
There is no part of the sky, no constellation or region, which is not
liable to occasional visits from these mysterious bodies. There is no
season of the year, no hour of the day or of the night when comets may
not be seen above the horizon. In like manner, the size and aspect of
the comets are of every character, from the dim spot just visible to an
eye fortified by a mighty telescope, up to a gigantic and brilliant
object, with a tail stretching across the heavens for a distance which
is as far as from the horizon to the zenith. So also the direction of
the tail of the comet seems at first to admit of every possible
position: it may stand straight up in the heavens, as if the comet were
about to plunge below the horizon; it may stream down from the head of
the comet, as if the body had been shot up from below; it may slope to
the right or to the left. Amid all this variety and seeming caprice, can
we discover any feature common to the different phenomena? We shall find
that there is a very remarkable law which the tails of comets obey--a
law so true and satisfactory, that if we are given the place of a comet
in the heavens, it is possible at once to point out in what direction
the tail will lie.

A beautiful comet appears in summer in the northern sky. It is near
midnight; we are gazing on the faintly luminous tail, which stands up
straight and points towards the zenith; perhaps it may be curved a
little or possibly curved a good deal, but still, on the whole, it is
directed from the horizon to the zenith. We are not here referring to
any particular comet. Every comet, large or small, that appears in the
north must at midnight have its tail pointed up in a nearly vertical
direction. This fact, which has been verified on numerous occasions, is
a striking illustration of the law of direction of comets' tails. Think
for one moment of the facts of the case. It is summer; the twilight at
the north shows the position of the sun, and the tail of the comet
points directly away from the twilight and away from the sun. Take
another case. It is evening; the sun has set, the stars have begun to
shine, and a long-tailed comet is seen. Let that comet be high or low,
north or south, east or west, its tail invariably points _away_ from
that point in the west where the departing sunlight still lingers.
Again, a comet is watched in the early morning, and if the eye be moved
from the place where the first streak of dawn is appearing to the head
of the comet, then along that direction, streaming away from the sun, is
found the tail of the comet. This law is of still more general
application. At any season, at any hour of the night, the tail of a
comet is directed away from the sun.

More than three hundred years ago this fact in the movement of comets
arrested the attention of those who pondered on the movements of the
heavenly bodies. It is a fact patent to ordinary observation, it gives
some degree of consistency to the multitudinous phenomena of comets, and
it must be made the basis of our enquiries into the structure of the
tails.

In the adjoining figure, Fig. 71, we show a portion of the parabolic
orbit of a comet, and we also represent the position of the tail of the
comet at various points of its path. It would be, perhaps, going too far
to assert that throughout the whole vast journey of the comet, its tail
must always be directed from the sun. In the first place, it must be
recollected that we can only see the comet during that small part of its
journey when it is approaching to or receding from the sun. It is also
to be remembered that, while actually passing round the sun, the
brilliancy of the comet is so overpowered by the sun that the comet
often becomes invisible, just as the stars are invisible in daylight.
Indeed, in certain cases, jets of cometary material are actually
projected towards the sun.

[Illustration: Fig. 71.--The Tail of a Comet directed from the Sun.]

In a hasty consideration of the subject, it might be thought that as the
comet was dashing along with enormous velocity the tail was merely
streaming out behind, just as the shower of sparks from a rocket are
strewn along the path which it follows. This would be an entirely
erroneous analogy; the comet is moving not through an atmosphere, but
through open space, where there is no medium sufficient to sweep the
tail into the line of motion. Another very remarkable feature is the
gradual growth of the tail as the comet approaches the sun. While the
body is still at a great distance it has usually no perceptible tail,
but as it draws in the tail gradually develops, and in some cases
reaches stupendous dimensions. It is not to be supposed that this
increase is a mere optical consequence of the diminution of distance. It
can be shown that the growth of the tail takes place much more rapidly
than it would be possible to explain in this way. We are thus led to
connect the formation of the tail with the approach to the sun, and we
are accordingly in the presence of an enigma without any analogy among
the other bodies of our system.

That the comet as a whole is attracted by the sun there can be no doubt
whatever. The fact that the comet moves in an ellipse or in a parabola
proves that the two bodies act and react on each other in obedience to
the law of universal gravitation. But while this is true of the comet as
a whole, it is no less certain that the tail of the comet is _repelled_
by the sun. It is impossible to speak with certainty as to how this
comes about, but the facts of the case seem to point to an explanation
of the following kind.

We have seen that the spectroscope has proved with certainty the
presence of hydrocarbon and other gases in comets. But we are not to
conclude from this that comets are merely masses of gas moving through
space. Though the total quantity of matter in a comet, as we have seen,
is exceedingly small, it is quite possible that the comet may consist of
a number of widely scattered particles of appreciable density; indeed,
we shall see in the next chapter, when describing the remarkable
relationship between comets and meteors, that we have reason to believe
this to be the case. We may therefore look on a comet as a swarm of tiny
solid particles, each surrounded by gas.

When we watch a great comet approaching the sun the nucleus is first
seen to become brighter and more clearly defined; at a later stage
luminous matter appears to be projected from it towards the sun, often
in the shape of a fan or a jet, which sometimes oscillates to and fro
like a pendulum. In the head of Halley's comet, for instance, Bessel
observed in October, 1835, that the jet in the course of eight hours
swung through an angle of 36 deg.. On other occasions concentric arcs of
light are formed round the nucleus, one after another, getting fainter
as they travel further from the nucleus. Evidently the material of the
fan or the arcs is repelled by the nucleus of the comet; but it is also
repelled by the sun, and this latter repulsive force compels the
luminous matter to overcome the attraction of gravitation, and to turn
back all round the nucleus in the direction away from the sun. In this
manner the tail is formed. (_See_ Plate XII.) The mathematical theory of
the formation of comets' tails has been developed on the assumption that
the matter which forms the tail is repelled both by the nucleus and by
the sun. This investigation was first undertaken by the great astronomer
Bessel, in his memoir on the appearance of Halley's comet in 1835, and
it has since been considerably developed by Roche and the Russian
astronomer Bredichin. Though we are, perhaps, hardly in a position to
accept this theory as absolutely true, we can assert that it accounts
well for the principal phenomena observed in the formation of comets'
tails.

Professor Bredichin has conducted his labours in the philosophical
manner which has led to many other great discoveries in science. He has
carefully collated the measurements and drawings of the tails of various
comets. One result has been obtained from this preliminary part of his
enquiry, which possesses a value that cannot be affected even if the
ulterior portion of his labours should be found to require
qualification. In the examination of the various tails, he observed that
the curvilinear shapes of the outlines fall into one or other of three
special types. In the first we have the straightest tails, which point
almost directly away from the sun. In the second are classed tails
which, after starting away from the sun, are curved backwards from the
direction towards which the comet is moving. In the third we find the
appendage still more curved in towards the comet's path. It can be shown
that the tails of comets can almost invariably be identified with one or
other of these three types; and in cases where the comet exhibits two
tails, as has sometimes happened, then they will be found to belong to
two of the types.

The adjoining diagram (Fig. 72) gives a sketch of an imaginary comet
furnished with tails of the three different types. The direction in
which the comet is moving is shown by the arrow-head on the line passing
through the nucleus. Bredichin concludes that the straightest of the
three tails, marked as Type I., is most probably due to the element
hydrogen; the tails of the second form are due to the presence of some
of the hydrocarbons in the body of the comet; while the small tails of
the third type may be due to iron or to some other element with a high
atomic weight. It will, of course, be understood that this diagram does
not represent any actual comet.

[Illustration: Fig. 72.--Bredichin's Theory of Comets' Tails.]

[Illustration: Fig. 73.--Tails of the Comet of 1858.]

An interesting illustration of this theory is afforded in the case of
the celebrated comet of 1858 already referred to, of which a drawing is
shown in Fig. 73. We find here, besides the great tail, which is the
characteristic feature of the body, two other faint streaks of light.
These are the edges of the hollow cone which forms a tail of Type I.
When we look through the central regions it will be easily understood
that the light is not sufficiently intense to be visible; at the edges,
however, a sufficient thickness of the cometary matter is presented, and
thus we have the appearance shown in this figure. It would seem that
Donati's comet possessed one tail due to hydrogen, and another due to
some of the compounds of carbon. The carbon compounds involved appear to
be of considerable variety, and there is, in consequence, a disposition
in the tails of the second type to a more indefinite outline than in the
hydrogen tails. Cases have been recorded in which several tails have
been seen simultaneously on the same comet. The most celebrated of these
is that which appeared in the year 1744. Professor Bredichin has devoted
special attention to the theory of this marvellous object, and he has
shown with a high degree of probability how the multiform tail could be
accounted for. The adjoining figure (Fig. 74) is from a sketch of this
object made on the morning of the 7th March by Mademoiselle Kirch at the
Berlin Observatory. The figure shows eleven streaks, of which the first
ten (counting from the left) represent the bright edges of five of the
tails, while the sixth and shortest tail is at the extreme right.
Sketches of this rare phenomenon were also made by Cheseaux at Lausanne
and De L'Isle at St. Petersburg. Before the perihelion passage the
comet had only had one tail, but a very splendid one.

[Illustration: Fig. 74.--The Comet of 1744.]

It is possible to submit some of the questions involved to the test of
calculation, and it can be shown that the repulsive force adequate to
produce the straight tail of Type I. need only be about twelve times as
large as the attraction of gravitation. Tails of the second type could
be produced by a repulsive force which was about equal to gravitation,
while tails of the third type would only require a repulsive force about
one-quarter the power of gravitation.[33] The chief repulsive force
known in nature is derived from electricity, and it has naturally been
surmised that the phenomena of comets' tails are due to the electric
condition of the sun and of the comet. It would be premature to assert
that the electric character of the comet's tail has been absolutely
demonstrated; all that can be said is that, as it seems to account for
the observed facts, it would be undesirable to introduce some mere
hypothetical repulsive force. It must be remembered that on quite other
grounds it is known that the sun is the seat of electric phenomena.

As the comet gradually recedes from the sun the repulsive force becomes
weaker, and accordingly we find that the tail of the comet declines. If
the comet be a periodic one, the same series of changes may take place
at its next return to perihelion. A new tail is formed, which also
gradually disappears as the comet regains the depths of space. If we may
employ the analogy of terrestrial vapours to guide us in our reasoning,
then it would seem that, as the comet retreats, its tail would condense
into myriads of small particles. Over these small particles the law of
gravitation would resume its undivided sway, no longer obscured by the
superior efficiency of the repulsion. The mass of the comet is, however,
so extremely small that it would not be able to recall these particles
by the mere force of attraction. It follows that, as the comet at each
perihelion passage makes a tail, it must on each occasion expend a
corresponding quantity of tail-making material. Let us suppose that the
comet was endowed in the beginning with a certain capital of those
particular materials which are adapted for the production of tails. Each
perihelion passage witnesses the formation of a tail, and the
expenditure of a corresponding amount of the capital. It is obvious that
this operation cannot go on indefinitely. In the case of the great
majority of comets the visits to perihelion are so extremely rare that
the consequences of the extravagance are not very apparent; but to those
periodic comets which have short periods and make frequent returns, the
consequences are precisely what might have been anticipated: the
tail-making capital has been gradually squandered, and thus at length we
have the spectacle of a comet without any tail at all. We can even
conceive that a comet may in this manner be completely dissipated, and
we shall see in the next chapter how this fate seems to have overtaken
Biela's periodic comet.

But as it sweeps through the solar system the comet may chance to pass
very near one of the larger planets, and, in passing, its motion may be
seriously disturbed by the attraction of the planet. If the velocity of
the comet is accelerated by this disturbing influence, the orbit will be
changed from a parabola into another curve known as a hyperbola, and the
comet will swing round the sun and pass away never to return. But if the
planet is so situated as to retard the velocity of the comet, the
parabolic orbit will be changed into an ellipse, and the comet will
become a periodic one. We can hardly doubt that some periodic comets
have been "captured" in this manner and thereby made permanent members
of our solar system, if we remark that the comets of short periods (from
three to eight years) come very near the orbit of Jupiter at some point
or other of their paths. Each of them must, therefore, have been near
the giant planet at some moment during their past history. Similarly the
other periodic comets of longer period approach near to the orbits of
either Saturn, Uranus, or Neptune, the last-mentioned planet being
probably responsible for the periodicity of Halley's comet. We have,
indeed, on more than one occasion, actually witnessed the violent
disturbance of a cometary orbit. The most interesting case is that of
Lexell's comet. In 1770 the French astronomer Messier (who devoted
himself with great success to the discovery of comets) detected a comet
for which Lexell computed the orbit, and found an ellipse with a period
of five years and some months. Yet the comet had never been seen before,
nor did it ever come back again. Long afterwards it was found, from most
laborious investigations by Burckhardt and Le Verrier, that the comet
had moved in a totally different orbit previous to 1767. But at the
beginning of the year 1767 it happened to come so close to Jupiter that
the powerful attraction of this planet forced it into a new orbit, with
a period of five and a half years. It passed the perihelion on the 13th
August, 1770, and again in 1776, but in the latter year it was not
conveniently situated for being seen from the earth. In the summer of
1779 the comet was again in the neighbourhood of Jupiter, and was thrown
out of its elliptic orbit, so that we have never seen it since, or,
perhaps, it would be safer to say that we have not with certainty
identified Lexell's comet with any comet observed since then. We are
also, in the case of several other periodic comets, able to fix in a
similar way the date when they started on their journeys in their
present elliptic orbits.

Such is a brief outline of the principal facts known with regard to
these interesting but perplexing bodies. We must be content with the
recital of what we know, rather than hazard guesses about matters beyond
our reach. We see that they are obedient to the great laws of
gravitation, and afford a striking illustration of their truth. We have
seen how modern science has dissipated the superstition with which, in
earlier ages, the advent of a comet was regarded. We no longer regard
such a body as a sign of impending calamity; we may rather look upon it
as an interesting and a beautiful visitor, which comes to please us and
to instruct us, but never to threaten or to destroy.




CHAPTER XVII.

SHOOTING STARS.


     Small Bodies of our System--Their Numbers--How they are
     Observed--The Shooting Star--The Theory of Heat--A Great Shooting
     Star--The November Meteors--Their Ancient History--The Route
     followed by the Shoal--Diagram of the Shoal of Meteors--How the
     Shoal becomes Spread out along its Path--Absorption of Meteors by
     the Earth--The Discovery of the Relation between Meteors and
     Comets--The Remarkable Investigations concerning the November
     Meteors--Two Showers in Successive Years--No Particles have ever
     been Identified from the Great Shooting Star Showers--Meteoric
     Stones--Chladni's Researches--Early Cases of Stone-falls--The
     Meteorite at Ensisheim--Collections of Meteorites--The Rowton
     Siderite--Relative Frequency of Iron and Stony
     Meteorites--Fragmentary Character of Meteorites--Tschermak's
     Hypothesis--Effects of Gravitation on a Missile ejected from a
     Volcano--Can they have come from the Moon?--The Claims of the Minor
     Planets to the Parentage of Meteorites--Possible Terrestrial
     Origin--The Ovifak Iron.

In the preceding chapters we have dealt with the gigantic bodies which
form the chief objects in what we know as the solar system. We have
studied mighty planets measuring thousands of miles in diameter, and we
have followed the movements of comets whose dimensions are often to be
told by millions of miles. Once, indeed, in a previous chapter we have
made a descent to objects much lower in the scale of magnitude, and we
have examined that numerous class of small bodies which we call the
minor planets. It is now, however, our duty to make a still further, and
this time a very long step, downwards in the scale of magnitude. Even
the minor planets must be regarded as colossal objects when compared
with those little bodies whose presence is revealed to us in an
interesting and sometimes in a striking manner.

These small bodies compensate in some degree for their minute size by
the profusion in which they exist. No attempt, indeed, could be made to
tell in figures the myriads in which they swarm throughout space. They
are probably of very varied dimensions, some of them being many pounds
or perhaps tons in weight, while others seem to be not larger than
pebbles, or even than grains of sand. Yet, insignificant as these bodies
may seem, the sun does not disdain to undertake their control. Each
particle, whether it be as small as the mote in a sunbeam or as mighty
as the planet Jupiter, must perforce trace out its path around the sun
in conformity with the laws of Kepler.

Who does not know that beautiful occurrence which we call a shooting
star, or which, in its more splendid forms, is sometimes called a meteor
or fireball? It is to objects of this class that we are now to direct
our attention.

A small body is moving round the sun. Just as a mighty planet revolves
in an ellipse, so even a small object will be guided round and round in
an ellipse with the sun in the focus. There are, at the present moment,
inconceivable myriads of such meteors moving in this manner. They are
too small and too distant for our telescopes, and we never see them
except under extraordinary circumstances.

When the meteor flashes into view it is moving with such enormous
velocity that it often traverses more than twenty miles in a second of
time. Such a velocity is almost impossible near the earth's surface: the
resistance of the air would prevent it. Aloft, in the emptiness of
space, there is no air to impede its flight. It may have been moving
round and round the sun for thousands, perhaps for millions of years,
without suffering any interference; but the supreme moment arrives, and
the meteor perishes in a streak of splendour.

In the course of its wanderings the body comes near the earth, and
within a few hundred miles of its surface begins to encounter the upper
surface of the atmosphere with which the earth is enclosed. To a body
moving with the appalling velocity of a meteor, a plunge into the
atmosphere is usually fatal. Even though the upper layers of air are
excessively attenuated, yet they suddenly check the velocity almost as
a rifle bullet would be checked when fired into water. As the meteor
rushes through the atmosphere the friction of the air warms its surface;
gradually it becomes red-hot, then white-hot, and is finally driven off
into vapour with a brilliant light, while we on the earth, one or two
hundred miles below, exclaim: "Oh, look, there is a shooting star!"

We have here an experiment illustrating the mechanical theory of heat.
It may seem incredible that mere friction should be sufficient to
generate heat enough to produce so brilliant a display, but we must
recollect two facts: first, that the velocity of the meteor is, perhaps,
one hundred times that of a rifle bullet; and, second, that the
efficiency of friction in developing heat is proportional to the square
of the velocity. The meteor in passing through the air may therefore
develop by the friction of the air about ten thousand times as much heat
as the rifle bullet. We do not make an exaggerated estimate in supposing
that the latter missile becomes heated ten degrees by friction; yet if
this be admitted, we must grant that there is such an enormous
development of heat attending the flight of the meteor that even a
fraction of it would be sufficient to drive the object into vapour.

Let us first consider the circumstances in which these external bodies
are manifested to us, and, for the sake of illustration, we may take a
remarkable fireball which occurred on November 6th, 1869. This body was
seen from many different places in England; and by combining and
comparing these observations, we obtain accurate information as to the
height of the object and the velocity with which it travelled.

It appears that this meteor commenced to be visible at a point ninety
miles above Frome, in Somersetshire, and that it vanished twenty-seven
miles over the sea, near St. Ives, in Cornwall. The path of the body,
and the principal localities from which it was observed, are shown in
the map (Fig. 75). The whole length of its visible course was about 170
miles, which was performed in a period of five seconds, thus giving an
average velocity of thirty-four miles per second. A remarkable feature
in the appearance which this fireball presented was the long persistent
streak of luminous cloud, about fifty miles long and four miles wide,
which remained in sight for fully fifty minutes. We have in this example
an illustration of the chief features of the phenomena of a shooting
star presented on a very grand scale. It is, however, to be observed
that the persistent luminous streak is not a universal, nor, indeed, a
very common characteristic of a shooting star.

[Illustration: Fig. 75.--The Path of the Fireball of November 6th,
1869.]

The small objects which occasionally flash across the field of the
telescope show us that there are innumerable telescopic shooting stars,
too small and too faint to be visible to the unaided eye. These objects
are all dissipated in the way we have described; it is, in fact, only at
the moment, and during the process of their dissolution, that we become
aware of their existence. Small as these missiles probably are, their
velocity is so prodigious that they would render the earth uninhabitable
were they permitted to rain down unimpeded on its surface. We must,
therefore, among the other good qualities of our atmosphere, not forget
that it constitutes a kindly screen, which shields us from a tempest of
missiles, the velocity of which no artillery could equal. It is, in
fact, the very fury of these missiles which is the cause of their utter
destruction. Their anxiety to strike us is so great, that friction
dissolves them into harmless vapour.

Next to a grand meteor such as that we have just described, the most
striking display in connection with shooting stars is what is known as a
shower. These phenomena have attracted a great deal of attention within
the last century, and they have abundantly rewarded the labour devoted
to them by affording some of the most interesting astronomical
discoveries of modern times.

The showers of shooting stars do not occur very frequently. No doubt the
quickened perception of those who especially attend to meteors will
detect a shower when others see only a few straggling shooting stars;
but, speaking generally, we may say that the present generation can
hardly have witnessed more than two or three such occurrences. I have
myself seen two great showers, one of which, in November, 1866, has
impressed itself on my memory as a glorious spectacle.

To commence the history of the November meteors it is necessary to look
back for nearly a thousand years. On the 12th of October, in the year
902, occurred the death of a Moorish king, and in connection with this
event an old chronicler relates how "that night there were seen, as it
were lances, an infinite number of stars, which scattered themselves
like rain to right and left, and that year was called the Year of the
Stars."

No one now believes that the heavens intended to commemorate the death
of the king by that display. The record is, however, of considerable
importance, for it indicates the year 902 as one in which a great shower
of shooting stars occurred. It was with the greatest interest
astronomers perceived that this was the first recorded instance of that
periodical shower, the last of whose regular returns were seen in 1799,
1833, and 1866. Further diligent literary research has revealed here and
there records of startling appearances in the heavens, which fit in with
successive returns of the November meteors. From the first instance, in
902, to the present day there have been twenty-nine visits of the
shower; and it is not unlikely that these may have all been seen in some
parts of the earth. Sometimes they may have been witnessed by savages,
who had neither the inclination nor the means to place on record an
apparition which to them was a source of terror. Sometimes, however,
these showers were observed by civilised communities. Their nature was
not understood, but the records were made; and in some cases, at all
events, these records have withstood the corrosion of time, and have now
been brought together to illustrate this curious subject. We have
altogether historical notices of twelve of these showers, collected
mainly by the industry of Professor H.A. Newton whose labours have
contributed so much to the advancement of our knowledge of shooting
stars.

Let us imagine a swarm of small objects roaming through space. Think of
a shoal of herrings in the ocean, extending over many square miles, and
containing countless myriads of individuals; or think of those enormous
flocks of wild pigeons in the United States of which Audubon has told
us. The shoal of shooting stars is perhaps much more numerous than the
herrings or the pigeons. The shooting stars are, however, not very close
together; they are, on an average, probably some few miles apart. The
actual bulk of the shoal is therefore prodigious; and its dimensions are
to be measured by hundreds of thousands of miles.

[Illustration: Fig. 76.--The Orbit of a Shoal of Meteors.]

The meteors cannot choose their own track, like the shoal of herrings,
for they are compelled to follow the route which is prescribed to them
by the sun. Each one pursues its own ellipse in complete independence of
its neighbours, and accomplishes its journey, thousands of millions of
miles in length, every thirty-three years. We cannot observe the meteors
during the greater part of their flight. There are countless myriads of
these bodies at this very moment coursing round their path. We never see
them till the earth catches them. Every thirty-three years the earth
makes a haul of these meteors just as successfully as the fisherman
among the herrings, and in much the same way, for while the fisherman
spreads his net in which the fishes meet their doom, so the earth has an
atmosphere wherein the meteors perish. We are told that there is no fear
of the herrings becoming exhausted, for those the fishermen catch are as
nothing compared to the profusion in which they abound in ocean. We may
say the same with regard to the meteors. They exist in such myriads,
that though the earth swallows up millions every thirty-three years,
plenty are left for future showers. The diagram (Fig. 76) will explain
the way in which the earth makes her captures. We there see the orbit
in which our globe moves around the sun, as well as the elliptic path of
the meteors, though it should be remarked that it is not convenient to
draw the figure exactly to scale, so that the path of the meteors is
relatively much larger than here represented. Once each year the earth
completes its revolution, and between the 13th and the 16th of November
crosses the track in which the meteors move. It will usually happen that
the great shoal is not at this point when the earth is passing. There
are, however, some stragglers all along the path, and the earth
generally catches a few of these at this date. They dart into our
atmosphere as shooting stars, and form what we usually speak of as the
November meteors.

It will occasionally happen that when the earth is in the act of
crossing the track it encounters the bulk of the meteors. Through the
shoal our globe then plunges, enveloped, of course, with the surrounding
coat of air. Into this net the meteors dash in countless myriads, never
again to emerge. In a few hours' time, the earth, moving at the rate of
eighteen miles a second, has crossed the track and emerges on the other
