We see then that nature operates in supporting the living part of the
creation, by laws as simple and beautiful as those by which the
animated world is governed. In the latter we see the order and
harmony which is observed by the planets, and their satellites, in
their revolution round the great source of heat and light;

   "---------- all combin'd
   And ruled unerring, by that Single Power,
   Which draws the stone projected, to the ground.

In the animated part of the creation, we observe those beautiful
phenomena which are exhibited by an almost infinite variety of
individuals; all depending upon, and produced by one simple law; the
acting of external powers upon their excitability.

I cannot express my admiration of the wisdom of the Creator better
than in the words of Thomson.

   "O unprofuse magnificence divine!
   O wisdom truly perfect! thus to call
   From a few causes such a scheme of life;
   Effects so various, beautiful, and great."

Life then, or those functions which we call living, are the effects
of certain exciting powers acting on the excitability, or property
distinguishing living from dead matter. When these effects, viz. the
functions, flow easily, pleasantly, and completely, from the action
of these powers, they indicate that state which we call health.

We may therefore, as we before hinted, distinguish three states of
the irritable fibre, or three different degrees of excitability, of
which the living body is susceptible.

1. The state of health which is peculiar to each individual, and
which has been called by Haller, and other physiologists, the tone of
the fibre. This is produced by a middle degree of stimulus acting
upon a middle degree of excitability: and the effect produced by this
action, we call excitement.

2. The state of accumulation, produced by the absence or diminished
action of the accustomed stimuli.

3. The state of exhaustion, produced by the too powerful action of
stimuli; and this may be produced either by the too powerful, or long
continued action of the common stimulants which support life, such as
food, air, heat, and exercise; or it may be caused by an application
of stimulants, which act more powerfully on the excitability, and
which exhaust it more quickly, such as wine, spirits, and opium,
musk, camphor, and various other articles used in medicines.

The state of health, or tone, if we use that term, consists therefore
in a certain quantity or energy of excitability necessary to its
preservation. To maintain this state, the action of the stimuli
should be strong enough to carry off from the body the surplus of
this irritable principle. To obtain this end, a certain equilibrium
is necessary between the excitability and the stimuli applied, or the
sum of all the stimuli acting upon it must be always nearly equal,
and sufficient to prevent an excess of excitability, but not so
strong as to carry off more than this excess. It is in this
equilibrium between the acting stimuli and the excitability, that the
health, or tone of the living body consists.

When the sum of the stimuli, acting on the body, is so small, as not
to carry off the excess of excitability, it accumulates, and diseases
of irritability are produced. Of this nature are those diseases to
which the poor are often subject, and which will be particularly
considered hereafter.

When the sum of the stimuli acting on the body, is too great, it is
deprived not only of the excess of excitability, but also of some
portion of the irritable principle necessary for the tone of the
body: or, to speak more distinctly, the body loses more excitability
than it receives, and of course must, in a short time, be in a state
of exhaustion. This gives rise to diseases which afflict drinkers, or
those who indulge in any kind of intemperance, or persons born in
climates where the temperature is moderate, but who emigrate to those
which are much warmer.

Thus we have endeavoured, after the example of Dr. Brown, to
ascertain the cause of the healthy state, before the causes of
diseases were investigated; and though this is contrary to the
general practice, yet it must be evident to every one, that unless we
are acquainted with the causes of good health, it will be impossible
for us to form any estimate of those variations from that state,
called diseases: hence it is that a number of diseases, which have
been brought on merely by the undue action of the exciting powers,
such as gout, rheumatism, and the numerous trains of nervous
complaints, which were by no means understood, may be easily and
satisfactorily explained, and as easily cured, by restoring the
proper action of these powers, and bringing the excitability to its
proper state. As this theory, therefore, is so important, not only in
respect to the preservation of health, which nearly concerns every
individual, but to the cure of diseases, which is the province of the
physician, I have endeavoured to explain it as fully and minutely as
possible; to make it still plainer we may perhaps make use of the
following illustration.

Suppose a fire to be made in a grate or furnace, filled with a kind
of fuel not very combustible, and which could only be kept burning by
means of a machine, containing several tubes placed before it, and
constantly pouring streams of air into it. Suppose also a pipe to be
fixed in the back of the chimney, through which a constant supply of
fresh fuel is gradually let down into the grate, to repair the waste
occasioned by the combustion kept up by the air machine.

The grate will represent the human body; the fuel in it the life or
excitability, and the tube behind, supplying fresh fuel, will denote
the power of all living systems, constantly to regenerate or produce
excitability; the air machine, consisting of several tubes, may
denote the various stimuli applied to the excitability of the body;
the flame produced in consequence of that application, represents
life; the product of the exciting powers acting upon the
excitability.

Here we see, that flame, like life, is drawn forth from fuel by the
constant application of streams of air, poured into it from the
different tubes of the machine. When the quantity of air poured in
through these different tubes is sufficient to consume the fuel as it
is supplied, a constant and regular flame will be produced: but if we
suppose that some of them are stopped, or that they do not supply a
sufficient quantity of air, then the fuel will accumulate, and the
flame will be languid and smothered, but liable to break out with
violence, when the usual quantity of air is supplied.

On the contrary, if we suppose a greater quantity of air to rush
through the tubes, then the fuel will be consumed or exhausted faster
than it is supplied; and in order therefore to reduce the combustion
to the proper degree, the quantity of air supplied must be
diminished, and the quantity of fuel increased.

If we suppose one of the tubes, instead of common air, to supply
oxygen gas, it will represent the action of wine, spirits, ether,
opium, and other powerful stimulants upon the body: a bright and
vivid flame will be produced, which however will only be of short
duration, for the fuel will be consumed faster than it is supplied,
and a state of exhaustion will take place.

We may carry this illustration still further, and suppose that the
air tubes exhaust the fuel every day faster than it can be supplied,
then it will be necessary at night to stop up some of the tubes, so
that the expense of fuel may be less than its supply, in order to
make up for the deficiency. When this is made up, the tubes may in
the morning be opened, and the combustion carried on during the day
as usual. This will illustrate the nature of sleep. In speaking of
this subject, it was observed, that the more violently the exciting
powers have acted, the sooner is sleep brought on; because the
excitability is sooner exhausted. In the same way the more the air
rushes through the tubes, the sooner will the fuel be consumed, and
want replenishing. When the exciting powers have acted feebly, a
person feels no inclination to sleep, because the excitability is not
exhausted to the proper degree, and therefore does not want
accumulating. But any diffusible stimulus, as spirits, or opium, will
soon exhaust it to the proper degree.

In the same way, if the air have not passed rapidly through the
tubes, the fuel will not be exhausted: but it may be brought to a
proper degree of exhaustion by the application of oxygen gas.

When the air which nourishes the flame is so regulated, that it
consumes the fuel as it is supplied, but no faster, a clear and
steady flame will be kept up, which will go on as long as the fuel
lasts, or the grate resists the action of the fire: but at last when
the fuel, which we do not suppose inexhaustible, is burnt out, the
fire must cease.

In the same manner, if the different exciting powers which support
life were properly regulated, all the functions of the body would be
properly performed, and we should pass our life in a state of health,
seldom known to any but savages, and brute animals not under the
dominion of man, who regulate these powers merely by the necessities
of nature.

When air is applied in too great quantity, and especially if some of
the tubes convey oxygen gas, then a violent combustion and flame is
excited, which will, in all probability, consume or burn out the
furnace or grate, or if it do not, it will burn out the fuel, and
thus exhaust itself.

In like manner, if the stimulants which support life be made to act
too powerfully, and particularly if any powerful stimulus, not
natural to the body, such as wine or spirits, be taken in too great
quantity, a violent inflammatory action will be the consequence,
which may destroy the human machine: but if it do not, it will
exhaust the excitability, and thus bring on great debility.

This analogy might be pursued further, but my intention was solely to
illustrate some of the outlines of our theory, by a comparison which
may facilitate the conception of the manner in which external powers
act on living bodies. The different powers which support life, and
without whose action we are unable to exist, such as heat, food, air,
&c. have been very improperly called nonnaturals, a term which is
much more applicable to those substances which we are daily in the
habit of receiving into the system, which excite it to undue actions,
and which nature never intended we should receive; such as spirituous
and fermented liquors, and high seasoned foods. In the preceding
illustration, I have spoken of a tube, as constantly pouring in fresh
fuel, because it was not easy otherwise to convey a familiar idea of
the power which all living systems possess of renewing their
excitability, when exhausted. The excitability is an unknown
somewhat, subject to peculiar laws, some of which we have examined,
but whose different states we are obliged to describe, though,
perhaps, inaccurately, by terms borrowed from the qualities of
material substances.

Though Dr. Brown very properly declined entering into the
consideration of the nature of excitability, or the manner in which
it is produced, the discoveries which have been made in chemistry
since his time, have thrown great light on the subject, and it is now
rendered highly probable that the excitability or vital principle, is
communicated to the body by the circulation, and is intimately
connected with the process of oxidation.

Many circumstances would tend to show, that a strict connexion exists
between the reception of oxygen into the body, and the vital
principle.

When an animal has been killed by depriving it of oxygen gas, the
heart and other muscles, and indeed the whole system, will be found
completely to have lost its excitability. This is not the case when
an animal is killed in a different manner. When an animal is shot, or
killed in the common manner, by bleeding to death, if the heart be
taken out, it will contract for some hours, on the application of
stimulants. But this is not the case with an animal that has been
drowned, or killed by immersion in carbonic acid, azotic, or
hydrogenous gases; in these last instances, the heart either does not
contract at all, or very feebly, on the application of the strongest
stimulants.

We have already seen that oxygen unites with the blood in the lungs,
during respiration: by the circulation of the blood it is distributed
to every part of the system, and we shall find, that in proportion to
its abundance is the excitability of the body. In proof of this, I
shall relate some facts and experiments.

Dr. Girtanner injected a quantity of very pure oxygen gas into the
jugular vein of a dog: the animal raised terrible outcries, breathed
very quickly, and with great difficulty: by little and little his
limbs became hard and stiff, he fell asleep, and died in the course
of a few minutes afterwards. It ought here to be observed, that any
of the gases, or almost any fluid, however mild, when thus suddenly
introduced into the circulating system, generally, and speedily,
occasions death.

On opening the chest, the heart was found more irritable than
ordinary, and its external contractions and dilatations continued for
more than an hour: the right auricle of the heart, which usually
contains black venous blood, contained, as well as the right
ventricle, a quantity of blood of a bright vermilion colour; and all
the muscles of the body were found to be more than usually irritable.
This experiment not only proves that the vermilion colour of the
blood proceeds from oxygen, but likewise seems to show, that oxygen
is the cause of excitability.

A quantity of azotic gas, which had been exposed for some time to the
contact of lime water, in order to separate any carbonic acid gas it
might contain, was injected into the jugular vein of a dog. The
animal died in twenty seconds. Upon opening the chest, the heart was
found filled with black and coagulated blood: this organ, and most of
the muscles had nearly lost the whole of their irritability, for they
contracted but very weakly, on the application of the strongest
stimulants.

A quantity of carbonic acid gas was injected into the jugular vein of
a dog: the animal became sleepy, and died in about a quarter of an
hour: the heart was found filled with black and coagulated blood, and
had lost the whole of its irritability; neither it, nor any of the
muscles producing any contractions, upon the application of
stimulants.

Humboldt likewise mentions a curious fact, which tends strongly to
confirm this idea. When the excitability of the limb of a frog had
been so far exhausted, by the application of zinc and silver, that it
would produce no more contractions, on moistening it with oxygenated
muriatic acid, the contractions were renewed.

After the excitability of the sensitive plant (mimosa pudica) had
been so far exhausted, by irritation, that it ceased to contract,
when further irritated, I restored this excitability, and brought it
to a very high degree of irritability, by moistening the earth in
which it grew with oxygenated muriatic acid. Seeds likewise vegetate
more quickly when moistened with this acid, than when they are not.

In short, we shall find, first, that every thing which increases the
quantity of oxygen in organized bodies, increases at the same time
their excitability.

Secondly, That whatever diminishes the quantity of oxygen, diminishes
the excitability.

The excitability of animals, made to breathe oxygen gas, or to take
the oxygenated muriate of potash, or acid fruits, is very much
increased.

On the contrary, when persons have inspired carbonic acid, or azotic
gas, or have taken into the system substances which have a strong
affinity for oxygen, and therefore tend to abstract it, such as
hydrogen, and spirits, the excitability becomes very much diminished.

When we sleep, in consequence of the excitability being exhausted,
the breathing becomes free, and a great quantity of oxygen is
received by the lungs, and combined with the blood, while very little
of it becomes exhausted by the actions of the body, for none,
excepting those which are called involuntary motions, are carried on
during sound sleep: so that in a few hours the body recovers the
excitability which it had lost: it is again sensible of the
impressions of external objects, and with the return of light we
wake.

These facts afford satisfactory proofs that the excitability of the
body is proportioned to the oxygen which it receives: but in what
manner it produces this state of susceptibility, and how it is
exhausted by stimulants, we have yet to learn.

The following theory may perhaps throw some light upon the subject. I
propose it, however, merely as an hypothesis, for we have no direct
proofs of it, but it seems to account for many phenomena.

It is now well known, that while the limb of an animal possesses
excitability, the smallest quantity of electricity sent along the
principal nerve leading to it, produces contractions similar to those
produced by the will. This is instanced in the common galvanic
experiment with the limb of a frog, which I had formerly occasion to
show.

From the effects produced, when a stream of electricity is sent
through water, I think it not improbable that hydrogen and
electricity may be identical. When a piece of zinc and silver are
connected together, and the zinc is put in a situation to decompose
water, and oxidate, a current of hydrogen gas will separate from the
silver wire, provided this be immersed under water; but when it is
not, a current of electricity passes, which is sensible to the
electrometer.

Now there appears no greater improbability in the supposition that
hydrogen, in a certain state, may be capable of passing through
metals, and animal substances, in the form of electricity, and that
when it comes in contact with water, which is not so good a
conductor, it may combine with caloric, and form hydrogen gas, in
which state it becomes incapable of passing through the conductors of
electricity: I say there appears no greater improbability in this,
than that caloric should sometimes be in such a state, that it will
pass through metals, and animal substances, which conduct it, and at
other times, as when combined with oxygen or hydrogen, it should form
gases, and be then incapable of passing through these conductors of
heat. Galvanic effects may be produced by the oxidation of fresh
muscular fibre without the aid of metals, and contractions have been
thus produced in the limb of an animal; and we have already noticed,
that when this contraction ceases, it may be restored, by moistening
the limb with oxygenated muriatic acid.

The excitability of the body may, most probably, be conveyed by
respiration, and the circulation of the blood, which tend continually
to oxidate the different parts: and hydrogen or electricity may be
secreted by the brain, and sent along the nerves, which are such good
conductors of it, and by uniting with the oxygen of the muscle, may
cause it to contract; but as the oxygen will, by this union, be
diminished, if the contractions be often repeated, the excitability
will thus be expended faster than it can be supplied by the
circulation, and will become exhausted. But will facts bear us out in
this explanation? To see this, we must examine the chemical nature of
the substances which produce the greatest action, and the greatest
exhaustion of the vital principle: namely, those which produce
intoxication.

Fermented liquors differ from water, in containing carbon and more
hydrogen: these produce intoxication: but pure spirits, which contain
still more hydrogen, produce a still higher degree of intoxication,
and consequent exhaustion of the excitability. Ether, which appears
to be little more than condensed hydrogen, probably kept in a liquid
state by union with a small quantity of carbon, and which easily
expands by caloric into a gas, which very much resembles hydrogen
gas, produces a still greater degree of intoxication: so that we see
