(Page 291)]

On account of the curvature of the earth's surface, the height at which
the Pole Star is seen above the horizon at any place depends regularly
upon the latitude; that is to say, the distance of the place in question
from the equator. For instance, at the north pole of the earth, where
the latitude is greatest, namely, 90 deg., the Pole Star will appear
directly overhead; whereas in England, where the latitude is about 50
deg., it will be seen a little more than half way up the northern sky.
At the equator, where the latitude is _nil_, the Pole Star will be on
the horizon due north.

In consequence of its unique position, the Pole Star is of very great
service in the study of the constellations. It is a kind of centre
around which to hang our celestial ideas--a starting point, so to speak,
in our voyages about the sky.

According to the constellation figures, the Pole Star is in _Ursa
Minor_, or the Little Bear, and is situated at the end of the tail of
that imaginary figure (see Plate XIX., p. 292). The chief stars of this
constellation form a group not unlike the Plough, except that the
"handle" is turned in the contrary direction. The Americans, in
consequence, speak of it as the "Little Dipper."

Before leaving this region of the sky, it will be well to draw attention
to the second magnitude star [z] in the Great Bear (Zeta Ursae Majoris),
which is the middle star in the "handle" of the Plough. This star is
usually known as Mizar, a name given to it by the Arabians. A person
with good eyesight can see quite near to it a fifth magnitude star,
known under the name of Alcor. We have here a very good example of that
deception in the estimation of objects in the sky, which has been
alluded to in an earlier chapter. Alcor is indeed distant from Mizar by
about one-third the apparent diameter of the moon, yet no one would
think so!

On the other side of Polaris from the Plough, and at about an equal
apparent distance, will be found a figure in the form of an irregular
"W", made up of second and third magnitude stars. This is the well-known
"Cassiopeia's Chair"--portion of the constellation of _Cassiopeia_ (see
Plate XIX., p. 292).

On either side of the Pole Star, about midway between the Plough and
Cassiopeia's Chair, but a little further off from it than these, are the
constellations of _Auriga_ and _Lyra_ (see Plate XIX., p. 292). The
former constellation will be easily recognised, because its chief
features are a brilliant yellowish first magnitude star, with one of the
second magnitude not far from it. The first magnitude star is Capella,
the other is [b] Aurigae. Lyra contains only one first magnitude
star--Vega, pale blue in colour. This star has a certain interest for us
from the fact that, as a consequence of that slow shift of direction of
the earth's axis known as Precession, it will be very near the north
pole of the heavens in some 12,000 years, and so will then be considered
the pole star (see Plate XIX., p. 292). The constellation of Lyra
itself, it must also be borne in mind, occupies that region of the
heavens towards which the solar system is travelling.

The handle of the Plough points roughly towards the constellation of
_Booetes_, in which is the brilliant first magnitude star Arcturus. This
star is of an orange tint.

Between Booetes and Lyra lie the constellations of _Corona Borealis_ (or
the Northern Crown) and _Hercules_. The chief feature of Corona
Borealis, which is a small constellation, is a semicircle of six small
stars, the brightest of which is of the second magnitude. The
constellation of Hercules is very extensive, but contains no star
brighter than the third magnitude.

Near to Lyra, on the side away from Hercules, are the constellations of
_Cygnus_ and _Aquila_. Of the two, the former is the nearer to the Pole
Star, and will be recognised by an arrangement of stars widely set in
the form of a cross, or perhaps indeed more like the framework of a
boy's kite. The position of Aquila will be found through the fact that
three of its brightest stars are almost in a line and close together.
The middle of these is Altair, a yellowish star of the first magnitude.

At a little distance from Ursa Major, on the side away from the Pole
Star, is the constellation of _Leo_, or the Lion. Its chief feature is a
series of seven stars, supposed to form the head of that animal. The
arrangement of these stars is, however, much more like a sickle,
wherefore this portion of the constellation is usually known as the
"Sickle of Leo." At the end of the handle of the sickle is a white first
magnitude star--Regulus.

The reader will, no doubt, recollect that it is from a point in the
Sickle of Leo that the Leonid meteors appear to radiate.

The star second in brightness in the constellation of Leo is known as
Denebola. This star, now below the second magnitude, seems to have been
very much brighter in the past. It is noted, indeed, as a brilliant
first magnitude star by Al Sufi, that famous Persian astronomer who
lived, as we have seen, in the tenth century. Ptolemy also notes it as
of the first magnitude.

In the neighbourhood of Auriga, and further than it from the Pole Star,
are several remarkable constellations--Taurus, Orion, Gemini, Canis
Minor, and Canis Major (see Plate XX., p. 296).

The first of these, _Taurus_ (or the Bull), contains two conspicuous
star groups--the Pleiades and the Hyades. The Pleiades are six or seven
small stars quite close together, the majority of which are of the
fourth magnitude. This group is sometimes occulted by the moon. The way
in which the stars composing it are arranged is somewhat similar to that
in the Plough, though of course on a scale ever so much smaller. The
impression which the group itself gives to the casual glance is thus
admirably pictured in Tennyson's _Locksley Hall_:--

"Many a night I saw the Pleiads, rising through the mellow shade,
Glitter like a swarm of fire-flies tangled in a silver braid."

[Illustration: PLATE XX. ORION AND HIS NEIGHBOURS

We see here that magnificent region of the sky which contains the
brightest star of all--Sirius. Note also especially the Milky Way, the
Pleiades, the Hyades, and the "Belt" and "Sword" of Orion.

(Page 296)]

The group of the Hyades occupies the "head" of the Bull, and is much
more spread out than that of the Pleiades. It is composed besides of
brighter stars, the brightest being one of the first magnitude,
Aldebaran. This star is of a red colour, and is sometimes known as the
"Eye of the Bull."

The constellation of _Orion_ is easily recognised as an irregular
quadrilateral formed of four bright stars, two of which, Betelgeux
(reddish) and Rigel (brilliant white), are of the first magnitude. In
the middle of the quadrilateral is a row of three second magnitude
stars, known as the "Belt" of Orion. Jutting off from this is another
row of stars called the "Sword" of Orion.

The constellation of _Gemini_, or the Twins, contains two bright
stars--Castor and Pollux--close to each other. Pollux, though marked
with the Greek letter [b], is the brighter of the two, and nearly of the
standard first magnitude.

Just further from the Pole than Gemini, is the constellation of _Canis
Minor_, or the Lesser Dog. Its chief star is a white first magnitude
one--Procyon.

Still further again from the Pole than Canis Minor is the constellation
of _Canis Major_, or the Greater Dog. It contains the brightest star in
the whole sky, the first magnitude star Sirius, bluish-white in colour,
also known as the "Dog Star." This star is almost in line with the stars
forming the Belt of Orion, and is not far from that constellation.

Taken in the following order, the stars Capella, [b] Aurigae, Castor,
Pollux, Procyon, and Sirius, when they are all above the horizon at the
same time, form a beautiful curve stretching across the heaven.

The groups of stars visible in the southern skies have by no means the
same fascination for us as those in the northern. The ancients were in
general unacquainted with the regions beyond the equator, and so their
scheme of constellations did not include the sky around the South Pole
of the heavens. In modern times, however, this part of the celestial
expanse was also portioned out into constellations for the purpose of
easy reference; but these groupings plainly lack that simplicity of
conception and legendary interest which are so characteristic of the
older ones.

The brightest star in the southern skies is found in the constellation
of _Argo_, and is known as Canopus. In brightness it comes next to
Sirius, and so is second in that respect in the entire heaven. It does
not, however, rise above the English horizon.

Of the other southern constellations, two call for especial notice, and
these adjoin each other. One is _Centaurus_ (or the Centaur), which
contains the two first magnitude stars, [a] and [b] Centauri. The first
of these, Alpha Centauri, comes next in brightness to Canopus, and is
notable as being the nearest of all the stars to our earth. The other
constellation is called _Crux_, and contains five stars set in the form
of a rough cross, known as the "Southern Cross." The brightest of these,
[a] Crucis, is of the first magnitude.

Owing to the Precession of the Equinoxes, which, as we have seen,
gradually shifts the position of the Pole among the stars, certain
constellations used to be visible in ancient times in more northerly
latitudes than at present. For instance, some five thousand years ago
the Southern Cross rose above the English horizon, and was just visible
in the latitude of London. It has, however, long ago even ceased to be
seen in the South of Europe. The constellation of Crux happens to be
situated in that remarkable region of the southern skies, in which are
found the stars Canopus and Alpha Centauri, and also the most brilliant
portion of the Milky Way. It is believed to be to this grand celestial
region that allusion is made in the Book of Job (ix. 9), under the title
of the "Chambers of the South." The "Cross" must have been still a
notable feature in the sky of Palestine in the days when that ancient
poem was written.

There is no star near enough to the southern pole of the heavens to earn
the distinction of South Polar Star.

The Galaxy, or _Milky Way_ (see Plate XX., p. 296), is a broad band of
diffused light which is seen to stretch right around the sky. The
telescope, however, shows it to be actually composed of a great host of
very faint stars--too faint, indeed, to be separately distinguished with
the naked eye. Along a goodly stretch of its length it is cleft in two;
while near the south pole of the heavens it is entirely cut across by a
dark streak.

In this rapid survey of the face of the sky, we have not been able to do
more than touch in the broadest manner upon some of the most noticeable
star groups and a few of the most remarkable stars. To go any further is
not a part of our purpose; our object being to deal with celestial
bodies as they actually are, and not in those groupings under which they
display themselves to us as a mere result of perspective.


[29] Attention must here be drawn to the fact that the name of the
constellation is always put in the genitive case.

[30] The early peoples, as we have seen, appear to have been attracted
by those groupings of the stars which reminded them in a way of the
figures of men and animals. We moderns, on the other hand, seek almost
instinctively for geometrical arrangements. This is, perhaps,
symptomatic of the evolution of the race. In the growth of the
individual we find, for example, something analogous. A child, who has
been given pencil and paper, is almost certain to produce grotesque
drawings of men and animals; whereas the idle and half-conscious
scribblings which a man may make upon his blotting-paper are usually of
a geometrical character.

[31] Because the line joining them _points_ in the direction of the Pole
Star.




CHAPTER XXIV

SYSTEMS OF STARS


Many stars are seen comparatively close together. This may plainly arise
from two reasons. Firstly, the stars may happen to be almost in the same
line of sight; that is to say, seen in nearly the same direction; and
though one star may be ever so much nearer to us than the other, the
result will give all the appearance of a related pair. A seeming
arrangement of two stars in this way is known as a "double," or double
star; or, indeed, to be very precise, an "optical double." Secondly, in
a pair of stars, both bodies may be about the same distance from us, and
actually connected as a system like, for instance, the moon and the
earth. A pairing of stars in this way, though often casually alluded to
as a double star, is properly termed a "binary," or binary system.

But collocations of stars are by no means limited to two. We find,
indeed, all over the sky such arrangements in which there are three or
more stars; and these are technically known as "triple" or "multiple"
stars respectively. Further, groups are found in which a great number of
stars are closely massed together, such a massing together of stars
being known as a "cluster."

The Pole Star (Polaris) is a double star, one of the components being of
a little below the second magnitude, and the other a little below the
ninth. They are so close together that they appear as one star to the
naked eye, but they may be seen separate with a moderately sized
telescope. The brighter star is yellowish, and the faint one white. This
brighter star is found _by means of the spectroscope_ to be actually
composed of three stars so very close together that they cannot be seen
separately even with a telescope. It is thus a triple star, and the
three bodies of which it is composed are in circulation about each
other. Two of them are darker than the third.

The method of detecting binary stars by means of the spectroscope is an
application of Doppler's principle. It will, no doubt, be remembered
that, according to the principle in question, we are enabled, from
certain shiftings of the lines in the spectrum of a luminous body, to
ascertain whether that body is approaching us or receding from us. Now
there are certain stars which always appear single even in the largest
telescopes, but when the spectroscope is directed to them a spectrum
_with two sets of lines_ is seen. Such stars must, therefore, be double.
Further, if the shiftings of the lines, in a spectrum like this, tell us
that the component stars are making small movements to and from us which
go on continuously, we are therefore justified in concluding that these
are the orbital revolutions of a binary system greatly compressed by
distance. Such connected pairs of stars, since they cannot be seen
separately by means of any telescope, no matter how large, are known as
"spectroscopic binaries."

In observations of spectroscopic binaries we do not always get a double
spectrum. Indeed, if one of the components be below a certain
magnitude, its spectrum will not appear at all; and so we are left in
the strange uncertainty as to whether this component is merely faint or
actually dark. It is, however, from the shiftings of the lines in the
spectrum of the other component that we see that an orbital movement is
going on, and are thus enabled to conclude that two bodies are here
connected into a system, although one of these bodies resolutely refuses
directly to reveal itself even to the all-conquering spectroscope.

Mizar, that star in the handle of the Plough to which we have already
drawn attention, will be found with a small telescope to be a fine
double, one of the components being white and the other greenish.
Actually, however, as the American astronomer, Professor F.R. Moulton,
points out, these stars are so far from each other that if we could be
transferred to one of them we should see the other merely as an ordinary
bright star. The spectroscope shows that the brighter of these stars is
again a binary system of two huge suns, the components revolving around
each other in a period of about twenty days. This discovery made by
Professor E.C. Pickering, the _first_ of the kind by means of the
spectroscope, was announced in 1889 from the Harvard Observatory in the
United States.

A star close to Vega, known as [e] (Epsilon) Lyrae (see Plate XIX., p.
292), is a double, the components of which may be seen separately with
the naked eye by persons with very keen eyesight. If this star, however,
be viewed with the telescope, the two companions will be seen far apart;
and it will be noticed that each of them is again a double.

By means of the spectroscope Capella is shown to be really composed of
two stars (one about twice as bright as the other) situated very close
together and forming a binary system. Sirius is also a binary system;
but it is what is called a "visual" one, for its component stars may be
_seen_ separately in very large telescopes. Its double, or rather
binary, nature, was discovered in 1862 by the celebrated optician Alvan
G. Clark, while in the act of testing the 18-inch refracting telescope,
then just constructed by his firm, and now at the Dearborn Observatory,
Illinois, U.S.A. The companion is only of the tenth magnitude, and
revolves around Sirius in a period of about fifty years, at a mean
distance equal to about that of Uranus from the sun. Seen from Sirius,
it would shine only something like our full moon. It must be
self-luminous and not a mere planet; for Mr. Gore has shown that if it
shone only by the light reflected from Sirius, it would be quite
invisible even in the Great Yerkes Telescope.

Procyon is also a binary, its companion having been discovered by
Professor J.M. Schaeberle at the Lick Observatory in 1896. The period of
revolution in this system is about forty years. Observations by Mr. T.
Lewis of Greenwich seem, however, to point to the companion being a
small nebula rather than a star.

The star [e] (Eta) Cassiopeiae (see Plate XIX., p. 292), is easily seen
as a fine double in telescopes of moderate size. It is a binary system,
the component bodies revolving around their common centre of gravity in
a period of about two hundred years. This system is comparatively near
to us, _i.e._ about nine light years, or a little further off than
Sirius.

In a small telescope the star Castor will be found double, the
components, one of which is brighter than the other, forming a binary
system. The fainter of these was found by Belopolsky, with the
spectroscope, to be composed of a system of two stars, one bright and
the other either dark or not so bright, revolving around each other in a
period of about three days. The brighter component of Castor is also a
spectroscopic binary, with a period of about nine days; so that the
whole of what we see with the naked eye as Castor, is in reality a
remarkable system of four stars in mutual orbital movement.

Alpha Centauri--the nearest star to the earth--is a visual binary, the
component bodies revolving around each other in a period of about
eighty-one years. The extent of this system is about the same as that of
Sirius. Viewed from each other, the bodies would shine only like our sun
as seen from Neptune.

Among the numerous binary stars the orbits of some fifty have been
satisfactorily determined. Many double stars, for which this has not yet
been done, are, however, believed to be, without doubt, binary. In some
cases a parallax has been found; so that we are enabled to estimate in
miles the actual extent of such systems, and the masses of the bodies in
terms of the sun's mass.

Most of the spectroscopic binaries appear to be upon a smaller scale
than the telescopic ones. Some are, indeed, comparatively speaking,
quite small. For instance, the component stars forming [b] Aurigae are
about eight million miles apart, while in [z] Geminorum, the distance
between the bodies is only a little more than a million miles.

Spectroscopic binaries are probably very numerous. Professor W.W.
Campbell, Director of the Lick Observatory, estimates, for instance,
that, out of about every half-a-dozen stars, one is a spectroscopic
binary.

It is only in the case of binary systems that we can discover the masses
of stars at all. These are ascertained from their movements with regard
to each other under the influence of their mutual gravitative
attractions. In the case of simple stars we have clearly nothing of the
kind to judge by; though, if we can obtain a parallax, we may hazard a
guess from their brightness.

Binary stars were incidentally discovered by Sir William Herschel. In
his researches to get a stellar parallax he had selected a number of
double stars for test purposes, on the assumption that, if one of such a
pair were much nearer than the other, it might show a displacement with
regard to its neighbour as a direct consequence of the earth's orbital
movement around the sun. He, however, failed entirely to obtain any
parallaxes, the triumph in this being, as we have seen, reserved for
Bessel. But in some of the double stars which he had selected, he found
certain alterations in the relative positions of the bodies, which
plainly were not a consequence of the earth's motion, but showed rather
that there was an actual circling movement of the bodies themselves
under their mutual attractions. It is to be noted that the existence of
such connected pairs had been foretold as probable by the Rev. John
Michell, who lived a short time before Herschel.

The researches into binary systems--both those which can be seen with
the eye and those which can be observed by means of the spectroscope,
ought to impress upon us very forcibly the wide sway of the law of
gravitation.

Of star clusters about 100 are known, and such systems often contain
several thousand stars. They usually cover an area of sky somewhat
smaller than the moon appears to fill. In most clusters the stars are
very faint, and, as a rule, are between the twelfth and sixteenth
magnitudes. It is difficult to say whether these are actually small
bodies, or whether their faintness is due merely to their great distance
from us, since they are much too far off to show any appreciable
parallactic displacement. Mr. Gore, however, thinks there is good
evidence to show that the stars in clusters are really close, and that
the clusters themselves fill a comparatively small space.

One of the finest examples of a cluster is the great globular one, in
the constellation of Hercules, discovered by Halley in 1714. It contains
over 5000 stars, and upon a clear, dark night is visible to the naked
eye as a patch of light. In the telescope, however, it is a wonderful
object. There are also fine clusters in the constellations of Auriga,
Pegasus, and Canes Venatici. In the southern heavens there are some
magnificent examples of globular clusters. This hemisphere seems,
indeed, to be richer in such objects than the northern. For instance,
there is a great one in the constellation of the Centaur, containing
some 6000 stars (see Plate XXI., p. 306).

[Illustration: PLATE XXI. THE GREAT GLOBULAR CLUSTER IN THE SOUTHERN
CONSTELLATION OF CENTAURUS

From a photograph taken at the Cape Observatory, on May 24th, 1903. Time
of exposure, 1 hour.

(Page 306)]

Certain remarkable groups of stars, of a nature similar to clusters,
though not containing such faint or densely packed stars as those we
have just alluded to, call for a mention in this connection. The best
example of such star groups are the Pleiades and the Hyades (see Plate
XX., p. 296), Coma Berenices, and Praesepe (or the Beehive), the
last-named being in the constellation of Cancer.

Stars which alter in their brightness are called _Variable Stars_, or
"variables." The first star whose variability attracted attention is
that known as Omicron Ceti, namely, the star marked with the Greek
letter [o] (Omicron) in the constellation of Cetus, or the Whale, a
constellation situated not far from Taurus. This star, the variability
of which was discovered by Fabricius in 1596, is also known as Mira, or
the "Wonderful," on account of the extraordinary manner in which its
light varies from time to time. The star known by the name of Algol,[32]
popularly called the "Demon Star"--whose astronomical designation is [b]
(Beta) Persei, or the star second in brightness in the constellation of
Perseus--was discovered by Goodricke, in the year 1783, to be a variable
star. In the following year [b] Lyrae, the star in Lyra next in order of
brightness after Vega, was also found by the same observer to be a
variable. It may be of interest to the reader to know that Goodricke was
deaf and dumb, and that he died in 1786 at the early age of twenty-one
years!

It was not, however, until the close of the nineteenth century that much
