
Behind him a thundering bang shook the wall and red flame burst out.
Rhes was the first one there, pulling at the twisted and smoking metal
with his gloved hands. Others grabbed on and bent the jagged pieces
aside. The hole was filled with smoke and nothing was visible through
it. Jason dived into the opening, rolled on a heap of rubble and smacked
into something solid. When he blinked the smoke from his eyes he looked
around him.

He was inside the city.

The others poured through now, picking him up as they charged in so he
wouldn't be trampled underfoot. Someone spotted the spaceship and they
ran that way.

A man ran around the corner of a building towards them. His Pyrran
reflexes sent him springing into the safety of a doorway the same moment
he saw the invaders. But they were Pyrrans, too. The man slumped slowly
back onto the street, three metal bolts sticking out of his body. They
ran on without stopping, running between the low storehouses. The ship
stood ahead.

Someone had reached it ahead of them, they could see the outer hatch
slowly grinding shut. A hail of bolts from the bows crashed into it with
no effect.

"Keep going!" Jason shouted. "Get next to the hull before he reaches the
guns."

This time three men didn't make it. The rest of them were under the
belly of the ship when every gun let go at once. Most of them were
aimed away from the ship, still the scream of shells and electric
discharges was ear-shattering. The three men still in the open dissolved
under the fire. Whoever was inside the ship had hit all the gun trips at
once, both to knock out the attackers and summon aid. He would be on the
screen now, calling for help. Their time was running out.

Jason reached up and tried to open the hatch, while the others watched.
It was locked from the inside. One of the men brushed him aside and
pulled at the inset handle. It broke off in his hand but the hatch
remained closed.

The big guns had stopped now and they could hear again.

"Did anyone get the gun from that dead man?" he asked. "It would blow
this thing open."

"No," Rhes said, "we didn't stop."

Before the words were out of his mouth two men were running back towards
the buildings, angling away from each other. The ship's guns roared
again, a string of explosions cut across one man. Before they could
change direction and find the other man he had reached the buildings.

He returned quickly, darting into the open to throw the gun to them.
Before he could dive back to safety the shells caught him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jason grabbed up the gun as it skidded almost to his feet. They heard
the sound of wide-open truck turbines screaming towards them as he
blasted the lock. The mechanism sighed and the hatch sagged open. They
were all through the air lock before the first truck appeared. Naxa
stayed behind with the gun, to hold the lock until they could take the
control room.

Everyone climbed faster than Jason, once he had pointed them the way, so
the battle was over when he got there. The single city Pyrran looked
like a pin-cushion. One of the techs had found the gun controls and was
shooting wildly, the sheer quantity of his fire driving the trucks back.

"Someone get on the radio and tell the talkers to call the attack off,"
Jason said. He found the communications screen and snapped it on. Kerk's
wide-eyed face stared at him from the screen.

"_You!_" Kerk said, breathing the word like a curse.

"Yes, it's me," Jason answered. He talked without looking up, while his
hands were busy at the control board. "Listen to me, Kerk--and don't
doubt anything I say. I may not know how to fly one of these ships, but
I do know how to blow them up. Do you hear that sound?" He flipped over
a switch and the faraway whine of a pump droned faintly. "That's the
main fuel pump. If I let it run--which I won't right now--it could
quickly fill the drive chamber with raw fuel. Pour in so much that it
would run out of the stern tubes. Then what do you think would happen to
your one and only spacer if I pressed the firing button? I'm not asking
you what would happen to me, since you don't care--but you need this
ship the way you need life itself."

There was only silence in the cabin now, the men who had won the ship
turned to face him. Kerk's voice grated loudly through the room.

"What do you want, Jason--what are you trying to do? Why did you lead
those animals in here ..." His voice cracked and broke as anger choked
him and spilled over.

"Watch your tongue, Kerk," Jason said with soft menace. "These _men_ you
are talking about are the only ones on Pyrrus who have a spaceship. If
you want them to share it with you, you had better learn to talk nicely.
Now come over here at once--and bring Brucco and Meta." Jason looked at
the older man's florid and swollen face and felt a measure of sympathy.
"Don't look so unhappy, it's not the end of the world. In fact, it might
be the beginning of one. And another thing, leave this channel open when
you go. Have it hooked into every screen in the city so everyone can see
what happens here. Make sure it's taped too, for replay."

Kerk started to say something, but changed his mind before he did. He
left the screen, but the set stayed alive. Carrying the scene in the
control room to the entire city.




XXVII.


The fight was over. It had ended so quickly the fact hadn't really sunk
in yet. Rhes rubbed his hand against the gleaming metal of the control
console, letting the reality of touch convince him. The other men milled
about, looking out through the viewscreens or soaking in the mechanical
strangeness of the room.

Jason was physically exhausted, but he couldn't let it show. He opened
the pilot's medbox and dug through it until he found the stimulants.
Three of the little gold pills washed the fatigue from his body, and he
could think clearly again.

"Listen to me," he shouted. "The fight's not over yet. They'll try
anything to take this ship back and we have to be ready. I want one of
the techs to go over these boards until he finds the lock controls. Make
sure all the air locks and ports are sealed. Send men to check them if
necessary. Turn on all the screens to scan in every direction, so no one
can get near the ship. We'll need a guard in the engine room, my control
could be cut if they broke in there. And there had better be a
room-by-room search of the ship, in case someone else is locked in with
us."

The men had something to do now and felt relieved. Rhes split them up
into groups and set them to work. Jason stayed at the controls, his hand
next to the pump switch. The battle wasn't over yet.

"There's a truck coming," Rhes called, "going slow."

"Should I blast it?" the man at the gun controls asked.

"Hold your fire," Jason said, "until we can see who it is. If it's the
people I sent for, let them through."

As the truck came on slowly, the gunner tracked it with his sights.
There was a driver and three passengers. Jason waited until he was
positive who they were.

"Those are the ones," he said. "Stop them at the lock, Rhes, make them
come in one at a time. Take their guns as they enter, then strip them of
_all_ their equipment. There is no way of telling what could be a
concealed weapon. Be specially careful of Brucco--he's the thin one with
a face like an ax edge--make sure you strip him clean. He's a specialist
in weapons and survival. And bring the driver too, we don't want him
reporting back about the broken air lock or the state of our guns."

Waiting was hard. His hand stayed next to the pump switch, even though
he knew he could never use it. Just as long as the others thought he
would.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were stampings and muttered curses in the corridor; the prisoners
were pushed in. Jason had one look at their deadly expressions and
clenched fists before he called to Rhes.

"Keep them against the wall and watch them. Bowmen keep your weapons
up." He looked at the people who had once been his friends and who now
swam in hatred for him. Meta, Kerk, Brucco. The driver was Skop, the man
Kerk had once appointed to guard him. He looked ready to explode now
that the roles had been reversed.

"Pay close attention," Jason said, "because your lives depend upon it.
Keep your backs to the wall and don't attempt to come any closer to me
than you are now. If you do, you will be shot instantly. If we were
alone, any one of you could undoubtedly reach me before I threw this
switch. But we're not. You have Pyrran reflexes and muscles--but so do
the bowmen. Don't gamble. Because it won't be a gamble. It will be
suicide. I'm telling you this for your own protection. So we can talk
peacefully without one of you losing his temper and suddenly getting
shot. _There is no way out of this._ You are going to be forced to
listen to everything I say. You can't escape or kill me. The war is
over."

"And we lost--and all because of you ... you _traitor_!" Meta snarled.

"Wrong on both counts," Jason said blandly. "I'm not a traitor because I
owe my allegiance to all men on this planet, both inside the perimeter
and out. I never pretended differently. As to losing--why you haven't
lost anything. In fact you've won. Won your war against this planet, if
you will only hear me out." He turned to Rhes, who was frowning in angry
puzzlement. "Of course your people have won also, Rhes. No more war with
the city, you'll get medicine, off-planet contact--everything you want."

"Pardon me for being cynical," Rhes said, "but you're promising the best
of all possible worlds for everyone. That will be a little hard to
deliver when our interests are opposed so."

"You strike through to the heart of the matter," Jason said. "Thank you.
This mess will be settled by seeing that everyone's interests are not
opposed. Peace between the city and farms, with an end to the useless
war you have been fighting. Peace between mankind and the Pyrran life
forms--because that particular war is at the bottom of all your
troubles."

"The man's mad," Kerk said.

"Perhaps. You'll judge that after you hear me out. I'm going to tell you
the history of this planet, because that is where both the trouble and
the solution lie.

"When the settlers landed on Pyrrus three hundred years ago they missed
the one important thing about this planet, the factor that makes it
different from any other planet in the galaxy. They can't be blamed for
the oversight, they had enough other things to worry about. The gravity
was about the only thing familiar to them, the rest of the environment
was a shocking change from the climate-controlled industrial world they
had left. Storms, vulcanism, floods, earthquakes--it was enough to drive
them insane, and I'm sure many of them did go mad. The animal and insect
life was a constant annoyance, nothing at all like the few harmless and
protected species they had known. I'm sure they never realized that the
Pyrran life was telepathic as well--"

"That again!" Brucco snapped. "True or not, it is of no importance. I
was tempted to agree with your theory of psionic-controlled attack on
us, but the deadly fiasco you staged proved that theory wrong."

"I agree," Jason answered. "I was completely mistaken when I thought
some outside agency directed the attack on the city with psionic
control. It seemed a logical theory at the time and the evidence pointed
that way. The expedition to the island _was_ a deadly fiasco--only don't
forget that attack was the direct opposite of what I wanted to have
done. If I had gone into the cave myself none of the deaths would have
been necessary. I think it would have been discovered that the plant
creatures were nothing more than an advanced life form with unusual psi
ability. They simply resonated strongly to the psionic attack on the
city. I had the idea backwards thinking they instigated the battle.
We'll never know the truth, though, because they are destroyed. But
their deaths did prove one thing. It allows us to find the real
culprits, the creatures who are leading, directing and inspiring the war
against the city."

"_Who?_" Kerk breathed the question, rather than spoke it.

"Why _you_ of course," Jason told him. "Not you alone, but all of your
people in the city. Perhaps you don't like this war. However you are
responsible for it, and keep it going."

Jason had to force back a smile as he looked at their dumfounded
expressions. He had to prove his point quickly, before even his allies
began to think him insane.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Here is how it works. I said Pyrran life was telepathic--and I meant
all life. Every single insect, plant and animal. At one time in this
planet's violent history these psionic mutations proved to be survival
types. They existed when other species died, and in the end I'm sure
they co-operated in wiping out the last survivors of the non-psi
strains. Co-operation is the key word here. Because while they still
competed against each other under normal conditions, they worked
together against anything that threatened them as a whole. When a
natural upheaval or a tidal wave threatened them, they fled from it in
harmony.

[Illustration]

"You can see a milder form of this same behavior on any planet that is
subject to forest fires. But here, mutual survival was carried to an
extreme because of the violent conditions. Perhaps some of the life
forms even developed precognition like the human quakemen. With this
advance warning the larger beasts fled. The smaller ones developed
seeds, or burrs or eggs, that could be carried to safety by the wind or
in the animals' fur, thus insuring racial survival. I know this is true,
because I watched it myself when we were escaping a quake."

"Admitted--all your points admitted," Brucco shouted. "But what does it
have to do with _us_? So all the animals run away together, what does
that have to do with the war?"

"They do more than run away together," Jason told him. "They work
together against any natural disaster that threatens them all. Some day
I'm sure, ecologists will go into raptures over the complex adjustments
that occur here in the advent of blizzards, floods, fires and other
disasters. There is only one reaction we really care about now, though.
That's the one directed towards the city people. Don't you realize
yet--they treat you all as another natural disaster!

"We'll never know exactly how it came about, though there is a clue in
that diary I found, dating from the first days on this planet. It said
that a forest fire seemed to have driven new species towards the
settlers. Those weren't new beasts at all--just old ones with new
attitudes. Can't you just imagine how those protected, over-civilized
settlers acted when faced with a forest fire? They panicked of course.
If the settlers were in the path of the fire, the animals must have
rushed right through their camp. Their reaction would undoubtedly have
been to shoot the fleeing creatures down.

"When they did that they classified themselves as a natural disaster.
Disasters take any form. Bipeds with guns could easily be included in
the category. The Pyrran animals attacked, were shot, and the war began.
The survivors kept attacking and informed all the life forms what the
fight was about. The radioactivity of this planet must cause plenty of
mutations--and the favorable, survival mutation was now one that was
deadly to man. I'll hazard a guess that the psi function even instigates
mutations, some of the deadlier types are just too one-sided to have
come about naturally in a brief three hundred years.

"The settlers, of course, fought back, and kept their status as a
natural disaster intact. Through the centuries they improved their
killing methods, not that it did the slightest good, as you know. You
city people, their descendants, are heirs to this heritage of hatred.
You fight and are slowly being defeated. How can you possibly win
against the biologic reserves of a planet that can recreate itself each
time to meet any new attack?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Silence followed Jason's words. Kerk and Meta stood white-faced as the
impact of the disclosure sunk in. Brucco mumbled and checked points off
on his fingers, searching for weak spots in the chain of reason. The
fourth city Pyrran, Skop, ignored all these foolish words that he
couldn't understand--or want to understand--and would have killed Jason
in an instant if there had been the slightest chance of success.

It was Rhes who broke the silence. His quick mind had taken in the
factors and sorted them out. "There's one thing wrong," he said. "What
about us? We live on the surface of Pyrrus without perimeters or guns.
Why aren't we attacked as well? We're human, descended from the same
people as the junkmen."

"You're not attacked," Jason told him, "because you don't identify
yourself as a natural disaster. Animals can live on the slopes of a
dormant volcano, fighting and dying in natural competition. But they'll
flee together when the volcano erupts. That eruption is what makes the
mountain a natural disaster. In the case of human beings, it is their
thoughts that identify them as life form or disaster. Mountain or
volcano. In the city everyone radiates suspicion and death. They enjoy
killing, thinking about killing, and planning for killing. This is
natural selection, too, you realize. These are the survival traits that
work best in the city. Outside the city men think differently. If they
are threatened individually, they fight, as will any other creature.
Under more general survival threats they co-operate completely with the
rules for universal survival that the city people break."

"How did it begin--this separation, I mean, between the two groups?"
Rhes asked.

"We'll probably never know," Jason said. "I think your people must have
originally been farmers, or psionic sensitives who were not with the
others during some natural disaster. They would, of course, act
correctly by Pyrran standards, and survive. This would cause a
difference of opinion with the city people who saw killing as the
