revolving stars which control the movements of a distant attendant; in
Beta the primary and secondary stars are in mutual revolution, whilst
round the former there circles a very close minute companion. There are
doubtless many binary stars which, if examined with adequate telescopic
power, would resolve themselves into triple and multiple systems, but
the profound distances of those objects render the detection of their
components a most difficult task.

Quadruple stars are usually arranged in pairs, _i.e._ the primary and
secondary of a binary system are each resolvable into two, forming two
pairs, each pair being in mutual revolution, while they both gravitate
round their common centre of gravity. Epsilon Lyrae, which has been
described as a double double, is an example of a quadruple system, and
Nu Scorpii is of a similar construction, but more beautiful because its
components are in closer proximity to each other. Close upon twenty of
those double double systems have been discovered in different parts of
the heavens.

One of the most interesting of quadruple systems is Theta Orionis, which
is situated in the Great Nebula, by which it is surrounded. This star,
when observed with a telescope of low power, can be at once resolved
into four separate lucent points, so arranged as to form a quadrilateral
figure or trapezium. They are of the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth
magnitudes, and described as pale white, garnet, faint lilac, and red.
Though they have been under careful observation for upwards of two
centuries, no perceptible motion has been perceived as occurring among
them, nor has there been any change in their relative positions--they
appear to be perfectly motionless; but we must not infer from this that
no physical bond of union exists between them, for they are situated at
an amazing distance from the Earth. Ascending higher in the scale of
celestial architecture, we have multiple stars forming systems still
more elaborate and complex, into the structure of which numerous stars
enter, and they, as they increase in number, gradually merge into
star-clusters.

If we assume that around each of the components of a multiple star there
circles a retinue of planetary worlds, we are confronted with a most
perplexing problem as to how the dynamical stability of a system so
different from, and so vastly more complicated than, that of our solar
system is maintained--where, as it were, suns and planets
intermingle--how numerous circling orbs can accomplish their revolutions
without being swayed and deflected from their paths by the gravitational
attraction of adjacent members of the same system. Perplexing though the
arrangement of such a scheme may be to our conception, yet, each orb has
been weighed, poised, and adjusted by Infinite Wisdom, to perform its
intricate motions in synchronous harmony with other members of the
system--all moving in unison like the parts of a complicated piece of
mechanism, and maintained in stable equilibrium by their mutual
attraction--

    Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere
    Of planets and of fixed in all her wheels
    Resembles nearest; mazes intricate,
    Eccentric, intervolved, yet regular
    Then most, when most irregular they seem;
    And in their motions harmony divine
    So smooths her charming tones that God's own ear
    Listens delighted.--v. 620-27.

All the natural phenomena with which we are familiar would, in the case
of planets revolving round the component suns of a multiple system, be
of a different kind or altogether absent. Instead of being illumined by
one sun, those worlds would, at certain times, have several suns--some
more distant than others--above their horizons, and upon very rare
occasions, if ever, would there be an entire absence of all of those
orbs from their skies. Consequently there would be no year such as we
are familiar with; no regular sequence of seasons similar to what is
experienced on Earth; no alternation of day and night, for there would
be '_no night there_,' though, in the absence of the primary orb, the
light emitted by distant suns, whilst sufficient to banish night, and
beyond comparison brighter than the Moon when at full, would, in the
diminution of its intensity from that of noonday, be as grateful a
change as that of from day to night which occurs on our globe.

Should those suns be differently coloured, each emitting its own
peculiar shade of light as it appears above the horizon, the varied
aspects of the perpetual day enjoyed by the inhabitants of those
circling worlds present to the imagination harmonies of light and shade
over which it is pleasant to linger.

TEMPORARY, PERIODICAL, AND VARIABLE STARS.--It may seem remarkable that
among so many thousands of stars which spangle the firmament, there
should occur no very perceptible change or variation in their aspect
and brilliancy. From age to age they present the same appearance, shine
with the same undiminished splendour, and rise and set with the same
regularity. So that from time immemorial the stars have been regarded by
mankind as the embodiment of all that is eternal and unchangeable. Yet,
the serenity of the celestial regions does not always remain
undisturbed--at occasional times a 'Nova,' or new star, blazes forth
unexpectedly in the heavens, and perplexes astronomers; and, after
shining with a varying degree of brilliancy for a few weeks or months,
gradually diminishes in size and brightness and eventually becomes lost
to sight.

A record has been kept of about twenty temporary stars that have been
observed at various periods since the time that reliable data of those
objects have been published. Pliny mentions the appearance of a new star
in the time of Hipparchus (134 B.C.); it was seen in the constellation
of the Scorpion, and it is said that it was the apparition of this star
which induced the celebrated astronomer to construct what is known as
the earliest star catalogue. A new star is said to have become visible
when the Emperor Honorius ruled, and another during the reign of the
Emperor Otho, about 945 A.D. In May 1012 a new star appeared in Aries,
and in July 1203 another was observed in Scorpio, which resembled
Saturn. The most remarkable star of this kind was one observed by Tycho
Brahe, which appeared in the constellation Cassiopeia. He first
perceived it on November 11, 1572. In lustre it equalled Jupiter, and
when at its brightest rivalled Venus; it was visible at noonday, and at
night its light could be perceived through strata of cloud which
rendered all other stars invisible. The star maintained its brilliancy
for three weeks, when it became of a yellowish colour and perceptibly
decreased in size; it afterwards assumed a ruddy hue resembling
Aldebaran, and, diminishing gradually in magnitude and brightness,
ceased to be visible in March 1574. It twinkled more than the other
stars, and during the time it could be perceived its position remained
unchanged. In 1604 a conspicuous new star burst forth in Ophiuchus. It
surpassed in brilliancy stars of the first magnitude, and outshone the
planet Jupiter, which was in its proximity. Kepler observed this star,
and described it as 'sparkling like a diamond with prismatic tints.' It
soon began to decline after its appearance; in March 1605 it had shrunk
to the dimensions of a third-magnitude star, and in a year later it
became entirely lost to view. Other stars of the same class, though of a
less conspicuous character, have been observed at occasional times.
Anthelme, a Carthusian monk, discovered one near Beta Cygni in 1670;
another appeared in Ophiuchus in 1848; one in Scorpio in 1860; one in
Corona Borealis in 1866; in Cygnus in 1876; in Andromeda in 1885; and in
Auriga in 1892.

Various theories have been advanced in order to account for the sudden
outbursts of those stars, the light from which has probably occupied
not much less than one hundred years in its passage hither. It has been
suggested that the collision of two suns, or of two great masses of
matter, would create such phenomena; but, apart from the improbability
of such a catastrophe occurring among the celestial orbs, the rapid
subsidence in the luminosity of the observed objects would indicate that
the outburst was produced by causes of a more rapidly transitory nature
than what would result from the collision of two condensed masses of
matter. A collision occurring between two swarms of meteors has been
suggested as one way of accounting for the sudden appearance of those
stars; but another, and more plausible, explanation is that they are
produced by a great eruption of glowing gas from the interior of a sun,
causing an enormous increase in its luminosity, which subsides after a
time, and is succeeded by a normal condition of things. It has been
observed that all those temporary stars, with the exception of two, have
appeared in the region of the Milky Way. In this luminous zone the
condensation of small gaseous stars and nebulae is more pronounced than
in any other part of the heavens, and this would seem to indicate that
there may be cosmical changes taking place among them which need not be
associated with the occurrence of catastrophes resulting in the
conflagration of worlds, and that Nature, in accomplishing her purposes,
does not overstep the uniform working of her laws, upon which depend the
stability and existence of the universe.

PERIODICAL AND VARIABLE STARS are distinguished from other similar
objects by the fluctuations which occur in the quantity of light emitted
by them. The difference in the luminosity of some stars is at times so
marked that, in a few weeks or months, they decline from the first or
second magnitudes to invisibility, and, after the expiration of a
certain period, they again gradually regain their pristine condition.
When these changes take place with regular recurrence, they are called
'periodical;' when they occur in a variable and uncertain manner, they
are called 'irregular.' About 300 stars are known as variable, but the
majority of them are telescopic objects. Their periodical changes of
brilliancy present every degree of variety; in some stars they are
scarcely perceptible and occur at long intervals; in others, changes of
brightness occur in a few hours or days, by which the light emitted is
intensified many hundreds of times.

Some stars accomplish their cycle of change in a few days, many in a few
weeks or months, and there are others which do not complete their
periods until the expiration of a number of years.

One of the most remarkable of variable stars is called Mira 'the
wonderful,' in the constellation Cetus. When at its maximum brilliancy
it shines for two or three weeks as a star of the second magnitude. It
then begins to gradually decline, and at the end of three months becomes
invisible. It remains invisible for five months, and then reappears, and
during the ensuing three months it regains by degrees its former
brilliancy. Mira completes a cycle of its changes in 334 days, and,
during that time, oscillates between a star of the second and tenth
magnitude. The variability of Mira Ceti was first observed by David
Fabricius in the sixteenth century.

Another remarkable star is Eta Argus, which is surrounded by the great
nebula in the constellation Argo Navis. It is invisible to the naked
eye, but in the telescope it has a reddish appearance, and is slightly
brighter than the stars in its vicinity. It was first observed by Halley
in 1677, and it was then of the fourth magnitude. In 1751 it had risen
to the second magnitude, and maintained its position as a star of this
class until 1837, when, on December 16 of that year, its brilliancy
suddenly increased, and it equalled in a short time Alpha Centauri. It
reached its maximum in 1843, and then it was surpassed only by Sirius.
It maintained its brilliancy for about ten years. In 1858, it declined
to the second magnitude, in 1859 to the third, and, gradually
diminishing, it became invisible to the naked eye in 1868. It is now of
the seventh magnitude, and is again increasing, and may soon resume its
position among the other stars. It is believed to have a period of
seventy years, and in that time its light ebbs and flows between the
seventh and first magnitudes.

The most interesting variable star in the heavens is Algol (the demon),
in the constellation Perseus. Its light fluctuations can be observed
without the aid of a telescope, and it completes a cycle of its changes
in two or three days. For about two days and thirteen hours it is
conspicuously visible as a star of the second magnitude; it then begins
to decline, and in about four hours sinks to the dimensions of a
fourth-magnitude star; it remains in this condition for twenty minutes,
and then increases gradually until, at the expiration of four hours, it
regains its former brilliancy, which it sustains for two days and
thirteen hours, when it again goes through the same cycle of changes in
a precisely similar manner to what has been described. Astrologers have
ascribed many evil influences to the demon star, which adorned the head
of Medusa; nor did it escape the observation of ancient astronomers that
this malevolent orb is--as a modern writer amusingly remarks--slowly
winking at us from out the depths of space.

Variable stars are found in greater numbers in some parts of the heavens
than in others. Those of a white colour, and with shorter and more
regular periods, are most numerous in the region of the Milky Way; those
that are small, with long periods and of a reddish hue, are more widely
removed from that zone. Stars of this class are all very remote, and no
attempt has as yet been made to ascertain the parallax of Algol.

Several theories have been suggested in order to account for the
periodical brilliancy of those stars. It has been suggested that the
stars have opaque non-luminous patches on their surfaces, and that
during axial rotation their light ebbs and flows according as the dark
or bright portions are turned towards us. This theory is highly
improbable. Another and more plausible reason, especially with regard to
short period variables, is, that around those stars there revolve opaque
bodies or satellites which at times intercept a portion of their light
by producing a partial eclipse of their discs, similar to that caused by
the dark body of the Moon when passing between the Sun and the Earth.

It is now known that in the case of variables of the Algol type, the
periodical fluctuations of their light arises from this cause, and that
round Algol there is a dark world or satellite travelling, which
completes a revolution of its orbit in about sixty-nine hours, and that,
during each circuit, it intercepts one half of the light of its primary
by partially eclipsing the orb, and thereby creating a diminution in its
apparent magnitude which becomes perceptible at recurring intervals.

STAR GROUPS.--These are plentifully scattered over the heavens and, by
their conspicuous brilliancy, add to the grandeur and magnificence of
the midnight sky. The Hyades in Taurus, of which Aldebaran is the chief,
forming the eye of the Bull, attract attention.

The stars in Coma Bernices form a rich group; the sickle in Leo, the
seven stars in Ursa Major, and those in Cassiopeia and Aquila are
familiarly known to all observers. Besides these, there are many other
groups and aggregations of stars which adorn the celestial vault and
enhance the beauty of the heavens.

STAR CLUSTERS.--On observing the heavens on a clear, dark night, there
can be seen in different parts of the sky closely aggregated groups of
stars called clusters. In some instances the component stars are so near
together that the naked eye is unable to discern the individual members
of the cluster. They then assume an indistinct, hazy, cloudlike
appearance. Upwards of 500 clusters are known to astronomers, the
majority of which are very remote. Many of them contain thousands of
stars compressed into a very small space, and others are so distant that
the largest telescopes are incapable of resolving their nebulous
appearance into separate stars.

Star clusters have been arranged into two classes, 'irregular' and
'globular;' but no sharp line of demarcation exists between them, though
each have their distinctive peculiarities. Irregular clusters consist of
aggregations of stars brought promiscuously together, and presenting an
appearance devoid of any structural arrangement. They are of different
shapes and sizes, possess no distinct outline, and are not condensed
towards their centre, like those that are globular. On examination, they
present an intricate reticulated appearance; streams and branches of
stars extend outwards from the parent cluster, sometimes in rows and
sinuous lines, and, in other instances, diverging from a common centre,
forming sprays. Sometimes the stars are seen to follow each other on the
same curve which terminates in loops and arches of symmetrical
proportions.

There are three conspicuous clusters in the northern sky that are
visible to the naked eye--viz. the Pleiades in Taurus, the Great Cluster
in the sword-handle of Perseus, and Praesepe in Cancer, commonly called
the Beehive.

The cluster which from time immemorial has had bestowed upon it the
chief attention of mankind are the beautiful Pleiades or Seven Sisters,
and intertwined among its stars are the legendary and mythological
beliefs of ancient nations and untutored tribes inhabiting the different
regions of the globe. When viewed with a telescope of moderate size the
cluster appears as a scattered group, and numerous stars become visible
that are imperceptible to ordinary vision.

In the sword-handle of Perseus there is a cluster which, to the naked
eye, appears as a small patch of luminous cloud. This inconspicuous
object when observed with an instrument of moderate power is resolved
into a magnificent assemblage of stars, and presents a spectacle which
creates in the mind of the beholder mingled feelings of admiration and
amazement. No telescope has yet penetrated its utmost depths, or
revealed all the glories of this shining region, crowded with glittering
points of light comparable in number to the pebbles strewn on the shore
of a troubled sea.

The cluster Praesepe in Cancer is visible on a clear night to the
unaided eye as a small nebula. This object attracted the attention of
Galileo, to which he applied his newly invented telescope, and was
delighted to find that his glass was capable of resolving it into a
