with a reproduced limb. (27/20. Dr. P. Hoy 'The American Naturalist' September
1871 page 579.)

The power of regrowth is generally much greater during the youth of an animal
or during the earlier stages of its development than during maturity. The
larvae or tadpoles of the Batrachians are capable of reproducing lost members,
but not so the adults. (27/21. Dr. Gunther in Owen 'Anatomy of Vertebrates'
volume 1 1866 page 567. Spallanzani has made similar observations.) Mature
insects have no power of regrowth, excepting in one order, whilst the larvae
of many kinds have this power. Animals low in the scale are able, as a general
rule, to reproduce lost parts far more easily than those which are more highly
organised. The myriapods offer a good illustration of this rule; but there are
some strange exceptions to it--thus Nemerteans, though lowly organised, are
said to exhibit little power of regrowth. With the higher vertebrata, such as
birds and mammals, the power is extremely limited. (27/22. A thrush was
exhibited before the British Association at Hull in 1853 which had lost its
tarsus, and this member, it was asserted, had been thrice reproduced; having
been lost, I presume, each time by disease. Sir J. Paget informs me that he
feels some doubt about the facts recorded by Sir J. Simpson ('Monthly Journal
of Medical Science' Edinburgh 1848 new series volume 2 page 890) of the
regrowth of limbs in the womb in the case of man.)

In the case of those animals which may be bisected or chopped into pieces, and
of which every fragment will reproduce the whole, the power of regrowth must
be diffused throughout the whole body. Nevertheless there seems to be much
truth in the view maintained by Prof. Lessona (27/23. 'Atti della Soc. Ital.
di Sc. Nat.' volume 11 1869 page 493.), that this capacity is generally a
localised and special one, serving to replace parts which are eminently liable
to be lost in each particular animal. The most striking case in favour of this
view, is that the terrestrial salamander, according to Lessona, cannot
reproduce lost parts, whilst another species of the same genus, the aquatic
salamander, has extraordinary powers of regrowth, as we have just seen; and
this animal is eminently liable to have its limbs, tail, eyes and jaws bitten
off by other tritons. (27/24. Lessona states that this is so in the paper just
referred to. See also 'The American Naturalist' September 1871 page 579.) Even
with the aquatic salamander the capacity is to a certain extent localised, for
when M. Philipeaux (27/25. 'Comptes Rendus' October 1, 1866 and June 1867.)
extirpated the entire fore limb together with the scapula, the power of
regrowth was completely lost. It is also a remarkable fact, standing in
opposition to a very general rule, that the young of the aquatic salamander do
not possess the power of repairing their limbs in an equal degree with the
adults (27/26. Bonnet 'Oeuvres Hist. Nat.' volume 5 page 294, as quoted by
Prof. Rolleston in his remarkable address to the 36th annual meeting of the
British Medical Association.) but I do not know that they are more active, or
can otherwise better escape the loss of their limbs, than the adults. The
walking-stick insect, Diapheromera femorata, like other insects of the same
order, can reproduce its legs in the mature state, and these from their great
length must be liable to be lost: but the capacity is localised (as in the
case of the salamander), for Dr. Scudder found (27/27. 'Proc. Boston Soc. of
Nat. Hist.' volume 12 1868-69 page 1.), that if the limb was removed within
the trochanto-femoral articulation, it was never renewed. When a crab is
seized by one of its legs, this is thrown off at the basal joint, being
afterwards replaced by a new leg; and it is generally admitted that this is a
special provision for the safety of the animal. Lastly, with gasteropod
molluscs, which are well known to have the power of reproducing their heads,
Lessona shows that they are very liable to have their heads bitten off by
fishes; the rest of the body being protected by the shell. Even with plants we
see something of the same kind, for non-deciduous leaves and young stems have
no power of regrowth, these parts being easily replaced by growth from new
buds; whilst the bark and subjacent tissues of the trunks of trees have great
power of regrowth, probably on account of their increase in diameter, and of
their liability to injury from being gnawed by animals.

GRAFT-HYBRIDS.

It is well known from innumerable trials made in all parts of the world, that
buds may be inserted into a stock, and that the plants thus raised are not
affected in a greater degree than can be accounted for by changed nutrition.
Nor do the seedlings raised from such inserted buds partake of the character
of the stock, though they are more liable to vary than are seedlings from the
same variety growing on its own roots. A bud, also, may sport into a new and
strongly-marked variety without any other bud on the same plant being in the
least degree affected. We may therefore infer, in accordance with the common
view, that each bud is a distinct individual, and that its formative elements
do not spread beyond the parts subsequently developed from it. Nevertheless,
we have seen in the abstract on graft-hybridisation in the eleventh chapter
that buds certainly include formative matter, which can occasionally combine
with that included in the tissues of a distinct variety or species; a plant
intermediate between the two parent-forms being thus produced. In the case of
the potato we have seen that the tubers produced from a bud of one kind
inserted into another are intermediate in colour, size, shape and state of
surface; that the stems, foliage, and even certain constitutional
peculiarities, such as precocity, are likewise intermediate. With these well-
established cases, the evidence that graft-hybrids have also been produced
with the laburnum, orange, vine, rose, etc., seems sufficient. But we do not
know under what conditions this rare form of reproduction is possible. From
these several cases we learn the important fact that formative elements
capable of blending with those of a distinct individual (and this is the chief
characteristic of sexual generation), are not confined to the reproductive
organs, but are present in the buds and cellular tissue of plants; and this is
a fact of the highest physiological importance.

DIRECT ACTION OF THE MALE ELEMENT ON THE FEMALE.

In the eleventh chapter, abundant proofs were given that foreign pollen
occasionally affects in a direct manner the mother-plant. Thus, when Gallesio
fertilised an orange-flower with pollen from the lemon, the fruit bore stripes
of perfectly characterised lemon-peel. With peas, several observers have seen
the colour of the seed-coats and even of the pod directly affected by the
pollen of a distinct variety. So it has been with the fruit of the apple,
which consists of the modified calyx and upper part of the flower-stalk. In
ordinary cases these parts are wholly formed by the mother-plant. We here see
that the formative elements included within the male element or pollen of one
variety can affect and hybridise, not the part which they are properly adapted
to affect, namely, the ovules, but the partially-developed tissues of a
distinct variety or species. We are thus brought half-way towards a graft-
hybrid, in which the formative elements included within the tissues of one
individual combine with those included in the tissues of a distinct variety or
species, thus giving rise to a new and intermediate form, independently of the
male or female sexual organs.

With animals which do not breed until nearly mature, and of which all the
parts are then fully developed, it is hardly possible that the male element
should directly affect the female. But we have the analogous and perfectly
well-ascertained case of the male element affecting (as with the quagga and
Lord Morton's mare) the female or her ova, in such a manner that when she is
impregnated by another male her offspring are affected and hybridised by the
first male. The explanation would be simple if the spermatozoa could keep
alive within the body of the female during the long interval which has
sometimes elapsed between the two acts of impregnation; but no one will
suppose that this is possible with the higher animals.

DEVELOPMENT.

The fertilised germ reaches maturity by a vast number of changes: these are
either slight and slowly effected, as when the child grows into the man, or
are great and sudden, as with the metamorphoses of most insects. Between these
extremes we have every gradation, even within the same class; thus, as Sir J.
Lubbock has shown (27/28. 'Transact. Linn. Soc.' volume 24 1863 page 62.)
there is an Ephemerous insect which moults above twenty times, undergoing each
time a slight but decided change of structure; and these changes, as he
further remarks, probably reveal to us the normal stages of development, which
are concealed and hurried through or suppressed in most other insects. In
ordinary metamorphoses, the parts and organs appear to become changed into the
corresponding parts in the next stage of development; but there is another
form of development, which has been called by Professor Owen metagenesis. In
this case "the new parts are not moulded upon the inner surface of the old
ones. The plastic force has changed its course of operation. The outer case,
and all that gave form and character to the precedent individual, perish and
are cast off; they are not changed into the corresponding parts of the new
individual. These are due to a new and distinct developmental process," etc.
(27/29. 'Parthenogenesis' 1849 pages 25, 26. Prof. Huxley has some excellent
remarks ('Medical Times' 1856 page 637) on this subject in reference to the
development of star-fishes, and shows how curiously metamorphosis graduates
into gemmation or zoid-formation, which is in fact the same as metagenesis.)
Metamorphosis, however, graduates so insensibly, into metagenesis, that the
two processes cannot be distinctly separated. For instance, in the last change
which Cirripedes undergo, the alimentary canal and some other organs are
moulded on pre-existing parts; but the eyes of the old and the young animal
are developed in entirely different parts of the body; the tips of the mature
limbs are formed within the larval limbs, and may be said to be metamorphosed
from them; but their basal portions and the whole thorax are developed in a
plane at right angles to the larval limbs and thorax; and this may be called
metagenesis. The metagenetic process is carried to an extreme point in the
development of some Echinoderms, for the animal in the second stage of
development is formed almost like a bud within the animal of the first stage,
the latter being then cast off like an old vestment, yet sometimes maintaining
for a short period an independent vitality. (27/30. Prof. J. Reay Greene in
Gunther's 'Record of Zoolog. Lit.' 1865 page 625.) If, instead of a single
individual, several were to be thus developed metagenetically within a pre-
existing form, the process would be called one of alternate generation. The
young thus developed may either closely resemble the encasing parent-form, as
with the larvae of Cecidomyia, or may differ to an astonishing degree, as with
many parasitic worms and jelly-fishes; but this does not make any essential
difference in the process, any more than the greatness or abruptness of the
change in the metamorphoses of insects.

The whole question of development is of great importance for our present
subject. When an organ, the eye, for instance, is metagenetically formed in a
part of the body where during the previous stage of development no eye
existed, we must look at it as a new and independent growth. The absolute
independence of new and old structures, although corresponding in structure
and function, is still more obvious when several individuals are formed within
a previous form, as in the cases of alternate generation. The same important
principle probably comes largely into play even in the case of apparently
continuous growth, as we shall see when we consider the inheritance of
modifications at corresponding ages.

We are led to the same conclusion, namely, the independence of parts
successively developed, by another and quite distinct group of facts. It is
well known that many animals belonging to the same order, and therefore not
differing widely from each other, pass through an extremely different course
of development. Thus certain beetles, not in any way remarkably different from
others of the same order, undergo what has been called a hyper-metamorphosis--
that is, they pass through an early stage wholly different from the ordinary
grub-like larva. In the same sub-order of crabs, namely, the Macroura, as
Fritz Muller remarks, the river cray-fish is hatched under the same form which
it ever afterwards retains; the young lobster has divided legs, like a Mysis;
the Palaemon appears under the form of a Zoea, and Peneus under the Nauplius-
form; and how wonderfully these larval forms differ from one another, is known
to every naturalist. (27/31. Fritz Muller 'Fur Darwin' 1864 s. 65, 71. The
highest authority on crustaceans, Prof. Milne-Edwards, insists ('Annal. des
Sci. Nat.' 2nd series Zoolog. tome 3 page 322) on the difference in the
metamorphosis of closely-allied genera.) Some other crustaceans, as the same
author observes, start from the same point and arrive at nearly the same end,
but in the middle of their development are widely different from one another.
Still more striking cases could be given with respect to the Echinodermata.
With the Medusae or jelly-fishes Professor Allman observes, "The
classification of the Hydroida would be a comparatively simple task if, as has
been erroneously asserted, generically-identical medusoids always arose from
generically-identical polypoids; and, on the other hand, that generically-
identical polypoids always gave origin to generically-identical medusoids." So
again, Dr. Strethill Wright remarks, "In the life-history of the Hydroidae any
phase, planuloid, polypoid, or medusoid, may be absent." (27/32. Prof. Allman
'Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.' 3rd series volume 13 1864 page 348; Dr. S.
Wright ibid volume 8 1861 page 127. See also page 358 for analogous statements
by Sars.)

According to the belief now generally accepted by our best naturalists, all
the members of the same order or class, for instance, the Medusae or the
Macrourous crustaceans, are descended from a common progenitor. During their
descent they have diverged much in structure, but have retained much in
common; and this has occurred, though they have passed through and still pass
through marvellously different metamorphoses. This fact well illustrates how
independent each structure is from that which precedes and that which follows
it in the course of development.

THE FUNCTIONAL INDEPENDENCE OF THE ELEMENTS OR UNITS OF THE BODY.

Physiologists agree that the whole organism consists of a multitude of
elemental parts, which are to a great extent independent of one another. Each
organ, says Claude Bernard (27/33. 'Tissus Vivants' 1866 page 22.), has its
proper life, its autonomy; it can develop and reproduce itself independently
of the adjoining tissues. A great German authority, Virchow (27/34. 'Cellular
Pathology' translated by Dr. Chance 1860 pages 14, 18, 83, 460.), asserts
still more emphatically that each system consists of an "enormous mass of
minute centres of action...Every element has its own special action, and even
though it derive its stimulus to activity from other parts, yet alone effects
the actual performance of duties...Every single epithelial and muscular fibre-
cell leads a sort of parasitical existence in relation to the rest of the
body...Every single bone-corpuscle really possesses conditions of nutrition
peculiar to itself." Each element, as Sir J. Paget remarks, lives its
appointed time and then dies, and is replaced after being cast off or
absorbed. (27/35. Paget 'Surgical Pathology' volume 1 1853 pages 12-14.) I
presume that no physiologist doubts that, for instance, each bone-corpuscle of
the finger differs from the corresponding corpuscle in the corresponding joint
of the toe; and there can hardly be a doubt that even those on the
corresponding sides of the body differ, though almost identical in nature.
This near approach to identity is curiously shown in many diseases in which
the same exact points on the right and left sides of the body are similarly
affected; thus Sir J. Paget (27/36. Ibid page 19.) gives a drawing of a
diseased pelvis, in which the bone has grown into a most complicated pattern,
but "there is not one spot or line on one side which is not represented, as
exactly as it would be in a mirror, on the other."

Many facts support this view of the independent life of each minute element of
the body. Virchow insists that a single bone-corpuscle or a single cell in the
skin may become diseased. The spur of a cock, after being inserted into the
ear of an ox, lived for eight years, and acquired a weight of 396 grammes
(nearly fourteen ounces), and the astonishing length of twenty-four
centimetres, or about nine inches; so that the head of the ox appeared to bear
three horns. (27/37. See Prof. Mantegazza's interesting work 'Degli innesti
Animali' etc. Milano 1865 page 51 tab. 3.) The tail of a pig has been grafted
into the middle of its back, and reacquired sensibility. Dr. Ollier (27/38.
'De la Production Artificielle des Os' page 8.) inserted a piece of periosteum
from the bone of a young dog under the skin of a rabbit, and true bone was
developed. A multitude of similar facts could be given. The frequent presence
of hairs and of perfectly developed teeth, even teeth of the second dentition,
in ovarian tumours (27/39. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire 'Hist. des
Anomalies' tome 2 pages 549, 560, 562; Virchow ibid page 484. Lawson Tait 'The
Pathology of Diseases of the Ovaries' 1874 pages 61, 62.), are facts leading
to the same conclusion. Mr. Lawson Tait refers to a tumour in which "over 300
teeth were found, resembling in many respects milk-teeth;" and to another
tumour, "full of hair which had grown and been shed from one little spot of
skin not bigger than the tip of my little finger. The amount of hair in the
sac, had it grown from a similarly sized area of the scalp, would have taken
almost a lifetime to grow and be shed."

Whether each of the innumerable autonomous elements of the body is a cell or
the modified product of a cell, is a more doubtful question, even if so wide a
definition be given to the term, as to include cell-like bodies without walls
and without nuclei. (27/40. For the most recent classification of cells, see
Ernst Hackel 'Generelle Morpholog.' b. 2 1866 s. 275.) The doctrine of omnis
cellula e cellula is admitted for plants, and widely prevails with respect to
animals. (27/41. Dr. W. Turner 'The Present Aspect of Cellular Pathology'
'Edinburgh Medical Journal' April 1863.) Thus Virchow, the great supporter of
the cellular theory, whilst allowing that difficulties exist, maintains that
every atom of tissue is derived from cells, and these from pre-existing cells,
and these primarily from the egg, which he regards as a great cell. That
cells, still retaining the same nature, increase by self-division or
proliferation, is admitted by every one. But when an organism undergoes great
changes of structure during development, the cells, which at each stage are
supposed to be directly derived from previously existing cells, must likewise
be greatly changed in nature; this change is attributed by the supporters of
the cellular doctrine to some inherent power which the cells possess, and not
to any external agency. Others maintain that cells and tissues of all kinds
may be formed, independently of pre-existing cells, from plastic lymph or
blastema. Whichever view may be correct, every one admits that the body
consists of a multitude of organic units, all of which possess their own
proper attributes, and are to a certain extent independent of all others.
Hence it will be convenient to use indifferently the terms cells or organic
units, or simply units.

VARIABILITY AND INHERITANCE.

We have seen in the twenty-second chapter that variability is not a principle
co-ordinate with life or reproduction, but results from special causes,
generally from changed conditions acting during successive generations. The
fluctuating variability thus induced is apparently due in part to the sexual
system being easily affected, so that it is often rendered impotent; and when
not so seriously affected, it often fails in its proper function of
transmitting truly the characters of the parents to the offspring. But
variability is not necessarily connected with the sexual system, as we see in
the cases of bud-variation. Although we are seldom able to trace the nature of
the connection, many deviations of structure no doubt result from changed
conditions acting directly on the organisation, independently of the
reproductive system. In some instances we may feel sure of this, when all, or
nearly all the individuals which have been similarly exposed are similarly and
definitely affected, of which several instances have been given. But it is by
no means clear why the offspring should be affected by the exposure of the
parents to new conditions, and why it is necessary in most cases that several
generations should have been thus exposed.

How, again, can we explain the inherited effects of the use or disuse of
particular organs? The domesticated duck flies less and walks more than the
wild duck, and its limb-bones have become diminished and increased in a
corresponding manner in comparison with those of the wild duck. A horse is
trained to certain paces, and the colt inherits similar consensual movements.
The domesticated rabbit becomes tame from close confinement; the dog,
intelligent from associating with man; the retriever is taught to fetch and
carry; and these mental endowments and bodily powers are all inherited.
Nothing in the whole circuit of physiology is more wonderful. How can the use
or disuse of a particular limb or of the brain affect a small aggregate of
reproductive cells, seated in a distant part of the body, in such a manner
that the being developed from these cells inherits the characters of either
one or both parents? Even an imperfect answer to this question would be
satisfactory.

In the chapters devoted to inheritance it was shown that a multitude of newly
acquired characters, whether injurious or beneficial, whether of the lowest or
highest vital importance, are often faithfully transmitted--frequently even
when one parent alone possesses some new peculiarity; and we may on the whole
conclude that inheritance is the rule, and non-inheritance the anomaly. In
some instances a character is not inherited, from the conditions of life being
directly opposed to its development; in many instances, from the conditions
incessantly inducing fresh variability, as with grafted fruit-trees and
highly-cultivated flowers. In the remaining cases the failure may be
attributed to reversion, by which the child resembles its grandparents or more
remote progenitors, instead of its parents.

Inheritance is governed by various laws. Characters which first appear at any
particular age tend to reappear at a corresponding age. They often become
associated with certain seasons of the year, and reappear in the offspring at
a corresponding season. If they appear rather late in life in one sex, they
tend to reappear exclusively in the same sex at the same period of life.

The principle of reversion, recently alluded to, is one of the most wonderful
of the attributes of Inheritance. It proves to us that the transmission of a
character and its development, which ordinarily go together and thus escape
discrimination, are distinct powers; and these powers in some cases are even
antagonistic, for each acts alternately in successive generations. Reversion
is not a rare event, depending on some unusual or favourable combination of
circumstances, but occurs so regularly with crossed animals and plants, and so
frequently with uncrossed breeds, that it is evidently an essential part of
the principle of inheritance. We know that changed conditions have the power
of evoking long-lost characters, as in the case of animals becoming feral. The
act of crossing in itself possesses this power in a high degree. What can be
more wonderful than that characters, which have disappeared during scores, or
hundreds, or even thousands of generations, should suddenly reappear perfectly
developed, as in the case of pigeons and fowls, both when purely bred and
especially when crossed; or as with the zebrine stripes on dun-coloured
horses, and other such cases? Many monstrosities come under this same head, as
when rudimentary organs are redeveloped, or when an organ which we must
believe was possessed by an early progenitor of the species, but of which not
even a rudiment is left, suddenly reappears, as with the fifth stamen in some
Scrophulariaceae. We have already seen that reversion acts in bud-
reproduction; and we know that it occasionally acts during the growth of the
same individual animal, especially, but not exclusively, if of crossed
parentage,--as in the rare cases described of fowls, pigeons, cattle, and
rabbits, which have reverted to the colours of one of their parents or
ancestors as they advanced in years.

We are led to believe, as formerly explained, that every character which
occasionally reappears is present in a latent form in each generation, in
nearly the same manner as in male and female animals the secondary characters
of the opposite sex lie latent and ready to be evolved when the reproductive
organs are injured. This comparison of the secondary sexual characters which
lie latent in both sexes, with other latent characters, is the more
appropriate from the case recorded of a Hen, which assumed some of the
masculine characters, not of her own race, but of an early progenitor; she
thus exhibited at the same time the redevelopment of latent characters of both
kinds. In every living creature we may feel assured that a host of long-lost
characters lie ready to be evolved under proper conditions. How can we make
intelligible and connect with other facts, this wonderful and common capacity
of reversion,--this power of calling back to life long-lost characters?

PART II.

I have now enumerated the chief facts which every one would desire to see
connected by some intelligible bond. This can be done, if we make the
following assumptions, and much may be advanced in favour of the chief one.
The secondary assumptions can likewise be supported by various physiological
considerations. It is universally admitted that the cells or units of the body
increase by self-division or proliferation, retaining the same nature, and
that they ultimately become converted into the various tissues and substances
of the body. But besides this means of increase I assume that the units throw
off minute granules which are dispersed throughout the whole system; that
these, when supplied with proper nutriment, multiply by self-division, and are
ultimately developed into units like those from which they were originally
derived. These granules may be called gemmules. They are collected from all
parts of the system to constitute the sexual elements, and their development
in the next generation forms a new being; but they are likewise capable of
transmission in a dormant state to future generations and may then be
developed. Their development depends on their union with other partially
developed or nascent cells which precede them in the regular course of growth.
Why I use the term union, will be seen when we discuss the direct action of
pollen on the tissues of the mother-plant. Gemmules are supposed to be thrown
off by every unit, not only during the adult state, but during each stage of
development of every organism; but not necessarily during the continued
existence of the same unit. Lastly, I assume that the gemmules in their
dormant state have a mutual affinity for each other, leading to their
aggregation into buds or into the sexual elements. Hence, it is not the
reproductive organs or buds which generate new organisms, but the units of
which each individual is composed. These assumptions constitute the
provisional hypothesis which I have called Pangenesis. Views in many respects
similar have been propounded by various authors. (27/42. Mr. G.H. Lewes
('Fortnightly Review' November 1, 1868 page 506) remarks on the number of
writers who have advanced nearly similar views. More than two thousand years
ago Aristotle combated a view of this kind, which, as I hear from Dr. W. Ogle,
was held by Hippocrates and others. Ray, in his 'Wisdom of God' (2nd edition
1692 page 68), says that "every part of the body seems to club and contribute
to the seed." The "organic molecules" of Buffon ('Hist. Nat. Gen.' edition of
1749 tome 2 pages 54, 62, 329, 333, 420, 425) appear at first sight to be the
same as the gemmules of my hypothesis, but they are essentially different.
Bonnet ('Oeuvres d'Hist. Nat.' tome 5 part 1 1781 4to edition page 334) speaks
of the limbs having germs adapted for the reparation of all possible losses;
but whether these germs are supposed to be the same with those within buds and
the sexual organs is not clear. Prof. Owen says ('Anatomy of Vertebrates'
volume 3 1868 page 813) that he fails to see any fundamental difference
between the views which he propounded in his 'Parthenogenesis' (1849 pages 5-
8), and which he now considers as erroneous, and my hypothesis of pangenesis:
but a reviewer ('Journal of Anat. and Phys.' May 1869 page 441) shows how
different they really are. I formerly thought that the "physiological units"
of Herbert Spencer ('Principles of Biology' volume 1 chapters 4 and 8 1863-64)
were the same as my gemmules, but I now know that this is not the case.
Lastly, it appears from a review of the present work by Prof. Mantegazza
('Nuova Antologia, Maggio' 1868), that he (in his 'Elementi di Igiene' Ediz. 3
page 540) clearly foresaw the doctrine of pangenesis.)

Before proceeding to show, firstly, how far these assumptions are in
themselves probable, and secondly, how far they connect and explain the
various groups of facts with which we are concerned, it may be useful to give
an illustration, as simple as possible, of the hypothesis. If one of the
Protozoa be formed, as it appears under the microscope, of a small mass of
homogeneous gelatinous matter, a minute particle or gemmule thrown off from
any part and nourished under favourable circumstances would reproduce the
whole; but if the upper and lower surfaces were to differ in texture from each
other and from the central portion, then all three parts would have to throw
off gemmules, which when aggregated by mutual affinity would form either buds
or the sexual elements, and would ultimately be developed into a similar
organism. Precisely the same view may be extended to one of the higher
animals; although in this case many thousand gemmules must be thrown off from
the various parts of the body at each stage of development; these gemmules
being developed in union with pre-existing nascent cells in due order of
succession.

Physiologists maintain, as we have seen, that each unit of the body, though to
a large extent dependent on others, is likewise to a certain extent
independent or autonomous, and has the power of increasing by self-division. I
go one step further, and assume that each unit casts off free gemmules which
are dispersed throughout the system, and are capable under proper conditions
of being developed into similar units. Nor can this assumption be considered
as gratuitous and improbable. It is manifest that the sexual elements and buds
include formative matter of some kind, capable of development; and we now know
from the production of graft-hybrids that similar matter is dispersed
throughout the tissues of plants, and can combine with that of another and
distinct plant, giving rise to a new being, intermediate in character. We know
also that the male element can act directly on the partially developed tissues
of the mother-plant, and on the future progeny of female animals. The
formative matter which is thus dispersed throughout the tissues of plants, and
which is capable of being developed into each unit or part, must be generated
there by some means; and my chief assumption is that this matter consists of
minute particles or gemmules cast off from each unit or cell. (27/43. Mr.
Lowne has observed ('Journal of Queckett Microscopical Club' September 23,
1870) certain remarkable changes in the tissues of the larva of a fly, which
makes him believe "it possible that organs and organisms are sometimes
developed by the aggregation of excessively minute gemmules, such as those
which Mr. Darwin's hypothesis demands.")

But I have further to assume that the gemmules in their undeveloped state are
capable of largely multiplying themselves by self-division, like independent
organisms. Delpino insists that to "admit of multiplication by fissiparity in
corpuscles, analogous to seeds or buds...is repugnant to all analogy." But
this seems a strange objection, as Thuret (27/44. 'Annales des Sc. Nat.' 3rd
series Bot. tome 14 1850 page 244.) has seen the zoospore of an alga divide
itself, and each half germinated. Haeckel divided the segmented ovum of a
siphonophora into many pieces, and these were developed. Nor does the extreme
minuteness of the gemmules, which can hardly differ much in nature from the
lowest and simplest organisms, render it improbable that they should grow and
multiply. A great authority, Dr. Beale (27/45. 'Disease Germs' page 20.), says
"that minute yeast cells are capable of throwing off buds or gemmules, much
less than the 1/100000 of an inch in diameter;" and these he thinks are
"capable of subdivision practically ad infinitum."

A particle of small-pox matter, so minute as to be borne by the wind, must
multiply itself many thousandfold in a person thus inoculated; and so with the
contagious matter of scarlet fever. (27/46. See some very interesting papers
on this subject by Dr. Beale in 'Medical Times and Gazette' September 9, 1865
pages 273, 330.) It has recently been ascertained (27/47. Third Report of the
R. Comm. on the Cattle Plague as quoted in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1866 page
446.) that a minute portion of the mucous discharge from an animal affected
with rinderpest, if placed in the blood of a healthy ox, increases so fast
that in a short space of time "the whole mass of blood, weighing many pounds,
is infected, and every small particle of that blood contains enough poison to
give, within less than forty-eight hours, the disease to another animal."

The retention of free and undeveloped gemmules in the same body from early
youth to old age will appear improbable, but we should remember how long seeds
lie dormant in the earth and buds in the bark of a tree. Their transmission
from generation to generation will appear still more improbable; but here
again we should remember that many rudimentary and useless organs have been
transmitted during an indefinite number of generations. We shall presently see
how well the long-continued transmission of undeveloped gemmules explains many
facts.

As each unit, or group of similar units, throughout the body, casts off its
gemmules, and as all are contained within the smallest ovule, and within each
spermatozoon or pollen-grain, and as some animals and plants produce an
astonishing number of pollen-grains and ovules (27/48. Mr. F. Buckland found
6,867,840 eggs in a cod-fish ('Land and Water' 1868 page 62). An Ascaris
produces about 64,000,000 eggs (Carpenter's 'Comp. Phys.' 1854 page 590). Mr.
J. Scott, of the Royal Botanic Garden of Edinburgh, calculated, in the same
manner as I have done for some British Orchids ('Fertilisation of Orchids'
page 344), the number of seeds in a capsule of an Acropera and found the
number to be 371,250. Now this plant produces several flowers on a raceme, and
many racemes during a season. In an allied genus, Gongora, Mr. Scott has seen
twenty capsules produced on a single raceme; ten such racemes on the Acropera
would yield above seventy-four millions of seed.), the number and minuteness
of the gemmules must be something inconceivable. But considering how minute
the molecules are, and how many go to the formation of the smallest granule of
any ordinary substance, this difficulty with respect to the gemmules is not
insuperable. From the data arrived at by Sir W. Thomson, my son George finds
that a cube of 1/10000 of an inch of glass or water must consist of between 16
million millions, and 131 thousand million million molecules. No doubt the
molecules of which an organism is formed are larger, from being more complex,
than those of an inorganic substance, and probably many molecules go to the
formation of a gemmule; but when we bear in mind that a cube of 1/10000 of an
inch is much smaller than any pollen-grain, ovule or bud, we can see what a
vast number of gemmules one of these bodies might contain.

The gemmules derived from each part or organ must be thoroughly dispersed
throughout the whole system. We know, for instance, that even a minute
fragment of a leaf of a Begonia will reproduce the whole plant; and that if a
fresh-water worm is chopped into small pieces, each will reproduce the whole
animal. Considering also the minuteness of the gemmules and the permeability
of all organic tissues, the thorough dispersion of the gemmules is not
surprising. That matter may be readily transferred without the aid of vessels
from part to part of the body, we have a good instance in a case recorded by
Sir J. Paget of a lady, whose hair lost its colour at each successive attack
of neuralgia and recovered it again in the course of a few days. With plants,
however, and probably with compound animals, such as corals, the gemmules do
not ordinarily spread from bud to bud, but are confined to the parts developed
from each separate bud; and of this fact no explanation can be given.

The assumed elective affinity of each gemmule for that particular cell which
precedes it in due order of development is supported by many analogies. In all
ordinary cases of sexual reproduction, the male and female elements certainly
have a mutual affinity for each other: thus, it is believed that about ten
thousand species of Compositae exist, and there can be no doubt that if the
pollen of all these species could be simultaneously or successively placed on
the stigma of any one species, this one would elect with unerring certainty
its own pollen. This elective capacity is all the more wonderful, as it must
have been acquired since the many species of this great group of plants
branched off from a common progenitor. On any view of the nature of sexual
reproduction, the formative matter of each part contained within the ovules
and the male element act on each other by some law of special affinity, so
that corresponding parts affect one another; thus, a calf produced from a
short-horned cow by a long-horned bull has its horns affected by the union of
the two forms, and the offspring from two birds with differently coloured
tails have their tails affected.

The various tissues of the body plainly show, as many physiologists have
insisted (27/49. Paget 'Lectures on Pathology' page 27; Virchow 'Cellular
Pathology' translated by Dr. Chance pages 123, 126, 294. Claude Bernard 'Des
Tissus Vivants' pages 177, 210, 337; Muller 'Physiology' English translation
page 290.), an affinity for special organic substances, whether natural or
foreign to the body. We see this in the cells of the kidneys attracting urea
from the blood; in curare affecting certain nerves; Lytta vesicatoria the
kidneys; and the poisonous matter of various diseases, as small-pox, scarlet-
fever, hooping-cough, glanders, and hydrophobia, affecting certain definite
parts of the body. It has also been assumed that the development of each
gemmule depends on its union with another cell or unit which has just
commenced its development, and which precedes it in due order of growth. That
the formative matter within the pollen of plants, which by our hypothesis
consists of gemmules, can unite with and modify the partially developed cells
of the mother-plant, we have clearly seen in the section devoted to this
subject. As the tissues of plants are formed, as far as is known, only by the
proliferation of pre-existing cells, we must conclude that the gemmules
derived from the foreign pollen do not become developed into new and separate
cells, but penetrate and modify the nascent cells of the mother-plant. This
process may be compared with what takes place in the act of ordinary
fertilisation, during which the contents of the pollen-tubes penetrate the
closed embryonic sac within the ovule, and determine the development of the
embryo. According to this view, the cells of the mother-plant may almost
literally be said to be fertilised by the gemmules derived from the foreign
pollen. In this case and in all others the proper gemmules must combine in due
order with pre-existing nascent cells, owing to their elective affinities. A
slight difference in nature between the gemmules and the nascent cells would
be far from interfering with their mutual union and development, for we well
know in the case of ordinary reproduction that such slight differentiation in
the sexual elements favours in a marked manner their union and subsequent
development, as well as the vigour of the offspring thus produced.

Thus far we have been able by the aid of our hypothesis to throw some obscure
light on the problems which have come before us; but it must be confessed that
many points remain altogether doubtful. Thus it is useless to speculate at
what period of development each unit of the body casts off its gemmules, as
the whole subject of the development of the various tissues is as yet far from
clear. We do not know whether the gemmules are merely collected by some
unknown means at certain seasons within the reproductive organs, or whether
after being thus collected they rapidly multiply there, as the flow of blood
to these organs at each breeding season seems to render probable. Nor do we
know why the gemmules collect to form buds in certain definite places, leading
to the symmetrical growth of trees and corals. We have no means of deciding
whether the ordinary wear and tear of the tissues is made good by means of
gemmules, or merely by the proliferation of pre-existing cells. If the
gemmules are thus consumed, as seems probable from the intimate connection
between the repair of waste, regrowth, and development, and more especially
from the periodical changes which many male animals undergo in colour and
structure, then some light would be thrown on the phenomena of old age, with
its lessened power of reproduction and of the repair of injuries, and on the
obscure subject of longevity. The fact of castrated animals, which do not cast
off innumerable gemmules in the act of reproduction, not being longer-lived
than perfect males, seems opposed to the belief that gemmules are consumed in
the ordinary repair of wasted tissues; unless indeed the gemmules after being
collected in small numbers within the reproductive organs are there largely
multiplied. (27/50. Prof. Ray Lankester has discussed several of the points
here referred to as bearing on pangenesis, in his interesting essay, 'On
Comparative Longevity in Man and the Lower Animals' 1870 pages 33, 77, etc.)

That the same cells or units may live for a long period and continue
multiplying without being modified by their union with free gemmules of any
kind, is probable from such cases as that of the spur of a cock which grew to
an enormous size when grafted into the ear of an ox. How far units are
modified during their normal growth by absorbing peculiar nutriment from the
surrounding tissues, independently of their union with gemmules of a distinct
nature, is another doubtful point. (27/51. Dr. Ross refers to this subject in
his 'Graft Theory of Disease' 1872 page 53.) We shall appreciate this
difficulty by calling to mind what complex yet symmetrical growths the cells
of plants yield when inoculated by the poison of a gall-insect. With animals
various polypoid excrescences and tumours are generally admitted (27/52.
Virchow 'Cellular Pathology' translated by Dr. Chance 1860 pages 60, 162, 245,
441, 454.) to be the direct product, through proliferation, of normal cells
which have become abnormal. In the regular growth and repair of bones, the
tissues undergo, as Virchow remarks (27/53. Ibid pages 412-426.), a whole
series of permutations and substitutions. "The cartilage cells may be
converted by a direct transformation into marrow-cells, and continue as such;
or they may first be converted into osseous and then into medullary tissue; or
lastly, they may first be converted into marrow and then into bone. So
variable are the permutations of these tissues, in themselves so nearly
allied, and yet in their external appearance so completely distinct." But as
these tissues thus change their nature at any age, without any obvious change
in their nutrition, we must suppose in accordance with our hypothesis that
gemmules derived from one kind of tissue combine with the cells of another
kind, and cause the successive modifications.

We have good reason to believe that several gemmules are requisite for the
development of one and the same unit or cell; for we cannot otherwise
understand the insufficiency of a single or even of two or three pollen-grains
or spermatozoa. But we are far from knowing whether the gemmules of all the
units are free and separate from one another, or whether some are from the
first united into small aggregates. A feather, for instance, is a complex
structure, and, as each separate part is liable to inherited variations, I
conclude that each feather generates a large number of gemmules; but it is
possible that these may be aggregated into a compound gemmule. The same remark
applies to the petals of flowers, which are sometimes highly complex
structures, with each ridge and hollow contrived for a special purpose, so
that each part must have been separately modified, and the modifications
transmitted; consequently, separate gemmules, according to our hypothesis,
must have been thrown off from each cell or unit. But, as we sometimes see
half an anther or a small portion of a filament becoming petali-form, or parts
or mere stripes of the calyx assuming the colour and texture of the corolla,
it is probable that with petals the gemmules of each cell are not aggregated
together into a compound gemmule, but are free and separate. Even in so simple
a case as that of a perfect cell, with its protoplasmic contents, nucleus,
nucleolus, and walls, we do not know whether or not its development depends on
a compound gemmule derived from each part. (27/54. See some good criticisms on
this head by Delpino and by Mr. G.H. Lewes in the 'Fortnightly Review'
November 1, 1868 page 509.)

Having now endeavoured to show that the several foregoing assumptions are to a
certain extent supported by analogous facts, and having alluded to some of the
most doubtful points, we will consider how far the hypothesis brings under a
single point of view the various cases enumerated in the First Part. All the
forms of reproduction graduate into one another and agree in their product;
for it is impossible to distinguish between organisms produced from buds, from
self-division, or from fertilised germs; such organisms are liable to
variations of the same nature and to reversions of the same kind; and as,
according to our hypothesis, all the forms of reproduction depend on the
aggregation of gemmules derived from the whole body, we can understand this
remarkable agreement. Parthenogenesis is no longer wonderful, and if we did
not know that great good followed from the union of the sexual elements
derived from two distinct individuals, the wonder would be that
parthenogenesis did not occur much oftener than it does. On any ordinary
theory of reproduction the formation of graft-hybrids, and the action of the
male element on the tissues of the mother-plant, as well as on the future
progeny of female animals, are great anomalies; but they are intelligible on
our hypothesis. The reproductive organs do not actually create the sexual
elements; they merely determine the aggregation and perhaps the multiplication
of the gemmules in a special manner. These organs, however, together with
their accessory parts, have high functions to perform. They adapt one or both
elements for independent temporary existence, and for mutual union. The
stigmatic secretion acts on the pollen of a plant of the same species in a
wholly different manner to what it does on the pollen of one belonging to a
distinct genus or family. The spermatophores of the Cephalopoda are
wonderfully complex structures, which were formerly mistaken for parasitic
worms; and the spermatozoa of some animals possess attributes which, if
observed in an independent animal, would be put down to instinct guided by
sense-organs,--as when the spermatozoa of an insect find their way into the
minute micropyle of the egg.

The antagonism which has long been observed (27/55. Mr. Herbert Spencer
('Principles of Biology' volume 2 page 430) has fully discussed this
antagonism.), with certain exceptions, between growth and the power of sexual
reproduction (27/56. The male salmon is known to breed at a very early age.
The Triton and Siredon, whilst retaining their larval branchiae, according to
Filippi and Dumeril ('Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.' 3rd series 1866 page 157)
are capable of reproduction. Ernst Haeckel has recently ('Monatsbericht Akad.
Wiss. Berlin' February 2, 1865) observed the surprising case of a medusa, with
its reproductive organs active, which produces by budding a widely different
form of medusa; and this latter also has the power of sexual reproduction.
Krohn has shown ('Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.' 3rd series volume 19 1862
page 6) that certain other medusae, whilst sexually mature, propagate by
gemmae. See also Kolliker 'Morphologie und Entwickelungsgeschichte des
Pennatulidenstammes' 1872 page 12.)--between the repair of injuries and
gemmation--and with plants, between rapid increase by buds, rhizomes, etc.,
and the production of seed, is partly explained by the gemmules not existing
in sufficient numbers for these processes to be carried on simultaneously.

Hardly any fact in physiology is more wonderful than the power of regrowth;
for instance, that a snail should be able to reproduce its head, or a
salamander its eyes, tail, and legs, exactly at the points where they have
been cut off. Such cases are explained by the presence of gemmules derived
from each part, and disseminated throughout the body. I have heard the process
compared with that of the repair of the broken angles of a crystal by re-
crystallisation; and the two processes have this much in common, that in the
one case the polarity of the molecules is the efficient cause, and in the
other the affinity of the gemmules for particular nascent cells. But we have
here to encounter two objections which apply not only to the regrowth of a
part, or of a bisected individual, but to fissiparous generation and budding.
The first objection is that the part which is reproduced is in the same stage
of development as that of the being which has been operated on or bisected;
and in the case of buds, that the new beings thus produced are in the same
stage as that of the budding parent. Thus a mature salamander, of which the
tail has been cut off, does not reproduce a larval tail; and a crab does not
reproduce a larval leg. In the case of budding it was shown in the first part
of this chapter that the new being thus produced does not retrograde in
development,--that is, does not pass through those earlier stages, which the
fertilised germ has to pass through. Nevertheless, the organisms operated on
or multiplying themselves by buds must, by our hypothesis, include innumerable
gemmules derived from every part or unit of the earlier stages of development;
and why do not such gemmules reproduce the amputated part or the whole body at
a corresponding early stage of development?

The second objection, which has been insisted on by Delpino, is that the
tissues, for instance, of a mature salamander or crab, of which a limb has
been removed, are already differentiated and have passed through their whole
course of development; and how can such tissues in accordance with our
hypothesis attract and combine with the gemmules of the part which is to be
reproduced? In answer to these two objections we must bear in mind the
evidence which has been advanced, showing that at least in a large number of
cases the power of regrowth is a localised faculty, acquired for the sake of
repairing special injuries to which each particular creature is liable; and in
the case of buds or fissiparous generation, for the sake of quickly
multiplying the organism at a period of life when it can be supported in large
numbers. These considerations lead us to believe that in all such cases a
stock of nascent cells or of partially developed gemmules are retained for
this special purpose either locally or throughout the body, ready to combine
with the gemmules derived from the cells which come next in due succession. If
this be admitted we have a sufficient answer to the above two objections.
Anyhow, pangenesis seems to throw a considerable amount of light on the
wonderful power of regrowth.

It follows, also, from the view just given, that the sexual elements differ
from buds in not including nascent cells or gemmules in a somewhat advanced
stage of development, so that only the gemmules belonging to the earliest
stages are first developed. As young animals and those which stand low in the
scale generally have a much greater capacity for regrowth than older and
higher animals, it would also appear that they retain cells in a nascent
state, or partially developed gemmules, more readily than do animals which
have already passed through a long series of developmental changes. I may here
add that although ovules can be detected in most or all female animals at an
extremely early age, there is no reason to doubt that gemmules derived from
parts modified during maturity can pass into the ovules.

With respect to hybridism, pangenesis agrees well with most of the ascertained
