ruler was near.

Then there were footsteps approaching the chest. A priest no doubt;
shrill whistling told of his anger. The concealing cover was jerked
outward and down, and Rawson, staring above him, saw not the coppery
face that he had expected, but the hideous white visage of Phee-e-al
himself.

For an instant the ruler of the mole-men stood half stooped in
petrified astonishment, and in that moment Rawson dragged himself to
his feet. No chance to use the gun--the other was upon him, his
gripping talons tearing Rawson's bare flesh. In one flashing thought,
Dean cursed himself for the uselessness of his weapon--he should have
taken a pistol, an automatic. Then, body to body with the savage, he
was dragged out over the chest.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had been holding the rifle above him, as he struggled from his
cramped quarters. The savage had grabbed him about the shoulders, but
his hands were still free; they held the gun on high. And in the
second when he found his feet under him, as Phee-e-al dragged him
clear of the chest, Rawson brought the breech of the gun crashing down
upon the pointed skull.

He felt the talons release their hold. The priests were rushing upon
him. Phee-e-al, too, had been only momentarily stunned--he was
springing. Then Rawson whipped the rifle down in line, and the
clamoring shrieks that filled the room with tumult were drowned under
another roar.

He saw Phee-e-al fall. Even then, through all the pandemonium within
his own mind, he thrilled with satisfaction at sight of a little dot
and a spreading stain above Phee-e-al's heart, where only bare skin
had been before.

The next shot took the foremost of the priests. The others paused,
hesitant for a moment, ranged out in an irregular line. Past them,
beyond the golden barrier, Rawson caught a confused glimpse of a sea
of red faces. Green flames were stabbing upward from their ready
weapons. The priests were between him and them, and there came to
Rawson in that instant, through all the chaos of fighting and
half-formed plans, the knowledge that these priests were a living
barrier that held off the flames.

He fired once more to check them, then sprang for the wide entrance
of the tunnel. He fired again back of him, shooting wildly as he ran,
then saw Loah as she came from her hiding place with the flame-thrower
ready in her hand.

"Quick!" he gasped. "Get back!" Then, with her, he was running
stumblingly through the dark.

       *       *       *       *       *

There could be no escape; even while they fled he knew it. And yet
they almost made it--though the end, when it came, was one that
neither could possibly have foreseen.

They were following a wide passage, one of the countless thoroughfares
of the Reds. It was deserted. Loah flashed her light freely. Ahead of
them the passage turned. Just short of that bend was a rift in the
rocks.

"There!" Loah gasped. "Turn there. It will take us back to the
_jana_." But the words were followed by a flash of green from dead
ahead.

The flames that made it came quickly after and a dozen of the red
warriors were before them, the light of their weapons slanting just
above Rawson's head. His rifle was half raised--they would at least
fight to the last. Then he realized that the green death was not
swinging downward.

From behind them, in the corridor through which they had raced, came a
chorus of whistling shouts. Rawson whirled to find more of the red
fighters, and again, though their hissing green flames were held
ready, they did not descend.

A priest, copper-colored, shining resplendently in the weird glow,
detached himself from the group and stepped forward under the
protection of their weapons. Loah's hand was depressing the muzzle of
Rawson's rifle. "Wait!" she said. "He wishes to speak."

       *       *       *       *       *

The priest stopped and addressed them. Loah answered; and to Rawson it
seemed horrible that her lips and throat should be called upon to form
those whistling words. Then she turned toward him.

"He says they will not harm you now if you surrender. Later, when they
select a new ruler, he may order you set free."

Rawson was doing some quick thinking. The priest was lying, clumsily,
childishly, but it might be he could bargain with them.

"Tell them this," he ordered Loah: "they are to let you go free--let
you go right now! If they do that, I'll lay down my gun. If they
don't, that priest will die before they get me. I don't think you can
make it," he added, "but go back to the _jana_. Don't stop for
anything. Drive it as fast as you can; you may still get there before
Gor does his stuff. And take the flame-thrower in case you are
followed--" He stopped; Loah was laughing.

"Did you really think, Dean-San, that I would desert you?" Again she
laughed softly--laughing squarely in the face of that waiting death, a
laugh that was half a sob, that caught suddenly in her throat as she
stared at Dean.

He could not read the look in her eyes as their expression changed.
"Yes," she said slowly, "yes, you are right. If I stay we both die,
quickly."

Again her voice made whistling sounds; the priest replied. Then Loah
threw her arms around Dean and kissed him. He was gripping his rifle;
before he could take her in his arms, she was gone. She walked
swiftly, the flame-thrower in her hands, toward the dark cleft in the
rocks, through which she disappeared. And Dean, though she had done
what he really wished, felt that all of his life and strength had
gone with him with that fleeing figure.

He placed his rifle on the floor and, straightening, held out his
empty hands; the priest's talons were upon his flesh.

"But I got Phee-e-al, anyhow," he was thinking dully.




CHAPTER XXV

_Smithy_


Scarcely more than a vault in the solid rock, the room where Rawson
lay. He had seen it for an instant when the priest, after tying his
hands behind him, had hurled him viciously into the room. It had but
one entrance, though up high on one wall was a crack some two feet in
width that admitted fresh air. A little room, only some twenty feet
square; but he would not suffocate--the priests did not intend that he
should die--not yet.

He saw one of the giant yellow workers bring a big metal plate. He put
it before the doorway; then, by the red glow, he knew that they had
sealed him in.

"I got Phee-e-al," he thought. "I did that much to help. That may put
a crimp in their plans, check the invasion up above. But Gor didn't do
as I told him, or it didn't work. The twenty-four hours must have gone
by."

Then, even in that thought, he found happiness. "That means that Loah
is safe," he told himself. "The shaft is clear; she's on her way back
right now."

He pictured the _jana_ falling swiftly through that dark shaft. He saw
in his mind the beautiful figure of the girl, lithe and slender,
standing at the controls.

About him was a silence like that of the grave; his blood pounded in
his temples like a throbbing drum. It was some time before he knew
that, with that throbbing, other faint sounds were mingled.

They came from the wall beside him, sharp tappings muffled by
distance, the faintest whispering echo of rock striking upon rock.
_Tap-tap_ ... _tap_. A longer pause.... _Tap._ They were making dots
and dashes that blurred with the beating in his own brain.

In that dreadful silence he strained every nerve in an agony of
listening. There was nothing more.

He had been roughly handled by the savages. His whole body was bruised
and aching, his thoughts hazy and blurred. "Woozy," he told himself.
"Guess the old bean must have got a bad crack. Hearing things--mustn't
do that."

Again he tried to picture the girl, speeding on toward that inner
world. Was she thinking of him? Surely she was. He could hear her
calling his name. "Dean," she was saying. "Dean-San." The words were
repeated, an agonized, ghostly whisper--repeated again, "Dean-San--oh,
Dean-San," before he knew that the sound was coming from overhead.
Then a light flashed once in the little room, and he saw her face,
looking down.

She was beside him an instant later. "Dean-San," she was saying, "did
you think that I really would leave you?" She was pressing her lips to
his. Uncovering her light, she worked frenziedly at the metal cords
that bound his wrists, pausing only to repeat her caresses--and at
last he was free.

"I reached the _jana_," she told him in hurried whispers, "and then I
came up. Their great room, where the Pathway to the Light begins, was
deserted. With a cord I pulled the lever, and the _jana_ vanished. I
could not leave it for them to use. Then I followed--I knew by the
sounds where they were taking you. And now, what can we do, Dean-San?
Where can we go?"

It was real! Loah was there beside him; he had her in his arms, his
bruised, bleeding arms whose hurts he no longer felt. And then,
through his mind, flashed the question: if this was real, what of the
other--the rappings he had heard? Perhaps it hadn't been a dream.

He lifted a fragment of rock and crashed it against the wall from
which those rappings apparently had come. Laboriously he spelled out
his name, remembering the dots and dashes from earlier flying days
when planes had been equipped with key-senders. He spelled it slowly
and waited, while only the silence beat upon him and the blood pounded
in his ears. Then he heard it. The answer came from a quicker hand:

"Rawson--this is Smithy."

But Smithy was dead! What could it mean? Slowly Rawson pounded out the
letters of his question: "Where--are--you?" The answer dispelled his
last doubt as to the reality of what he had heard.

It _was_ Smithy. Others were with him, for Smithy said "we," and they
were prisoners, sealed up in a living tomb. But where? Smithy did not
know. He knew only that they were in a big room where the rocks had
been shattered and molten gold spilled on the floor. There was a hole
in the roof, but too small to get through--a round hole, about eight
inches in diameter. And, at that, Rawson interrupted to tap out a
single word.

"Coming!" he said, and turned toward Loah and the light.

The girl had found a metal rope in her wanderings; she had used it to
let herself down into the cave. And now it was she who helped Dean to
pull his bruised body up and into the narrow crack. Loah had clung to
the flame-thrower; they found it where she had left it up above.

The tapping rocks she could not understand, but she knew Dean had a
definite plan in mind when he whispered: "The room where you first
found me--do you remember? Do you know the way?"

"I will always remember," she said simply. "And, yes, I know the way."

Rawson caught glimpses now and again of that broad thoroughfare along
which he had once traveled, a prisoner of the mole-men. But Loah knew
other and seldom-used passages that roughly paralleled it; and then,
after a time, Rawson himself knew in what direction they must go.

He knew, too, that they had followed a circular route, and that the
room in which he had been sealed was not a great way from the place in
which Smithy was a prisoner. Yet this had been his only way to reach
it.

When they came to a sudden sharp turn, he realized that they were
close. Beyond that bend would be the branching, lateral tunnel that
led to Smithy's prison.

The main runway had been deserted by the Reds. Stopping often to
listen, starting at times into side passages at some fancied alarm,
they had met with no opposition. But now, from beyond the angling
passage, came the familiar shrillness of the mole-men's voices.

Again the two concealed themselves, but no one approached. "It's a
guard we hear," Rawson whispered. "They're guarding that entrance
where we must go. They're taking no chances on Smithy's escaping."
Then he crept to the point where the passage turned, the flame-thrower
ready in his hand.

He drew back. For the moment it seemed to him physically impossible to
turn this weapon upon them. They were savages, true, but it seemed
horrible to slash living bodies with a weapon like this. Then he
thought of the devastation those same weapons had wrought among the
people of his own world. His momentary hesitation vanished. With one
spring he leaped into the open where, a hundred feet away, red bodies
were massed, and the air above was quivering with the green jets of
their weapons.

His own flame-thrower he had turned to a tiny point of light; now it
roared forth in fury as he swung it forward. They had no time even to
aim their weapons or to turn them on. They were stampeded by the
astounding attack. And still Rawson sickened as he saw them fall.

There were some who, panic-stricken, dropped their cylinders and
leaped for safety in a narrow branching way. Rawson knew he should
have killed them, knew it in the instant that they vanished, but that
momentary, uncontrollable revulsion within him had stayed his hand.

He rushed forward now, Loah still bravely at his side--past the fallen
bodies, through the choking odor of burned flesh. Grabbing up one of
the weapons that had been dropped, he thrust it into her hands and
said: "Wait here. Stand them off if they come back." Then he was
rushing up the side corridor toward a room where once, in a
far-distant past, he himself had been confined.

The flame-thrower lighted the way. It showed him the metal plate and
the smooth, glassy rock that had been melted around its edge. He
pounded on the metal and shouted Smithy's name.

Voices answered from within--voices almost unintelligible for the
wonder and unbelief and joy that made them a confusion of wordless
shouts. Then he stepped back and turned the blast of his weapon upon
the rock at the edge of the plate.

The metal sheet moved at last, its top swinging slowly outward. Its
base was held by the gummy, hardening rock. Then it broke free and
crashed to the floor, and the light of Dean's weapon showed through
the black opening upon the blanched faces of men, where eyes were
still wide in disbelief.

Though they were looking at one of their own kind, it must have taken
then a moment to realize that the naked body, clad only in a golden
loin cloth, and the hands that held one of the fearful, green-flamed
weapons, were those of a human. Then one of them broke from the
others, sprang heedlessly across the still-glowing plate, and threw
his arms about the barbaric figure.

"Dean!" he choked. "Dean, it's really you! You're alive!"

And Rawson's voice, too, was husky as he said: "Smithy, I thought you
were gone. The radio said they had got you, old man."

Then other khaki-clad bodies, a dozen of them, were crowding through
the hot portal, and Rawson came suddenly to himself.

"Quick!" he shouted. "They'll be after us in a second. Follow me."

Loah was waiting. Her own flame-thrower spat a little jet of green; it
was the only light. Rawson saw here she had gathered up the other
weapons and had turned them off so that even their little light would
not blind her as she kept watch down the dark passage.

"Do we want them?" Dean shouted to the others. And Smithy echoed the
question:

"Do we want them, Colonel?"

Colonel Culver, his face almost unrecognizable under its smears of
powder stains and blood, snapped a quick answer: "No. We outrange them
with our rifles. They're only flame-throwers, not ray projectors. Beat
it! Run like the devil!"

Rawson snatched Loah's weapon and threw it with the others. It would
be hard going, ahead--she must not be uselessly burdened. But he kept
his own. Then with his one free hand he swept her up till she was
racing beside him as they led the way.

"I should have kept the fire weapon," the girl protested; "I, too, can
fight."

Rawson, speaking between breaths, reassured her: "Too heavy. Their
guns will protect us--"

Behind them, a man's voice cried out once, a single, hoarse scream of
agony; then the rock wall took the sharp crackle of rifle fire and
threw the sound into crashing, thundering echoes.




CHAPTER XXVI

_Power!_


A girl whose creamy body was strangely unsoiled by smoke or grime,
whose jeweled breast-plates flashed in the light of her torch while
the loose wrappings about her waist whipped against her as she ran.
And Rawson, naked but for the golden loin cloth, running beside her.
Then Smithy, and ten others in the khaki uniform of the service--it
was all that was left of the fifty who had dared the depths. And now
all of them were harried and driven like helpless animals in the
