
At that moment all thought of escape was swept from me, submerged by
awe.

This vast Cosmorama! This stupendous pageant of the events of Time!


CHAPTER XII

_A Billion Years in An Hour!_

I saw at first, from the window of the cage, nothing more than an area
of gray blur. I stared, and it appeared to be shifting, crawling,
slowly tossing and rolling. It was a formless vista of Nothingness,
yet it seemed a pregnant Nothingness. Things I could sense were
happening out there; things almost to be seen.

Then my sight, my perception, gradually became adjusted. The gray mist
remained, and slowly it took form. It made a tremendous panorama of
gray, a void of illimitable, unfathomable distance; gray above,
below--everywhere; and in it the cage hung poised.

The Robot said, "Is it clearing? Are you seeing anything?"

"Yes," I murmured. I held Mary firmly beside me; there was the sense,
in all this weightless void, that we must fall. "Yes, but it is gray;
only gray."

"There are colors," said the Robot. "And the daylight and darkness of
the days. But we are moving through them very rapidly, so they blend
into gray."

The Time-dials of the cage controls showed their pointers whirling in
a blur. We were speeding forward through the years--a thousand years
to a second of my consciousness; or a hundred thousand years to a
second: I could not say.[2] All the colors, the light and shade of
this great changing void, were mingled to this drab monochrome.

[Footnote 2: Upon a later calculation I judged that the average
passage of the years in relation to my perception of Time-rate was
slightly over 277,500 years a second. Undoubtedly throughout the
myriad centuries preceding the birth of mankind our rate was very
considerably faster than that; and from the dawn of history
forward--which is so tiny a fraction of the whole--we traveled
materially slower.]

The movement was a flow. The changes of possibly a hundred thousand
years occurred while I blinked my eyes. It seemed a melting movement.
Shapes were melting, dissipating, vanishing; others, intermingled,
rising to form a new vista. There were a myriad details, each of them
so rapid they were lost to my senses; but the effect of them, over the
broad sweeps of longer Time, I could perceive.

A void of swirling shapes. The Beginning! But not the Beginning of
Time. This that I was seeing was near the beginning of our world. This
was the new Earth here, forming now. Our world--a new star amid all
the others of the great Celestial Cosmos. As I gazed at its changing
sweep of movement, my whirling fancy filled in some of the details
flashing here unseen.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few moments ago this had been a billion and a half years before my
birth. 1,500,000,000 B. C. A fluid Earth; a cauldron of molten
star-dust and flaming gases: it had been that, just a few moments ago.
The core was cooling, so that now a viscous surface was here with the
gas flames dead.

A cooling, congealing surface, with an atmosphere forming over it. At
first that atmosphere had doubtless been a watery, envelope of steam.
What gigantic storms must have lashed it! Boiling rain falling to hiss
against the molten Earth! The congealing surface rent by great
earthquakes; cataclysms rending and tearing....

1,000,000,000 B. C. passed. And upon this torn, hardening surface,
with the cooling fires receding to the inner core, I knew that the
great envelope of steam had cooled and condensed. Into the hollows of
the broken surface, the water settled. The oceans were born. The land
remained upon the heights. What had been the steaming envelope,
remained, and became the atmosphere.

And the world was round because of its rotation. One may put a lump of
heated sealing wax upon a bodkin and twirl it; and the wax will cool
into roundness, bulging at the equator from centrifugal force, and
flattening at the poles.

At 900,000,000 B. C. I could realize by what I saw that this was the
Earth beneath me. Land and water were here, and above was the sky.

We swept from the mist. I became aware of a wide-flung, gray formless
landscape. Its changing outlines were less swiftly moving than before.
And beside it, now quite near where our cage hung poised, a great gray
sea stretched away to a curving horizon. And overhead was the tenuous
gray of the sky.

The young world. Undoubtedly it rotated more swiftly now than in my
later era. The sun was hotter, and closer perhaps: the days and nights
were briefer. And now, upon this new-born world, life was beginning.
The swirling air did not hold it, nor yet the barren rocky land. The
great mystery--this thing organic which we call life--began in the
sea. I gestured for Mary toward that leveled vista of gray water, to
the warm, dark ocean depths, whose surface was now lashed always by
titanic storms. But to us, as we stared, that surface seemed to
stretch almost steady, save where it touched the land with a blur of
changing configurations.

"The sea," I murmured. "Life is beginning there now."

       *       *       *       *       *

In fancy I pictured it. The shallow shores of the sea, where the water
was warmer. The mother of all life on Earth, these shallows. In them
lay the spawn, an irritability: then one-celled organisms, to
gradually evolve through the centuries to the many-celled, and more
complex of nature.

But still so primitive! From the shallows of the sea, they spread to
the depths. Questing new environment, they would be ascending the
rivers. Diversifying their kinds. Sea-worms, sea-squirts: and then the
first vertebrates, the lamprey-eels.

Thousands of years. And on the land--this melting landscape at which
I stood gazing--I could mentally picture that a soil had come. There
would be a climate still wracked by storms and violent changes, but
stable enough to allow the soil to bear a vegetation. And in the sky
overhead would be clouds, with rain to renew the land's fertility.

Still no organic life could be on land. But in the warm, dark deeps of
the sea, great monsters now were existing. And in the shallows there
was a teeming life, diversified to a myriad forms. I can fancy the
first organisms of the shallows--strangely questing--adventuring out
of the water--seeking with a restless, nameless urge a new
environment. Coming ashore. Fighting and dying.

And then adapting themselves to the new conditions. Prospering.
Changing, ever changing their organic structure; climbing higher.
Amphibians at first crudely able to cope with both sea and land. Then
the land vertebrates, with the sea wholly abandoned. Great walking and
flying reptiles. Birds, gigantic--the pterodactyls.

And then, at last, the mammals.

The age of the giants! Nature, striving to cope with adverse
environment sought to win the battle by producing bigness. Monster
things roamed the land, flew in the air, and were supreme in the
sea....

       *       *       *       *       *

We sped through a period when great lush jungles covered the land. The
dials read 350,000,000 B. C. The gray panorama of landscape had loomed
up to envelope our spectral, humming cage, then fallen away again. The
shore of the sea was constantly changing. I thought once it was over
us. For a period of ten million years the blurred apparition of it
seemed around us. And then it dropped once more, and a new shore line
showed.

150,000,000 B. C. I knew that the dinosaurs, the birds and the archaic
mammals were here now. Then, at 50,000,000 B. C., the higher mammals
had been evolved.

The Time, to Mary Atwood and me, was a minute--but in those myriad
centuries the higher numerals had risen to the anthropoids. The apes!
Erect! Slow-thinking, but canny, they came to take their place in this
world among the things gigantic. But the gigantic things were no
longer supreme. Nature had made an error, and was busy rectifying it.
The dinosaurs--all the giant reptiles--were now sorely pressed. Brute
strength, giant size and tiny brain could not win this struggle. The
huge unwieldy things were being beaten. The smaller animals, birds and
reptiles were more agile, more resourceful, and began to dominate.
Against the giants, and against all hostility of environment, they
survived. And the giants went down to defeat. Gradually, over
thousands of centuries, they died out and were gone....

We entered 1,000,000 B. C. A movement of Migul, the mechanism,
attracted my attention. He left us at the window and went to his
controls.

"What is it?" I demanded.

"I am retarding us. We have been traveling very fast. One million
years and a few thousand are all which remain before we must stop."

I had noticed once or twice before that Migul had turned to gaze
through the Time-telespectroscope. Now he said:

"We are again followed!"

But he would say no more than that, and he silenced me harshly when I
questioned.

Suddenly, Mary touched me. "That little mirror on the table--look! It
holds an image!"

We saw very briefly on the glowing mirror the image of a Time-cage
like our own, but smaller. It was pursuing us. But why, or who might
be operating it we could not then guess.

       *       *       *       *       *

My attention went back to the Time-dials, and then to the window. The
Cosmorama now was proceeding with a slowing sweep of change. It was
less blurred; its melting outlines could more readily be perceived.
The line of seashore swept like a gray gash across the vista. The land
stretched back into the haze of distance.

500,000 B. C. Again my fancy pictured what was transpiring upon this
vast stage. The apes roamed the Earth. There is no one to say what was
here in this grayness of the Western Hemisphere stretching around me,
but in Java there was a man-like ape. And then it was an ape-like man!
Mankind, here at last! Man, the Killer! Of all the beasts, this new
thing called man, most relentless of killers, had come here now to
struggle upward and dominate his world! This man-like ape in a quarter
of a million years became an ape-like man.

250,000 B. C. and the Heidelberg man, a little less ape-like, wandered
throughout Europe....

We had felt, a moment before, all around us, the cold of a dense
whiteness which engulfed the scene. The first of the great Glacial
periods? Ice coming down from the Poles? The axis of the Earth
changing perhaps? Our spectral cage hummed within the blue-gray ice,
and then emerged.

The beasts and man fought the surge of ice, withdrawing when it
advanced, returning as it receded. The Second Glacial Period came and
passed, and the Third....

We swept out into the blended sunlight and darkness again. The land
stretched away with primitive forests. The dawn of history was
approaching. Mankind was questing upward now, with the light of
Reason burning brightly at last....

At 75,000 B. C., when the Third Glacial Period was partially over, man
was puzzling with his chipped stone implements. The Piltdown--the Dawn
Man--was England....

The Fourth Glacial Period passed.

50,000 B. C. The Cro-Magnons and the Grimaldi Negroids were playing
their parts, now. Out of chipped stone implements the groping brain of
man evolved polished stone. It took forty thousand years to do that!
The Neolithic Age was at hand. Man learned to care for his family a
little better. Thus, he discovered fire. He fought with this newly
created monster; puzzled over it; conquered it; kept his family warm
with it and cooked.

       *       *       *       *       *

We passed 10,000 B. C. Man was progressing faster. He was finding new
wants and learning how to supply them. Animals were domesticated, made
subservient and put to work. A vast advance! No longer did man think
it necessary to kill, to subdue: the master could have a servant.

Food was found in the soil. More fastidious always, in eating, man
learned to grow food. Then came the dawn of agriculture.

And then we swept into the period of recorded history. 4241 B. C. In
Egypt, man was devising a calendar....

This fragment of space upon which we gazed--this space of the Western
Hemisphere near the shore of the sea--was destined to be the site of a
city of millions--the New York City of my birth. But it was a backward
space, now. In Europe, man was progressing faster....

Perhaps, here in America, in 4000 B. C. there was nothing in human
form. I gazed out at the surrounding landscape. It seemed almost
steady, now, of outline. We were moving through Time much less rapidly
than ever before. I remarked the sweep of a thousand years on the
Time-dials. It had become an appreciable interval of Time to me. I
gazed again out the window. The change of outline was very slight. I
could distinguish where the ocean came against the curving line of
shore, and saw a blurred vista of gray forests spreading out over the
land. And then I could distinguish the rivers, and a circular open
stretch of water, landlocked. A bay!

"Mary, look!" I cried. "The harbor--the rivers! See, we are on an
island!"

It made our hearts pound. Out of the chaos, out of the vast reaches of
past Time, it seemed that we were coming home. More than a vague
familiarity was in this panorama now. Here was the little island which
soon was to be called Manhattan. Our window faced the west. A river
showed off there--a gray gash with wall-like cliffs. The sea had
swung, and was behind us to the east.

Familiar space! It was growing into the form we had known it. Our cage
was poised near the south-central part of the island. We seemed to be
on a slight rise of ground. There were moments when the gray quivering
outlines of forest trees loomed around us; then they melted down and
were replaced by others.

A primeval forest, here, solid upon this island and across the narrow
waters; solid upon the mainland.

What strange animals were here, roaming these dark primeval glades?
What animals, with the smaller stamp of modernity, were pressing here
for supremacy? As I gazed westward I could envisage great herds of
bison roaming, a lure to men who might come seeking them as food.

       *       *       *       *       *

And men were coming. 3,000 B. C., then 2,000 B. C. I think no men were
here yet; and to me there was a great imaginative appeal in this
backward space. The New World, it was soon to be called. And it was
six thousand years, at the least, behind the Hemisphere of the east.

Egypt, now, with no more than a shadowy distant heritage from the
beast, was flourishing. In Europe, Hellenic culture soon would
blossom. In this march of events, the great Roman Empire was
impending.

1,000 B. C. Men were coming to this backward space. The way from Asia
was open. Already the Mongoloid tribes, who had crossed where in my
day was the Bering Strait, were cut off from the Old World. And they
spread east and south, hunting the bison.

And now Christ was born. The turning point in the spiritual
development of mankind....

To me, another brief interval. The intricate events of man's upward
struggle were transpiring in Europe, Asia and Africa. The canoe-borne
Mongols had long since found the islands of the South Seas. Australia
was peopled. The beauty of New Zealand had been found and recognized.

500 A. D. The Mongoloids had come, and were flourishing here. They
were changed vastly from those ancestors of Asia whence they had
sprung. An obscure story, this record of primitive America! The
Mongoloids were soon so changed that one could fancy the blood of
another people had mingled with them. Amerindians, we call them now.
They were still very backward in development, yet made tremendous
forward leaps, so that, reaching Mexico, they may have become the
Aztecs, and in Peru, the Incas. And separated, not knowing of each
other's existence, these highest two civilizations of the Western
World nourished with a singularly strange similarity....

I saw on the little island around me still no evidence of man. But men
were here. The American Indian, still bearing evidence of the Mongols,
plied these waters in his frail canoes. His wigwams of skins, the
smoke of his signal fires--these were not enduring enough for me to
see....

       *       *       *       *       *

We had no more than passed the year 500 A. D.--and were traveling with
progressive retardation--when again I was attracted by the movements
of the Robot, Migul. It had been sitting behind us at the control
table setting the Time-levers, slowing our flight. Frequently it gazed
eastward along the tiny beam of light which issued from the
telespectroscope. For an interval, now, its recording mirror had been
dark. But I think that Migul was seeing evidences of the other cage
which was pursuing us, and planning to stop at some specific Time with
whose condition it was familiar. Once already it had seemed about to
stop, and then changed its plan.

I turned upon it. "Are you stopping now, Migul?"
