
CHAPTER III

A battered and antiquated flivver came chugging down the wire-fenced
lane to the laboratory, an hour later. It made a prodigious din, and
Tommy Reames went out to meet it. He was still a little pale. He had
watched the steel globe turned practically inside out by the Ragged
Men. He had seen them bringing out cameras, cushions, and even the
padding of the walls, to be torn to bits in a truly maniacal fury. But
he had not seen one sign of a human being killed. Denham and his
daughter had not been in the globe when it was found and ransacked. So
far, then, they were probably safe. Tommy had seen them vanish into
the tree-fern forest. They had been afraid, and with good reason. What
dangers they might encounter in the fern forest he could not guess.
How long they would escape the search of the Ragged Men, he could not
know. How he could ever hope to find them if he succeeded in
duplicating Denham's dimension-traveling apparatus he could not even
think of, just now. But the Ragged Men were not searching the fern
forest. So much was sure. They were encamped by the steel sphere, and
a scurvy-looking lot they were.

Coming out of the brick laboratory, Tommy saw a brawny figure getting
out of the antiquated flivver whose arrival had been so thunderous.
That brawny figure nodded to him and grinned. Tommy recognized him.
The red-headed, broad-shouldered filling station attendant in the last
village, who had given him specific directions for reaching this
place.

"You hit that gate a lick, didn't you?" asked the erstwhile filling
station attendant amiably. "Mr. Von Holtz said you had a flat and a
busted radiator. That right?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy nodded. The red-headed man walked around the car, scratched his
chin, and drew out certain assorted tools. He put them on the grass
with great precision, pumped a gasoline blow-torch to pressure and
touched a match to its priming-basin, and while the gasoline flamed
smokily he made a half dozen casual movements with a file, and the
broken radiator tube was exposed for repair.

He went back to the torch and observed placidly:

"The Professor ain't around, is he?"

Tommy shook his head.

"Thought not," said the red-headed one. "He gen'rally comes out and
talks a while. I helped him build some of them dinkuses in the barn
yonder."

Tommy said eagerly:

"Say, which of those things did you help him build? That big thing
with the solenoid--the coil?"

"Yeah. How'd it work?" The red-headed one set a soldering iron in
place and began to jack up the rear wheel to get at the tire. "Crazy
idea, if you ask me. I told Miss Evelyn so. She laughed and said she'd
be in the ball when it was tried. Did it work?"

"Too damn well," said Tommy briefly. "I've got to repair that
solenoid. How about a job helping?"

The red-headed man unfastened the lugs of the rim, kicked the tire
speculatively, and said, "Gone to hell." He put on the spare tire with
ease and dispatch.

"Um," he said. "How about that Mr. Von Holtz? Is he goin' to boss the
job?"

"He is not," said Tommy, with a shade of grimness in his tone.

       *       *       *       *       *

The red-headed man nodded and took the soldering iron in hand. He
unwound a strip of wire solder, mended the radiator tube with placid
ease, and seemed to bang the cooling-flanges with a total lack of
care. They went magically back into place, and it took close
inspection to see that the radiator had been damaged.

"She's all right," he observed. He regarded Tommy impersonally.
"Suppose you tell me how come you horn in on this," he suggested, "an'
maybe I'll play. That guy Von Holtz is a crook, if you ask me about
him."

Tommy ran his hand across his forehead, and told him.

"Um," said the red-headed man calmly. "I think I'll go break Mr. Von
Holtz's neck. I got me a hunch."

He took two deliberate steps forward. But Tommy said:

"I saw Denham not an hour ago. So far, he's all right. How long he'll
be all right is a question. But I'm going after him."

The red-headed man scrutinized him exhaustively.

"Um. I might try that myself. I kinda like the Professor. An' Miss
Evelyn. My name's Smithers. Let's go look through the dinkus the
Professor made."

They went together into the laboratory. Von Holtz was looking through
the dimensoscope. He started back as they entered, and looked acutely
uneasy when he saw the red-headed man.

"How do you do," he said nervously. "They--the Ragged Men--have just
brought in a dead man. But it is not the Herr Professor."

Without a word, Tommy took the brass tube in his hand. Von Holtz moved
away, biting his lips. Tommy stared into that strange other world.

       *       *       *       *       *

The steel sphere lay as before, slightly askew upon a bank of glossy
ferns. But its glass windows were shattered, and fragments of
everything it had contained were scattered about. The Ragged Men had
made a camp and built a fire. Some of them were roasting meat--the
huge limb of a monstrous animal with a scaly, reptilian hide. Others
were engaged in vehement argument over the body of one of their
number, lying sprawled out upon the ground.

Tommy spoke without moving his eyes from the eyepiece.

"I saw Denham with a club just now. This man was killed by a club."

The Ragged Men in the other world debated acrimoniously. One of them
pointed to the dead man's belt, and spread out his hands. Something
was missing from the body. Tommy saw, now, three or four other men
with objects that looked rather like policemen's truncheons, save that
they were made of glittering metal. They were plainly weapons. Denham,
then, was armed--if he could understand how the weapon was used.

The Ragged Men debated, and presently their dispute attracted the
attention of a man with a huge black beard. He rose from where he sat
gnawing at a piece of meat and moved grandly toward the disputatious
group. They parted at his approach, but a single member continued the
debate against even the bearded giant. The bearded one plucked the
glittering truncheon from his belt. The disputatious one gasped in
fear and flung himself desperately forward. But the bearded man kept
the truncheon pointed steadily.... The man who assailed him staggered,
reached close enough to strike a single blow, and collapsed. The
bearded man pointed the metal truncheon at him as he lay upon the
ground. He heaved convulsively, and was still.

The bearded man went back to his seat and picked up the gnawed bit of
meat again. The dispute had ceased. The chattering group of men
dispersed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy was about to leave the eyepiece of the instrument when a
movement nearby caught his eye. A head peered cautiously toward the
encampment. A second rose beside it. Denham and his daughter Evelyn.
They were apparently no more than thirty feet from the dimensoscope.
Tommy could see them talking cautiously, saw Denham lift and examine a
metal truncheon like the bearded man's, and force his daughter to
accept it. He clutched a club, himself, with a grim satisfaction.

Moments later they vanished quietly in the thick fern foliage, and
though Tommy swung the dimensoscope around in every direction, he
could see nothing of their retreat.

He rose from that instrument with something approaching hopefulness.
He'd seen Evelyn very near and very closely. She did not look happy,
but she did look alert rather than worn. And Denham was displaying a
form of competence in the face of danger which was really more than
would have been expected in a Ph.D., a M.A., and other academic
distinctions running to most of the letters of the alphabet.

"I've just seen Denham and Evelyn again," said Tommy crisply. "They're
safe so far. And I've seen one of the weapons of the Ragged Men in
use. If we can get a couple of automatics and some cartridges to
Denham, he'll be safe until we can repair the big solenoid."

"There was the small catapult," said Von Holtz bitterly, "but it was
dismantled. The Herr Professor saw me examining it, and he dismantled
it. So that I did not learn how to calculate the way of changing the
position--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy's eyes rested queerly on Von Holtz for a moment.

"You know how to make the metal required," he said suddenly. "You'd
better get busy making it. Plenty of it. We'll need it."

Von Holtz stared at him, his weak eyes almost frightened.

"You _know_? You know how to combine the right angles?"

"I think so," said Tommy. "I've got to find out if I'm right. Will you
make the metal?"

Von Holtz bit at his too-red lips.

"But Herr Reames!" he said stridently, "I wish to know the equation!
Tell me the method of pointing a body in a fourth or a fifth
direction. It is only fair--"

"Denham didn't tell you," said Tommy.

Von Holtz's arms jerked wildly.

"But I will not make the metal! I insist upon being told the equation!
I insist upon it! I will not make the metal if you do not tell me!"

Smithers was in the laboratory, of course. He had been surveying the
big solenoid-catapult and scratching his chin reflectively. Now he
turned.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Tommy took Von Holtz by the shoulders. And Tommy's hands were the
firm and sinewy hands of a sportsman, if his brain did happen to be
the brain of a scientist. Von Holtz writhed in his grip.

"There is only one substance which could be the metal I need, Von Holtz,"
he said gently. "Only one substance is nearly three-dimensional.
Metallic ammonium! It's known to exist, because it makes a mercury
amalgam, but nobody has been able to isolate it because nobody has
been able to give it a fourth dimension--duration in time. Denham did
it. You can do it. And I need it, and you'd better set to work at the
job. You'll be very sorry if you don't, Von Holtz!"

Smithers said with a vast calmness.

"I got me a hunch. So if y'want his neck broke...."

Tommy released Von Holtz and the lean young man gasped and sputtered
and gesticulated wildly in a frenzy of rage.

"He'll make it," said Tommy coldly. "Because he doesn't dare not to!"

Von Holtz went out of the laboratory, his weak-looking eyes staring
and wild, and his mouth working.

"He'll be back," said Tommy briefly. "You've got to make a small model
of that big catapult, Smithers. Can you do it?"

"Sure," said Smithers. "The ring'll be copper tubing, with
pin-bearings. Wind a coil on the lathe. It'll be kinda rough, but
it'll do. But gears, now...."

"I'll attend to them. You know how to work that metallic ammonium?"

"If that's what it was," agreed Smithers. "I worked it for the
Professor."

Tommy leaned close and whispered:

"You never made any gears of that. But did you make some springs?"

"Uh-huh!"

Tommy grinned joyously.

"Then we're set and I'm right! Von Holtz wants a mathematical formula,
and no one on earth could write one, but we don't need it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Smithers rummaged around the laboratory with a casual air, acquired
this and that and the other thing, and set to work with an astounding
absence of waste motions. From time to time he inspected the great
catapult thoughtfully, verified some impression, and went about the
construction of another part.

And when Von Holtz did not return, Tommy hunted for him. He suddenly
remembered hearing his car motor start. He found his car missing. He
swore, then, and grimly began to hunt for a telephone in the house.
But before he had raised central he heard the deep-toned purring of
the motor again. His car was coming swiftly back to the house. And he
saw, through a window, that Von Holtz was driving it.

The lean young man got out of it, his face white with passion. He
started for the laboratory. Tommy intercepted him.

"I--went to get materials for making the metal," said Von Holtz
hoarsely, repressing his rage with a great effort. "I shall begin at
once, Herr Reames."

Tommy said nothing whatever. Von Holtz was lying. Of course. He
carried nothing in the way of materials. But he had gone away from the
house, and Tommy knew as definitely as if Von Holtz had told him, that
Von Holtz had gone off to communicate in safety with someone who
signed his correspondence with a J.

Von Holtz went into the laboratory. The four-cylinder motor began to
throb at once. The whine of the dynamo arose almost immediately after.
Von Holtz came out of the laboratory and dived into a shed that
adjoined the brick building. He remained in there.

Tommy looked at the trip register on his speedometer. Like most people
with methodical minds, he had noted the reading on arriving at a new
destination. Now he knew how far Von Holtz had gone. He had been to
the village and back.

"Meaning," said Tommy grimly to himself, "that the J who wants plans
and calculations is either in the village or at the end of a
long-distance wire. And Von Holtz said he was on the way. He'll
probably turn up and try to bribe me."

       *       *       *       *       *

He went back into the laboratory and put his eye to the eyepiece of
the dimensoscope. Smithers had his blow-torch going and was busily
accumulating an apparently unrelated series of discordant bits of
queerly-shaped metal. Tommy looked through at the strange mad world he
could see through the eyepiece.

The tree-fern forest was still. The encampment of the Ragged Men was
nearly quiet. Sunset seemed to be approaching in this other world,
though it was still bright outside the laboratory. The hours of day
and night were obviously not the same in the two worlds, so close
together that a man could be flung from one to the other by a
mechanical contrivance.

The sun seemed larger, too, than the orb which lights our normal
earth. When Tommy swung the vision instrument about to search for it,
he found a great red ball quite four times the diameter of our own
sun, neatly bisected by the horizon. Tommy watched, waiting for it to
sink. But it did not sink straight downward as the sun seems to do in
all temperate latitudes. It descended, yes, but it moved along the
horizon as it sank. Instead of a direct and forthright dip downward,
the sun seemed to progress along the horizon, dipping more deeply as
it swam. And Tommy watched it blankly.

"It's not our sun.... But it's not our world. Yet it revolves, and
there are men on it. And a sun that size would bake the earth.... And
it's sinking at an angle that would only come at a latitude of--"

That was the clue. He understood at once. The instrument through which
he regarded the strange world looked out upon the polar regions of
that world. Here, where the sun descended slantwise, were the high
latitudes, the coldest spaces upon all the whole planet. And if here
there were the gigantic growths of a carboniferous era, the tropic
regions of this planet must be literal infernos.

And then he saw in its gradual descent the monster sun was going along
behind the golden city, and the outlines of its buildings, the
magnificence of its spires, were limned clearly for him against the
dully glowing disk.

Nowhere upon earth had such a city ever been dreamed of. No man had
ever envisioned such a place, where far-flung arches interconnected
soaring, towering columns, where curves of perfect grace were united
in forms of utterly perfect proportion....

       *       *       *       *       *

The sunlight died, and dusk began and deepened, and vividly brilliant
stars began to come out overhead, and Tommy suddenly searched the
heavens eagerly for familiar constellations. And found not one. All
the stars were strange. These stars seemed larger and much more near
than the tiny pinpoints that blink down upon our earth.

And then he swung the instrument again and saw great fires roaring and
the Ragged Men crouched about them. Within them, rather, because they
