head was made. The nard, an Indian product from that plant, which
is still found growing on the distant Himalayas, could then be
imported into Palestine only by the rich.

The wild spikenard, or false Solomon's seal, has not the remotest
connection with this tribe of plants. Inasmuch as some of the
American spikenard's tiny flowers are staminate and some
pistillate, while others again are perfect, they depend upon
flies chiefly - but on some wasps and beetles, too - to transfer
pollen and enable the fertile ones to set seed. How certain of
the winter birds gormandize on the resinous, spicy little
berries! A flock of juncos will strip the fruit from every
spikenard in the neighborhood the first day it arrives from the
North.

The WILD or FALSE SARSAPARILLA (A. nudicaulis), so common in
woods, hillsides, and thickets, shelters its three spreading
umbels of greenish-white flowers in May and June beneath a canopy
formed by a large, solitary, compound leaf. The aromatic roots,
which run horizontally sometimes three feet or more through the
soil, send up a very short, smooth proper stem which lifts a tall
leafstalk and a shorter, naked flower stalk. The single large
leaf, of exquisite bronzy tints when young, is compounded of from
three to five oval, toothed leaflets on each of its three
divisions. The tiny five-parted flowers have their petals curved
backward over the calyx to make their refreshments more
accessible for the flies, on which they chiefly rely for aid in
producing those close clusters of dark-purple berries on which
migrating birds feast in early autumn. By these agents the plant
has been distributed from Newfoundland to the Carolinas, westward
from Manitoba to Missouri, which is not surprising when we
remember that certain birds travel from the Gulf of Mexico to the
Great Lakes in a single night. While the true sarsaparilla of
medicine should come from a quite different herb that flourishes
in Mexico and South America, this one furnishes a commercial
substitute enormously used as a blood purifier and cooling summer
drink. Burrowing rabbits delight to nibble the long, slender,
fragrant roots.


The GINSENG (Panax quinquefolium; Aralia quinquefolia of Gray)
found in rich woods from Quebec to Alabama, and westward to
Nebraska - that is, where found at all, for much hunting has all
but exterminated it in many regions - bears a solitary umbel of
small yellowish-green, five-parted, polygamous flowers in July
and August at the end of a smooth stem about a foot high. Bright
crimson berries follow the clusters on the female plants in early
autumn. Three long-petioled leaves, which grow in a whorl at the
top of the low stem, are palmately divided into five thin, ovate,
pointed, and irregularly toothed leaflets. But it is the deep
fusiform root, simple or branched, about which the Americanized
Chinese, at least, are most concerned. For centuries Chinese
physicians have ascribed miraculous virtues to the Manchurian
ginseng. Not only can it remove fatigue and restore lost powers,
but by its use veterans became frisky youths again according to
these wise men of the East. In short, they consider it the
panacea for all ills (Panax: pan = all, akos = remedy) - the
source of immortality. Naturally the roots were and are in great
demand, especially such as branch so as to resemble the human
form. (Both the Chinese name Schin-sen, and Garan-toguen, the
Indian one, are said to mean like a man. Here is an interesting
clue for the ethnologists to follow !) Imperial edict prohibited
the Chinese from digging up their native plant lest it be
exterminated. So Jesuit missionaries, who discovered our similar
ginseng, were not slow in exporting it to China when it was
literally worth its weight in gold. Indeed, it is always sold by
weight - a fact on which the heathen Chinee "with ways that are
dark and tricks that are vain" not infrequently relies. Chinamen,
who gather large quantities in our Western States to sell to the
wholesale druggists for export, sometimes drill holes into the
largest roots, pour in melted lead, and plug up the drills so
ingeniously that druggists refuse to pay for a Chinaman's
diggings until they have handled and weighed each root
separately.

The DWARF GINSENG, OR GROUND NUT (P. trifolium; Aralia trifolia
of Gray) whose little white flowers are clustered in feathery,
fluffy balls above the whorl of three compound leaves in April
and May, chooses low thickets and moist woods for its habitat -
often in the same neighborhood with its larger relative.
Yellowish berries follow the fragrant white pompons. One must
burrow deep, like the rabbits, to find its round, pungent, sweet,
nut-like root, measuring about half an inch across, which few
have ever seen.


WILD CARROT; QUEEN ANNE'S LACE; BIRD'S-NEST
  (Daucus Carota)  Carrot family

Flowers - Small, of unequal sizes (polygamous), white, rarely
pinkish gray, 5-parted, in a compound, flat, circular umbel, the
central floret often dark crimson; the umbels very concave in
fruit. An involucre of narrow, pinnately cut bracts. Stem: 1 to 3
ft. high, with stiff hairs; from a deep, fleshy, conic root.
Leaves: Cut into fine, fringy divisions; upper ones smaller and
less dissected.
Preferred Habitat - Wastelands, fields, roadsides. Flowering
Season - June-September.
Distribution - Eastern half of United States and Canada. Europe
and Asia.

A pest to farmers, a joy to the flower lover, and a welcome
signal for refreshment to hosts of flies, beetles, bees, and
wasps, especially to the paper-nest builders, the sprangly wild
carrot lifts its fringy foliage and exquisite lacy, blossoms
above the dry soil of three continents. From Europe it has come
to spread its delicate wheels over our summer landscape, until
whole fields are whitened by them east of the Mississippi. Having
proved fittest in the struggle for survival in the fiercer
competition of plants in the over-cultivated Old World, it takes
its course of empire westward year by year, Finding most
favorable conditions for colonizing in our vast, uncultivated
area; and the less aggressive, native occupants of our soil are
only too readily crowded out. Would that the advocates of
unrestricted immigration of foreign peasants studied the parallel
examples among floral invaders!

What is the secret of the wild carrots' triumphal march? As
usual, it is to be sought chiefly in the flower's scheme to
attract and utilize visitors. Nectar being secreted in open disks
near to one another, the shortest-tongued insects can lick it up
from the Umbelliferae with even less loss of time than from the
tubular florets of the Cornpositae. Over sixty distinct species
of insects may be taken on the wild carrot by any amateur, since
it blooms while insect life is at its height but, as might be
expected, the long-tongued and color-loving, specialized bees and
butterflies do not often waste time on florets so easily drained
by the mob. Ants find the stiff hairs on the stem disagreeable
obstacles to pilfering; but no visitors seem to object to the
flowers' suffocating odor.

One of these lacy, white umbels must be examined under a lens
before its delicate structure and perfection of detail can be
appreciated. Naturally a visitor is attracted first by the
largest, most showy florets situated around the outer edge of the
wheel, on which he leaves pollen, brought from another umbel; and
any vitalizing dust remaining on his under side may be left on
the less conspicuous hermaphrodite blossoms as he makes his way
toward the center, where the tiny, pollen-bearing florets are
grouped. From the latter, as he flies away, he will carry fresh
pollen to the outer row of florets on another umbel, and so on -
at least this is the usual and highly advantageous method. After
general fertilization, the slender flower-stalks curl inward, and
the umbel forms a hollow nest that gradually contracts as it
dries, almost, if not quite, closing at the top, albeit the
fiction that bees and spiders make their home in the seeding
umbels circulates freely.

Still another fiction is that the cultivated carrot, introduced
to England by the Dutch in Queen Elizabeth's reign, was derived
from this wild species. Miller, the celebrated English botanist
and gardener, among many others, has disproved this statement by
utterly failing again and again to produce an edible vegetable
from this wild root. When cultivation of the garden carrot lapses
for a few generations, it reverts to the ancestral type -a
species quite distinct from Daucus Carota.


SMOOTHER SWEET CICELY
  (Washingtonia longistylis; Osmorrhiza longistylis of Gray)
Carrot family

Flowers - Small, white, 5-parted; in few rayed, long-peduncled
umbels, with small bracts below them. Stem: 1 1/2 to 3 ft. high,
branching, from thick, fleshy, fragrant, edible roots. Leaves:
Lower ones often very large, long-petioled, thrice-compound, and
again divided, the leaflets ovate, pointed, deeply toothed,
slightly downy; upper leaves less compound, nearly sessile.
Preferred Habitat - Rich, moist woods and thickets.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to the Carolinas, westward to Dakota.

Graceful in gesture, with delicate, fernlike leaves and
anise-scented roots that children, like rabbits, delight to
nibble, the sweet cicely attracts attention by its fragrance,
however insignificant its flowers. In wooded places, such as it
prefers to dwell in, white blossoms, which are far more
noticeable in a dim light than colored ones, and finely cut
leaves that can best withstand the drip from trees, abound. These
white umbels bear a large proportion of male, or pollen-bearing,
florets to the number of hermaphrodite, or two-sexed, florets;
but as the latter mature their pollen before their stigmas become
susceptible to it, self-fertilization is well guarded against,
and cross-fertilization is effected with the help of as many
flies as small bees, which come in numbers to lick up the nectar
so freely exposed in consideration of their short tongues. We
have to thank these little creatures for the long, slender seeds,
armed with short bristles along the ribs, that they may snatch
rides on our garments, together with the beggar-ticks, burdock,
cleavers, and other vagabond colonists in search of unoccupied
ground. Be sure you know the difference between sweet cicely and
the poisonous water hemlock before tasting the former's spicy
root.

Was there no more important genus - containing, if possible, red,
white, and blue flowers - to have named in honor of the Father of
his Country?

Another member of the Carrot family, the SANICLE or BLACK
SNAKEROOT (Sanicula Marylandica), found blooming from May to July
in such rich, moist woodlands and shrubbery as the sweet cicely
prefers, lifts spreading, two to four rayed umbels of
insignificant-looking but interesting little greenish-white
florets. At first the tips of the five petals are tucked into the
center of each little flower; underneath them the stamens are now
imprisoned while any danger of self-fertilizing the stigma
remains. The few hermaphrodite florets have their styles
protruding from the start, and incoming insects leave pollen
brought from staminate florets on the early-maturing stigmas.
After cross-fertilization has been effected, it is the pistil's
turn to keep out of the way, and give the imprisoned stamens a
chance: the styles curve until the stigmas are pressed against
the sides of the ovary, that not a grain of pollen may touch
them; the petals spread and release the stamens; but so great is
the flower's zeal not to be fertilized with its own pollen that
it sometimes holds the anthers tightly between the petals until
all the vitalizing dust has been shed! Around the hermaphrodite
florets are a large number of male florets in each hemispheric
cluster. Hooked bristles and slender, curved styles protrude from
the little burr-like seeds, that any creature passing by may give
them a lift to fresh colonizing land! The firm bluish-green
leaves, palmately divided into from five to seven oblong,
irregularly saw-edged segments, the upper leaves seated on the
stem, the lower ones long-petioled, help us to identify this
common weed.

With splendid, vigorous gesture the COW-PARSNIP (Heracleum
lanatum) rears itself from four to eight feet above moist, rich
soil from ocean to ocean in circumpolar regions as in temperate
climes. A perfect Hercules for coarseness and strength does it
appear when contrasted with some of the dainty members of the
carrot tribe. In June and July, when a myriad of winged creatures
are flying, large, compound, many-rayed umbels of both
hermaphrodite and male white flowers are spread to attract their
benefactors the flies, of which twenty-one species visit them
regularly, besides small bees, wasps, and other short-tongued
insects, which have no difficulty in licking up the freely
exposed nectar. The anthers, maturing first, compel
cross-fertilization which accounts for the plant's vigor and its
aggressive march across the continent. A very stout, ridged,
hairy stem, the petioled leaves compounded of three broadly
ovate, lobed and saw-edged divisions, downy on the underside, and
the great umbels, which sometimes measure a foot across, all bear
out the general impression of a Hercules of the fields.

FOOL'S PARSLEY, or CICELY, or DOG-POISON (Aethusa cynapium), a
European immigrant found in waste ground and rubbish heaps from
Nova Scotia to New Jersey and westward to the Mississippi, should
be known only to be avoided. The dark bluish-green, finely
divided, rather glossy leaves when bruised do not give out the
familiar fragrance of true parsley; the little narrow bracts,
turned downward around each separate flower-cluster, give it a
bearded appearance, otherwise the white umbel suggests a small
wild carrot head of bloom. Cows have died from eating this
innocent-looking little plant among the herbage; but most
creatures know by instinct that it must not be touched.

Strange that a family which furnishes the carrot, parsnip,
parsley, fennel, caraway, coriander, and celery to mankind,
should contain many members with deadly properties. Fortunately
the large, coarse WATER HEMLOCK, SPOTTED COWBANE, MUSQUASH ROOT,
or BEAVER-POISON (Cicuta maculata) has been branded as a
murderer. Purple streaks along its erect branching stem
correspond to the marks on Cain's brow. Above swamps and low
ground it towers. Twice or thrice pinnate leaves, the lower ones
long-stalked and often enormous, the leaflets' conspicuous veins
apparently ending in the notches of the coarse, sharp teeth, help
to distinguish it from its innocent relations sometimes
confounded with it. Its several tuberiform fleshy roots contain
an especially deadly poison; nevertheless, some highly
intelligent animals, beavers, rabbits, and the omnivorous small
boy among others have mistaken it for sweet-cicely with fatal
results. Indeed, the potion drunk by Socrates and other
philosophers and criminals at Athens, is thought to have been a
decoction made from the roots of this very hemlock. Many little
white flowers in each cluster make up a large umbel; and many
umbels to a plant attract great numbers of flies, small bees, and
wasps, which sip the freely exposed nectar apparently with only
the happiest consequences, as they transfer pollen from the male
to the proterandrous hermaphrodite flowers. Just as the
cow-parsnip shows a preponderance of flies among its visitors, so
the water hemlock seems to attract far more bees and wasps than
any of the umbel-bearing carrot tribe. It blooms from the end of
June through August.

Still another poisonous species is the HEMLOCK WATER-PARSNIP
(Sium cicutaefolium), found in swampy places throughout Canada
and the United States from ocean to ocean. The compound,
long-rayed umbels of small white flowers, fringy-bracted below,
which measure two or three inches across; the extremely variable
pinnate leaves, which may be divided into from three to six pairs
of narrow and sharply toothed leaflets (or perhaps the lower
long-stalked ones as finely dissected as a wild carrot leaf where
they grow in water), and the stout, grooved, branching stem, from
two to six feet tall, are its distinguishing characteristics. In
these umbels it will be noticed there are far more hermaphrodite,
or two-sexed, florets (maturing their anthers first), than there
are male ones; consequently quantities of unwelcome seed are set
with the help of small bees, wasps, and flies, which receive
generous entertainment from July to October.

The MOCK BISHOP'S-WEED (Ptilimnium capillaceum), a slender,
delicate, dainty weed found chiefly in saltwater meadows from
Massachusetts to Florida and around the Gulf coast to Texas, has
very finely dissected, fringy leaves and compound umbels two to
four inches across, of tiny white florets, with threadlike bracts
below. It blooms throughout the summer.


FLOWERING DOGWOOD
  (Cornus florida)  Dogwood family

Flowers - (Apparently) large, white or pinkish, the four
conspicuous parts simulating petals, notched at the top, being
really bracts of an involucre below the true flowers, clustered,
in the center, which are very small, greenish yellow, 4-parted,
perfect. Stem: A large shrub or small tree, wood hard, bark
rough. Leaves: Opposite, oval, entire-edged, petioled, paler
underneath. Fruit: Clusters of egg-shaped scarlet berries, tipped
with the persistent calyx.
Preferred Habitat - Woodlands rocky thickets, wooded roadsides.
Flowering Season - April-June.
Distribution - Maine to Florida, west to Ontario and Texas.

Has Nature's garden a more decorative ornament than the flowering
dogwood, whose spreading flattened branches whiten the woodland
borders in May as if an untimely snowstorm had come down upon
them, and in autumn paint the landscape with glorious crimson,
scarlet, and gold, dulled by comparison only with the clusters of
vivid red berries among the foliage? Little wonder that
nurserymen sell enormous numbers of these small trees to be
planted on lawns. The horrors of pompous monuments, urns, busts,
shafts, angels, lambs, and long-drawn-out eulogies in stone in
many a cemetery are mercifully concealed in part by these boughs,
laden with blossoms of heavenly purity.

    "Let dead names be eternized in dead stone,
     But living names by living shafts be known.
     Plant thou a tree whose leaves shall sing
     Thy deeds and thee each fresh, recurrent spring."

Fit symbol of immortality! Even before the dogwood's leaves fall
in autumn, the round buds for next year's bloom appear on the
twigs, to remain in consoling evidence all winter with the
scarlet fruit. When the buds begin to swell in spring, the four
reddish-purple, scale-like bracts expand, revealing a dozen or
more tiny green flowers clustered within for the large, white,
petal-like parts, with notched, tinted, and puckered lips, into
which these reddish bracts speedily develop, and which some of us
have mistaken for a corolla, are not petals at all - not the true
flowers - merely appendages around the real ones, placed there,
like showy advertisements, to attract customers. Nectar, secreted
in a disk on each minute ovary, is eagerly sought by little
Andrena and other bees, besides flies and butterflies. Insects
crawling about these clusters, whose florets are all of one kind,
get their heads and undersides dusted with pollen, which they
transfer as they suck. Hungry winter birds, which bolt the red
fruit only when they can get no choicer fare, distribute the
smooth, indigestible stones far and wide.

When the Massachusetts farmers think they hear the first brown
thrasher in April advising them to plant their Indian corn,
reassuringly calling, "Drop it, drop it - cover it up, cover it
up - pull it up, pull it up, pull it up" (Thoreau), they look to
the dogwood flowers to confirm the thrasher's advice before
taking it.

The LOW or DWARF CORNEL, or BUNCHBERRY (C. canadensus) whose
scaly stem does its best to attain a height of nine inches, bears
a whorl of from four to six oval, pointed, smooth leaves at the
summit. From the midst of this whorl comes a cluster of minute
greenish florets, encircled by four to six large, showy, white
petal-like bracts, quite like a small edition of the flowering
dogwood blossom. Tight clusters of round berries, that are lifted
upward on a gradually lengthened peduncle after the flowers fade
(May-July), brighten with vivid touches of scarlet shadowy, mossy
places in cool, rich woods, where the dwarf cornels, with the
partridge vine, twin flower, gold thread, and fern, form the most
charming of carpets.

Other common dogwoods there are - shrubs from three to ten feet
in height - which bear flat clusters of small white flowers
without the showy petal-like bracts, imitating a corolla, as in
the two preceding species, but each little four-parted blossom
attracting its miscellaneous crowd of benefactors by association
with dozens of its counterparts in a showy cyme. Because these
flowers expand farther than the minute florets of the dwarf
cornel or the flowering dogwood, and the sweets are therefore
more accessible, all the insects which fertilize them come to the
shrub dogwoods too, and in addition very many beetles, to which
their odor seems especially attractive. ("Odore carabico o
scarabeo" - Delpino.) The ROUND-LEAVED CORNEL or DOGWOOD [now
ROUNDLEAF DOGWOOD] (C. circinata), found on shady hillsides, in
open woodlands, and roadside thickets - especially in rocky
districts - from Nova Scotia to Virginia, and westward to Iowa,
may be known by its greenish, warty twigs; its broadly ovate, or
round petioled, opposite leaves, short-tapering to a point, and
downy beneath; and, in May and June, by its small, flat, white
flower-clusters about two inches across, that are followed by
light-blue (not edible) berries.

Even more abundant is the SILKY CORNEL, KINNIKINNICK, or SWAMP
DOGWOOD [now SILKY DOGWOOD] (C. amonum; C. sericca of Gray) found
in low, wet ground, and beside streams, from Nebraska to the
Atlantic Ocean, south to Florida and north to New Brunswick. Its
dull-reddish twigs, oval or oblong leaves, rounded at the base
but tapering to a point at the apex, and usually silky-downy with
fine, brownish hairs underneath (to prevent the pores from
clogging with vapors arising from its damp habitat); its rather
compact, flat clusters of white flowers from May to July, and its
bluish berries are its distinguishing features. The Indians loved
to smoke its bark for its alleged tonic effect.

The RED-OSIER CORNEL or DOGWOOD (C. stolonifera), which has
spread, with the help of running shoots, through the soft soil of
its moist retreats, over the British Possessions north of us and
throughout the United States from ocean to ocean, except at the
extreme south, may be known by its bright purplish-red twigs; its
opposite, slender, petioled leaves, rather abruptly pointed at
the apex, roughish on both sides, but white or nearly so beneath;
its small, flat-topped white flower-clusters in June or July; and
finally, by its white or lead-colored fruit.

In good, rich, moist soil another white-fruited species, the
PANICLED CORNEL or DOGWOOD (C. candidissima; C. paniculata of
Gray) rears its much-branched, smooth, gray stems. In May or June
the shrub is beautiful with numerous convex, loose clusters of
white flowers at the ends of the twigs. So far do the stamens
diverge from the pistil that self-pollination is not likely; but
an especially large number of the less specialized insects,
seeking the freely exposed nectar, do all the necessary work as
they crawl about and fly from shrub to shrub. This species bears
comparatively long and narrow leaves, pale underneath. Its range
is from Maine to the Carolinas and westward to Nebraska.


WHITE ALDER; SWEET PEPPERBUSH; ALDER-LEAVED CLETHRA
  (Clethra alnifolia)  White Alder family

Flowers - Very fragrant, white, about 1/3 in. across, borne in
long, narrow, upright, clustered spikes, with awl-shaped bracts.
Calyx of 5 sepals; 5 longer petals; 10 protruding stamens, the
style longest. Stem: A much-branched shrub, 3 to 10 ft. high.
Leaves: Alternate, oblong or ovate, finely saw-edged above the
middle at least, green on both sides, tapering at base into short
petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Low, wet woodland and roadside thickets;
swamps; beside slow streams; meadows.
Flowering Season - July-August.
Distribution - Chiefly near the coast, in States bordering the
Atlantic Ocean.

Like many another neglected native plant, the beautiful sweet
pepperbush improves under cultivation; and when the departed
lilacs, syringa, snowball, and blossoming almond, found with
almost monotonous frequency in every American garden, leave a
blank in the shrubbery at midsummer, these fleecy white spikes
should exhale their spicy breath about our homes. But wild
flowers, like a prophet, may remain long without honor in their
own country. This and a similar but more hairy species found in
the Alleghany region, the MOUNTAIN SWEET PEPPERBUSH (C.
acuminata), with pointed leaves, pale beneath, and spreading or
drooping flower-spikes, go abroad to be appreciated. Planted
beside lakes and streams on noblemen's estates, how overpowering
must their fragrance be in the heavy, moisture-laden air of
England! Even in our drier atmosphere, it hangs about the
thickets like incense.


ROUND-LEAVED PYROLA; PEAR-LEAVED, or FALSE WINTERGREEN; INDIAN or
CANKER LETTUCE
  (Pyrola rolundifolia)  Wintergreen family

Flowers - Very fragrant, white, in a spike; 6 to 20, nodding from
an erect, bracted scape 6 to 20 in. high. Calyx 5-parted corolla,
over 1/2 in. across, of 5 concave, obtuse petals 10 stamens,
protruding pistil, style curved, stigma 5-lobed. Leaves: All
spreading from the base by margined petioles; shining leathery
green, round or broadly oval, obtuse, 1 1/2 to 3 in. long,
persistent through the winter.
Preferred Habitat - Open woods.
Flowering Season - June-July.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Georgia, west to Ohio and
Minnesota.

Deliciously fragrant little flowers, nodding from an erect,
slender stalk, when seen at a distance are often mistaken for
lilies-of-the-valley growing wild. But closer inspection of the
rounded, pearlike leaves in a cluster from the running root, and
the concave, not bell-shaped, white, waxen blossoms, with the
pistil protruding and curved, indicate the commonest of the
pyrolas. Some of its kin dwell in bogs and wet places, but this
plant and the shin-leaf carpet drier woodland where dwarf
cornels, partridge vines, pipsissewa, and goldthread weave their
charming patterns too. Certain of the lovely pyrola clan, whose
blossoms range from greenish white, flesh-color, and pink to deep
purplish rose, have so many features in common they were once
counted mere varieties of this round-leaved wintergreen - an
easygoing classification broken up by later-day systematists, who
now rank the varieties as distinct species. It will be noticed
that all these flowers have their anthers erect in the bud but
reversed at flowering time, each of the two sacs opening by a
pore which, in reality, is at the base of the sac, though by
reversion it appears to be at the top. To these pores small bees
and flies fasten their short lips to feed on pollen, some of
which will be necessarily .jarred out on them as they struggle
for a foothold on the stamens, and will be carried by them to
another flower's protruding stigma, which impedes their entrance
purposely to receive the imported pollen.

By reason of the old custom of clapping on a so-called
"shinplaster" to every bruise, regardless of its location on the
human body, a lovely little plant, whose leaves were once counted
a first aid to the injured, still suffers instead under an
unlovely name. The SHIN-LEAF (P. elliptica) sends up a naked
flower-stalk, scaly at the base, often with a bract midway, and
bearing at the top from seven to fifteen very fragrant, nodding,
waxen, greenish-white blossoms, similar to the round-leaved
wintergreen's. But on the thinner, dull, dark-green, upright
leaves, with slight wavy indentations, scarcely to be called
teeth, on the margins, their shorter leaf-stalks often reddish,
one chiefly depends to name this common plant. It is usually
found, in company with a few or many of its fellows, in rich
woodlands so far west as the Rocky Mountains, blooming from June
to August, according to the climate of its wide range.

When the little SERRATED or ONE-SIDED WINTERGREEN (P. secunda)
first sends up its slender raceme in June or July, it is erect
but presently the small, greenish-white flowers, opening
irregularly along one side, appear to weigh it downward into a
curve. Usually several bracted scapes rise from a running,
branched rootstock, to a height of from three to (rarely) ten
inches above a cluster of basal evergreen leaves. These latter
are rather thin, oval, slightly pointed, wavy or slightly
saw-edged, the midrib prominent above and below. A peculiarity of
the flowers is, that their petals are partially welded together
into little bells, with the clapper (alias the straight green
pistil) protruding, and the stamens united around its base. After
the blossoms have been fertilized, the tiny, round,
five-scalloped seed capsules, with the pistil still protruding,
remain in evidence for months, as is usual in the pyrola clan.
Small as the plant is, it has managed to distribute itself over
Europe, Asia, and the woods and thickets of our own land from
Labrador to Alaska, southward to California, Mexico, and the
District of Columbia.

Another little globe-trotter, so insignificant in size that one
is apt to overlook it until its surprisingly large blossom
appears in June or July, is the ONE-FLOWERED WINTERGREEN (Moneses
uniflora), found in cool northern woods, especially about the
roots of pines, in such yielding soil as will enable its long
stem to run just below the surface. ONE-FLOWERED PYROLA, it is
often called, although it belongs to a genus all its own. A
boldly curved stalk, like a miniature Bo-peep crook, enables the
solitary white or pink widely open flower to droop from the tip,
thus protecting its precious contents from rain, and from
crawling pilferers, to whom a pendent blossom is as inaccessible
as a hanging bird's nest is to snakes. This five-petalled waxen
flower, half an inch across or over, with its ten white,
yellow-tipped stamens, and green, club-shaped pistil projecting
from a conspicuous round ovary, never nods more than six inches
above the ground, often at only half that height. When there is
no longer need for the stalk to crook, that is to say, after the
flower has begun to fruit, it gradually straightens itself out so
that the little seed capsule, with the style and its five-lobed
stigma still persistent, is held erect. The thin, rounded, finely
notched leaves, measuring barely an inch in length, are clustered
in whorls next the ground. Whether one comes upon colonies of
this gregarious little plant, or upon a lonely straggler, the
"single delight" (moneses), as Dr. Gray called the solitary
flower, is one of the joys of a tramp through the summer woods.


INDIAN PIPE; ICE-PLANT; GHOST-FLOWER; CORPSE-PLANT
  (Monotropa uniflora)  Indian-pipe family

Flowers - Solitary, smooth, waxy, white (rarely pink),
oblong-bell shaped, nodding from the tip of a fleshy, white,
scaly scape 4 to 10 in. tall. Calyx of 2 to 4 early-falling white
sepals; 4 or 5 oblong, scale-like petals; 8 or 10 tawny, hairy
stamens; a 5-celled, egg-shaped ovary, narrowed into the short,
thick style. Leaves: None. Roots: A mass of brittle fibers, from
which usually a cluster of several white scapes arises. Fruit: A
5-valved, many-seeded, erect capsule.
Preferred Habitat - Heavily shaded, moist, rich woods, especially
under oak and pine trees.
Flowering Season - June-August.
Distribution - Almost throughout temperate North America.

Colorless in every part, waxy, cold, and clammy, Indian pipes
rise like a company of wraiths in the dim forest that suits them
well. Ghoulish parasites, uncanny saprophytes, for their matted
roots prey either on the juices of living plants or on the
decaying matter of dead ones, how weirdly beautiful and
decorative, they are! The strange plant grows also in Japan, and
one can readily imagine how fascinated the native artists must be
by its chaste charms.

Yet to one who can read the faces of flowers, as it were, it
stands a branded sinner. Doubtless its ancestors were
industrious, honest creatures, seeking their food in the soil,
and digesting it with the help of leaves filled with good green
matter (chlorophyll) on which virtuous vegetable life depends;
but some ancestral knave elected to live by piracy, to drain the
already digested food of its neighbors; so the Indian pipe
gradually lost the use of parts for which it had need no longer,
until we find it today without color and its leaves degenerated
into mere scaly bracts. Nature has manifold ways of illustrating
the parable of the ten pieces of money. Spiritual law is natural
law: "From him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken
away." Among plants as among souls, there are all degrees of
backsliders. The foxglove, which is guilty of only sly, petty
larceny, wears not the equivalent of the striped suit and the
shaved head; nor does the mistletoe, which steals crude food from
the tree, but still digests it itself, and is therefore only a
dingy yellowish green. Such plants, however, as the broomrape,
pinesap, beechdrops, the Indian pipe, and the dodder - which
marks the lowest stage of degradation of them all - appear among
their race branded with the mark of crime as surely as was Cain.

No wonder this degenerate hangs its head; no wonder it grows
black with shame on being picked, as if its wickedness were only
just then discovered! To think that a plant related on one side
to many of the loveliest flowers in Nature's garden- - the
azaleas, laurels, rhododendrons, and the bonny heather - and on
the other side to the modest but no less charming wintergreen
tribe, should have fallen from grace to such a depth! Its
scientific name, meaning a flower once turned, describes it
during only a part of its career. When the minute, innumerable
seeds begin to form, it proudly raises its head erect, as if
conscious that it had performed the one righteous act of its
life.


LABRADOR TEA
  (Ledum Groenlandicum; L. latifolium of Gray)  Heath family

Flowers - White, 5-parted, 1/2 in. across or less, numerous,
borne in terminal, umbellate clusters rising from scaly, sticky
bud-bracts. Stem: A compact shrub 1 to 4 ft. high, resinous, the
twigs woolly-hairy. Leaves: Alternate, thick, evergreen, oblong,
obtuse, small, dull above, rusty-woolly beneath, the margins
curled.
Preferred Habitat - Swamps, bogs, wet mountain woods. Flowering
Season - May-June.
Distribution - Greenland to Pennsylvania, west to Wisconsin.

Whoever has used the homeopathic lotion distilled from the leaves
