or seven of your back teeth."

"Have you any idea where they're taking us?" she asked soberly.

"No," he answered flatly, looking deep into her steadfast eyes. "No use
lying to you--if I know you at all you'd rather take it standing up.
That talk of Jovians or Neptunians is the bunk--nothing like that ever
grew in our Solarian system. All the signs say that we're going for a
long ride."




CHAPTER 11

NEVIAN STRIFE


The Nevian space-ship was hurtling upon its way. Space-navigators both,
the two Terrestrial officers soon discovered that it was even then
moving with a velocity far above that of light and that it must be
accelerating at a high rate, even though to them it seemed
stationary--they could feel only a gravitational force somewhat less
than that of their native Earth.

Bradley, seasoned old campaigner that he was, had retired promptly as
soon as he had completed a series of observations, and was sleeping
soundly upon a pile of cushions in the first of the three
inter-connecting rooms. In the middle room, which was to be Clio's,
Costigan was standing very close to the girl, but was not touching her.
His body was rigid, his face was tense and drawn.

"You are wrong, Conway; all wrong," Clio was saying, very seriously. "I
know how you feel, but it's false chivalry."

"That isn't it, at all," he insisted, stubbornly. "It isn't only that
I've got you out here in space, in danger and alone, that's stopping me.
I know you and I know myself well enough to know that what we start now
we'll go through with for life. It doesn't make any difference, that
way, whether I start making love to you now or whether I wait until
we're back on Tellus; but I'm telling you that for your own good you'd
better pass me up entirely. I've got enough horsepower to keep away from
you if you tell me to--not otherwise."

"I know it, both ways, dear, but...."

"But nothing!" he interrupted. "Can't you get it into your skull what
you'll be letting yourself in for if you marry me? Assume that we get
back, which isn't sure, by any means. But even if we do, some day--and
maybe soon, too, you can't tell--somebody is going to collect fifty
grams of radium for my head."

"Fifty grams--and everybody knows that Samms himself is rated at only
sixty? I _knew_ that you were somebody, Conway!" Clio exclaimed,
undeterred. "But at that, something tells me that any pirate will earn
even that much reward several times over before he collects it. Don't be
silly, my dear--goodnight."

She tipped her head back, holding up to him her red, sweetly curved,
smiling lips, and his arms swept around her. Her arms went up around his
neck and they stood, clasped together in the motionless ecstasy of
love's first embrace.

"Girl, girl, how I love you!" Costigan's voice was husky, his usually
hard eyes were glowing with a tender light. "That settles that. I'll
really _live_ now, anyway, while...."

"Stop it!" she commanded, sharply. "You're going to live until you die
of old age--see if you don't. You'll simply _have_ to, Conway!"

"That's so, too--no percentage in dying now. All the pirates between
Tellus and Andromeda couldn't take me after this--I've got too much to
live for. Well, goodnight, sweetheart, I'd better beat it--you need some
sleep."

The lovers' parting was not as simple and straightforward a procedure as
Costigan's speech would indicate, but finally he did seek his own room
and relaxed upon a pile of cushions, his stern visage transformed.
Instead of the low metal ceiling he saw a beautiful, oval, tanned young
face, framed in a golden-blonde corona of hair. His gaze sank into the
depths of loyal, honest, dark blue eyes; and looking deeper and deeper
into those blue wells he fell asleep. Upon his face, too set and grim by
far for a man of his years--the lives of Sector Chiefs of the
Triplanetary Service were not easy, nor as a rule were they long--there
lingered as he slept that newly-acquired softness of expression, the
reflection of his transcendent happiness.

For eight hours he slept soundly, as was his wont, then, also according
to his habit and training he came wide awake, with no intermediate stage
of napping.

"Clio?" he whispered. "Awake, girl?"

"Awake!" her voice come through the ultra phone, relief in every
syllable. "Good heavens, I thought you were going to sleep until we got
to wherever it is that we're going! Come on in, you two--I don't see how
you can possibly sleep, just as though you were home in bed."

"You've got to learn to sleep anywhere if you expect to keep in...."
Costigan broke off as he opened the door and saw Clio's wan face. She
had evidently spent a sleepless and wracking eight hours. "Good Lord,
Clio, why didn't you call me?"

"Oh, I'm all right, except for being a little jittery. No need of asking
how _you_ feel, is there?"

"No--I feel hungry," he answered cheerfully. "I'm going to see what we
can do about it--or say, guess I'll see whether they're still
interfering on Samms' wave."

He took out the small, insulated case and touched the contact stud
lightly with his finger. His arm jerked away powerfully.

"Still at it," he gave the unnecessary explanation. "They don't seem to
want us to talk outside, but his interference is as good as my
talking--they can trace it, of course. Now I'll see what I can find out
about our breakfast."

He stepped over to the plate and shot its projector beam forward into
the control room, where he saw Nerado lying, doglike, at his instrument
panel. As Costigan's beam entered the room a blue light flashed on and
the Nevian turned an eye and an arm toward his own small observation
plate. Knowing that they were now in visual communication, Costigan
beckoned an invitation and pointed to his mouth in what he hoped was the
universal sign of hunger. The Nevian waved an arm and fingered controls,
and as he did so a wide section of the floor of Clio's room slid aside.
The opening thus made revealed a table which rose upon its low pedestal,
a table equipped with three softly-cushioned benches and spread with a
glittering array of silver and glassware.

Bowls and platters of a dazzlingly white metal, narrow-waisted goblets
of sheerest crystal; all were hexagonal, beautifully and intricately
carved or etched in apparently conventional marine designs. And the
table utensils of this strange race were peculiar indeed. There were
tearing forceps of sixteen needle-sharp curved teeth; there were
flexible spatulas; there were deep and shallow ladles with flexible
edges; there were many other peculiarly-curved instruments at whose uses
the Terrestrials could not even guess; all having delicately-fashioned
handles to fit the long slender fingers of the Nevians.

But if the table and its appointments were surprising to the
Terrestrials, revealing as they did a degree of culture which none of
them had expected to find in a race of beings so monstrous, the food was
even more surprising, although in another sense. For the wonderful
crystal goblets were filled with a grayish-green slime of a nauseous and
over-powering odor, the smaller bowls were full of living sea spiders
and other such delicacies; and each large platter contained a fish fully
a foot long, raw and whole, garnished tastefully with red, purple, and
green strands of seaweed!

Clio looked once, then gasped, shutting her eyes and turning away from
the table, but Costigan flipped the three fish into a platter and set it
aside before he turned back to the visiplate.

"They'll go good fried," he remarked to Bradley, signaling vigorously to
Nerado that the meal was not acceptable and that he wanted to talk to
him, _in person_. Finally he made himself clear, the table sank down out
of sight, and the Nevian commander cautiously entered the room.

At Costigan's insistence, he came up to the visiplate, leaving near the
door three alert and fully-armed guards. The man then shot the beam into
the galley of the pirate's lifeboat, suggesting that they should be
allowed to live there. For some time the argument of arms and fingers
raged--though not exactly fluent conversation, both sides managed to
convey their meanings quite clearly. Nerado would not allow the
Terrestrials to visit their own ship--he was taking no chances--but
after a thorough ultra-ray inspection he did finally order some of his
men to bring into the middle room the electric range and a supply of
Terrestrial food. Soon the Nevian fish were sizzling in a pan and the
appetizing odors of coffee and browning biscuit permeated the room. But
at the first appearance of those odors the Nevians departed hastily,
content to watch the remainder of the curious and repulsive procedure in
their visiray plates.

Breakfast over and everything made tidy and ship-shape, Costigan turned
to Clio.

"Look here, girl; you've got to learn how to sleep. You're all in. Your
eyes look like you've been on a Martian picnic and you didn't eat half
enough breakfast. You've got to sleep and eat to keep fit. We don't
want you passing out on us, so I'll put out this light, and you'll lie
down here and sleep until noon."

"Oh, no, don't bother. I'll sleep tonight. I'm quite...."

"You'll sleep now," he informed her, levelly. "I never thought of you
being nervous, with Bradley and me on each side of you. We're both right
here now, though, and we'll stay here. We'll watch over you like a
couple of old hens with one chick between them. Come on; lie down and go
bye-bye."

Clio laughed at the simile, but lay down obediently. Costigan sat upon
the edge of the great divan holding her hand, and they chatted idly. The
silences grew longer, Clio's remarks became fewer, and soon her
long-lashed eyelids fell and her deep, regular breathing showed that she
was sound asleep. The man stared at her, his very heart in his eyes. So
young, so beautiful, so lovely--and _how_ he did love her! He was not
formally religious, but his every thought was a prayer. If he could only
get her out of this mess ... he wasn't fit to live on the same planet
with her, but ... just give him one chance, God ... just one!

But Costigan had been laboring for days under a terrific strain, and had
been going very short on sleep. Half hypnotized by his own mixed
emotions and by his staring at the smooth curves of Clio's cheek, his
own eyes closed and, still holding her hand, he sank down into the soft
cushions beside her and into oblivion.

Thus sleeping hand in hand like two children Bradley found them, and a
tender, fatherly expression came over his face as he looked down at
them.

"Nice little girl, Clio," he mused, "and when they made Costigan they
broke the mold. They'll do--about as fine a couple of kids as old Tellus
ever produced. I could do with some more sleep myself." He yawned
prodigiously, lay down at Clio's left, and in minutes was himself
asleep.

Hours later, both men were awakened by a merry peal of laughter. Clio
was sitting up, regarding them with sparkling eyes. She was refreshed,
buoyant, ravenously hungry and highly amused. Costigan was amazed and
annoyed at what he considered a failure in a self-appointed task;
Bradley was calm and matter-of-fact.

"Thanks for being such a nice body-guard, you two." Clio laughed again,
but sobered quickly. "I slept wonderfully well, but I wonder if I can
sleep tonight without making you hold my hand all night?"

"Oh, he doesn't mind doing that," Bradley commented.

"Mind it!" Costigan exclaimed, and his eyes and his tone spoke volumes.

They prepared and ate another meal, one to which Clio did full justice.
Rested and refreshed, they had begun to discuss possibilities of escape
when Nerado and his three armed guards entered the room. The Nevian
scientist placed a box upon a table and began to make adjustments upon
its panels, eyeing the Terrestrials attentively after each setting.
After a time a staccato burst of articulate speech issued from the box,
and Costigan saw a great light.

"You've got it--hold it!" he exclaimed, waving his arms excitedly. "You
see, Clio, their voices are pitched either higher or lower than
ours--probably higher--and they've built an audio-frequency changer.
He's nobody's fool, that lizard!"

Nerado heard Costigan's voice, there was no doubt of that. His long neck
looped and twisted in Nevian gratification; and although neither side
could understand the other, both knew that intelligent speech and
hearing were attributes common to the two races. This fact altered
markedly the relations between captors and captives. The Nevians
admitted among themselves that the strange bipeds might be quite
intelligent, after all; and the Terrestrials at once became more
hopeful.

"It isn't so bad, if they can talk," Costigan summed up the situation.
"We might as well take it easy and make the best of it, particularly
since we haven't been able to figure out any possible way of getting
away from them. They can talk and hear, and we can learn their language
in time. Maybe we can make some kind of a deal with them to take us back
to our own system, if we can't make a break."

The Nevians being as eager as the Terrestrials to establish
communication, Nerado kept the newly devised frequency changer in
constant use. There is no need of describing at length the details of
that interchange of languages. Suffice it to say that starting at the
very bottom they learned as babies learn, but with the great advantage
over babies of possessing fully developed and capable brains. And while
the human beings were learning the tongue of Nevia, several of the
amphibians (and incidentally Clio Marsden) were learning Triplanetarian;
the two officers knowing well that it would be much easier for the
Nevians to learn the logically-built common language of the Three
Planets than to master the senseless intricacies of English.

In a short time the two parties were able to understand each other after
a fashion, by using a weird mixture of both languages. As soon as a few
ideas had been exchanged, the Nevian scientists built transformers small
enough to be worn collar-like by the Terrestrials, and the captives were
allowed to roam at will throughout the great vessel; only the
compartment in which was stored the dismembered pirate lifeboat being
sealed to them. Thus it was that they were not left long in doubt when
another fish-shaped cruiser of the void was revealed upon their lookout
plates in the awful emptiness of interstellar space.

"This is our sister-ship going to your Solarian system for a cargo of
the iron which is so plentiful there," Nerado explained to his
involuntary guests.

"I hope the gang has got the bugs worked out of our super-ship!"
Costigan muttered savagely to his companions as Nerado turned away. "If
they have, that outfit will get something more than a load of iron when
they get there!"

More time passed, during which a blue-white star separated itself from
the infinitely distant firmament and began to show a perceptible disk.
Larger and larger it grew, becoming bluer and bluer as the flying
space-ship approached it, until finally Nevia could be seen, apparently
close beside her parent orb.

Heavily laden though the vessel was, such was her power that she was
soon dropping vertically downward toward a large lagoon in the middle of
the Nevian city. That bit of open water was devoid of life, for this was
to be no ordinary landing. Under the terrific power of the beams braking
the descent of that unimaginable load of allotropic iron the water
seethed and boiled; and instead of floating gracefully upon the surface
of the sea, this time the huge ship of space sank like a plummet to the
bottom. Having accomplished the delicate feat of docking the vessel
safely in the immense cradle prepared for her, Nerado turned to the
Tellurians, who, now under guard, had been brought before him.

"While our cargo of iron is being discharged, I am to take you three
specimens to the College of Science, where you are to undergo a thorough
physical and psychological examination. Follow me."

"Wait a minute!" protested Costigan, with a quick and furtive wink at
his companions. "Do you expect us to go through _water_, and at this
frightful depth?"

"Certainly," replied the Nevian, in surprise. "You are air-breathers, of
course, but you must be able to swim a little, and this slight
depth--but little more than thirty of your meters--will not trouble
you."

"You are wrong, twice," declared the Terrestrial, convincingly. "If by
'swimming' you mean propelling yourself in or through the water, we know
nothing of it. In water over our heads we drown helplessly in a minute
or two, and the pressure at this depth would kill us instantly."

"Well, I could take a lifeboat, of course, but that ..." the Nevian
Captain began, doubtfully, but broke off at the sound of a staccato call
from his signal panel.

"Captain Nerado, attention!"

"Nerado," he acknowledged into a microphone.

"The Third City is being attacked by the fishes of the greater deeps.
They have developed new and powerful mobile fortresses mounting
unheard-of weapons and the city reports that it cannot long withstand
their attack. They are asking for all possible help. Your vessel not
only has vast stores of iron, but also mounts weapons of power. You are
requested to proceed to their aid at the earliest possible moment."

Nerado snapped out orders and the liquid iron fell in streams from
wide-open ports, forming a vast, red pool in the bottom of the dock. In
a short time the great vessel was in equilibrium with the water she
displaced, and as soon as she had attained a slight buoyancy the ports
snapped shut and Nerado threw on the power.

"Go back to your own quarters and stay there until I send for you," the
Nevian directed, and as the Terrestrials obeyed the curt orders the
cruiser tore herself from the water and flashed up into the crimson sky.

"What a barefaced liar!" Bradley exclaimed. The three, transformers cut
off, were back in the middle room of their suite. "You can outswim an
otter, and I happen to know that you came up out of the old DZ83 from a
depth of...."

"Maybe I did exaggerate a trifle," Costigan interrupted, "but the more
helpless he thinks we are the better for us. And we want to stay out of
any of their cities as long as we can, because they may be hard places
to get out of. I've got a couple of ideas, but they aren't ripe enough
to pick yet.... Wow! How this bird's been traveling! We're there
already! If he hits the water going like this, he'll split himself,
