don't want them pushing in there with the gravity-beam if it isn't going
to do any good."

Murray laughed. "They'll find it out soon enough. I think we've got
plenty speed to beat those infra-sound rays, too. If that's as strong as
they come, we've got 'em licked."

"Don't crow yet, boy friend," said Gloria. "You don't know what those
babies have up their sleeves--excuse me, their trunks."

As the American fleet formed for a mass attack, the Lassan globes had
been rising, and now they were a bare five thousand feet below the
rocket-cruisers, swinging along at a height of 25,000 feet above the
earth in the last rays of the setting sun. As the green globes rose they
took their places in a formation like an enormous crescent, the ends of
which were extended as each new globe came up to join it.

"Looks like they want to get us in the middle and pop us from all
directions at once," observed Sherman. "Well, here goes. Pick the end of
the line; that's our best chance. How's your potential, Gloria?"

"O. K., chief," she answered. "Lightning this time?"

He nodded. The rockets of the _Monitor II_ roared; its prow dipped
forward, and at an incredible speed it swept down on the line of Lassan
warships, followed by the rest of the American fleet. But it was no
surprise this time. As the monitors plunged in, from every green globe
that could bring them to bear, the long yellow rays shot forth. Right
through them the _Monitor II_ plunged; the grate of it, even through
their double coating of armor and the vacuum chambers, set their teeth
on edge; then the rocket-ship was pointing directly down at one of the
Lassans and Gloria snapped the key that released the artificial
lightning.

A jagged beam of flame, intenser than the hottest furnace, leaped
through the air, struck the green globe, and sought the earth in a
thousand tiny rivulets of light. For just a second the globe seemed
unharmed; then slowly, and almost majestically, it began to dissolve in
mid-air, spouting flames at every pore. Fully ten miles down and beyond,
the _Monitor_ turned again, and not till then did the sound of the
explosion reach them, a terrific, rending thunder-clap.

"See that?" cried Sherman. "That formation of theirs isn't so dumb.
They've got it all ranged out; none of our ships can get at them without
coming through at least one of those yellow rays, and if we stay in them
too long--blooie!"

They peered through the windows at the formation. Off at one side, they
could make out the forms of two more rocket-ships, outlined against the
sky, while behind and above them pursued by the searching yellow beams,
came the rest. As they turned, they saw the gravity-beam shoot from one
of the American ships, crumple uselessly against a green globe. Then
they plunged in, again, firing the gravity beam earthward to work up the
potential for another lightning discharge.

       *       *       *       *       *

The hills below rocked and roared to the repeated shock. Trees fell in
crashing ruin as lightning-bolt or infra-sound shivered them to bits;
great cars of burned earth and molten rock marked the spots where the
gravity-beam struck the ground. All round was a maze of yellow rays,
lightning flashes, and green globes that reeled, rose, fell, sometimes
blowing up, sometimes giving ground, but always fighting back sternly
and vigorously and always rising through the clear spring evening.

Murray Lee, at the rear of the ship, was the only one to see an American
rocket-ship, caught and held for a few fatal moments by two yellow rays,
slowly divest itself of its outer armor, then of its inner, and go
whirling to the earth, dissolved into its ultimate fragments by those
irresistible pennons of sound.

Gloria Rutherford at the prow was the only one to see another caught
bow-on in a yellow ray, reply by firing its gravity-beam right down the
ray and into the green globe through the port from which the ray had
issued. The ray went out--a spreading spot of flame appeared at the port
and the great green globe crumpled into a little ball of flame before
her eyes. But such events as these were the merest flashes in the
close-locked combat. For the most part they had time to do nothing but
handle the controls, throw switches to and fro, shoot forth gravity-beam
and lightning-flash in endless alternation at the Lassan ships of which
there always appeared to be one more right before them as Sherman
twisted and turned the _Monitor_ with a skill that was almost uncanny.

Suddenly he pulled out; the four looked round. They were miles high;
below half hidden in the dusk, were the red and brown roofs of a city.
Far away on the horizon the battle still roared; a rolling cloud of
smoke now, shot with the vivid fires of the American lightning flashes.
The wings of their ship were spread; they were soaring gently earthward
without the application of the rocket power.

"Had to get away for a minute," Sherman explained. "We were heating up
from the speed. My God, but we're high up; at least 45,000 feet!"

"Yes, and getting higher," Ben pointed out. "Those green globes must be
headed for the moon."

"Do you know, I wouldn't be a bit surprised but what you're right,"
replied Sherman, "I'll bet an oil-ball against the whole Lassan city
that they think we can't navigate space and they're trying to get above
us and then hang around and pop us when we have to land. Well, come on
gang, let's get back."

He shot the wings in again, worked the controls, and they headed back
toward the conflict.

It was less of a turmoil now, more of an ordered swing, charge, pass and
charge again against the diminishing number of the Lassan globes. Of the
American rocket-ships Gloria could now count but two beside their own.
One she had seen break up; whether the others, badly damaged, had hauled
out for repairs, or whether, riven by the deadly yellow ray, they had
gone crashing to the earth, there was no way of knowing. But the Lassans
were not escaping unharmed; there were hardly a third as many as at the
beginning and even as they approached another one disappeared in the
vivid flash of the rocket's lightnings. Still the rest rose steadily on,
going straight up as though they indeed hoped to escape their tormentors
by rising to the moon.

They dived in: Gloria pressed the lightning key and another Lassan globe
blew up; then they were climbing again. Beneath them the night had come.
The earth was a dark mass, far down, and from that enormous distance
looked slightly dished out at the edges. But though the earth was dark,
at that ultimate height of the atmosphere the sun had not yet set. Still
the strange fight went on, higher and higher. The roar of the exhaust
explosions died away behind them and Murray looked questioningly at
Sherman.

"Out this far, there isn't much air," he said. "Takes air to conduct
sound. Wonder what they're up to, anyway. All right, Gloria."

He dived at another Lassan and she pressed the lightning ray; but this
time there was no flash, no flaming Lassan ship falling in ruins to the
ground.

"Who'd have thought it!" said Sherman, as he swung the _Monitor_ round
after the charge. "Of course--we're up so high that we've made a spark
gap that even lightning won't jump. But I don't get their idea; those
sound rays won't be any good out here, either."




CHAPTER XXIII

Into the Depths


The _Monitor_ turned again, speeding back toward the remaining Lassan
ships; with a startling shock of surprise, Gloria noticed that there
were only two. Down below them one of the last three American
rocket-cruisers had spread her wings and was gliding gently toward the
earth. Like the _Monitor's_, her crew had evidently found the lightning
flash worthless at the enormous altitude and was abandoning the battle
till conditions became more favorable. The other rocket remained
faithful; turned as they turned and charged up with them toward the last
of the Lassans.

It was a weird scene. They had climbed so far that the earth was now
perceptibly round beneath them; a vague line marked the westward
progress of the sunset and beyond it the sun, an immense yellow ball,
set with a crown of vividly red flames, hung in the inky-black heavens.
On the opposite side, the stars, more brilliant and greater in number
than any ever before viewed by the eye of man, made the sky a carpet of
light across which the green globes moved like shadows, their undersides
illumined by the sun.

As the _Monitor_ approached, the nearest globe seemed to be turning on
its axis. Suddenly, out of the side that faced them, came the quick,
stabbing beam of the light-ray, like the flicker of a sword. It struck
the _Monitor_ full on the prow. There was a burning rain of sparks past
the windows; the rocket-ship leaped and quivered, and those within felt,
rather than saw, something give. Then, with a tremendous explosion, all
the more horrible because utterly without sound, the great globe that
had thrown the ray, burst into fragments.

And at the same moment the _Monitor_ began to fall. Down, down, down
went the rocket-cruiser with the round ball of the earth rising to meet
them at a speed incredible. The sun went out; they were swallowed in a
purple twilight as they plunged. The earth changed from a ball to a
dish, from a dish to a plane, from a plane to a dark mass without form,
and in the mass vague lights and glimmerings of water came out, and
still their course was unchecked, still Sherman fought frantically with
the useless controls.

Desperately Murray pressed the firing keys of the stern-rockets;
unchecked she drove on, almost straight down, plunging to certain
destruction. The earth loomed nearer, nearer, the end seemed
inevitable--.

Then Gloria saved them. In some moment of inspiration, she threw on the
searchlight; and the automatic connection fired the gravity-beam. There
was a shattering report; the course of the _Monitor_ was halted, and
bruised and broken, she tumbled over and over to the ground, safe but
ruined.

"Suffering Lassans!" said Ben Ruby, as they picked themselves out of the
wreckage, "but that was a jar. What hit us, anyway?"

Sherman pointed to Gloria, breathlessly. "Give the little girl a hand,"
he ejaculated. "She sure pulled us out of the fire that time."

"I'll say she did," said Murray, "but what happened, anyway? I thought
that light-ray of theirs wouldn't work on these ships."

"It won't--in air," said Sherman ruefully, surveying the wreck of the
_Monitor_. "But the air blankets down the effect a lot. Out there we got
the whole dose. Even then it shouldn't have hurt us so seriously, but I
expect a lot of our lead sheathing got jarred loose when we went through
those yellow rays and when they let that light-ray go, she leaked all
over the place. Wonder what made that Lassan ship blow up like that,
though? I thought she sure had us."

"Oh," said Ben, "I think maybe I did that. When the light-ray came on it
occurred to me that the gravity-beam might go down their beam of light
just as fast as it would down ours, and they must have a port-hole or
something through their gravity-screen or they couldn't let the ray out.
So I just let them have it."

"Boy, you sure saved the lives of four of Uncle Sam's flying men that
time. About one second more of that stuff and we'd have cracked up right
there. Look at the front of our bus. The outer plating is all caved in
and the inner is starting to go."

"She is pretty well used up isn't she? What gets me though, is that
there's one more of those things loose."

"Look!" cried Gloria suddenly, pointing upward.

Far in the zenith above them they saw a point of light; a point that
grew and spread and became definite as a great star; then it became a
shooting star, plunging earthward, and so great was its speed that even
as they watched they could make out a green fragment, flame-wrapped in
its midst.

"The last one!" said Sherman. "Thank God for that. Wonder how they got
her?"

"Wonder what we do next," remarked Murray, practically.

They looked about them. They were on a hillside in a little clearing in
a high, narrow valley. On every side were woods, dark and impenetrable.
Just below they could hear the purl of a brook, and the trees about them
were bare with the dark bareness of spring, a few fugitive buds being
the only announcement that the season of growing was at hand. No
landmarks, no roads were visible, and the sky was darkening fast.

"The question," said Gloria, "is not where do we go, but where are we
going from."

"It might be most anywhere," remarked Murray. "Adirondacks, Catskills,
or even Laurentians. I don't think we got far enough west for it to be
the Blue Ridge or the Appalachians, but there's no way of telling."

"Well," Gloria offered, "I've been in a lot of mountains in my day, but
I never saw any where following a stream didn't take you somewhere
sooner or later. I vote we trail along with that brook there and see
what happens."

"Bright thought," commented Ben. "Let's see what we can dig out of the
wreck by way of weapons."

"What for? There aren't any animals, and they couldn't hurt you if there
were. If we meet any of the Lassans any weapon you got out of that mess
wouldn't be much use. Wish we had a flashlight though."

Treading carefully, but with a good deal of noise and confusion, they
began to crash their way through the underbrush along the bank of the
stream. At the foot of the valley it dived over a diminutive waterfall
and then tumbled into another similar brook. Along the combined streams
ran a road--a dirt road originally, now long untraveled, muddy and bad,
but still a road.

An hour's walking brought them around the foot of another mountain and
into a valley where the road divided before a projecting buttress of
rock. A teetering sign-post stood at the fork. With some trouble, and
after getting himself immersed to the knees in the ditch, Murray managed
to reach it and straining his eyes in the starlight, made out what it
said. "THIS WAY TO HAMILTON'S CHICKEN DINNERS. 1 MILE" it read. With a
snort of disgust he hurled the deceitful guidepost into the ditch and
joined the others.

"Toss a coin," someone suggested. No coins. A knife was flipped up
instead. It fell heads and in accordance with its decision they took the
road to the right. It led them along beside the stream for a while, then
parted company with it and began to climb, and they soon found
themselves at the crest of the hill. The night had become darker and
darker, clouding over. But for the road they would have been completely
lost. Finally, after skirting the hillcrest for a distance, the road
dipped abruptly, and as it did so, they passed out of the forest into a
region cleared but not cultivated, with numerous close-cut stumps coming
right to the roadside.

"But for the fact that it's a long ways away," remarked Sherman, "I
would say that this was the district around the Lassan headquarters."

"What makes you think it's a long ways away?" asked Gloria. "Do you know
where we are? Neither do I."

"By the nine gods of Clusium, I believe that's it, at that!" said
Sherman suddenly as the road turned past a place where a long scar of
earth ran up the hillside, torn and blackened. "Look--that looks exactly
like the result of one of our gravity-beam shots! And there--isn't that
the door?"

They were on the hillside now, directly above the place he had
indicated. From above and in the darkness it appeared as a cliff,
breaking down rapidly to the valley, but Sherman led them to one side,
straight down the hill and in another moment they were at its base. The
great door through which the green balls had poured out that evening
stood before them, a mighty arch reaching up into the dimness--and it
was open.

"Looks like the boys haven't come home to supper yet," said Gloria in an
awed whisper, contemplating the gigantic arch and the dark passage into
which it led.

"Yes, and a lot of them aren't coming, either," replied Murray in a
similar tone. "But what do we do--make a break for it or poke in and see
if anybody's home?"

"Listen, you three," said Sherman. "You run along and build some more
monitors and go get whatever comes out of here. Me, I'm going to have a
whirl at this door. The swellest girl in the world is in there, or was,
and I'm going to find her."

"Nothing doing, old scout," said Ben. "If you go in we go too--except
Gloria."

"What's the matter with me?" she demanded. "I'm made of the same kind of
machinery you are, aren't I? And I'm good enough to run your foolish
fighting-machine. Don't be a goop." And she stepped forward.

The blue-domed hall that gave directly on the outer air had disappeared
since Sherman and Marta Lami had raced out of it on that night that now
seemed so long ago. In its place was an enormous tunnel, lined
apparently with some metal, for its sides were smooth and shimmering.
The portion they entered was lightless, but it curved as it ran down,
and around the curve they could see the faint reflection of a light
somewhere farther along the passage. Their feet echoed oddly in the
enormous silence of the place. There seemed nothing alive or dead
within.

"Boy," whispered Murray to Gloria, "if one of those green globes comes
back now it will squash us flatter than a false prosperity bankroll.
This is the craziest thing we ever did."

"Right," she said, "but what the hell? I just came for the ride. Look,
what's that?"

Before them, around the bend of the passage, they could see another door
from which the light which glittered along the tunnel was streaming. In
the opening stood a man, or what seemed to be a man, facing,
fortunately, inwards.

After a moment's cautious peering, Sherman pronounced him one of the
ape-man slaves. He wore a thought-helmet, and had some kind of a weapon
in his hand. The four held a cautiously whispered conference.

"Listen," said Sherman, "we've got to jump that baby before he does
anything. I think he's got one of those small light-guns. Didn't know
they trusted them to the slaves, but I suppose so many of the Lassans
got shot up that they had to do it. Now, who's got a knife?"

A search of pockets revealed that Murray Lee had the only one in the
company.

"Never mind," said Sherman, "one is enough. Now we three will sneak up
on him. The main thing is not to let him see us; if he makes a move,
jump him quick. Remember there's a Lassan at the other end of the line,
and the Lassan is getting everything he thinks. He doesn't think very
fast, but don't take chances. If he sees us, you hop in, Murray, and cut
the wire that leads out of his helmet and short-circuit it. They may
have it fixed so that it won't short-circuit by now but I don't think
so. If he doesn't see us before we jump him, clap your hands over his
eyes, Ben, and I'll try to get the helmet off him and pass out some
information to the Lassan at the other end that will keep him quiet. But
the main thing is to get that gun first. Everybody understand?"

Three heads nodded in unison.

"All right. Come on."

They crept up the passage together avoiding touching hands lest the ring
of the metal should warn the sentry. As they approached they could see
the room he looked out on was one of the familiar blue-domed halls; the
passage ended sharply some six feet above its floor ("Taking no chances
on more escapes" thought Sherman) and that the hall was of enormous
size. There were machines in one corner of the floor. In another stood
one of the green globes, half finished, with spidery trellises of red
metal outlining what would be the surface of the sphere. Around it
helmeted mechanical men came and went busily. The rest of the hall, for
all its vast extent, was completely empty. At the far end was a row of
doors; high on the far side an opening that looked like a door but had
no obvious purpose.

This much they saw; then the sentry stirred as though to turn, and with
a quick patter of feet, they were upon him. Before he had time to turn
around Ben Ruby launched himself in a perfect football tackle for his
legs, bringing the ape-man down with a crash. As he fell, Sherman
snatched at the helmet, and Gloria the light-gun, which had dropped from
his fingers, while Murray pinioned the struggling creature's arms. In a
moment Sherman found the finger-holes in the helmet, pressed, and it
came loose in his hands while the ape-man ceased to struggle.

"Let him up now, folks," said Sherman, "give him a swift kick and point
him toward the door. He won't come back." And he rapidly adjusted the
thought-helmet to his own head.

The Lassan at the other end was evidently disturbed. He had received the
