enemy trenches. Hugo looked over there for a moment and smiled. He
looked down at the thing and vomited. The guns began again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another winter. Time had become stagnant. All about it was a pool of mud
and suppuration, and shot through it was the sound of guns and the scent
of women, the taste of wine and the touch of cold flesh. Somewhere, he
could not remember distinctly where, Hugo had a clean uniform, a
portfolio of papers, a jewel-case of medals. He was a great man--a man
feared. The Colorado in the Foreign Legion. Men would talk about what
they had seen him accomplish all through the next fifty years--at
watering places in the Sahara, at the crackling fires of country-house
parties in Shropshire, on the shores of the South Seas, on the moon,
maybe. Old men, at the last, would clear the phlegm from their skinny
throats and begin: "When I was a-fightin' with the Legion in my youngest
days, there was a fellow in our company that came from some place in
wild America that I disrecollect." And younger, more sanguine men would
listen and shake their heads and wish that there was a war for them to
fight.

Hugo was not satisfied with that. Still, he could see no decent exit and
contrive no better use for himself. He clung frantically to the ideals
he had taken with him and to the splendid purpose with which he had
emblazoned his mad lust to enlist. Marseilles and the sentiment it had
inspired seemed very far away. He thought about it as he walked toward
the front, his head bent into the gale and his helmet pitched to protect
his eyes from the sting of the rain.

That night he slept with Shayne, a lieutenant now, twice wounded, thrice
decorated, and, like Hugo, thinner than he had been, older, with eyes
grown bleak, and seldom vehement. He resembled his lean Yankee ancestors
after their exhausting campaigns of the wilderness, alive and sentient
only through a sheer stubbornness that brooked neither element nor
disaster. Only at rare moments did the slight strain of his French blood
lift him from that grim posture. Such a moment was afforded by the
arrival of Hugo.

"Great God, Hugo! We haven't seen you in a dog's age." Other soldiers
smiled and brought rusty cigarettes into the dug-out where they sat and
smoked.

Hugo held out his hand. "Been busy. Glad to see you."

"Yes. I know how busy you've been. Up and down the lines we hear about
you. _Le Colorado._ Damn funny war. You'd think you weren't human, or
anywhere near human, to hear these birds. Wish you'd tell me how you get
away with it. Hasn't one nicked you yet?"

"Not yet."

"God damn. Got me here"--he tapped his shoulder--"and here"--his thigh.

"That's tough. I guess the sort of work I do isn't calculated to be as
risky as yours," Hugo said.

"Huh! That you can tell to Sweeny." The Frenchmen were still sitting
politely, listening to a dialogue they could not understand. Hugo and
Shayne eyed each other in silence. A long, penetrating silence. At
length the latter said soberly: "Still as enthusiastic as you were that
night in Marseilles?"

"Are you?"

"I didn't have much conception of what war would be then."

"Neither did I," Hugo responded. "And I'm not very enthusiastic any
more."

"Oh, well--"

"Exactly."

"Heard from your family?"

"Sure."

"Well--"

They relapsed into silence again. By and by they ate a meal of cold
food, supplemented by rank, steaming coffee. Then they slept. Before
dawn Hugo woke feeling like a man in the mouth of a volcano that had
commenced to erupt. The universe was shaking. The walls of the dug-out
were molting chunks of earth. The scream and burst of shells were
constant. He heard Shayne's voice above the din, issuing orders in
French. Their batteries were to be phoned. A protective counter-fire. A
_barrage_ in readiness in case of attack, which seemed imminent. Larger
shells drowned the voice. Hugo rose and stood beside Shayne.

"Coming over?"

"Coming over."

A shapeless face spoke in the gloom. The voice panted. "We must get out
of here, my lieutenant. They are smashing in the dug-out." A methodical
scramble to the orifice. Hell was rampaging in the trench. The shells
fell everywhere. Shayne shook his head. It was neither light nor dark.
The incessant blinding fire did not make things visible except for
fragments of time and in fantastic perspectives. Things belched and
boomed and smashed the earth and whistled and howled. It was impossible
to see how life could exist in that caldron, and yet men stood calmly
all along the line. A few of them, here and there, were obliterated.

The red sky in the southeast became redder with the rising sun. Hugo
remained close to the wall. It was no novelty for him to be under shell
fire. But at such times he felt the need of a caution with which he
could ordinarily dispense. If one of the steel cylinders found him, even
his mighty frame might not contain itself. Even he might be rent
asunder. Shayne saw him and smiled. Twenty yards away a geyser of fire
sprayed the heavens. Ten feet away a fragment of shell lashed down a
pile of sand-bags. Shayne's smile widened. Hugo returned it.

Then red fury enveloped the two men. Hugo was crushed ferociously
against the wall and liberated in the same second. He fell forward, his
ears singing and his head dizzy. He lay there, aching. Dark red stains
flowed over his face from his nose and ears. Painfully he stood up. A
soldier was watching him from a distance with alarmed eyes. Hugo
stepped. He found that locomotion was possible. The bedlam increased. It
brought a sort of madness. He remembered Shayne. He searched in the
smoking, stinking muck. He found the shoulders and part of Shayne's
head. He picked them up in his hands, disregarding the butchered ends of
the raw gobbet. White electricity crackled in his head.

He leaped to the parapet, shaking his fists. "God damn you dirty sons of
bitches. I'll make you pay for this. You got him, got him, you bastards!
I'll shove your filthy hides down the devil's throat and through his
guts. Oh, Jesus!" He did not feel the frantic tugging of his fellows. He
ran into that bubbling, doom-ridden chaos, waving his arms and shouting
maniacal profanities. A dozen times he was knocked down. He bled slowly
where fragments had battered him. He crossed over and paused on the
German parapet. He was like a being of steel. Bullets sprayed him. His
arms dangled and lifted. Barbed wire trailed behind him.

Down before him, shoulder to shoulder, the attacking regiments waited
for the last crescendo of the bombardment. They saw him come out of the
fury and smiled grimly. They knew such madness. They shot. He came on.
At last they could hear his voice dimly through the tumult. Someone
shouted that he was mad--to beware when he fell. Hugo jumped among them.
Bayonets rose. Hugo wrenched three knives from their wielders in one
wild clutch. His hands went out, snatching and squeezing. That was all.
No weapons, no defence. Just--hands. Whatever they caught they crushed
flat, and heads fell into those dreadful fingers, sides, legs, arms,
bellies. Bayonets slid from his tawny skin, taking his clothes. By and
by, except for his shoes, he was naked. His fingers had made a hundred
bunches of clotted pulp and then a thousand as he walked swiftly forward
in that trench. Ahead of him was a file of green; behind, a clogged row
of writhing men. Scarcely did the occupants of each new traverse see him
before they were smitten. The wounds he inflicted were monstrous. On he
walked, his voice now stilled, his breath sucking and whistling through
his teeth, his hands flailing and pinching and spurting red with every
contact. No more formidable engine of desolation had been seen by man,
no more titanic fury, no swifter and surer death. For thirty minutes he
raged through that line. The men thinned. He had crossed the attacking
front.

Then the barrage lifted. But no whistles blew. No soldiers rose. A few
raised their heads and then lay down again. Hugo stopped and went back
into the _abattoir_. He leaped to the parapet. The French saw him,
silhouetted against the sky. The second German wave, coming slowly over
a far hill, saw him and hesitated. No ragged line of advancing men. No
cacophony of rifle fire. Only that strange, savage figure. A man dipped
in scarlet, nude, dripping, panting. Slowly in that hiatus he wheeled.
His lungs thundered to the French. "Come on, you black bastards. I've
killed them all. Come on. We'll send them down to hell."

The officers looked and understood that something phenomenal had
happened. No Germans were coming. A man stood above their trench. "Come,
quick!" Hugo shouted. He saw that they did not understand. He stood an
instant, fell into the trench; and presently a shower of German corpses
flung through the air in wide arcs and landed on the very edge of the
French position. Then they came, and Hugo, seeing them, went on alone to
meet the second line. He might have forged on through that bloody swathe
to the heart of the Empire if his vitality had been endless. But, some
time in the battle, he fell unconscious on the field, and his
forward-leaning comrades, pushing back the startled enemy, found him
lying there.

They made a little knot around him, silent, quivering. "It is the
Colorado," someone said. "His friend, Shayne--it is he who was the
lieutenant just killed."

They shook their heads and felt a strange fear of the unconscious man.
"He is breathing." They called for stretcher-bearers. They faced the
enemy again, bent over on the stocks of their rifles, surged forward.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hugo was washed and dressed in pyjamas. His wounds had healed without
the necessity of a single stitch. He was grateful for that. Otherwise
the surgeons might have had a surprise which would have been difficult
to allay. He sat in a wheel chair, staring across a lawn. An angular
woman in an angular hat and tailored clothes was trying to engage him in
conversation.

"Is it very painful, my man?"

Hugo was seeing that trench again--the pulp and blood and hate of it.
"Not very."

Her tongue and saliva made a noise. "Don't tell me. I know it was. I
know how you all bleed and suffer."

"Madam, it happens that my wounds were quite superficial."

"Nonsense, my boy. They wouldn't have brought you to a base hospital in
that case. You can't fool me."

"I was suffering only from exhaustion."

She paused. He saw a gleam in her eye. "I suppose you don't like to
talk--about things. Poor boy! But I imagine your life has been so full
of horror that it would be good for you to unburden yourself. Now tell
me, just what does it feel like to bayonet a man?"

Hugo trembled. He controlled his voice. "Madam," he replied, "it feels
exactly like sticking your finger into a warm, steaming pile of
cow-dung."

"Oh!" she gasped. And he heard her repeat it again in the corridor.




XIV


     "Mr. and Mrs. Ralph Jordan Shayne," Hugo wrote. Then he paused in
     thought. He began again. "I met your son in Marseilles and was with
     him most of the time until his death." He hesitated. "In fact, he
     died in my arms from the effect of the same shell which sent me to
     this hospital. He is buried in Carcy cemetery, on the south side.
     It is for that reason I take the liberty to address you.

     "I thought that you would like to know some of the things that he
     did not write to you. Your son enlisted because he felt the war
     involved certain ideals that were worthy of preservation. That he
     gave his life for those ideals must be a source of pride to you. In
     training he was always controlled, kindly, unquarrelsome,
     comprehending. In battle he was aggressive, brilliant, and more
     courageous than any other man I have ever known.

     "In October, a year ago, he was decorated for bringing in Captain
     Crouan, who was severely wounded during an attack that was
     repulsed. Under heavy shell fire Tom went boldly into no man's
     land and carried the officer from a shell pit on his back. At the
     time Tom himself sustained three wounds. He was mentioned a number
     of times in the dispatches for his leadership of attacks and
     patrols. He was decorated a second time for the capture of a German
     field officer and three of his staff, a coup which your son
     executed almost single-handed.

     "Following his death his company made an attack to avenge him,
     which wiped out the entire enemy position along a sector nearly a
     kilometre in width and which brought a permanent advantage to the
     Allied lines. That is mute testimony of his popularity among the
     officers and men. I know of no man more worthy of the name
     'American,' no American more worthy of the words 'gentleman' and
     'hero.'

     "I realize the slight comfort of these things, and yet I feel bound
     to tell you of them, because Tom was my friend, and his death is
     grievous to me as well as to you.

     "Yours sincerely,

     "(LIEUTENANT) HUGO DANNER"

Hugo posted the letter. When the answer came, he was once again in
action, the guns chugging and rumbling, the earth shaking. The reply
read:

     "DEAR LIEUTENANT DANNER:

     "Thank you for your letter in reference to our son. We knew that he
     had enlisted in some foreign service. We did not know of his
     death. I am having your statements checked, because, if they are
     true, I shall be one of the happiest persons alive, and his mother
     will be both happy and sad. The side of young Tom which you claim
     to have seen is one quite unfamiliar to us. At home he was always a
     waster, much of a snob, and impossible to control. It may be harsh
     to say such things of him now that he is dead, but I cannot recall
     one noble deed, one unselfish act, in his life here with us.

     "That I have a dead son would not sadden me. Tom had been
     disinherited by us, his mother and father. But that my dead son was
     a hero makes me feel that at last, coming into the Shayne blood and
     heritage, he has atoned. And so I honour him. If the records show
     that all you said of him is true, I shall not only honour him in
     this country, but I shall come to France to pay my tribute with a
     full heart and a knowledge that neither he nor I lived in vain.

     "Gratefully yours,

     "R. J. SHAYNE"

Hugo reread the letter and stood awhile with wistful eyes. He remembered
Shayne's Aunt Emma, Shayne's bitter calumniation of his family. Well,
they had not understood him and he had not wanted them to understand
him. Perhaps Shayne had been more content than he admitted in the mud of
the trenches. The war had been a real thing to him. Hugo thought of its
insufficiencies for himself. The world was not enough for Shayne, but
the war had been. Both were insufficient for Hugo Danner. He listened to
the thunder in the sky tiredly.

Two months later Hugo was ordered from rest billets to the major's
quarters. A middle-aged man and woman accompanied by a sleek Frenchman
awaited him. The man stepped forward with dignified courtesy. "I am Tom
Shayne's father. This is Mrs. Shayne."

Hugo felt a great lack of interest in them. They had come too late. It
was their son who had been his friend. He almost regretted the letter.
He shook hands with them. Mrs. Shayne went to an automobile. Her husband
invited Hugo to a cafe. Over the wine he became suddenly less dignified,
more human, and almost pathetic. "Tell me about him, Danner. I loved
