
In a deep cavern in the hinterlands of Asia, men responded to the
command coming over the speaker system. Already driven to the point of
exhaustion, they were working harder than they had ever worked before.
The moment of victory, for which all true Asians had lived, was near at
hand. The launching of this bomb would make the Asian Union master of
the world. Orders had come through to launch this bomb immediately.

"Zero minus forty-five minutes," the speaker said. The drone had gone
from the voice of the officer watching the time. A rising excitement
appeared in the tones as if he, too, had caught the scent of fear
rising in the vast underground depot.

So much was left to be done. The atomic warhead was already in place,
waiting for the day of launching, otherwise the task would have been
impossible. The driving engines were complete, but had to be fueled.
The steering equipment was almost ready, only the installation of the
left gyroscope was necessary. This was at hand waiting to be installed.
Five technicians constantly got in each other's way as they tried to
slip the delicate instrument into place.

"Zero minus thirty minutes!"

The gyroscope was eased into place and tested. It was found to be in
perfect working order.

In the course plotting room, the final calculations were being made.
Wind direction and velocity aloft had been noted across half the
planet. This had some importance on the launching and landing end but
had no significance when the bomb itself was out of the atmosphere.

The target had been figured and refigured. Actually, the target was
anywhere on the continent of North America. If this bomb struck
anywhere in the Mississippi valley, the whole watershed below the
striking point would be scoured clean of all life. Water carrying
radiation downstream would account for that.

"Zero minus fifteen minutes!"

On the outside of the mountain, in a special observatory constructed
for this precise purpose, radar scopes for tracking the rocket were
ready. Instruments in the laboratory there were for the purpose of
changing the course of the super bomb, if it veered too far from its
destination. The technicians there were on their toes. They had no
guards to encourage them but they needed none. They knew what would
happen if this bomb failed to land and the fault was traced to their
door.

What would happen when the bomb landed?

Hell would happen!

Probably the crust of the Earth would open up in a hole miles in depth.
Meteor Crater, in Arizona, would be the work of a child compared to the
result of this explosion. What had happened at Hiroshima and Nagasaki
would be nothing in comparison.

The possibility existed that the molten magma of the core of the planet
would gush forth. No one knew for sure whether or not this would
happen. If it did take place, the result might be the sudden appearance
of a lake of over-flowing lava.

The shock waves from the bomb would probably be strong enough to pull
down every skyscraper that still remained standing in America.

The effect on the watershed where the bomb landed would be almost
complete catastrophe. If it struck on any of the rivers or streams
flowing into the Mississippi, the water supply of all cities downstream
to New Orleans would be contaminated.

Nobody knew what the effect of the fall-out from this bomb would be.
High air currents might carry radioactive particles for thousands of
miles from the explosion point, where they would fall as a gentle but
very deadly rain upon the Earth below.

"_Zero minus ten minutes!_"

The high, thin note of a violin appeared in the vast underground
cavern. Amid the scurrying of feet, the shouts of the foremen bossing
the work gangs, and the occasional cracking of the rifles of the guard,
the sound was unheard by the ears. But deeper centers heard it.

The first man to go was a fat engineer. Sighing, he stumbled and fell.
When he did not rise a guard approached him. As the guard determined
that the man was snoring, he lifted his rifle.

The engineer died without awakening.

Another shot rang out as another man went to sleep, then continued on
to join his fathers.

The technician busy filling the fuel tanks of the rocket was the third
man to go. He managed to finish closing the filler cap and to lay down
his flexible line before the urge to sleep overcame him.

By this time the guards knew that something was wrong.

Silence came over the cavern. In the stillness, the note of the violin
flickering up and down the scale could be heard. Men looked at each
other in growing apprehension. Looking, some of them lay down and went
to sleep.

"Sleep gas!" an officer bawled. "Shoot all foreigners on sight!"

The officer suspected that some spy had slipped into the underground
cavern and had released gas there. His command was intended to enable
his men to find and eliminate this alien. As such, from a military
standpoint, it was a good command. It had this deficiency: when his men
did not find any aliens, but their own people continued going to sleep
on them, they began imagining foreigners. The guards began to shoot
their own technicians and engineers.

As panic swept through the cavern, guards began to shoot other guards.
Soon the people in this huge underground chamber were tearing and
destroying each other. And one other thing: they were also going to
sleep.

The panic grew to hurricane proportions.

When Kurt Zen appeared inside the cavern the whole vast place was as
still as a tomb. Smoke from the rifles hung in the air, the cavern
stank of death and fear. But the bomb still rested in its launching
cradle.

Zen took one long look at that bomb. He felt his sigh of relief clear
down to the ends of his toes. At the sight, the last remnant of pain
vanished from his toes and fingers. Not that the damage done by the
matches did not still exist. It did. But in the surge of elation that
swept through him, he completely forgot the pain.

"We just got here in time," a man said, appearing beside him. It was
Spike Larson who had spoken. Awe on his face, Larson glanced around the
cavern. "They started killing each other. They must have gone nuts."

"I don't blame them," Zen said. "I damned near did, on the way here."

"That trip through nothing is sure a stinker, isn't it," Larson
answered, grinning and shaking his head.

Zen agreed with him whole-heartedly. After tuning his body to an
instrument in the cavern, hidden so well that Cuso's men had not had
time to find it, West had punched a button. The machine had vanished.
West had vanished. A horrible moment had come when it had seemed that
his feet were standing on nothing more substantial than air. What he
had felt under his feet had, in fact, been far less substantial than
air, which had body. It had been even less solid than space. It had
been _nothing_.

Swishing, colonel Grant came into existence on the other side of Zen.
Grant looked fussed, but he gripped the rifle he had taken from one of
Cuso's men with determination.

"Just between you and me, I'd rather fly a space satellite to Mars any
day in preference to facing this jump."

"I know what you mean," Zen said.

As he spoke, another figure came into existence to his left. Nedra!
She came spinning into reality with a smile on her face. Zen wasted a
moment wondering what kind of cast-iron nerves this girl had.

"It looks as if all we have to do is to tie them up," Spike Larson
said. "This is almost too good to be true."

"It is too good to be true," Zen said. Turmoil was--somewhere. He did
not know where but it seemed to him that a vast uneasiness had suddenly
come into existence. It had to do, somehow, with the future, with a
something that was about to happen.

"Halt!" Grant's voice rang out.

Zen swung his gaze around just in time to see an Asian lift himself to
his feet near a control board that stood beside the rocket.

"He's walking in his sleep," Larson exclaimed.

"_Zero minus one minute_," the loudspeaker announced.

"Where in the hell is that man on the speaker?" Grant demanded. "The
sleep frequency didn't get to him!"

"No time to be concerned about him now," Zen said. The turmoil that
existed somewhere had increased in intensity. Somehow it was concerned
with the solitary Asian who was reeling in circles like a drunken man
trying to make up his mind.

"Shall I shoot him, colonel?" Grant demanded.

Zen hesitated. He knew that West's deepest wish was to avoid violence
if that was possible.

The split second's delay was fatal. Grant's shot rang out--much too
late.

Reeling on his feet, the man reached the control panel, and pulled the
single switch there. A heavy thud came from the rocket as a ram drove
home inside the heavy metal hull.

"Get back!" Zen screamed.

He caught Nedra and pulled her backward. Beside him, he knew that Grant
and Larson were also reeling backward. Inside the rocket a steady
rumble of sound was building up. Low in frequency but heavy in volume
it seemed to shake the foundations of the Earth itself. Inside the
vessel heavy heat charges were building up. Smoke and flame spurted
backward as the first warming charge let go.

For all Zen knew this section was to have been cleared before the
firing of the first rocket. He did not know whether provision had been
made for the elimination of flame and smoke but he knew that heat and
smoke hit him as he pulled Nedra away.

Then the main charges let go.

Rising like some devil spurting upward from the depths of hell itself,
the launching cradle carrying the rocket lurched upward. The stone
floor shook underfoot, the mountain shook. Unless this rocket could be
stopped, the whole planet would shake. Earth would twitch her skin like
an elephant stung by a giant wasp.

With a thundering roar the rocket shook itself loose from its cradle
and hurled into the sky under its own power.

"West," Zen shouted.

"Yes, Kurt." The craggy man's reply was as prompt as it would have been
if he had stayed in the same room. Actually he was in the American
center.

"We've lost," Zen said.

"I know," West replied. A sadness as deep as the ocean of space was in
his voice.

"Pull these people back to you."

"Of course."

"Me last." The last lingering roars of sound were still pounding down
the bore of the launching cradle.

"Why do you want to be last?"

"Duty," Zen said. "Get that miracle device of yours into operation,
pronto."

"Sure. I'm starting now."

"Hey, guys, you're going home!" Zen yelled at the people with him.

"What good is it to go home?" Spike Larson asked.

"There won't be any home within an hour," Grant added. "Or however long
that rocket will take to land. Why go back to what isn't there?"

"That's where we will start the task of rebuilding," Zen said.

"Rebuild what with what?" Larson demanded.

"There will be something left," Zen said firmly. "You are already
underground. You will stay that way. Keep the good fight going, for
years. Raise some kids to keep it going after you are gone." He felt
very firm and sure about what he was saying.

"You're full of hot air," Red-Dog Jimmie Thurman said.

"Besides, you are planning something else," Nedra spoke. "You want to
get rid of us so you can--"

"West!" Zen shouted.

"Yes, Kurt."

"Take 'em away!" Zen yelled. "They're trying to rebel on me. Take Nedra
first before she reads my mind."

"I'm working as fast as I can," West answered. "This instrument has to
be tuned to the individual body frequency. Ah--"

"I knew there was something--" Nedra began. And vanished. Zen grinned.
He had the impression that she was calling him names that no lady
should speak as she went away. Time would cure that, if any time was
left. In the chamber an Asian was stirring.

"Zen, old man, what are you up to?" Grant asked.

"Take this one next," Kurt ordered. Grant looked reluctant but resigned
as he disappeared.

Zen was alone in the big chamber. Smoke swirled from the ceiling. One
Asian was already on his feet and a guard was sitting up.

"I've got them all here," West's voice came across vast distances.

"Good."

"Are you ready?"

"Yeah," Zen answered. "But I'm going that way." He pointed toward the
ceiling.

"Kurt!" West's voice was sharp with sudden pain as he caught the
colonel's meaning.

"That way or no way," Zen answered.

