inflection. Many leaves can be found in which the purple fluid within
the cells is of an equally dark tint on the upper and lower sides of
the tentacles, extending also downwards on both sides to equally near
their bases. If the tentacles of such a leaf are excited into movement,
it will generally be found after some hours that the cells on the
concave side are much paler than they were before, or are quite
colourless, those on the convex side having become much darker. In two
instances, after particles of hair had been placed on glands, and when
in the course of 1 hr. 10 m. the tentacles were incurved halfway
towards the centre of the leaf, this change of colour in the two sides
was conspicuously plain. In another case, after a bit of meat had been
placed on a gland, the purple colour was observed at intervals to be
slowly travelling from the upper to the lower part, down the convex
side of

* Sachs, 'Trait de Bot.' 3rd edit. 1874, p. 1038. This view was, I
believe, first suggested by Lamarck.

  Sachs, ibid. p. 919.  [page 256]

the bending tentacle. But it does not follow from these observations
that the cells on the convex side become filled with more fluid during
the act of inflection than they contained before; for fluid may all the
time be passing into the disc or into the glands which then secrete
freely.

The bending of the tentacles, when leaves are immersed in a dense
fluid, and their subsequent re-expansion in a less dense fluid, show
that the passage of fluid from or into the cells can cause movements
like the natural ones. But the inflection thus caused is often
irregular; the exterior tentacles being sometimes spirally curved.
Other unnatural movements are likewise caused by the application of
dense fluids, as in the case of drops of syrup placed on the backs of
leaves and tentacles. Such movements may be compared with the
contortions which many vegetable tissues undergo when subjected to
exosmose. It is therefore doubtful whether they throw any light on the
natural movements.

If we admit that the outward passage of fluid is the cause of the
bending of the tentacles, we must suppose that the cells, before the
act of inflection, are in a high state of tension, and that they are
elastic to an extraordinary degree; for otherwise their contraction
could not cause the tentacles often to sweep through an angle of above
180o. Prof. Cohn, in his interesting paper* on the movements of the
stamens of certain Compositae, states that these organs, when dead, are
as elastic as threads of india-rubber, and are then only half as long
as they were when alive. He believes that the living protoplasm

* 'Abhand. der Schles. Gesell. fr vaterl. Cultur,' 1861, Heft i. An
excellent abstract of this paper is given in the 'Annals and Mag. of
Nat. Hist.' 3rd series, 1863, vol. xi. pp. 188-197.  [page 257]

within their cells is ordinarily in a state of expansion, but is
paralysed by irritation, or may be said to suffer temporary death; the
elasticity of the cell-walls then coming into play, and causing the
contraction of the stamens. Now the cells on the upper or concave side
of the bending part of the tentacles of Drosera do not appear to be in
a state of tension, nor to be highly elastic; for when a leaf is
suddenly killed, or dies slowly, it is not the upper but the lower
sides of the tentacles which contract from elasticity. We may,
therefore, conclude that their movements cannot be accounted for by the
inherent elasticity of certain cells, opposed as long as they are alive
and not irritated by the expanded state of their contents.

A somewhat different view has been advanced by other
physiologists--namely that the protoplasm, when irritated, contracts
like the soft sarcode of the muscles of animals. In Drosera the fluid
within the cells of the tentacles at the bending place appears under
the microscope thin and homogeneous, and after aggregation consists of
small, soft masses of matter, undergoing incessant changes of form and
floating in almost colourless fluid. These masses are completely
redissolved when the tentacles re-expand. Now it seems scarcely
possible that such matter should have any direct mechanical power; but
if through some molecular change it were to occupy less space than it
did before, no doubt the cell-walls would close up and contract. But in
this case it might be expected that the walls would exhibit wrinkles,
and none could ever be seen. Moreover, the contents of all the cells
seem to be of exactly the same nature, both before and after
aggregation; and yet only a few of the basal cells contract, the rest
of the tentacle remaining straight.

A third view maintained by some physiologists, [page 258] though
rejected by most others, is that the whole cell, including the walls,
actively contracts.  If the walls are composed solely of
non-nitrogenous cellulose, this view is highly improbable; but it can
hardly be doubted that they must be permeated by proteid matter, at
least whilst they are growing. Nor does there seem any inherent
improbability in the cell-walls of Drosera contracting, considering
their high state of organisation; as shown in the case of the glands by
their power of absorption and secretion, and by being exquisitely
sensitive so as to be affected by the pressure of the most minute
particles. The cell-walls of the pedicels also allow various impulses
to pass through them, inducing movement, increased secretion and
aggregation. On the whole the belief that the walls of certain cells
contract, some of their contained fluid being at the same time forced
outwards, perhaps accords best with the observed facts. If this view is
rejected, the next most probable one is that the fluid contents of the
cells shrink, owing to a change in their molecular state, with the
consequent closing in of the walls. Anyhow, the movement can hardly be
attributed to the elasticity of the walls, together with a previous
state of tension.

With respect to the nature of the motor impulse which is transmitted
from the glands down the pedicels and across the disc, it seems not
improbable that it is closely allied to that influence which causes the
protoplasm within the cells of the glands and tentacles to aggregate.
We have seen that both forces originate in and proceed from the glands
within a few seconds of the same time, and are excited by the same
causes. The aggregation of the protoplasm lasts almost as long as the
tentacles remain inflected, even though this be for more than a week;
but the [page 259] protoplasm is redissolved at the bending place
shortly before the tentacles re-expand, showing that the exciting cause
of the aggregating process has then quite ceased. Exposure to carbonic
acid causes both the latter process and the motor impulse to travel
very slowly down the tentacles. We know that the aggregating process is
delayed in passing through the cell- walls, and we have good reason to
believe that this holds good with the motor impulse; for we can thus
understand the different rates of its transmission in a longitudinal
and transverse line across the disc. Under a high power the first sign
of aggregation is the appearance of a cloud, and soon afterwards of
extremely fine granules, in the homogeneous purple fluid within the
cells; and this apparently is due to the union of molecules of
protoplasm. Now it does not seem an improbable view that the same
tendency--namely for the molecules to approach each other--should be
communicated to the inner surfaces of the cell-walls which are in
contact with the protoplasm; and if so, their molecules would approach
each other, and the cell-wall would contract.

To this view it may with truth be objected that when leaves are
immersed in various strong solutions, or are subjected to a heat of
above 130o Fahr. (54o.4 Cent.), aggregation ensues, but there is no
movement. Again, various acids and some other fluids cause rapid
movement, but no aggregation, or only of an abnormal nature, or only
after a long interval of time; but as most of these fluids are more or
less injurious, they may check or prevent the aggregating process by
injuring or killing the protoplasm. There is another and more important
difference in the two processes: when the glands on the disc are
excited, they transmit some influence up the surrounding [page 260]
tentacles, which acts on the cells at the bending place, but does not
induce aggregation until it has reached the glands; these then send
back some other influence, causing the protoplasm to aggregate, first
in the upper and then in the lower cells.

The Re-expansion of the Tentacles.--This movement is always slow and
gradual. When the centre of the leaf is excited, or a leaf is immersed
in a proper solution, all the tentacles bend directly towards the
centre, and afterwards directly back from it. But when the point of
excitement is on one side of the disc, the surrounding tentacles bend
towards it, and therefore obliquely with respect to their normal
direction; when they afterwards re-expand, they bend obliquely back, so
as to recover their original positions. The tentacles farthest from an
excited point, wherever that may be, are the last and the least
affected, and probably in consequence of this they are the first to
re-expand. The bent portion of a closely inflected tentacle is in a
state of active contraction, as shown by the following experiment. Meat
was placed on a leaf, and after the tentacles were closely inflected
and had quite ceased to move, narrow strips of the disc, with a few of
the outer tentacles attached to it, were cut off and laid on one side
under the microscope. After several failures, I succeeded in cutting
off the convex surface of the bent portion of a tentacle. Movement
immediately recommenced, and the already greatly bent portion went on
bending until it formed a perfect circle; the straight distal portion
of the tentacle passing on one side of the strip. The convex surface
must therefore have previously been in a state of tension, sufficient
to counter-balance that of the concave surface, which, when free,
curled into a complete ring.

The tentacles of an expanded and unexcited leaf [page 261] are
moderately rigid and elastic; if bent by a needle, the upper end yields
more easily than the basal and thicker part, which alone is capable of
becoming inflected. The rigidity of this basal part seems due to the
tension of the outer surface balancing a state of active and persistent
contraction of the cells of the inner surface. I believe that this is
the case, because, when a leaf is dipped into boiling water, the
tentacles suddenly become reflexed, and this apparently indicates that
the tension of the outer surface is mechanical, whilst that of the
inner surface is vital, and is instantly destroyed by the boiling
water. We can thus also understand why the tentacles as they grow old
and feeble slowly become much reflexed. If a leaf with its tentacles
closely inflected is dipped into boiling water, these rise up a little,
but by no means fully re-expand. This may be owing to the heat quickly
destroying the tension and elasticity of the cells of the convex
surface; but I can hardly believe that their tension, at any one time,
would suffice to carry back the tentacles to their original position,
often through an angle of above 180o. It is more probable that fluid,
which we know travels along the tentacles during the act of inflection,
is slowly re-attracted into the cells of the convex surface, their
tension being thus gradually and continually increased.

A recapitulation of the chief facts and discussions in this chapter
will be given at the close of the next chapter.  [page 262]




                          CHAPTER XI.

RECAPITULATION OF THE CHIEF OBSERVATIONS ON DROSERA ROTUNDIFOLIA.

As summaries have been given to most of the chapters, it will be
sufficient here to recapitulate, as briefly as I can, the chief points.
In the first chapter a preliminary sketch was given of the structure of
the leaves, and of the manner in which they capture insects. This is
effected by drops of extremely viscid fluid surrounding the glands and
by the inward movement of the tentacles. As the plants gain most of
their nutriment by this means, their roots are very poorly developed;
and they often grow in places where hardly any other plant except
mosses can exist. The glands have the power of absorption, besides that
of secretion.  They are extremely sensitive to various stimulants,
namely repeated touches, the pressure of minute particles, the
absorption of animal matter and of various fluids, heat, and galvanic
action. A tentacle with a bit of raw meat on the gland has been seen to
begin bending in 10 s., to be strongly incurved in 5 m., and to reach
the centre of the leaf in half an hour. The blade of the leaf often
becomes so much inflected that it forms a cup, enclosing any object
placed on it.

A gland, when excited, not only sends some influence down its own
tentacle, causing it to bend, but likewise to the surrounding
tentacles, which become incurved; so that the bending place can be
acted on by an impulse received from opposite directions, [page 263]
namely from the gland on the summit of the same tentacle, and from one
or more glands of the neighbouring tentacles. Tentacles, when
inflected, re-expand after a time, and during this process the glands
secrete less copiously, or become dry. As soon as they begin to secrete
again, the tentacles are ready to re-act; and this may be repeated at
least three, probably many more times.

It was shown in the second chapter that animal substances placed on the
discs cause much more prompt and energetic inflection than do inorganic
bodies of the same size, or mere mechanical irritation; but there is a
still more marked difference in the greater length of time during which
the tentacles remain inflected over bodies yielding soluble and
nutritious matter, than over those which do not yield such matter.
Extremely minute particles of glass, cinders, hair, thread,
precipitated chalk, &c., when placed on the glands of the outer
tentacles, cause them to bend. A particle, unless it sinks through the
secretion and actually touches the surface of the gland with some one
point, does not produce any effect. A little bit of thin human hair
8/1000 of an inch (.203 mm.) in length, and weighing only 1/78740 of a
grain (.000822 mg.), though largely supported by the dense secretion,
suffices to induce movement. It is not probable that the pressure in
this case could have amounted to that from the millionth of a grain.
Even smaller particles cause a slight movement, as could be seen
through a lens. Larger particles than those of which the measurements
have been given cause no sensation when placed on the tongue, one of
the most sensitive parts of the human body.

Movement ensues if a gland is momentarily touched three or four times;
but if touched only once or twice, [page 264] though with considerable
force and with a hard object, the tentacle does not bend. The plant is
thus saved from much useless movement, as during a high wind the glands
can hardly escape being occasionally brushed by the leaves of
surrounding plants. Though insensible to a single touch, they are
exquisitely sensitive, as just stated, to the slightest pressure if
prolonged for a few seconds; and this capacity is manifestly of service
to the plant in capturing small insects. Even gnats, if they rest on
the glands with their delicate feet, are quickly and securely embraced.
The glands are insensible to the weight and repeated blows of drops of
heavy rain, and the plants are thus likewise saved from much useless
movement.

The description of the movements of the tentacles was interrupted in
the third chapter for the sake of describing the process of
aggregation. This process always commences in the cells of the glands,
the contents of which first become cloudy; and this has been observed
within 10 s. after a gland has been excited. Granules just resolvable
under a very high power soon appear, sometimes within a minute, in the
cells beneath the glands; and these then aggregate into minute spheres.
The process afterwards travels down the tentacles, being arrested for a
short time at each transverse partition. The small spheres coalesce
into larger spheres, or into oval, club-headed, thread- or
necklace-like, or otherwise shaped masses of protoplasm, which,
suspended in almost colourless fluid, exhibit incessant spontaneous
changes of form.  These frequently coalesce and again separate. If a
gland has been powerfully excited, all the cells down to the base of
the tentacle are affected. In cells, especially if filled with dark red
fluid, the first step in the [page 265] process often is the formation
of a dark red, bag-like mass of protoplasm, which afterwards divides
and undergoes the usual repeated changes of form. Before any
aggregation has been excited, a sheet of colourless protoplasm,
including granules (the primordial utricle of Mohl), flows round the
walls of the cells; and this becomes more distinct after the contents
have been partially aggregated into spheres or bag-like masses. But
after a time the granules are drawn towards the central masses and
unite with them; and then the circulating sheet can no longer be
distinguished, but there is still a current of transparent fluid within
the cells.

Aggregation is excited by almost all the stimulants which induce
movement; such as the glands being touched two or three times, the
pressure of minute inorganic particles, the absorption of various
fluids, even long immersion in distilled water, exosmose, and heat. Of
the many stimulants tried, carbonate of ammonia is the most energetic
and acts the quickest:  a dose of 1/134400 of a grain (.00048 mg.)
given to a single gland suffices to cause in one hour well-marked
aggregation in the upper cells of the tentacle. The process goes on
only as long as the protoplasm is in a living, vigorous, and oxygenated
condition.

The result is in all respects exactly the same, whether a gland has
been excited directly, or has received an influence from other and
distant glands. But there is one important difference: when the central
glands are irritated, they transmit centrifugally an influence up the
pedicels of the exterior tentacles to their glands; but the actual
process of aggregation travels centripetally, from the glands of the
exterior tentacles down their pedicels. The exciting influence,
therefore, which is transmitted from [page 266] one part of the leaf to
another must be different from that which actually induces aggregation.
The process does not depend on the glands secreting more copiously than
they did before; and is independent of the inflection of the tentacles.
It continues as long as the tentacles remain inflected, and as soon as
these are fully re-expanded, the little masses of protoplasm are all
redissolved; the cells becoming filled with homogeneous purple fluid,
as they were before the leaf was excited.

As the process of aggregation can be excited by a few touches, or by
the pressure of insoluble particles, it is evidently independent of the
absorption of any matter, and must be of a molecular nature. Even when
caused by the absorption of the carbonate or other salt of ammonia, or
an infusion of meat, the process seems to be of exactly the same
nature. The protoplasmic fluid must, therefore, be in a singularly
unstable condition, to be acted on by such slight and varied causes.
Physiologists believe that when a nerve is touched, and it transmits an
influence to other parts of the nervous system, a molecular change is
induced in it, though not visible to us. Therefore it is a very
interesting spectacle to watch the effects on the cells of a gland, of
the pressure of a bit of hair, weighing only 1/78700 of a grain and
largely supported by the dense secretion, for this excessively slight
pressure soon causes a visible change in the protoplasm, which change
is transmitted down the whole length of the tentacle, giving it at last
a mottled appearance, distinguishable even by the naked eye.

In the fourth chapter it was shown that leaves placed for a short time
in water at a temperature of 110o Fahr. (43o.3 Cent.) become somewhat
inflected; they are thus also rendered more sensitive to the action
[page 267] of meat than they were before. If exposed to a temperature
of between 115o and 125o(46o.1-51o.6 Cent.), they are quickly
inflected, and their protoplasm undergoes aggregation; when afterwards
placed in cold water, they re-expand. Exposed to 130o (54o.4 Cent.), no
inflection immediately occurs, but the leaves are only temporarily
paralysed, for on being left in cold water, they often become inflected
and afterwards re-expand. In one leaf thus treated, I distinctly saw
the protoplasm in movement. In other leaves, treated in the same
manner, and then immersed in a solution of carbonate of ammonia, strong
aggregation ensued. Leaves placed in cold water, after an exposure to
so high a temperature as 145o (62o.7 Cent.), sometimes become slightly,
though slowly, inflected; and afterwards have the contents of their
cells strongly aggregated by carbonate of ammonia. But the duration of
the immersion is an important element, for if left in water at 145o
(62o.7 Cent.), or only at 140o (60o Cent.), until it becomes cool, they
are killed, and the contents of the glands are rendered white and
opaque. This latter result seems to be due to the coagulation of the
albumen, and was almost always caused by even a short exposure to 150o
(65o.5 Cent.); but different leaves, and even the separate cells in the
same tentacle, differ considerably in their power of resisting heat.
Unless the heat has been sufficient to coagulate the albumen, carbonate
of ammonia subsequently induces aggregation.

In the fifth chapter, the results of placing drops of various
nitrogenous and non-nitrogenous organic fluids on the discs of leaves
were given, and it was shown that they detect with almost unerring
certainty the presence of nitrogen. A decoction of green peas or of
fresh cabbage-leaves acts almost as powerfully as an infusion of raw
meat; whereas an infusion of cabbage- [page 268] leaves made by keeping
them for a long time in merely warm water is far less efficient. A
decoction of grass-leaves is less powerful than one of green peas or
cabbage-leaves.

These results led me to inquire whether Drosera possessed the power of
dissolving solid animal matter. The experiments proving that the leaves
are capable of true digestion, and that the glands absorb the digested
matter, are given in detail in the sixth chapter. These are, perhaps,
the most interesting of all my observations on Drosera, as no such
power was before distinctly known to exist in the vegetable kingdom. It
is likewise an interesting fact that the glands of the disc, when
irritated, should transmit some influence to the glands of the exterior
tentacles, causing them to secrete more copiously and the secretion to
become acid, as if they had been directly excited by an object placed
on them. The gastric juice of animals contains, as is well known, an
acid and a ferment, both of which are indispensable for digestion, and
so it is with the secretion of Drosera. When the stomach of an animal
is mechanically irritated, it secretes an acid, and when particles of
glass or other such objects were placed on the glands of Drosera, the
secretion, and that of the surrounding and untouched glands, was
increased in quantity and became acid. But, according to Schiff, the
stomach of an animal does not secrete its proper ferment, pepsin, until
certain substances, which he calls peptogenes, are absorbed; and it
appears from my experiments that some matter must be absorbed by the
glands of Drosera before they secrete their proper ferment.  That the
secretion does contain a ferment which acts only in the presence of an
acid on solid animal matter, was clearly proved by adding minute doses
of [page 269] an alkali, which entirely arrested the process of
digestion, this immediately recommencing as soon as the alkali was
neutralised by a little weak hydrochloric acid. From trials made with a
large number of substances, it was found that those which the secretion
of Drosera dissolves completely, or partially, or not at all, are acted
on in exactly the same manner by gastric juice. We may, therefore,
conclude that the ferment of Drosera is closely analogous to, or
identical with, the pepsin of animals.

The substances which are digested by Drosera act on the leaves very
differently. Some cause much more energetic and rapid inflection of the
tentacles, and keep them inflected for a much longer time, than do
others. We are thus led to believe that the former are more nutritious
than the latter, as is known to be the case with some of these same
substances when given to animals; for instance, meat in comparison with
gelatine. As cartilage is so tough a substance and is so little acted
on by water, its prompt dissolution by the secretion of Drosera, and
subsequent absorption is, perhaps, one of the most striking cases. But
it is not really more remarkable than the digestion of meat, which is
dissolved by this secretion in the same manner and by the same stages
as by gastric juice. The secretion dissolves bone, and even the enamel
of teeth, but this is simply due to the large quantity of acid
secreted, owing, apparently, to the desire of the plant for phosphorus.
In the case of bone, the ferment does not come into play until all the
phosphate of lime has been decomposed and free acid is present, and
then the fibrous basis is quickly dissolved. Lastly, the secretion
attacks and dissolves matter out of living seeds, which it sometimes
kills, or injures, as shown by the diseased state [page 270] of the
seedlings. It also absorbs matter from pollen, and from fragments of
leaves.

The seventh chapter was devoted to the action of the salts of ammonia.
These all cause the tentacles, and often the blade of the leaf, to be
inflected, and the protoplasm to be aggregated. They act with very
different power; the citrate being the least powerful, and the
phosphate, owing, no doubt, to the presence of phosphorus and nitrogen,
by far the most powerful. But the relative efficiency of only three
salts of ammonia was carefully determined, namely the carbonate,
nitrate, and phosphate. The experiments were made by placing
half-minims (.0296 ml.) of solutions of different strengths on the
discs of the leaves,--by applying a minute drop (about the 1/20 of a
minim, or .00296 ml.) for a few seconds to three or four glands,--and
by the immersion of whole leaves in a measured quantity. In relation to
these experiments it was necessary first to ascertain the effects of
distilled water, and it was found, as described in detail, that the
more sensitive leaves are affected by it, but only in a slight degree.

A solution of the carbonate is absorbed by the roots and induces
aggregation in their cells, but does not affect the leaves. The vapour
is absorbed by the glands, and causes inflection as well as
aggregation. A drop of a solution containing 1/960 of a grain (.0675
mg.) is the least quantity which, when placed on the glands of the
disc, excites the exterior tentacles to bend inwards. But a minute
drop, containing 1/14400 of a grain (.00445 mg.), if applied for a few
seconds to the secretion surrounding a gland, causes the inflection of
the same tentacle.  When a highly sensitive leaf is immersed in a
solution, and there is ample time for absorption, the 1/268800 of a
grain [page 271] (.00024 mg.) is sufficient to excite a single tentacle
into movement.

The nitrate of ammonia induces aggregation of the protoplasm much less
quickly than the carbonate, but is more potent in causing inflection. A
drop containing 1/2400 of a grain (.027 mg.) placed on the disc acts
powerfully on all the exterior tentacles, which have not themselves
received any of the solution; whereas a drop with 1/2800 of a grain
caused only a few of these tentacles to bend, but affected rather more
plainly the blade. A minute drop applied as before, and containing
1/28800 of a grain (.0025 mg.), caused the tentacle bearing this gland
to bend. By the immersion of whole leaves, it was proved that the
absorption by a single gland of 1/691200 of a grain (.0000937 mg.) was
sufficient to set the same tentacle into movement.

The phosphate of ammonia is much more powerful than the nitrate. A drop
containing 1/3840 of a grain (.0169 mg.) placed on the disc of a
sensitive leaf causes most of the exterior tentacles to be inflected,
as well as the blade of the leaf. A minute drop containing 1/153600 of
a grain (.000423 mg.), applied for a few seconds to a gland, acts, as
shown by the movement of the tentacle. When a leaf is immersed in
thirty minims (1.7748 ml.) of a solution of one part by weight of the
salt to 21,875,000 of water, the absorption by a gland of only the
1/19760000 of a grain (.00000328 mg.), that is, about the
one-twenty-millionth of a grain, is sufficient to cause the tentacle
bearing this gland to bend to the centre of the leaf. In this
experiment, owing to the presence of the water of crystallisation, less
than the one-thirty-millionth of a grain of the efficient elements
could have been absorbed. There is nothing remarkable in such minute
quantities being absorbed by the glands, [page 272] for all
physiologists admit that the salts of ammonia, which must be brought in
still smaller quantity by a single shower of rain to the roots, are
absorbed by them. Nor is it surprising that Drosera should be enabled
to profit by the absorption of these salts, for yeast and other low
fungoid forms flourish in solutions of ammonia, if the other necessary
elements are present.  But it is an astonishing fact, on which I will
not here again enlarge, that so inconceivably minute a quantity as the
one-twenty-millionth of a grain of phosphate of ammonia should induce
some change in a gland of Drosera, sufficient to cause a motor impulse
to be sent down the whole length of the tentacle; this impulse exciting
movement often through an angle of above 180o. I know not whether to be
most astonished at this fact, or that the pressure of a minute bit of
hair, supported by the dense secretion, should quickly cause
conspicuous movement. Moreover, this extreme sensitiveness, exceeding
that of the most delicate part of the human body, as well as the power
of transmitting various impulses from one part of the leaf to another,
have been acquired without the intervention of any nervous system.

As few plants are at present known to possess glands specially adapted
for absorption, it seemed worth while to try the effects on Drosera of
various other salts, besides those of ammonia, and of various acids.
Their action, as described in the eighth chapter, does not correspond
at all strictly with their chemical affinities, as inferred from the
classification commonly followed. The nature of the base is far more
influential than that of the acid; and this is known to hold good with
animals. For instance, nine salts of sodium all caused well-marked
inflection, and none of them were poisonous in small doses; whereas
seven of the nine corre- [page 273] sponding salts of potassium
produced no effect, two causing slight inflection. Small doses,
moreover, of some of the latter salts were poisonous. The salts of
sodium and potassium, when injected into the veins of animals, likewise
differ widely in their action. The so-called earthy salts produce
hardly any effect on Drosera. On the other hand, most of the metallic
salts cause rapid and strong inflection, and are highly poisonous; but
there are some odd exceptions to this rule; thus chloride of lead and
zinc, as well as two salts of barium, did not cause inflection, and
were not poisonous.

Most of the acids which were tried, though much diluted (one part to
437 of water), and given in small doses, acted powerfully on Drosera;
nineteen, out of the twenty-four, causing the tentacles to be more or
less inflected. Most of them, even the organic acids, are poisonous,
often highly so; and this is remarkable, as the juices of so many
plants contain acids. Benzoic acid, which is innocuous to animals,
seems to be as poisonous to Drosera as hydrocyanic. On the other hand,
hydrochloric acid is not poisonous either to animals or to Drosera, and
induces only a moderate amount of inflection. Many acids excite the
glands to secrete an extraordinary quantity of mucus; and the
protoplasm within their cells seems to be often killed, as may be
inferred from the surrounding fluid soon becoming pink. It is strange
that allied acids act very differently: formic acid induces very slight
inflection, and is not poisonous; whereas acetic acid of the same
strength acts most powerfully and is poisonous.  Lactic acid is also
poisonous, but causes inflection only after a considerable lapse of
time.  Malic acid acts slightly, whereas citric and tartaric acids
produce no effect.  [page 274]

In the ninth chapter the effects of the absorption of various alkaloids
and certain other substances were described. Although some of these are
poisonous, yet as several, which act powerfully on the nervous system
of animals, produce no effect on Drosera, we may infer that the extreme
sensibility of the glands, and their power of transmitting an influence
to other parts of the leaf, causing movement, or modified secretion, or
aggregation, does not depend on the presence of a diffused element,
