he was accomplishing was due to the power, and redounded to the glory
of David.  The old man must have rubbed it in pretty strong, for those
fierce warriors nearly came to blows in their efforts to be among the
first of those to kneel before me and kiss my hand.  When it came to
kissing Dian's I think they enjoyed it more; I know I should have.

A happy thought occurred to me as I stood upon the little deck of the
Amoz with the first of Perry's primitive cannon behind me.  When Ja
kneeled at my feet, and first to do me homage, I drew from its scabbard
at his side the sword of hammered iron that Perry had taught him to
fashion.  Striking him lightly on the shoulder I created him king of
Anoroc.  Each captain of the forty-nine other feluccas I made a  duke.
I left it to Perry to enlighten them as to the value of the honors I
had bestowed upon them.

During these ceremonies Raja and Ranee had stood beside Dian and me.
Their bellies had been well filled, but still they had difficulty in
permitting so much edible humanity to pass unchallenged.  It was a good
education for them though, and never after did they find it difficult
to associate with the human race without arousing their appetites.

After the ceremonies were over we had a chance to talk with Perry and
Ja.  The former told me that Ghak, king of Sari, had sent my letter and
map to him by a runner, and that he and Ja had at once decided to set
out on the completion of the fleet to ascertain the correctness of my
theory that the Lural Az, in which the Anoroc Islands lay, was in
reality the same ocean as that which lapped the shores of Thuria under
the name of Sojar Az, or Great Sea.

Their destination had been the island retreat of Hooja, and they had
sent word to Ghak of their plans that we might work in harmony with
them.  The tempest that had blown us off the coast of the continent had
blown them far to the south also.  Shortly before discovering us they
had come into a great group of islands, from between the largest two of
which they were sailing when they saw Hooja's fleet pursuing our dugout.

I asked Perry if he had any idea as to where we were, or in what
direction lay Hooja's island or the continent.  He replied by producing
his map, on which he had carefully marked the newly discovered
islands--there described as the Unfriendly Isles--which showed Hooja's
island northwest of us about two points West.

He then explained that with compass, chronometer, log and reel, they
had kept a fairly accurate record of their course from the time they
had set out.  Four of the feluccas were equipped with these
instruments, and all of the captains had been instructed in their use.

I was very greatly surprised at the ease with which these savages had
mastered the rather intricate detail of this unusual work, but Perry
assured me that they were a wonderfully intelligent race, and had been
quick to grasp all that he had tried to teach them.

Another thing that surprised me was the fact that so much had been
accomplished in so short a time, for I could not believe that I had
been gone from Anoroc for a sufficient period to permit of building a
fleet of fifty feluccas and mining iron ore for the cannon and balls,
to say nothing of manufacturing these guns and the crude muzzle-loading
rifles with which every Mezop was armed, as well as the gunpowder and
ammunition they had in such ample quantities.

"Time!" exclaimed Perry.  "Well, how long were you gone from Anoroc
before we picked you up in the Sojar Az?"

That was a puzzler, and I had to admit it.  I didn't know how much time
had elapsed and neither did Perry, for time is nonexistent in
Pellucidar.

"Then, you see, David," he continued, "I had almost unbelievable
resources at my disposal.  The Mezops inhabiting the Anoroc Islands,
which stretch far out to sea beyond the three principal isles with
which you are familiar, number well into the millions, and by far the
greater part of them are friendly to Ja.  Men, women, and children
turned to and worked the moment Ja explained the nature of our
enterprise.

"And not only were they anxious to do all in their power to hasten the
day when the Mahars should be overthrown, but--and this counted for
most of all--they are simply ravenous for greater knowledge and for
better ways of doing things.

"The contents of the prospector set their imaginations to working
overtime, so that they craved to own, themselves, the knowledge which
had made it possible for other men to create and build the things which
you brought back from the outer world.

"And then," continued the old man, "the element of time, or, rather,
lack of time, operated to my advantage.  There being no nights, there
was no laying off from work--they labored incessantly stopping only to
eat and, on rare occasions, to sleep.  Once we had discovered iron ore
we had enough mined in an incredibly short time to build a thousand
cannon.  I had only to show them once how a thing should be done, and
they would fall to work by thousands to do it.

"Why, no sooner had we fashioned the first muzzle-loader and they had
seen it work successfully, than fully three thousand Mezops fell to
work to make rifles.  Of course there was much confusion and lost
motion at first, but eventually Ja got them in hand, detailing squads
of them under competent chiefs to certain work.

"We now have a hundred expert gun-makers.  On a little isolated isle we
have a great powder-factory.  Near the iron-mine, which is on the
mainland, is a smelter, and on the eastern shore of Anoroc, a well
equipped ship-yard.  All these industries are guarded by forts in which
several cannon are mounted and where warriors are always on guard.

"You would be surprised now, David, at the aspect of Anoroc.  I am
surprised myself; it seems always to me as I compare it with the day
that I first set foot upon it from the deck of the Sari that only a
miracle could have worked the change that has taken place."

"It is a miracle," I said; "it is nothing short of a miracle to
transplant all the wondrous possibilities of the twentieth century back
to the Stone Age.  It is a miracle to think that only five hundred
miles of earth separate two epochs that are really ages and ages apart."

"It is stupendous, Perry! But still more stupendous is the power that
you and I wield in this great world.  These people look upon us as
little less than supermen.  We must show them that we are all of that.

"We must give them the best that we have, Perry."

"Yes," he agreed; "we must.  I have been thinking a great deal lately
that some kind of shrapnel shell or explosive bomb would be a most
splendid innovation in their warfare.  Then there are breech-loading
rifles and those with magazines that I must hasten to study out and
learn to reproduce as soon as we get settled down again; and--"

"Hold on, Perry!" I cried.  "I didn't mean these sorts of things at
all.  I said that we must give them the best we have.  What we have
given them so far has been the worst.  We have given them war and the
munitions of war.  In a single day we have made their wars infinitely
more terrible and bloody than in all their past ages they have been
able to make them with their crude, primitive weapons.

"In a period that could scarcely have exceeded two outer earthly hours,
our fleet practically annihilated the largest armada of native canoes
that the Pellucidarians ever before had gathered together.  We
butchered some eight thousand warriors with the twentieth-century gifts
we brought.  Why, they wouldn't have killed that many warriors in the
entire duration of a dozen of their wars with their own weapons!  No,
Perry; we've got to give them something better than scientific methods
of killing one another."

The old man looked at me in amazement.  There was reproach in his eyes,
too.

"Why, David!" he said sorrowfully.  "I thought that you would be
pleased with what I had done.  We planned these things together, and I
am sure that it was you who suggested practically all of it.  I have
done only what I thought you wished done and I have done it the best
that I know how."

I laid my hand on the old man's shoulder.

"Bless your heart, Perry!" I cried.  "You've accomplished miracles.
You have done precisely what I should have done, only you've done it
better.  I'm not finding fault; but I don't wish to lose sight myself,
or let you lose sight, of the greater work which must grow out of this
preliminary and necessary carnage.  First we must place the empire upon
a secure footing, and we can do so only by putting the fear of us in
the hearts of our enemies; but after that--

"Ah, Perry! That is the day I look forward to! When you and I can build
sewing-machines instead of battle-ships, harvesters of crops instead of
harvesters of men, plow-shares and telephones, schools and colleges,
printing-presses and paper! When our merchant marine shall ply the
great Pellucidarian seas, and cargoes of silks and typewriters and
books shall forge their ways where only hideous saurians have held sway
since time began!"

"Amen!" said Perry.

And Dian, who was standing at my side, pressed my hand.



CHAPTER XV

CONQUEST AND PEACE

The fleet sailed directly for Hooja's island, coming to anchor at its
north-eastern extremity before the flat-topped hill that had been
Hooja's stronghold.  I sent one of the prisoners ashore to demand an
immediate surrender; but as he told me afterward they wouldn't believe
all that he told them, so they congregated on the cliff-top and shot
futile arrows at us.

In reply I had five of the feluccas cannonade them.  When they
scampered away at the sound of the terrific explosions, and at sight of
the smoke and the iron balls I landed a couple of hundred red warriors
and led them to the opposite end of the hill into the tunnel that ran
to its summit.  Here we met a little resistance; but a volley from the
muzzle-loaders turned back those who disputed our right of way, and
presently we gained the mesa.  Here again we met resistance, but at
last the remnant of Hooja's horde surrendered.

Juag was with me, and I lost no time in returning to him and his tribe
the hilltop that had been their ancestral home for ages until they were
robbed of it by Hooja.  I created a kingdom of the island, making Juag
king there.  Before we sailed I went to Gr-gr-gr, chief of the
beast-men, taking Juag with me.  There the three of us arranged a code
of laws that would permit the brute-folk and the human beings of the
island to live in peace and harmony.  Gr-gr-gr sent his son with me
back to Sari, capital of my empire, that he might learn the ways of the
human beings.  I have hopes of turning this race into the greatest
agriculturists of Pellucidar.  When I returned to the fleet I found
that one of the islanders of Juag's tribe, who had been absent when we
arrived, had just returned from the mainland with the news that a great
army was encamped in the Land of Awful Shadow, and that they were
threatening Thuria.  I lost no time in weighing anchors and setting out
for the continent, which we reached after a short and easy voyage.

From the deck of the Amoz I scanned the shore through the glasses that
Perry had brought with him.  When we were close enough for the glasses
to be of value I saw that there was indeed a vast concourse of warriors
entirely encircling the walled-village of Goork, chief of the Thurians.
As we approached smaller objects became distinguishable.  It was then
that I discovered numerous flags and pennants floating above the army
of the besiegers.

I called Perry and passed the glasses to him.

"Ghak of Sari," I said.

Perry looked through the lenses of a moment, and then turned to me with
a smile.

"The red, white, and blue of the empire," he said.  "It is indeed your
majesty's army."

It soon became apparent that we had been sighted by those on shore, for
a great multitude of warriors had congregated along the beach watching
us.  We came to anchor as close in as we dared, which with our light
feluccas was within easy speaking-distance of the shore.  Ghak was
there and his eyes were mighty wide, too; for, as he told us later,
though he knew this must be Perry's fleet it was so wonderful to him
that he could not believe the testimony of his own eyes even while he
was watching it approach.

To give the proper effect to our meeting I commanded that each felucca
fire twenty-one guns as a salute to His Majesty Ghak, King of Sari.
Some of the gunners, in the exuberance of their enthusiasm, fired solid
shot; but fortunately they had sufficient good judg-ment to train their
pieces on the open sea, so no harm was done.  After this we landed--an
arduous task since each felucca carried but a single light dugout.

I learned from Ghak that the Thurian chieftain, Goork, had been
inclined to haughtiness, and had told Ghak, the Hairy One, that he knew
nothing of me and cared less; but I imagine that the sight of the fleet
and the sound of the guns brought him to his senses, for it was not
long before he sent a deputation to me, inviting me to visit him in his
village.  Here he apologized for the treatment he had accorded me, very
gladly swore allegiance to the empire, and received in return the title
of king.

We remained in Thuria only long enough to arrange the treaty with
Goork, among the other details of which was his promise to furnish the
imperial army with a thousand lidi, or Thurian beasts of burden, and
drivers for them.  These were to accompany Ghak's army back to Sari by
land, while the fleet sailed to the mouth of the great river from which
Dian, Juag, and I had been blown.

The voyage was uneventful.  We found the river easily, and sailed up it
for many miles through as rich and wonderful a plain as I have ever
seen.  At the head of navigation we disembarked, leaving a sufficient
guard for the feluccas, and marched the remaining distance to Sari.

Ghak's army, which was composed of warriors of all the original tribes
of the federation, showing how successful had been his efforts to
rehabilitate the empire, marched into Sari some time after we arrived.
With them were the thousand lidi from Thuria.

At a council of the kings it was decided that we should at once
commence the great war against the Mahars, for these haughty reptiles
presented the greatest obstacle to human progress within Pellucidar.  I
laid out a plan of campaign which met with the enthusiastic
indorsement of the kings.  Pursuant to it, I at once despatched fifty
lidi to the fleet with orders to fetch fifty cannon to Sari.  I also
ordered the fleet to proceed at once to Anoroc, where they were to take
aboard all the rifles and ammunition that had been completed since
their departure, and with a full complement of men to sail along the
coast in an attempt to find a passage to the inland sea near which lay
the Mahars' buried city of Phutra.

Ja was sure that a large and navigable river connected the sea of
Phutra with the Lural Az, and that, barring accident, the fleet would
be before Phutra as soon as the land forces were.

At last the great army started upon its march.  There were warriors
from every one of the federated kingdoms.  All were armed either with
bow and arrows or muzzle-loaders, for nearly the entire Mezop
contingent had been enlisted for this march, only sufficient having
been left aboard the feluccas to man them properly.  I divided the
forces into divisions, regiments, battalions, companies, and even to
platoons and sections, appointing the full complement of officers and
noncommissioned officers.  On the long march I schooled them in their
duties, and as fast as one learned I sent him among the others as a
teacher.

Each regiment was made up of about a thousand bowmen, and to each was
temporarily attached a company of Mezop musketeers and a battery of
artillery--the latter, our naval guns, mounted upon the broad backs of
the mighty lidi.  There was also one full regiment of Mezop musketeers
and a regiment of primitive spearmen.  The rest of the lidi that we
brought with us were used for baggage animals and to transport our
women and children, for we had brought them with us, as it was our
intention to march from one Mahar city to another until we had subdued
every Mahar nation that menaced the safety of any kingdom of the empire.

Before we reached the plain of Phutra we were discovered by a company
of Sagoths, who at first stood to give battle; but upon seeing the vast
numbers of our army they turned and fled toward Phutra.  The result of
this was that when we came in sight of the hundred towers which mark
the entrances to the buried city we found a great army of Sagoths and
Mahars lined up to give us battle.

At a thousand yards we halted, and, placing our artillery upon a slight
eminence at either flank, we commenced to drop solid shot among them.
Ja, who was chief artillery officer, was in command of this branch of
the service, and he did some excellent work, for his Mezop gunners had
become rather proficient by this time.  The Sagoths couldn't stand much
of this sort of warfare, so they charged us, yelling like fiends.  We
let them come quite close, and then the musketeers who formed the first
line opened up on them.

The slaughter was something frightful, but still the remnants of them
kept on coming until it was a matter of hand-to-hand fighting.  Here
our spearmen were of value, as were also the crude iron swords with
which most of the imperial warriors were armed.

We lost heavily in the encounter after the Sagoths reached us; but they
were absolutely exterminated--not one remained even as a prisoner.  The
Mahars, seeing how the battle was going, had hastened to the safety of
their buried city.  When we had overcome their gorilla-men we followed
after them.

But here we were doomed to defeat, at least temporarily; for no sooner
