men shouting, and as they passed the many levels on their quick
passage to the landing-stage they saw armed men running hither and
thither in search of the cause of the commotion.

Beside the stage lay the Thuria, with three warriors on guard.
Again the Heliumite and the Lotharian fought shoulder to shoulder,
but the battle was soon over, for the Prince of Helium alone would
have been a match for any three that Dusar could produce.

Scarce had the Thuria risen from the ways ere a hundred or more
fighting men leaped to view upon the landing-stage.  At their head
was Astok of Dusar, and as he saw the two he had thought so safely
in his power slipping from his grasp, he danced with rage and
chagrin, shaking his fists and hurling abuse and vile insults at
them.

With her bow inclined upward at a dizzy angle, the Thuria shot
meteor-like into the sky.  From a dozen points swift patrol boats
darted after her, for the scene upon the landing-stage above the
palace of the Prince of Dusar had not gone unnoticed.

A dozen times shots grazed the Thuria's side, and as Carthoris could
not leave the control levers, Thuvia of Ptarth turned the muzzles
of the craft's rapid-fire guns upon the enemy as she clung to the
steep and slippery surface of the deck.

It was a noble race and a noble fight.  One against a score now, for
other Dusarian craft had joined in the pursuit; but Astok, Prince
of Dusar, had built well when he built the Thuria.  None in the
navy of his sire possessed a swifter flier; no other craft so well
armoured or so well armed.

One by one the pursuers were distanced, and as the last of them
fell out of range behind, Carthoris dropped the Thuria's nose to a
horizontal plane, as with lever drawn to the last notch, she tore
through the thin air of dying Mars toward the east and Ptarth.

Thirteen and a half thousand haads away lay Ptarth--a stiff
thirty-hour journey for the swiftest of fliers, and between Dusar
and Ptarth might lie half the navy of Dusar, for in this direction
was the reported seat of the great naval battle that even now might
be in progress.

Could Carthoris have known precisely where the great fleets of
the contending nations lay, he would have hastened to them without
delay, for in the return of Thuvia to her sire lay the greatest
hope of peace.

Half the distance they covered without sighting a single warship,
and then Kar Komak called Carthoris's attention to a distant craft
that rested upon the ochre vegetation of the great dead sea-bottom,
above which the Thuria was speeding.

About the vessel many figures could be seen swarming.  With the
aid of powerful glasses, the Heliumite saw that they were green
warriors, and that they were repeatedly charging down upon the crew
of the stranded airship.  The nationality of the latter he could
not make out at so great a distance.

It was not necessary to change the course of the Thuria to permit
of passing directly above the scene of battle, but Carthoris dropped
his craft a few hundred feet that he might have a better and closer
view.

If the ship was of a friendly power, he could do no less than stop
and direct his guns upon her enemies, though with the precious
freight he carried he scarcely felt justified in landing, for
he could offer but two swords in reinforcement--scarce enough to
warrant jeopardizing the safety of the Princess of Ptarth.

As they came close above the stricken ship, they could see that
it would be but a question of minutes before the green horde would
swarm across the armoured bulwarks to glut the ferocity of their
bloodlust upon the defenders.

"It would be futile to descend," said Carthoris to Thuvia.  "The
craft may even be of Dusar--she shows no insignia.  All that we
may do is fire upon the hordesmen"; and as he spoke he stepped to
one of the guns and deflected its muzzle toward the green warriors
at the ship's side.

At the first shot from the Thuria those upon the vessel below
evidently discovered her for the first time.  Immediately a device
fluttered from the bow of the warship on the ground.  Thuvia of
Ptarth caught her breath quickly, glancing at Carthoris.

The device was that of Kulan Tith, Jeddak of Kaol--the man to whom
the Princess of Ptarth was betrothed!

How easy for the Heliumite to pass on, leaving his rival to the fate
that could not for long be averted!  No man could accuse him of
cowardice or treachery, for Kulan Tith was in arms against Helium,
and, further, upon the Thuria were not enough swords to delay even
temporarily the outcome that already was a foregone conclusion in
the minds of the watchers.

What would Carthoris, Prince of Helium, do?

Scarce had the device broken to the faint breeze ere the bow of
the Thuria dropped at a sharp angle toward the ground.

"Can you navigate her?" asked Carthoris of Thuvia.

The girl nodded.

"I am going to try to take the survivors aboard," he continued.
"It will need both Kar Komak and myself to man the guns while
the Kaolians take to the boarding tackle.  Keep her bow depressed
against the rifle fire.  She can bear it better in her forward
armour, and at the same time the propellers will be protected."

He hurried to the cabin as Thuvia took the control.  A moment later
the boarding tackle dropped from the keel of the Thuria, and from
a dozen points along either side stout, knotted leathern lines
trailed downward.  At the same time a signal broke from her bow:

"Prepare to board us."

A shout arose from the deck of the Kaolian warship.  Carthoris,
who by this time had returned from the cabin, smiled sadly.  He was
about to snatch from the jaws of death the man who stood between
himself and the woman he loved.

"Take the port bow gun, Kar Komak," he called to the bowman, and
himself stepped to the gun upon the starboard bow.

They could now feel the sharp shock of the explosions of the green
warriors' projectiles against the armoured sides of the staunch
_Thuria_.

It was a forlorn hope at best.  At any moment the repulsive ray
tanks might be pierced.  The men upon the Kaolian ship were battling
with renewed hope.  In the bow stood Kulan Tith, a brave figure
fighting beside his brave warriors, beating back the ferocious
green men.

The Thuria came low above the other craft.  The Kaolians were forming
under their officers in readiness to board, and then a sudden fierce
fusillade from the rifles of the green warriors vomited their hail
of death and destruction into the side of the brave flier.

Like a wounded bird she dived suddenly Marsward careening drunkenly.
Thuvia turned the bow upward in an effort to avert the imminent
tragedy, but she succeeded only in lessening the shock of the
flier's impact as she struck the ground beside the Kaolian ship.

When the green men saw only two warriors and a woman upon the deck
of the Thuria, a savage shout of triumph arose from their ranks,
while an answering groan broke from the lips of the Kaolians.

The former now turned their attention upon the new arrival, for
they saw her defenders could soon be overcome and that from her
deck they could command the deck of the better-manned ship.

As they charged a shout of warning came from Kulan Tith, upon the
bridge of his own ship, and with it an appreciation of the valour
of the act that had put the smaller vessel in these sore straits.

"Who is it," he cried, "that offers his life in the service of
Kulan Tith?  Never was wrought a nobler deed of self-sacrifice upon
Barsoom!"

The green horde was scrambling over the Thuria's side as there
broke from the bow the device of Carthoris, Prince of Helium, in
reply to the query of the jeddak of Kaol.  None upon the smaller
flier had opportunity to note the effect of this announcement upon
the Kaolians, for their attention was claimed slowly now by that
which was transpiring upon their own deck.

Kar Komak stood behind the gun he had been operating, staring with
wide eyes at the onrushing hideous green warriors.  Carthoris,
seeing him thus, felt a pang of regret that, after all, this man
that he had thought so valorous should prove, in the hour of need,
as spineless as Jav or Tario.

"Kar Komak--the man!" he shouted.  "Grip yourself!  Remember the
days of the glory of the seafarers of Lothar.  Fight!  Fight, man!
Fight as never man fought before.  All that remains to us is to
die fighting."

Kar Komak turned toward the Heliumite, a grim smile upon his lips.

"Why should we fight," he asked.  "Against such fearful odds?
There is another way--a better way.  Look!"  He pointed toward the
companion-way that led below deck.

The green men, a handful of them, had already reached the Thuria's
deck, as Carthoris glanced in the direction the Lotharian had
indicated.  The sight that met his eyes set his heart to thumping
in joy and relief--Thuvia of Ptarth might yet be saved?  For from
below there poured a stream of giant bowmen, grim and terrible.
Not the bowmen of Tario or Jav, but the bowmen of an odwar of
bowmen--savage fighting men, eager for the fray.

The green warriors paused in momentary surprise and consternation,
but only for a moment.  Then with horrid war-cries they leaped
forward to meet these strange, new foemen.

A volley of arrows stopped them in their tracks.  In a moment the
only green warriors upon the deck of the Thuria were dead warriors,
and the bowmen of Kar Komak were leaping over the vessel's sides
to charge the hordesmen upon the ground.

Utan after utan tumbled from the bowels of the Thuria to launch
themselves upon the unfortunate green men.  Kulan Tith and his
Kaolians stood wide-eyed and speechless with amazement as they
saw thousands of these strange, fierce warriors emerge from the
companion-way of the small craft that could not comfortably have
accommodated more than fifty.

At last the green men could withstand the onslaught of overwhelming
numbers no longer.  Slowly, at first, they fell back across the
ochre plain.  The bowmen pursued them.  Kar Komak, standing upon
the deck of the Thuria, trembled with excitement.

At the top of his lungs he voiced the savage war-cry of his forgotten
day.  He roared encouragement and commands at his battling utans,
and then, as they charged further and further from the Thuria, he
could no longer withstand the lure of battle.

Leaping over the ship's side to the ground, he joined the last of
his bowmen as they raced off over the dead sea-bottom in pursuit
of the fleeing green horde.

Beyond a low promontory of what once had been an island the green
men were disappearing toward the west.  Close upon their heels
raced the fleet bowmen of a bygone day, and forging steadily ahead
among them Carthoris and Thuvia could see the mighty figure of Kar
Komak, brandishing aloft the Torquasian short-sword with which he
was armed, as he urged his creatures after the retreating enemy.

As the last of them disappeared behind the promontory, Carthoris
turned toward Thuvia of Ptarth.

"They have taught me a lesson, these vanishing bowmen of Lothar,"
he said.  "When they have served their purpose they remain not
to embarrass their masters by their presence.  Kulan Tith and his
warriors are here to protect you.  My acts have constituted the
proof of my honesty of purpose.  Good-bye," and he knelt at her
feet, raising a bit of her harness to his lips.

The girl reached out a hand and laid it upon the thick black hair
of the head bent before her.  Softly she asked:

"Where are you going, Carthoris?"

"With Kar Komak, the bowman," he replied.  "There will be fighting
and forgetfulness."

The girl put her hands before her eyes, as though to shut out some
mighty temptation from her sight.

"May my ancestors have mercy upon me," she cried, "if I say the
thing I have no right to say; but I cannot see you cast your life
away, Carthoris, Prince of Helium!  Stay, my chieftain.  Stay--I
love you!"

A cough behind them brought both about, and there they saw standing,
not two paces from them Kulan Tith, Jeddak of Kaol.

For a long moment none spoke.  Then Kulan Tith cleared his throat.

"I could not help hearing all that passed," he said.  "I am no fool,
to be blind to the love that lies between you.  Nor am I blind to
the lofty honour that has caused you, Carthoris, to risk your life
and hers to save mine, though you thought that that very act would
rob you of the chance to keep her for your own.

"Nor can I fail to appreciate the virtue that has kept your lips
sealed against words of love for this Heliumite, Thuvia, for I know
that I have but just heard the first declaration of your passion
for him.  I do not condemn you.  Rather should I have condemned
you had you entered a loveless marriage with me.

"Take back your liberty, Thuvia of Ptarth," he cried, "and bestow
it where your heart already lies enchained, and when the golden
collars are clasped about your necks you will see that Kulan Tith's
is the first sword to be raised in declaration of eternal friendship
for the new Princess of Helium and her royal mate!"




A GLOSSARY OF NAMES AND TERMS USED IN THE MARTIAN BOOKS

Aaanthor.  A dead city of ancient Mars.

Aisle of Hope.  An aisle leading to the court-room in Helium.

Apt.  An Arctic monster.  A huge, white-furred creature with
      six limbs, four of which, short and heavy, carry it over
      the snow and ice; the other two, which grow forward
      from its shoulders on either side of its long, powerful
      neck, terminate in white, hairless hands with which it
      seizes and holds its prey.  Its head and mouth are
      similar in appearance to those of a hippopotamus,
      except that from the sides of the lower jawbone two
      mighty horns curve slightly downward toward the front.
      Its two huge eyes extend in two vast oval patches from
      the centre of the top of the cranium down either side
      of the head to below the roots of the horns, so that
      these weapons really grow out from the lower part of
      the eyes, which are composed of several thousand ocelli
      each.  Each ocellus is furnished with its own lid, and
      the apt can, at will, close as many of the facets of
      his huge eyes as he chooses.  (See THE WARLORD OF MARS.)

Astok.  Prince of Dusar.

Avenue of Ancestors.  A street in Helium.

Banth.  Barsoomian lion.  A fierce beast of prey that roams
      the low hills surrounding the dead seas of ancient Mars.
      It is almost hairless, having only a great, bristly mane
      about its thick neck.  Its long, lithe body is supported
      by ten powerful legs, its enormous jaws are equipped
      with several rows of long needle-like fangs, and its
      mouth reaches to a point far back of its tiny ears.  It
      has enormous protruding eyes of green.  (See THE GODS
      OF MARS.)

Bar Comas.  Jeddak of Warhoon.  (See A PRINCESS OF MARS.)

Barsoom.  MARS.

Black pirates of Barsoom.  Men six feet and over in height.
      Have clear-cut and handsome features; their eyes are
      well set and large, though a slight narrowness lends
      them a crafty appearance.  The iris is extremely black
      while the eyeball itself is quite white and clear.  Their
      skin has the appearance of polished ebony.  (See THE
      GODS OF MARS.)
