"We got updates," Rita said. "That's why we're back -- we couldn't let
it go on the way it was. We owed it to Debra."

"And Lillian," Tom said.

"And Lillian," Rita said, absently.

Dan pulled up a chair of his own. "You're not being fair to him," he
said. At least someone was on my side.

"We've been more than fair," Lil said. "You know that better than
anyone, Dan. We've forgiven and forgiven and forgiven, made every
allowance. He's sick and he won't take the cure. There's nothing more we
can do for him."

"You could be his friend," Dan said. The light-headedness was back, and
I slumped in my chair, tried to control my breathing, the panicked
thumping of my heart.

"You could try to understand, you could try to help him. You could stick
with him, the way he stuck with you. You don't have to toss him out on
his ass."

Lil had the good grace to look slightly shamed. "I'll get him a room,"
she said. "For a month. In Kissimmee. A motel. I'll pick up his network
access. Is that fair?"

"It's more than fair," Rita said. Why did she hate me so much? I'd been
there for her daughter while she was away -- ah. That might do it, all
right. "I don't think it's warranted. If you want to take care of him,
sir, you can. It's none of my family's business."

Lil's eyes blazed. "Let me handle this," she said. "All right?"

Rita stood up abruptly. "You do whatever you want," she said, and
stormed out of the room.

"Why are you coming here for help?" Tom said, ever the voice of reason.
"You seem capable enough."

"I'm going to be taking a lethal injection at the end of the week," Dan
said. "Three days. That's personal, but you asked."

Tom shook his head. _Some friends you've got yourself_, I could see him
thinking it.

"That soon?" Lil asked, a throb in her voice.

Dan nodded.

In a dreamlike buzz, I stood and wandered out into the utilidor, out
through the western castmember parking, and away.

I wandered along the cobbled, disused Walk Around the World, each
flagstone engraved with the name of a family that had visited the Park a
century before. The names whipped past me like epitaphs.

The sun came up noon high as I rounded the bend of deserted beach
between the Grand Floridian and the Polynesian. Lil and I had come here
often, to watch the sunset from a hammock, arms around each other, the
Park spread out before us like a lighted toy village.

Now the beach was deserted, the Wedding Pavilion silent. I felt suddenly
cold though I was sweating freely. So cold.

Dreamlike, I walked into the lake, water filling my shoes, logging my
pants, warm as blood, warm on my chest, on my chin, on my mouth, on my
eyes.

I opened my mouth and inhaled deeply, water filling my lungs, choking
and warm. At first I sputtered, but I was in control now, and I inhaled
again. The water shimmered over my eyes, and then was dark.

#

I woke on Doctor Pete's cot in the Magic Kingdom, restraints around my
wrists and ankles, a tube in my nose. I closed my eyes, for a moment
believing that I'd been restored from a backup, problems solved,
memories behind me.

Sorrow knifed through me as I realized that Dan was probably dead by
now, my memories of him gone forever.

Gradually, I realized that I was thinking nonsensically. The fact that I
remembered Dan meant that I hadn't been refreshed from my backup, that
my broken brain was still there, churning along in unmediated isolation.

I coughed again. My ribs ached and throbbed in counterpoint to my head.
Dan took my hand.

"You're a pain in the ass, you know that?" he said, smiling.

"Sorry," I choked.

"You sure are," he said. "Lucky for you they found you -- another minute
or two and I'd be burying you right now."

_No_, I thought, confused. _They'd have restored me from backup_. Then
it hit me: I'd gone on record refusing restore from backup after having
it recommended by a medical professional. No one would have restored me
after that. I would have been truly and finally dead. I started to
shiver.

"Easy," Dan said. "Easy. It's all right now. Doctor says you've got a
cracked rib or two from the CPR, but there's no brain damage."

"No _additional_ brain damage," Doctor Pete said, swimming into view. He
had on his professionally calm bedside face, and it reassured me despite
myself.

He shooed Dan away and took his seat. Once Dan had left the room, he
shone lights in my eyes and peeked in my ears, then sat back and
considered me. "Well, Julius," he said. "What exactly is the problem? We
can get you a lethal injection if that's what you want, but offing
yourself in the Seven Seas Lagoon just isn't good show. In the meantime,
would you like to talk about it?"

Part of me wanted to spit in his eye. I'd tried to talk about it and
he'd told me to go to hell, and now he changes his mind? But I did want
to talk.

"I didn't want to die," I said.

"Oh no?" he said. "I think the evidence suggests the contrary."

"I wasn't trying to die," I protested. "I was trying to --" What? I was
trying to. . ._abdicate_. Take the refresh without choosing it, without
shutting out the last year of my best friend's life. Rescue myself from
the stinking pit I'd sunk into without flushing Dan away along with it.
That's all, that's all.

"I wasn't thinking -- I was just acting. It was an episode or something.
Does that mean I'm nuts?"

"Oh, probably," Doctor Pete said, offhandedly. "But let's worry about
one thing at a time. You can die if you want to, that's your right. I'd
rather you lived, if you want my opinion, and I doubt that I'm the only
one, Whuffie be damned. If you're going to live, I'd like to record you
saying so, just in case. We have a backup of you on file -- I'd hate to
have to delete it."

"Yes," I said. "Yes, I'd like to be restored if there's no other
option." It was true. I didn't want to die.

"All right then," Doctor Pete said. "It's on file and I'm a happy man.
Now, are you nuts? Probably. A little. Nothing a little counseling and
some R&R wouldn't fix, if you want my opinion. I could find you
somewhere if you want."

"Not yet," I said. "I appreciate the offer, but there's something else I
have to do first."

#

Dan took me back to the room and put me to bed with a transdermal
soporific that knocked me out for the rest of the day. When I woke, the
moon was over the Seven Seas Lagoon and the monorail was silent.

I stood on the patio for a while, thinking about all the things this
place had meant to me for more than a century: happiness, security,
efficiency, fantasy. All of it gone. It was time I left. Maybe back to
space, find Zed and see if I could make her happy again. Anywhere but
here. Once Dan was dead -- God, it was sinking in finally -- I could
catch a ride down to the Cape for a launch.

"What's on your mind?" Dan asked from behind me, startling me. He was in
his boxers, thin and rangy and hairy.

"Thinking about moving on," I said.

He chuckled. "I've been thinking about doing the same," he said.

I smiled. "Not that way," I said. "Just going somewhere else, starting
over. Getting away from this."

"Going to take the refresh?" he asked.

I looked away. "No," I said. "I don't believe I will."

"It may be none of my business," he said, "but why the fuck not? Jesus,
Julius, what're you afraid of?"

"You don't want to know," I said.

"I'll be the judge of that."

"Let's have a drink, first," I said.

Dan rolled his eyes back for a second, then said, "All right, two
Coronas, coming up."

After the room-service bot had left, we cracked the beers and pulled
chairs out onto the porch.

"You sure you want to know this?" I asked.

He tipped his bottle at me. "Sure as shootin'," he said.

"I don't want refresh because it would mean losing the last year," I
said.

He nodded. "By which you mean 'my last year,'" he said. "Right?"

I nodded and drank.

"I thought it might be like that. Julius, you are many things, but hard
to figure out you are not. I have something to say that might help you
make the decision. If you want to hear it, that is."

What could he have to say? "Sure," I said. "Sure." In my mind, I was on
a shuttle headed for orbit, away from all of this.

"I had you killed," he said. "Debra asked me to, and I set it up. You
were right all along."

The shuttle exploded in silent, slow moving space, and I spun away from
it. I opened and shut my mouth.

It was Dan's turn to look away. "Debra proposed it. We were talking
about the people I'd met when I was doing my missionary work, the stone
crazies who I'd have to chase away after they'd rejoined the Bitchun
Society. One of them, a girl from Cheyenne Mountain, she followed me
down here, kept leaving me messages. I told Debra, and that's when she
got the idea.

"I'd get the girl to shoot you and disappear. Debra would give me
Whuffie -- piles of it, and her team would follow suit. I'd be months
closer to my goal. That was all I could think about back then, you
remember."

"I remember." The smell of rejuve and desperation in our little cottage,
and Dan plotting my death.

"We planned it, then Debra had herself refreshed from a backup -- no
memory of the event, just the Whuffie for me."

"Yes," I said. That would work. Plan a murder, kill yourself, have
yourself refreshed from a backup made before the plan. How many times
had Debra done terrible things and erased their memories that way?

"Yes," he agreed. "We did it, I'm ashamed to say. I can prove it, too --
I have my backup, and I can get Jeanine to tell it, too." He drained his
beer. "That's my plan. Tomorrow. I'll tell Lil and her folks, Kim and
her people, the whole ad-hoc. A going-away present from a shitty
friend."

My throat was dry and tight. I drank more beer. "You knew all along," I
said. "You could have proved it at any time."

He nodded. "That's right."

"You let me. . ." I groped for the words. "You let me turn into. . ."
They wouldn't come.

"I did," he said.

All this time. Lil and he, standing on _my_ porch, telling me I needed
help. Doctor Pete, telling me I needed refresh from backup, me saying
no, no, no, not wanting to lose my last year with Dan.

"I've done some pretty shitty things in my day," he said. "This is the
absolute worst. You helped me and I betrayed you. I'm sure glad I don't
believe in God -- that'd make what I'm going to do even scarier."

Dan was going to kill himself in two days' time. My friend and my
murderer. "Dan," I croaked. I couldn't make any sense of my mind. Dan,
taking care of me, helping me, sticking up for me, carrying this
horrible shame with him all along. Ready to die, wanting to go with a
clean conscience.

"You're forgiven," I said. And it was true.

He stood.

"Where are you going" I asked.

"To find Jeanine, the one who pulled the trigger. I'll meet you at the
Hall of Presidents at nine a.m.."

#

I went in through the Main Gate, not a castmember any longer, a Guest
with barely enough Whuffie to scrape in, use the water fountains and
stand in line. If I were lucky, a castmember might spare me a chocolate
banana. Probably not, though.

I stood in the line for the Hall of Presidents. Other guests checked my
Whuffie, then averted their eyes. Even the children. A year before,
they'd have been striking up conversations, asking me about my job here
at the Magic Kingdom.

I sat in my seat at the Hall of Presidents, watching the short film with
the rest, sitting patiently while they rocked in their seats under the
blast of the flash-bake. A castmember picked up the stageside mic and
thanked everyone for coming; the doors swung open and the Hall was
empty, except for me. The castmember narrowed her eyes at me, then
recognizing me, turned her back and went to show in the next group.

No group came. Instead, Dan and the girl I'd seen on the replay entered.

"We've closed it down for the morning," he said.

I was staring at the girl, seeing her smirk as she pulled the trigger on
me, seeing her now with a contrite, scared expression. She was terrified
of me.

"You must be Jeanine," I said. I stood and shook her hand. "I'm Julius."

Her hand was cold, and she took it back and wiped it on her pants.

My castmember instincts took over. "Please, have a seat. Don't worry,
it'll all be fine. Really. No hard feelings." I stopped short of
offering to get her a glass of water.

_Put her at her ease_, said a snotty voice in my head. _She'll make a
better witness. Or make her nervous, pathetic -- that'll work, too; make
Debra look even worse_.

I told the voice to shut up and got her a cup of water.

By the time I came back, the whole gang was there. Debra, Lil, her
folks, Tim. Debra's gang and Lil's gang, now one united team. Soon to be
scattered.

Dan took the stage, used the stageside mic to broadcast his voice.
"Eleven months ago, I did an awful thing. I plotted with Debra to have
Julius murdered. I used a friend who was a little confused at the time,
used her to pull the trigger. It was Debra's idea that having Julius
killed would cause enough confusion that she could take over the Hall of
Presidents. It was."
