
"Very good, Scriver, very good indeed. In fact, if I were put in the
witness-box I am not sure that I would be able to swear that this was
not my signature. What's this you have said in the body of the letter
about sentiment? Not making me write anything sentimental, I hope. Be
careful, my boy, I don't want the newspapers to get hold of anything
that they could turn into ridicule. They are too apt to do that sort of
thing if they get half a chance."

"Oh, I think you will find that all right," said the young man; "still
I thought it best to submit it to you before sending it off. You see
the lady who writes has been getting up a 'Ringamy Club' in Kalamazoo,
and she asks you to give her an autographic sentiment which they will
cherish as the motto of the club. So I wrote the sentence, 'All classes
of labor should have equal compensation.' If that won't do, I can
easily change it.'

"Oh, that will do first rate--first rate."

"Of course it is awful rot, but I thought it would please the feminine
mind."

"Awful _what_ did you say, Mr. Scriver?"

"Well, slush--if that expresses it better. Of course, you don't believe
any such nonsense."

Mr. Johnson Ringamy frowned as he looked at his secretary.

"I don't think I understand you," he said, at last.

"Well, look here, Mr. Ringamy, speaking now, not as a paid servant to
his master, but----"

"Now, Scriver, I won't have any talk like that. There is no master or
servant idea between us. There oughtn't to be between anybody. All men
are free and equal."

"They are in theory, and in my eye, as I might say if I wanted to make
it more expressive."

"Scriver, I cannot congratulate you on your expressive language, if I
may call it so. But we are wandering from the argument. You were going
to say that speaking as----Well, go on."

"I was going to say that, speaking as one reasonably sensible man to
another, without any gammon about it; don't you think it is rank
nonsense to hold that one class of labor should be as well compensated
as another. Honestly now?"

The author sat back in his chair and gazed across the table at his
secretary. Finally, he said:

"My dear Scriver, you can't really mean what you say. You know that I
hold that all classes of labor should have exactly the same
compensation. The miner, the blacksmith, the preacher, the postal
clerk, the author, the publisher, the printer--yes, the man who sweeps
out the office, or who polishes boots, should each share alike, if this
world were what it should be--yes, and what it _will_ be. Why,
Scriver, you surely couldn't have read my book----"

"Read it? why, hang it, I _wrote_ it."

"You wrote it? The deuce you did! I always thought I was the author of
----"

"So you are. But didn't I take it all down in shorthand, and didn't I
whack it out on the type-writer, and didn't I go over the proof sheets
with you. And yet you ask me if I have read it!"

"Oh, yes, quite right, I see what you mean. Well, if you paid as much
attention to the arguments as you did to the mechanical production of
the book, I should think you would not ask if I really meant what I
said."

"Oh, I suppose you meant it all right enough--in a way--in theory,
perhaps, but----"

"My dear sir, allow me to say that a theory which is not practical, is
simply no theory at all. The great success of 'Gazing Upward,' has been
due to the fact that it is an eminently practical work. The
nationalization of everything is not a matter of theory. The ideas
advocated in that book, can be seen at work at any time. Look at the
Army, look at the Post Office."

"Oh, that's all right, looking at things in bulk. Let us come down to
practical details. Detail is the real test of any scheme. Take this
volume, 'Gazing Upward.' Now, may I ask how much this book has netted
you up to date?"

"Oh, I don't know exactly. Somewhere in the neighborhood of L20,000."

"Very well then. Now let us look for a moment at the method by which
that book was produced. You walked up and down this room with your
hands behind your back, and dictated chapter after chapter, and I sat
at this table taking it all down in shorthand. Then you went out and
took the air while I industriously whacked it out on the type-writer."

"I wish you wouldn't say 'whacked,' Scriver. That's twice you've used
it."

"All right:--typographical error--For 'whacked' read 'manipulated.'
Then you looked over the type-written pages, and I erased and wrote in
and finally got out a perfect copy. Now I worked as hard--probably
harder--than you did, yet the success of that book was entirely due to
you, and not to me. Therefore it is quite right that you should get
L20,000 and that I should get two pounds a week. Come now, isn't it?
Speaking as a man of common sense."

"Speaking exactly in that way I say no it is not right. If the world
were properly ruled the compensation of author and secretary would have
been exactly the same."

"Oh, well, if you go so far as that," replied the Secretary, "I have
nothing more to say."

The author laughed, and the two men bent their energies to the
correspondence. When the task was finished, Scriver said:

"I would like to get a couple of days off, Mr. Ringamy. I have some
private business to attend to."

"When could you get back?"

"I'll report to you on Thursday morning."

"Very well, then. Not later than Thursday. I think I'll take a couple
of days off myself."

      *      *      *      *      *

On Thursday morning Mr. Johnson Ringamy sat in his library looking out
of the window, but the day was not as pleasant as when he last gazed at
the hills, and the woods, and green fields. A wild spring storm lashed
the landscape, and rattled the raindrops against the pane. Mr. Ringamy
waited for some time and then opened the study door and looked in. The
little room was empty. He rang the bell, and the trim servant-girl
appeared.

"Has Mr. Scriver come in yet?"

"No, sir, he haven't."

"Perhaps the rain has kept him."

"Mr. Scriver said that when you come back, sir, there was a letter on
the table as was for you."

"Ah, so there is. Thank you, that will do."

The author opened the letter and read as follows:

"MY DEAR MR. RINGAMY,--Your arguments the other day fully convinced me
that you were right, and I was wrong ("Ah! I thought they would,"
murmured the author). I have therefore taken a step toward putting your
theories into practice. The scheme is an old one in commercial life,
but new in its present application, so much so that I fear it will find
no defenders except yourself, and I trust that now when I am far away
("Dear me, what does this mean!" cried the author) you will show any
doubters that I acted on the principles which will govern the world
when the theories of 'Gazing Upward' are put into practice. For fear
that all might not agree with you at present, I have taken the
precaution of going to that undiscovered country, from whose bourne no
extradition treaty forces the traveler to return--sunny Spain. You said
you could not tell my rendition of your signature from your own.
Neither could the bank cashier. My exact mutation of your signature has
enabled me to withdraw L10,000 from your bank account. Half the
profits, you know. You can send future accumulations, for the book will
continue to sell, to the address of
                                     "ADAM SCRIVER.
_"Poste Restant, Madrid, Spain"_


Mr. Ringamy at once put the case in the hands of the detectives, where
it still remains.




A SLIPPERY CUSTOMER.


When John Armstrong stepped off the train at the Union Station, in
Toronto, Canada, and walked outside, a small boy accosted him.

"Carry your valise up for you, sir?"

"No, thank you," said Mr. Armstrong.

"Carry it up for ten cents, sir?"

"No."

"Take it up for five cents, sir?"

"Get out of my way, will you?"

The boy got out of the way, and John Armstrong carried the valise
himself.

There was nearly half a million dollars in it, so Mr. Armstrong thought
it best to be his own porter.

      *      *      *      *      *

In the bay window of one of the handsomest residences in Rochester, New
York, sat Miss Alma Temple, waiting for her father to come home from
the bank. Mr. Horace Temple was one of the solid men of Rochester, and
was president of the Temple National Bank. Although still early in
December, the winter promised to be one of the most severe for many
years, and the snow lay crisp and hard on the streets, but not enough
for sleighing. It was too cold for snow, the weatherwise said. Suddenly
Miss Alma drew back from the window with a quick flush on her face that
certainly was not caused by the coming of her father. A dapper young
man sprang lightly up the steps, and pressed the electric button at the
door. When the young man entered the room a moment later Miss Alma was
sitting demurely by the open fire. He advanced quickly toward her, and
took both her outstretched hands in his. Then, furtively looking around
the room, he greeted her still more affectionately, in a manner that
the chronicler of these incidents, is not bound to particularize.
However, the fact may be mentioned that whatever resistance the young
woman thought fit to offer was of the faintest and most futile kind,
and so it will be understood, at the beginning, that these two young
persons had a very good understanding with each other.

"You seem surprised to see me," he began.

"Well, Walter, I understood that you left last time with some
energetically expressed resolutions never to darken our doors again."

"Well, you see, my dear, I am sometimes a little hasty; and, in fact,
the weather is so dark nowadays, anyhow, that a little extra darkness
does not amount to much, and so I thought I would take the risk of
darkening them once more."

"But I also understood that my father made you promise, or that you
promised voluntarily, not to see me again without his permission?"

"Not voluntarily. Far from it. Under compulsion, I assure you. But I
didn't come to see you at all. That's where you are mistaken. The
seeing you is merely an accident, which I have done my best to avoid.
Fact! The girl said, 'Won't you walk into the drawing-room,' and
naturally I did so. Never expected to find you here. I thought I saw a
young lady at the window as I came up, but I got such a momentary
glimpse that I might have been mistaken."

"Then I will leave you and not interrupt----"

"Not at all. Now I beg of you not to leave on my account, Alma. You
know I would not put you to any trouble for the world."

"You are very kind, I am sure, Mr. Brown."

"I am indeed, Miss Temple. All my friends admit that. But now that you
are here--by the way, I came to see Mr. Temple. Is he at home?"

"I am expecting him every moment."

"Oh, well, I'm disappointed; but I guess I will bear up for awhile--
until he comes, you know."

"I thought your last interview with him was not so pleasant that you
would so soon seek another."

"The fact is, Alma, we both lost our tempers a bit, and no good ever
comes of that. You can't conduct business in a heat, you know."

"Oh, then the asking of his daughter's hand was business--a mere
business proposition, was it?"

"Well, I confess he put it that way--very strongly, too. Of course,
with me there would have been pleasure mixed with it if he had--but he
didn't. See here, Alma--tell me frankly (of course he talked with you
about it) what objection he has to me anyhow."

"I suppose you consider yourself such a desirable young man that it
astonishes you greatly that any person should have any possible
objection to you?"

"Oh, come now, Alma; don't hit a fellow when he's down, you know. I
don't suppose I have more conceit than the average young man; but then,
on the other hand, I am not such a fool, despite appearances, as not to
know that I am considered by some people as quite an eligible
individual. I am not a pauper exactly, and your father knows that. I
don't think I have many very bad qualities. I don't get drunk; I don't
--oh, I could give quite a list of the things I don't do."

"You are certainly frank enough, my eligible young man. Still you must
not forget that my papa is considered quite an eligible father-in-law,
if it comes to that."

"Why, of course, I admit it. How could it be otherwise when he has such
a charming daughter?"

"You know I don't mean that, Walter. You were speaking of wealth and so
was I. Perhaps we had better change the subject."

"By the way, that reminds me of what I came to see you about. What do----"

"To see me? I thought you came to see my father."

"Oh, yes--certainly--I did come to see him, of course, but in case I
saw you, I thought I would ask you for further particulars in the case.
I have asked you the question but you have evaded the answer. You did
not tell me why he is so prejudiced against me. Why did he receive me
in such a gruff manner when I spoke to him about it? It is not a
criminal act to ask a man for his daughter. It is not, I assure you. I
looked up the law on the subject, and a young friend of mine, who is a
barrister, says there is no statute in the case made and provided. The
law of the State of New York does not recognize my action as against
the peace and prosperity of the commonwealth. Well, he received me as
if I had been caught robbing the bank. Now I propose to know what the
objection is. I am going to hear----"

"Hush! Here is papa now."

Miss Alma quickly left the room, and met her father in the hall. Mr.
Brown stood with his hands in his pockets and his back to the fire. He
heard the gruff voice of Mr. Temple say, apparently in answer to some
information given him by his daughter: "Is he? What does he want?"

There was a moment's pause, and then the same voice said:

"Very well, I will see him in the library in a few minutes."

Somehow the courage of young Mr. Brown sank as he heard the banker's
voice, and the information he had made up his mind to demand with some
hauteur, he thought he would ask, perhaps, in a milder manner.

Mr. Brown brightened up as the door opened, but it was not Miss Alma
who came in. The servant said to him:

"Mr. Temple is in the library, sir. Will you come this way!"

He followed and found the banker seated at his library table, on which
he had just placed some legal-looking papers, bound together with a
thick rubber band. It was evident that his work did not stop when he
left the bank. Young Brown noticed that Mr. Temple looked careworn and
haggard, and that his manner was very different from what it had been
on the occasion of the last interview.

"Good evening, Mr. Brown. I am glad you called. I was on the point of
writing to you, but the subject of our talk the other night was crowded
from my mind by more important matters."

Young Mr. Brown thought bitterly that there ought not to be matters
more important to a father than his daughter's happiness, but he had
the good sense not to say so.

"I spoke to you on that occasion with a--in a manner that was--well,
hardly excusable, and I wish to say that I am sorry I did so. What I
had to state might have been stated with more regard for your
feelings."

"Then may I hope, Mr. Temple, that you have changed your mind with----"

"No, sir. What I said then--that is, the substance of what I said, not
the manner of saying it--I still adhere to."

"May I ask what objection you have to me?"

"Certainly. I have the same objection that I have to the majority of
the society young men of the present day. If I make inquiries about
you, what do I find? That you are a noted oarsman--that you have no
profession--that your honors at college consisted in being captain of
the football team, and----"

"No, no, the baseball club."

"Same thing, I suppose."

"Quite different, I assure you, Mr. Temple."

"Well, it is the same to me at any rate. Now, in my time young men had
a harder row to hoe, and they hoed it. I am what they call a self-made
man and probably I have a harsher opinion of the young men of the
present day than I should have. But if I had a son I would endeavor to
have him know how to do something, and then I would see that he did
it."

"I am obliged to you for stating your objection, Mr. Temple. I have
taken my degree in Harvard law school, but I have never practiced,
because, as the little boy said, I didn't have to. Perhaps if some one
had spoken to me as you have done I would have pitched in and gone to
work. It is not too late yet. Will you give me a chance? The position
of cashier in your bank, for instance?"

The effect of these apparently innocent words on Mr. Temple was
startling. He sprang to his feet and brought down his clenched fist on
the table with a vehemence that made young Mr. Brown jump. "What do you
mean, sir?" he cried, sternly. "What do you mean by saying such a
thing?"

"Why, I--I--I--mean----" stammered Brown, but he could get no further. He
thought the old man had suddenly gone crazy. He glared across the
library table at Brown as if the next instant he would spring at his
throat. Then the haggard look came into his face again, he passed his
hand across his brow, and sank into his chair with a groan.

"My dear sir," said Brown, approaching him, "what is the matter? Is
there anything I can----"

"Sit down, please," answered the banker, melancholy. "You will excuse
me I hope, I am very much troubled. I did not intend to speak of it,
but some explanation is due to you. A month from now, if you are the
kind of man that most of your fellows are, you will not wish to marry
my daughter. There is every chance that at that time the doors of my
bank will be closed."

"You astonish me, sir. I thought----"

"Yes, and so every one thinks. I have seldom in my life trusted the
wrong man, but this time I have done so, and the one mistake seems
likely to obliterate all that I have succeeded in doing in a life of
hard work."

"If I can be of any financial assistance I will be glad to help you."

"How much?"

"Well, I don't know--50,000 dollars perhaps or----"

"I must have 250,000 dollars before the end of this month."

"Two hundred and fifty thousand!"

"Yes, sir. William L. Staples, the cashier of our bank, is now in
Canada with half a million of the bank funds. No one knows it but
myself and one or two of the directors. It is generally supposed that
he has gone to Washington on a vacation."

"But can't you put detectives on his track?"

"Certainly. Then the theft would be made public at once. The papers
would be full of it. There might be a run on the bank, and we would
have to close the doors the next day. To put the detectives on his
track would merely mean bringing disaster on our own heads. Staples is
quite safe, and he knows it. Thanks to an idiotic international
arrangement he is as free from danger of arrest in Canada as you are
