We were not long in finding, on all sides, evidence that our trip up
through the cloud dome had been a master stroke, and that the presumable
incredulity of Ingra with regard to our claims was not shared by others.
He might have his intimates, who entertained prejudices against us
resembling his own, but if so we saw nothing of them. In fact, Ingra was
much less in evidence than before, but I did not feel reassured by that;
on the contrary, it made me all the more fearful of some plot on his
part, and Jack was decidedly of my opinion.

"Hang him!" he said, "he's up to some mischief, and I know it. Much as I
detest him, I'd rather have him _in_ sight than _out_, just now. He makes
me feel like a snake in a bush; if he'd only show his ugly head, or
spring his rattle, I'd be more comfortable."

But the kindness and deference with which we were treated, and the new
wonders that were shown to us in the capital, gradually drove Ingra from
our minds. Now we were permitted to enter the temples without opposition,
our presence there according with our new character of "children of the
sun." We saw the worship that was offered before the solar images by
family parties, and attended, as favored guests, the periodical
ceremonies in the great temple. Edmund confessed that the high priest
greatly embarrassed him by staring into his eyes, and plainly assuming
that he knew things of which he was profoundly ignorant.

"The hardest thing I ever undertook," he said, "is to hold my mind in
suspense during these trying interviews, when he endeavors to read the
depths of my soul, and I to throw a veil over them which he cannot
penetrate."

In some way, Edmund discovered that the high priest and all the priests
connected with the sun worship (and they certainly bore a family
likeness) belonged to a special race, whose roots ran back into the most
remote antiquity, and about whose persons clung a sacredness that placed
them, in some respects, above the royal family itself. We frequently
visited the great library, where Edmund undertook a study of the language
of the printed rolls, though what he made of it I never clearly
understood. I do not think that he succeeded in deciphering any of it. He
also spent much time studying their mechanics and engineering, for which
he professed great admiration.

But most interesting of all to us was what Edmund himself accomplished. I
have told you of his remark about the color-sound music, viz., that he
thought it not impossible that even human senses might be enabled to
appreciate it. Well, he actually realized that wildly improbable dream!
He fitted up a laboratory of his own in which he labored sometimes for
twenty hours at a stretch, and at last he brought to us the astonishing
invention he had made.

I can make no pretense of understanding it; although Edmund declared
that, in substance, it was no more wonderful than a telephone. The
machine consisted of a little metal box. (He made three of them, and I
have mine yet, but it will not work on the earth, and it lies on my table
as I write, serving for the most wonderful paper weight that a man ever
possessed.) When this box was pressed against the ear in front of one of
the revolving disks that threw out blending colors, or in the presence of
a "singing" bird, the most divine harmonies seemed to awake _in the
brain_. I cannot make the slightest approach to a description of the
marvelous phenomenon. One felt his whole being infused with ecstatic
joy. It was the very soul of music itself, celestial, ineffable! The
wonder-box also enabled us to catch many sounds peculiar to the
atmosphere of Venus, formed of vibrations, as Edmund had explained, that
lie outside our gamut. But to these, apart from the music, I could never
listen. They were _too_ abnormal, filling one with inexplicable terror,
as if he had been snatched out of nature and compelled to listen to the
sounds of a preternatural world. The only sound that I ever heard with my
natural ear which bore the slightest resemblance to these was the awful
piercing whistle of the monster that killed Ala's man.

Yet we derived immense pleasure from the possession of those little
boxes. With their aid, we could appreciate the exquisite melodies that
were played everywhere--in great halls where thousands were assembled, in
the temples great and small, and in the homes of the people, to which we
were often admitted. In every house there was on one of the walls a
"musical rose," whose harmonies entranced the visitor. And the variety of
musical _motifs_ seemed to be absolutely without limit. One was never
tired of the entertainment because there was so little repetition.

On one ever-memorable occasion we heard the great national, or, as Edmund
preferred to call it, "racial" hymn, played in the air from the principal
tower. When we had only beheld the play of colors characterizing this
composition we had found it altogether delightful, although, as I have
said, Edmund detected, even then, some underlying tone of sadness or
despair; but when its _sounds_ broke into the brain the effect was
overwhelming. The entire thing seemed to have been "written in a minor
key," of infinite world-embracing pathos. The listener was plunged into
depths of feeling that seemed unfathomable, eternal--and unendurable.

"Heavens!" whispered Jack to me in an awed voice, dropping the box from
his ear, "I can't _stand_ it!"

I saw tears running down his face, and felt them on my own. Edmund and
Henry were equally affected, and could not continue to listen. Edmund
said nothing, but I recalled his words about the traditional belief of
this people that their world had entered upon the last stage of its
existence. Then I watched the countenances about us; they wore an
expression of solemnity, and yet there was something which spoke of an
uplifting pride, awakened by the great paean, and swelling the heart with
memories of interminable ages of past glory.

"Come," said Edmund at last, turning away, "this is not for us. The
measureless sadness we feel, but the triumphant reflection of ancestral
greatness is for them alone. Heavens! what an artist he must have been
who composed this!--if it be not like the Iliad, the work of an age
rather than of a man."

We almost forgot the passage of time in the enjoyment of our now
delightful and untroubled existence, but there came at last a rude
awakening from this life, which had become for us like a dream.

As I have said, we had ceased to worry about Ingra, whom we seldom saw,
and who, when we did see him, gave no indication of continued enmity. At
first we had kept the car under continual surveillance, but as time went
on we became careless in this respect, and at last we did not guard it at
all.

One day, during the time of repose, I happened to be, with Juba, in our
room on that stage of the great tower where the car was anchored, while
Edmund and the others were below in the palace. Juba was already asleep,
and I was lying down and courting drowsiness, when a slight noise outside
attracted my attention. I stepped softly to the door and looked out. The
door of the car was open! Supposing that Edmund was there I approached to
speak to him. By good fortune I was wearing the soft slippers worn by
everybody here, and which we had adopted, so that my footsteps made no
sound.

As I reached the car door and looked in, I nearly dropped in the
intensity of my surprise and consternation. There, at the farther end,
was Ingra, on his knees before the mechanical mouths which swallowed the
invisible elements of power from the air; and beside him was another,
also on his knees, and busy with tools, apparently trying to detach the
things. The explanation flashed over my mind; Ingra had brought a skilled
engineer to aid him in discovering the secret of the car, and, no doubt,
to rob it of its mysterious mechanism. They seemed to fear no
interruption, because Ingra had undoubtedly informed himself of the fact
that for a day or two past we had abandoned the use of our room in the
tower, and taken our repose in our apartments in the palace. It was by
mere chance that Juba and I had, on this occasion, remained so long aloft
that I had decided to take our sleep in the tower room.

Anticipating no surveillance, Ingra was not on his guard, and had no idea
that I was behind him. Instinctively I grasped for my pistol but
instantly remembered that it was with my coat in the room. I tiptoed
back, awoke Juba, making him a sign to be noiseless, got the pistol, and
returned, without a sound, to the open door of the car with Juba at my
heels. They were yet on their knees, with their heads under the shelf,
and I heard the slight grating made by the tool that Ingra's assistant
was using. The pistol was in my hand. What should I do? Shoot him down
without warning, or trust to the strength of Juba to enable us to
overcome them both and make them prisoners?

While I hesitated, and it was but a moment, Ingra suddenly rose to his
feet and confronted us. An exclamation burst from his lips, and the other
sprang up. I covered Ingra with the pistol and pulled the trigger. There
was not a sound! The sickening remembrance then burst over me that I had
not reloaded the pistol since Edmund had emptied its whole chamber in the
closing fight with the tarantula of the swamps. Ingra, followed by his
man, sprang upon me like a tiger. In a twinkling I lay on my back, and
before I could recover my feet, I saw Juba and Ingra in a deadly
struggle, while the other ran away and disappeared. Jumping up I ran to
Juba's assistance, but the fight was so furious, and the combatants
whirled so rapidly, that I could get no hold. I saw, however, that Juba
was more than a match for his opponent, and I darted into the car to get
one of the automatic rifles, thinking that I could use it as a club to
put an end to the struggle if the opportunity should offer. But the
locker was firmly closed and I could not open it. After a minute of vain
efforts I returned to the combatants and found that Juba had nearly
completed his mastery. He had Ingra doubled over his knee and was
endeavoring to pinion his hands.

At this instant, when the victory seemed complete, and our enemy in our
power, Juba uttered a faint cry and fell in a heap. Blood instantly
stained the floor around him, and Ingra, with a bound, dropping a long
knife, attained the door of a nearby chamber, and was out of sight before
I could even start to pursue him. Nevertheless, I ran after him, but
quickly became involved in a labyrinth where it was useless to continue
the search, and where I nearly lost my way.

I then returned to see how seriously Juba had been wounded. He had
crawled into the car. I bent over him--he was dead! The knife had
inflicted a fearful wound, and it seemed wonderful that he could have
made his way unassisted even over the short distance from where he was
struck down to the door of the car.

_Juba dead!_ I felt faint and sick! But the critical nature of the
emergency helped to steady my nerves by giving me something else to think
of and to do. Edmund must be called at once. There were no "elevators"
running regularly during the general hours of repose, and I did not know
the way up and down the tower by the ladder-like stairways which
connected the stages. But there were signals by which the little craft
that served as elevators could be summoned in case of necessity, and I
pulled one of the signal cords. It seemed an age before the air ship
came, and another before I could reach Edmund.

His great self-control enabled him to conceal his grief at my news, but
Jack was overcome. He had really loved Juba almost as if he had been
human and a brother. The big-hearted fellow actually sobbed as if his
heart would break. Then came the reaction, and I should never have
believed that Jack Ashton could exhibit such malevolent ferocity. His
lips all but foamed, as he fairly shouted, striking his big fists
together:

"This'll be _my_ job! Edmund! Peter! You hear me! Don't either of you
dare to lay a hand on _that devil!_ He's _mine!_ Oh! I'll--" But he could
not finish his sentence for gnashing his teeth.

We calmed him as best we could and then summoned an air ship. While we
waited, Edmund suddenly put his hand in his pocket, and withdrawing it
quickly, said, with a bitter smile:

"What a fool I have been in my carelessness. Ingra has had the key
abstracted from my pocket by some thief. That explains how he got the car
open."

The moment the ship came we hurriedly ascended to the platform. When
Edmund saw poor Juba's body lying in the car and learned how he had made
his way there to die, he was more affected than when he first heard of
his death.

"He has died for us," he said solemnly; "he has crawled here as to a
refuge, and here he shall remain until I can bury him among his people in
his old home. Would to God I had never taken him from it!"

"Then you will start at once for the dark hemisphere?" I asked.

"At the earliest possible moment; and it shall be on the way to our own
home."

But we were not to depart before even a more terrible tragedy had
darkened over us, for now the tide of fate was suddenly running at flood.



CHAPTER XX


THE CORYBANTIA OF THE SUN

I have several times mentioned Edmund's half-formed impression that there
was some very remarkable ceremony connected with the cyclical apparition
of the sun before the eyes of its worshipers. He had said, you may
recall, that it seemed probable that the religious rites on these rare
occasions bore some resemblance to the _bacchanalia_, or _dionysia_, of
ancient Greece. How he had derived that idea I do not know, but it proved
to have been but too well founded---only he had not guessed the full
truth. The followers of Dionysus made themselves drunken with the wine of
their god and then indulged in the wildest excesses. Here, as we were now
to learn, the worshipers of the sun were seized with another kind of
madness, leading to scenes that I believe, and hope, have never had their
parallel upon the earth.

With our hearts sore for Juba, we had completed our preparations for
departure within six hours after his tragic death. Ala had been informed
of the tragedy, and had visited the car and looked upon the dead form,
which I thought greatly affected her. Edmund held little communication
with her, but it was evidently with her cooperation that he was able to
procure a kind of coffin, in which we placed Juba's body. I do not know
whether Edmund informed her of his purpose to quit the planet, but she
must have known that we were going to convey our friend somewhere for
interment.

We were actually on the point of casting loose the car, Ala and a crowd
of attendants watching our movements, when there came the second great
sound of united voices which we had heard in this speechless world. It
rose like a sudden wail from the whole city. There was a rushing to and
fro, Ala's face grew as pale as death, and her attendants fell upon their
knees and began to lift their hands heavenward, with an expression of
terror and wild appeal.

At the same time we noticed a sudden brightening about us, and Edmund
stepping out on the platform, immediately beckoned, with the first signs
of uncontrollable excitement that I had ever seen him display. I was
instantly at his side, and a single glance told the story.

High in the heavens, the sun had burst forth in all its marvelous
splendor!

A vast rift was open in the cloud dome, through which the gigantic god of
day poured down his rays with a fierceness that was inconceivable. The
heat was like the blast of a furnace, and I felt my head beginning to
swim.

"Quick!" cried Edmund, grasping my sleeve and pulling me into the car.
"These rays are fatal! My God, what a sight!"

As by magic the atmosphere had become crowded with air ships, and throngs
of thousands were pouring from them upon the great platform and the other
stages, as well as upon the surrounding towers. Every available space was
filling up with people hastening from below. As fast as they arrived they
threw themselves into the most extraordinary postures of adoration,
lifting hands and eyes to the sun. I remember thinking, in a flash, that
the intense glare of light must burn to the very sockets of their
eyes--but they did not flinch. It was evident, however, that those who
looked directly in the sun's face were blinded.

I looked round for Ala, and noticed with a thrill that her beautiful eyes
were wide open and glancing with an expression that I cannot describe,
over her kneeling people. Beside her was the towering form of the great
priest, who was staring straight at the sun--and yet, although his eyes
were open, it was evident that they were not rendered altogether
sightless even by that awful light. They burned like coals. He was making
strange gestures with his long arms, and in unison with his every
movement a low, heart-thrilling sound came from the throats of the
multitude.

Edmund, at my shoulder, muttered under his breath:

"Shall I try to save her from this?--But to what good?"

For a moment he seemed to hesitate, and I thought that he was about to
rush out upon the platform and seize Ala in order to rescue her from some
danger that he foresaw; when, all at once, the multitude rose to its
feet, staggering, and began to rush to and fro, colliding with one
another, falling, rising again, grappling, struggling, uttering terrible
cries--and then I saw the flash of knives.

"Good heavens!" shouted Edmund. "It is the ultraviolet rays! They have
gone mad!"

In the meantime the gigantic high priest whirled upon his heel, swinging
his arms abroad and uttering a kind of chant which was audible above the
dreadful clamor of the rabid multitude. Though he had no weapon, he
seemed the inspirer of this Aceldama, and around him its fury raged.
Presently he drew close to Ala, who still stood motionless, as if
petrified by the awful scene. I felt Edmund give a violent start, and
before I comprehended his intention, he had dashed from the car, and was
forcing his way through the struggling throng toward the queen.

"Edmund!" I shouted. "For God's sake, come back!"

Jack started to follow him, but I held him back with all my strength.

"Let me go!" he yelled. "Edmund will be killed!"

"And you, too!" I answered. "Break open the locker and get the guns!"

Jack threw himself upon the door of the locker, and strove to wrench it
open. Meanwhile, half paralyzed with excitement, I remained standing at
the door. I saw Edmund hurl aside those who attacked him, and push on
toward his goal. But a minute later a knife reached him, and he fell.

"Quick, Jack, quick!" I shouted; "Edmund is down!"

He had not got the locker open, but he darted to my side, and together we
rushed out into the press. Shall I ever forget that moment! We were
pushed, hustled, struck, hurled to and fro; but we had only a few steps
to go, and we reached our leader where he lay. Seizing him, we succeeded
somehow in carrying him into the car. Our clothes were torn, our hands
and faces were bleeding, and there was blood on Jack's shoulder. Edmund
was alive. We placed him on a bench, and then the fascination of the
spectacle without again enchained us.

Suddenly my eyes fell upon Ingra, who had not previously made his
appearance. He was as insane as the others, and like many of them had a
knife in his hand. In a moment he pushed his way toward Ala, and my heart
rose in my throat, for I did not know what mad thought might be in his
mind. If I had had a weapon, I believe I should have shot him, but before
he had arrived within three yards of the queen there came an explosion of
flame--I do not know how else to describe it, for it was so sudden--and
the great platform was instantly wrapped in licking tongues of fire.

The wickerwork caught like tinder, and the gauzy screws threw off streams
of sparks like so many Fourth of July pinwheels. The gush of heat from
the conflagration was terrible, and I turned my eyes in horror from the
stricken multitude which seemed to have been shocked back into sanity by
the sudden universal danger only to find itself a helpless prey to the
flames.

"It's all over with them!" cried Jack.

His words awoke me to our own danger. We must get away instantly. Knowing
the proper button to touch to throw the mechanism into action, I pushed
it forcibly and pulled out a knob which I had often seen Edmund
manipulate in starting the car. It responded immediately, and in a second
we were afloat, and clear of the tower. Seeing that the direction which
the car was taking would remove us from the reach of the flames, and that
there was nothing ahead to obstruct its progress, and knowing that Edmund
often left it to run of itself when the speed was slow, and there was no
occasion to change its course, I now hurried with Jack to Edmund's side.
Henry all this time had been lying on a bench like one in a trance.

Jack and I stripped off Edmund's coat, and at once saw the nature of his
wound. A knife had penetrated his side, and there was considerable
effusion of blood, but I was surgeon enough to feel sure that the wound
was not mortal. He roused up as he felt us working over him, and opening
his eyes, said faintly:

"You will find bandages under the locker. What has happened? We are
moving."

"The tower is all in flames!" exclaimed Jack, before I could interrupt
him, for I should have preferred not to tell Edmund the real situation
just at that moment.

Jack's words roused him like an electric shock. He pushed us aside, and
