

     _Or mark in shining letters Kunckel's name
     In the pale phosphor's self-consuming flame._

                                            CANTO I. l. 231.


Kunckel, a native of Hamburgh, was the first who discovered to the world
the process for producing phosphorus; though Brandt and Boyle were
likewise said to have previously had the art of making it. It was
obtained from sal microcosmicum by evaporation in the form of an acid,
but has since been found in other animal substances, as in the ashes of
bones, and even in some vegetables, as in wheat flour. Keir's chemical
Dict. This phosphoric acid is like all other acids united with vital
air, and requires to be treated with charcoal or phlogiston to deprive
it of this air, it then becomes a kind of animal sulphur, but of so
inflammable a nature, that on the access of air it takes fire
spontaneously, and as it burns becomes again united with vital air, and
re-assumes its form of phosphoric acid.

As animal respiration seems to be a kind of slow combustion, in which it
is probable that phosphoric acid is produced by the union of phosphorus
with the vital air, so it is also probable that phosphoric acid is
produced in the excretory or respiratory vessels of luminous insects, as
the glow-worm and fire-fly, and some marine insects. From the same
principle I suppose the light from putrid fish, as from the heads of
hadocks, and from putrid veal, and from rotten wood in a certain state
of their putrefaction, is produced, and phosphorus thus slowly combined
with air is changed into phosphoric acid. The light from the Bolognian
stone, and from calcined shells, and from white paper, and linen after
having been exposed for a time to the sun's light, seem to produce
either the phosphoric or some other kind of acid from the sulphurous or
phlogistic matter which they contain. See note on Beccari's shells. l.
180.

There is another process seems similar to this slow combustion, and that
is _bleaching_. By the warmth and light of the sun the water sprinkled
upon linen or cotton cloth seems to be decomposed, (if we credit the
theory of M. Lavoisier,) and a part of the vital air thus set at liberty
and uncombined and not being in its elastic form, more easily dissolves
the colouring or phlogistic matter of the cloth, and produces a new
acid, which is itself colourless, or is washed out of the cloth by
water. The new process of bleaching confirms a part of this theory, for
by uniting much vital air to marine acid by distilling it from
manganese, on dipping the cloth to be bleached in water repleat with
this super-aerated marine acid, the colouring matter disappears
immediately, sooner indeed in cotton than in linen. See note XXXIV.

There is another process which I suspect bears analogy to these above-
mentioned, and that is the rancidity of animal fat, as of bacon; if
bacon be hung up in a warm kitchen, with much salt adhering on the
outside of it, the fat part of it soon becomes yellow and rancid; if it
be washed with much cold water after it has imbibed the salt, and just
before it is hung up, I am well informed, that it will not become
rancid, or in very slight degrees. In the former case I imagine the salt
on the surface of the bacon attracts water during the cold of the night,
which is evaporated during the day, and that in this evaporation a part
of the water becomes decomposed, as in bleaching, and its vital air
uniting with greater facility in its unelastic state with the animal
fat, produces an acid, perhaps of the phosphoric kind, which being of a
fixed nature lies upon the bacon, giving it the yellow colour and rancid
taste. It is remarkable that the super-aerated marine acid does not
bleach living animal substances, at least it did not whiten a part of my
hand which I for some minutes exposed to it.




                        NOTE XI.--STEAM-ENGINE.


     _Quick moves the balanced beam, of giant-birth,
     Wields his large limbs, and nodding shakes the earth._

                                            CANTO I. l. 261.


The expansive force of steam was known in some degree to the antients,
Hero of Alexandria describes an application of it to produce a rotative
motion by the re-action of steam issuing from a sphere mounted upon an
axis, through two small tubes bent into tangents, and issuing from the
opposite sides of the equatorial diameter of the sphere, the sphere was
supplied with steam by a pipe communicating with a pan of boiling water,
and entering the sphere at one of its poles.

A french writer about the year 1630 describes a method of raising water
to the upper part of a house by filling a chamber with steam, and
suffering it to condense of itself, but it seems to have been mere
theory, as his method was scarcely practicable as he describes it. In
1655 the Marquis of Worcester mentions a method of raising water by fire
in his Century of Inventions, but he seems only to have availed himself
of the expansive force and not to have known the advantages arising from
condensing the steam by an injection of cold water. This latter and most
important improvement seems to have been made by Capt. Savery sometime
prior to 1698, for in that year his patent for the use of that invention
was confirmed by act of parliament. This gentleman appears to have been
the first who reduced the machine to practice and exhibited it in an
useful form. This method consisted only in expelling the air from a
vessel by steam and condensing the steam by an injection of cold water,
which making a vacuum, the pressure of the atmosphere forced the water
to ascend into the steam-vessel through a pipe of 24 to 26 feet high,
and by the admission of dense steam from the boiler, forcing the water
in the steam-vessel to ascend to the height desired. This construction
was defective because it required very strong vessels to resist the
force of the steam, and because an enormous quantity of steam was
condensed by coming in contact with the cold water in the steam-vessel.

About or soon after that time M. Papin attempted a steam-engine on
similar principles but rather more defective in its construction.

The next improvement was made very soon afterwards by Messrs. Newcomen
and Cawley of Dartmouth, it consisted in employing for the steam-vessel
a hollow cylinder, shut at bottom and open at top, furnished with a
piston sliding easily up and down in it, and made tight by oakum or
hemp, and covered with water. This piston is suspended by chains from
one end of a beam, moveable upon an axis in the middle of its length, to
the other end of this beam are suspended the pump-rods.

The danger of bursting the vessels was avoided in this machine, as
however high the water was to be raised it was not necessary to increase
the density of the steam but only to enlarge the diameter of the
cylinder.

Another advantage was, that the cylinder not being made so cold as in
Savary's method, much less steam was lost in filling it after each
condensation.

The machine however still remained imperfect, for the cold water thrown
into the cylinder acquired heat from the steam it condensed, and being
in a vessel exhausted of air it produced steam itself, which in part
resisted the action of the atmosphere on the piston; were this remedied
by throwing in more cold water the destruction of steam in the next
filling of the cylinder would be proportionally increased. It has
therefore in practice been found adviseable not to load these engines
with columns of water weighing more than seven pounds for each square
inch of the area of the piston. The bulk of water when converted into
steam remained unknown until Mr. J. Watt, then of Glasgow, in 1764,
determined it to be about 1800 times more rare than water. It soon
occurred to Mr. Watt that a perfect engine would be that in which no
steam should be condensed in filling the cylinder, and in which the
steam should be so perfectly cooled as to produce nearly a perfect
vacuum.

Mr. Watt having ascertained the degree of heat in which water boiled in
vacuo, and under progressive degrees of pressure, and instructed by Dr.
Black's discovery of latent heat, having calculated the quantity of cold
water necessary to condense certain quantities of steam so far as to
produce the exhaustion required, he made a communication from the
cylinder to a cold vessel previously exhausted of air and water, into
which the steam rushed by its elasticity, and became immediately
condensed. He then adapted a cover to the cylinder and admitted steam
above the piston to press it down instead of air, and instead of
applying water he used oil or grease to fill the pores of the oakum and
to lubricate the cylinder.

He next applied a pump to extract the injection water, the condensed
steam, and the air, from the condensing vessel, every stroke of the
engine.

To prevent the cooling of the cylinder by the contact of the external
air, he surrounded it with a case containing steam, which he again
protected by a covering of matters which conduct heat slowly.

This construction presented an easy means of regulating the power of the
engine, for the steam being the acting power, as the pipe which admits
it from the boiler is more or less opened, a greater or smaller quantity
can enter during the time of a stroke, and consequently the engine can
act with exactly the necessary degree of energy.

Mr. Watt gained a patent for his engine in 1768, but the further
persecution of his designs were delayed by other avocations till 1775,
when in conjunction with Mr. Boulton of Soho near Birmingham, numerous
experiments were made on a large scale by their united ingenuity, and
great improvements added to the machinery, and an act of parliament
obtained for the prolongation of their patent for twenty-five years,
they have since that time drained many of the deep mines in Cornwall,
which but for the happy union of such genius must immediately have
ceased to work. One of these engines works a pump of eighteen inches
diameter, and upwards of 100 fathom or 600 feet high, at the rate of ten
to twelve strokes of seven feet long each, in a minute, and that with
one fifth part of the coals which a common engine would have taken to do
the same work. The power of this engine may be easier comprehended by
saying that it raised a weight equal to 81000 pounds 80 feet high in a
minute, which is equal to the combined action of 200 good horses. In
Newcomen's engine this would have required a cylinder of the enormous
diameter of 120 inches or ten feet, but as in this engine of Mr. Watt
and Mr. Boulton the steam acts, and a vacuum is made, alternately above
and below the piston, the power exerted is double to what the same
cylinder would otherways produce, and is further augmented by an
inequality in the length of the two ends of the lever.

These gentlemen have also by other contrivances applied their engines to
the turning of mills for almost every purpose, of which that great pile
of machinery the Albion Mill is a well known instance. Forges, slitting
mills, and other great works are erected where nature has furnished no
running water, and future times may boast that this grand and useful
engine was invented and perfected in our own country.

Since the above article went to the press the Albion Mill is no more; it
is supposed to have been set on fire by interested or malicious
incendaries, and is burnt to the ground. Whence London has lost the
credit and the advantage of possessing the most powerful machine in the
world!




                           NOTE XII.--FROST.


     _In phalanx firm the fiend of Frost assail._

                                            CANTO I. l. 439.


The cause of the expansion of water during its conversion into ice is
not yet well ascertained, it was supposed to have been owing to the air
being set at liberty in the act of congelation which was before
dissolved in the water, and the many air bubbles in ice were thought to
countenance this opinion. But the great force with which ice expands
during its congelation, so as to burst iron bombs and coehorns,
according to the experiments of Major Williams at Quebec, invalidates
this idea of the cause of it, and may sometime be brought into use as a
means of breaking rocks in mining, or projecting cannon-balls, or for
other mechanical purposes, if the means of producing congelation should
ever be discovered to be as easy as the means of producing combustion.

Mr. de Mairan attributes the increase of bulk of frozen water to the
different arrangement of the particles of it in crystallization, as they
are constantly joined at an angle of 60 degrees; and must by this
disposition he thinks occupy a greater volume than if they were
parallel. He found the augmentation of the water during freezing to
amount to one-fourteenth, one-eighteenth, one-nineteenth, and when the
water was previously purged of air to only one-twenty-second part. He
adds that a piece of ice, which was at first only one-fourteenth part
specifically lighter than water, on being exposed some days to the frost
became one-twelfth lighter than water. Hence he thinks ice by being
exposed to greater cold still increases in volume, and to this
attributes the bursting of ice in ponds and on the glaciers. See Lewis's
Commerce of Arts, p. 257. and the note on Muschus in the other volume of
this work.

This expansion of ice well accounts for the greater mischief done by
vernal frosts attended with moisture, (as by hoar-frosts,) than by the
dry frosts called black frosts. Mr. Lawrence in a letter to Mr. Bradley
complains that the dale-mist attended with a frost on may-day had
destroyed all his tender fruits; though there was a sharper frost the
night before without a mist, that did him no injury; and adds, that a
garden not a stone's throw from his own on a higher situation, being
above the dale-mist, had received no damage. Bradley, Vol. II. p. 232.

Mr. Hunter by very curious experiments discovered that the living
principle in fish, in vegetables, and even in eggs and seeds, possesses
a power of resisting congelation. Phil. Trans. There can be no doubt but
that the exertions of animals to avoid the pain of cold may produce in
them a greater quantity of heat, at least for a time, but that
vegetables, eggs, or seeds, should possess such a quality is truly
wonderful. Others have imagined that animals possess a power of
preventing themselves from becoming much warmer than 98 degrees of heat,
when immersed in an atmosphere above that degree of heat. It is true
that the increased exhalation from their bodies will in some measure
cool them, as much heat is carried off by the evaporation of fluids, but
this is a chemical not an animal process. The experiments made by those
who continued many minutes in the air of a room heated so much above any
natural atmospheric heat, do not seem conclusive, as they remained in it
a less time than would have been necessary to have heated a mass of beef
of the same magnitude, and the circulation of the blood in living
animals, by perpetually bringing new supplies of fluid to the skin,
would prevent the external surface from becoming hot much sooner than
the whole mass. And thirdly, there appears no power of animal bodies to
produce cold in diseases, as in scarlet fever, in which the increased
action of the vessels of the skin produces heat and contributes to
exhaust the animal power already too much weakened.

It has been thought by many that frosts meliorate the ground, and that
they are in general salubrious to mankind. In respect to the former it
is now well known that ice or snow contain no nitrous particles, and
though frost by enlarging the bulk of moist clay leaves it softer for a
time after the thaw, yet as soon as the water exhales, the clay becomes
as hard as before, being pressed together by the incumbent atmosphere,
and by its self-attraction, called _setting_ by the potters. Add to this
that on the coasts of Africa, where frost is unknown, the fertility of
the soil is almost beyond our conceptions of it. In respect to the
general salubrity of frosty seasons the bills of mortality are an
evidence in the negative, as in long frosts many weakly and old people
perish from debility occasioned by the cold, and many classes of birds
and other wild animals are benumbed by the cold or destroyed by the
consequent scarcity of food, and many tender vegetables perish from the
degree of cold.

I do not think it should be objected to this doctrine that there are
moist days attended with a brisk cold wind when no visible ice appears,
and which are yet more disagreeable and destructive than frosty weather.
For on these days the cold moisture, which is deposited on the skin is
there evaporated and thus produces a degree of cold perhaps greater than
the milder frosts. Whence even in such days both the disagreeable
sensations and insalubrious effects belong to the cause abovementioned,
viz. the intensity of the cold. Add to this that in these cold moist
days as we pass along or as the wind blows upon us, a new sheet of cold
water is as it were perpetually applied to us and hangs upon our bodies,
now as water is 800 times denser than air and is a much better conductor
of heat, we are starved with cold like those who go into a cold bath,
both by the great number of particles in contact with the skin and their
greater facility of receiving our heat.

It may nevertheless be true that snows of long duration in our winters
may be less injurious to vegetation than great rains and shorter frosts,
for two reasons. 1. Because great rains carry down many thousand pounds
worth of the best part of the manure off the lands into the sea, whereas
snow dissolves more gradually and thence carries away less from the
land; any one may distinguish a snow-flood from a rain-flood by the
transparency of the water. Hence hills or fields with considerable
inclination of surface should be ploughed horizontally that the furrows
may stay the water from showers till it deposits its mud. 2. Snow
protects vegetables from the severity of the frost, since it is always
in a state of thaw where it is in contact with the earth; as the earth's
heat is about 48 deg. and the heat of thawing snow is 32 deg. the vegetables
between them are kept in a degree of heat about 40, by which many of
them are preserved. See note on Muschus, Vol. II. of this work.




                        NOTE XIII.--ELECTRICITY


     _Cold from each point cerulean lustres gleam._

                                            CANTO I. l. 339.


                            ELECTRIC POINTS.

There was an idle dispute whether knobs or points were preferable on the
top of conductors for the defence of houses. The design of these
conductors is to permit the electric matter accumulated in the clouds to
pass through them into the earth in a smaller continued stream as the
cloud approaches, before it comes to what is termed striking distance;
now as it is well known that accumulated electricity will pass to points
at a much greater distance than it will to knobs there can be no doubt
of their preference; and it would seem that the finer the point and the
less liable to become rusty the better, as it would take off the
lightening while it was still at a greater distance, and by that means
preserve a greater extent of building; the very extremity of the point
should be of pure silver or gold, and might be branched into a kind of
brush, since one small point can not be supposed to receive so great a
quantity as a thicker bar might conduct into the earth.

If an insulated metallic ball is armed with a point, like a needle,
projecting from one part of it, the electric fluid will be seen in the
dark to pass off from this point, so long as the ball is kept supplied
with electricity. The reason of this is not difficult to comprehend,
every part of the electric atmosphere which surrounds the insulated ball
is attracted to that ball by a large surface of it, whereas the electric
atmosphere which is near the extremity of the needle is attracted to it
by only a single point, in consequence the particles of electric matter
near the surface of the ball approach towards it and push off by their
greater gravitation the particles of electric matter over the point of
the needle in a continued stream.

Something like this happens in respect to the diffusion of oil on water
from a pointed cork, an experiment which was many years ago shewn me by
Dr. Franklin; he cut a piece of cork about the size of a letter-wafer
and left on one edge of it a point about a sixth of an inch in length
projecting as a tangent to the circumference. This was dipped in oil and
thrown on a pond of water and continued to revolve as the oil left the
point for a great many minutes. The oil descends from the floating cork
upon the water being diffused upon it without friction and perhaps
without contact; but its going off at the point so forcibly as to make
the cork revolve in a contrary direction seems analogous to the
departure of the electric fluid from points.

Can any thing similar to either of these happen in respect to the
earth's atmosphere and give occasion to the breezes on the tops of
mountains, which may be considered as points on the earths
circumference?


                              FAIRY-RINGS.

There is a phenomenon supposed to be electric which is yet unaccounted
for, I mean the Fairy-rings, as they are called, so often seen on the
grass. The numerous flashes of lightning which occur every summer are, I
believe, generally discharged on the earth, and but seldom (if ever)
from one cloud to another. Moist trees are the most frequent conductors
of these flashes of lightning, and I am informed by purchasers of wood
that innumerable trees are thus cracked and injured. At other times
larger parts or prominences of clouds gradually sinking as they move
along, are discharged on the moisture parts of grassy plains. Now this
knob or corner of a cloud in being attracted by the earth will become
nearly cylindrical, as loose wool would do when drawn out into a thread,
and will strike the earth with a stream of electricity perhaps two or
ten yards in diameter. Now as a stream of electricity displaces the air
it passes through, it is plain no part of the grass can be burnt by it,
but just the external ring of this cylinder where the grass can have
access to the air, since without air nothing can be calcined. This earth
after having been so calcined becomes a richer soil, and either funguses
or a bluer grass for many years mark the place. That lightning displaces
the air in its passage is evinced by the loud crack that succeeds it,
which is owing to the sides of the aerial vacuum clapping together when
the lightning is withdrawn. That nothing will calcine without air is now
well understood from the acids produced in the burning of phlogistic
substances, and may be agreeably seen by suspending a paper on an iron
prong and putting it into the centre of the blaze of an iron-furnace; it
may be held there some seconds and may be again withdrawn without its
being burnt, if it be passed quickly into the flame and out again
through the external part of it which is in contact with the air. I know
some circles of many yards diameter of this kind near Foremark in
Derbyshire which annually produce large white funguses and stronger
grass, and have done so, I am informed, above thirty years. This
increased fertility of the ground by calcination or charring, and its
continuing to operate so many years is well worth the attention of the
farmer, and shews the use of paring and burning new turf in agriculture,
which produces its effect not so much by the ashes of the vegetable
fibres as by charring the soil which adheres to them.

These situations, whether from eminence or from moisture, which were
proper once to attract and discharge a thunder-cloud, are more liable
again to experience the same. Hence many fairy-rings are often seen near
each other either without intersecting each other, as I saw this summer
in a garden in Nottinghamshire, or intersecting each other as described
on Arthur's seat near Edinburgh in the Edinb. Trans. Vol. II. p. 3.




                       NOTE XIV.--BUDS AND BULBS.


     _Where dwell my vegetative realms benumb'd
     In buds imprison'd, or in bulbs intomb'd._

                                            CANTO I. l. 459.


A tree is properly speaking a family or swarm of buds, each bud being an
individual plant, for if one of these buds be torn or cut out and
planted in the earth with a glass cup inverted over it to prevent its
exhalation from being at first greater than its power of absorption, it
will produce a tree similar to its parent; each bud has a leaf, which is
its lungs, appropriated to it, and the bark of the tree is a congeries
of the roots of these individual buds, whence old hollow trees are often
seen to have some branches flourish with vigour after the internal wood
is almost intirely decayed and vanished. According to this idea Linneus
has observed that trees and shrubs are roots above ground, for if a tree
be inverted leaves will grow from the root-part and roots from the
trunk-part. Phil. Bot p. 39. Hence it appears that vegetables have two
methods of propagating themselves, the oviparous as by seeds, and the
viviparous as by their buds and bulbs, and that the individual plants,
whether from seeds or buds or bulbs, are all annual productions like
many kinds of insects as the silk-worm, the parent perishing in the
autumn after having produced an embryon, which lies in a torpid state
during the winter, and is matured in the succeeding summer. Hence
