broadcast and letter of dismissal have been relayed to him."

"Mr. President.  You have your Star Gate, for now, but it seems that
your communications networks are grossly inferior to our own.  Or
perhaps your intelligence services have wavered in their loyalties, and
are no longer reliable.  The Third Fleet has not been at its last
stated position for days."  At this Stone shot a quick glance at Plant,
who remained impassive.  "Your bird has flown the cage.  Can you
promise me it will not land again to our detriment?"

The President scowled and would have switched off the visual, but Plant
put a hand to his wrist.  His manner was calm and unruffled.

"Premier Denisov.  You are known as a man of many facets, and once
again you hide your true intentions.  That Hayes has gone is neither
surprising, nor wholly unexpected.  But you play a dangerous game when
you speak of military capabilities, and imagined weaknesses.  I cannot
believe that you really want a full-scale confrontation.  You know as
well as I do, such a war would be disastrous to us both."

Now it was Denisov who scowled, and began to speak roughly.  But Plant
interrupted him firmly.

"Let's cut to the chase.  You want to turn the current instability to
your own advantage.  You want to seize new territories.  But before you
do, I'd advise you to look at the larger picture.  Hayes is out of
control, and until we stop him, millions of innocents are in peril.
You have your interests and we have ours; but I cannot believe so many
human lives do not concern you.  I'm asking you to put aside our
differences, and help us make things right again.  Help us bring Hayes
to justice, peacefully, and with a minimum of bloodshed."

"Help you?" scoffed Denisov.  "Help YOU?  We could have put an end to
this nonsense before it began!  Or have you forgotten the Cantons, the
little play-toy Nazis who started it all?  You made another pretty
speech then, about non-interference, and the self-determination of free
peoples.  And yet again when the Belgians and Swiss openly declared
themselves.  We could have crushed them like the pitiful insects they
are!  But again you tied our hands.  You may take little pleasure in
the fact, but whatever our dealings with you, one more attack from that
quarter and we will end their puny noise forever.  Help YOU!"

Plant stuck to his guns, though with difficulty.  How did one dispute
facts that were essentially correct, however twisted for personal gain?

"NONE of this, Premier Denisov, NONE of it, is relevant now.  We have
admitted our mistakes, and extended to you the hand of reconciliation.
Do you take it?  Make your purpose clear."

"Very well, Mr. VICE-president.  I will tell you exactly where the
peoples of the Soviet Space Republics stand."  He paused, as if calling
to mind a prepared speech.

"We are not yet at full-scale war with you.  But we have no intention
of letting Hayes run loose, or of having our hands tied anywhere in the
galaxy, in dealing with the crisis as we see fit.  And should we
encounter ANY hostile force within Soviet space or that of our allies,
we shall deal with them as declared enemies.  If you should reach the
Third Fleet before us, and bring it under your firm control, so be it.
But if we come upon Hayes first we will not be gentle, or stop to
negotiate.

"As a further sign of our firm resolve in this matter, we are recalling
our ambassador from Washington and breaking off formal relations with
you.  If you have anything to say to us in future, that is worth
hearing, you may reach me directly, here.  That is all."

The screen went blank.  The transmission ended.  Stone, Plant and Bacon
were silent.


*


The following day Stone met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and had
them each swear a further oath of allegiance to him, their
Commander-in-Chief, to serve no other, and to have no secret dealings
with Hayes.  He then appointed new heads of the Army and Space Navy,
and those who would not submit were dismissed.

There was angry shouting, and much hard feeling, but no violence in the
transition.






X

Isograph:  7/20 to 12/30


Not on the socialist and pioneer alone did the hammer-stroke fall.  Nor
was the sword always wielded by those without a cause, to the detriment
of the noble and just.  This struggle, this convulsion of wills, was a
human reality, and therefore complex.

Like and yet unlike so many wars before it, this conflict, neither
large nor glorious, was fought on a myriad of battlefields, where
reasons were often lost, and morals obscured.  The constraints of
civilization had been removed, freeing men, both good and evil, to
commune once more with their darker nature.  That was all.  And that
was more than enough.

There was but a single unifying link among the sprawl of planets and
peoples caught up, involved, willingly or not, in this unraveling:  all
those who transgressed were filled with the desire to take, at the
expense and death of others, and those who were transgressed upon,
fought with all they had not to yield up the pebbles of home, seeds of
family, and grains of meaning they had found.  And whether right or
wrong, wise, brave or foolish, they bled.


Part, the First


                The breast of woman is the very temple of Nature
                Transporting the mind and body of Man
                        To other places,
                Other times, where beings struggled
                In endless rhythm with the forces
                        that seek to drag us back to earth.
                Mystical, beautiful, oh Woman
                You are the crown of creation:
                The pure and holy vessel of new life.
                Oh, glory of this world
                Keep me forever young!

                                        ---unnamed Irish poet



The Irish planet-colony of New Belfast was rich and fertile.  The air
was infinitely breathable and sustaining, the vegetation lush, with
roots that went deep into the ground.  It was a land and sea that men
could be proud to die for, a place where family could mean something,
and women grow old without feeling lost.  To watch a young maid walk
here among the fields, to see the depths in her eyes that reflected the
melancholy of her soul, and hear the Gaelic accent touch lightly on the
stones of moss-covered walls, was to know that God gave love to Man.
Life flowed in its every vein, and the minor modes of Baroque ballads
seemed to form a living chain to many pasts.

It was also a place coveted by the French Elite, who knew all that the
Irish knew of love and land and harvest, but knew it better, and
therefore contrived to take from these coarse, uncultured folk what
could more fruitfully be employed by themselves.

And so a siege was laid, in which the Free French took no part, and
even loudly decried.  But due to a peculiar Dual Constitution enacted
late in the twenty-first century---at which time the French, desiring
to show their independence, frank difference, and superiority to the
rest of the world, had created a political structure wholly new and
untried---their approval was not needed for a military venture
utilizing French Elite forces.

New Belfast was surrounded and cut off.  And as the Irish had only one
other major holding, the green homeland of Earth, and few outposts
close at hand, it was unlikely that sufficient help would arrive before
the colonists were overthrown and new, foreign defenses erected---new,
foreign erections defended.

And United Ireland* as well, for reasons no foreigner could quite
comprehend, had established few ties or alliances with the vast expanse
beyond its islands, except for a continuing dialogue with their many
descendants living in the Commonwealth, which they had always, until
now, considered protection enough.

..........


*The province of Northern Ireland had been restored in time by the
British not because the mindless violence of the IRA had succeeded, but
because it had failed.  The bitter cycle of hatred had finally, toward
the mid 22nd Century, diffused, and both sides forgotten their
indisputable righteousness long enough to come to the bargaining table,
where a mutually acceptable agreement had been reached.



...........................


But at the moment the Americans had other things on their minds.  Hayes
was still on the loose, the Soviets were brewing mischief of their own,
and Stone had been assassinated.

The protective shields and outer defenses of the planet were strong, as
were the staunch will of both soldier and civilian who manned and
supported them.  But the offensive capabilities of the French were not
to be underestimated.  Not for nothing had they ruled most of Europe
under Bonaparte (though they seemed better at taking territory than
holding it).  Who would prevail?

The United British Kingdoms kept a consulate and Consul-general on New
Belfast (though he was seldom petitioned or asked for advice), and on
the morning of October 10, a fortnight after the siege and assault had
begun, he appeared at the residence of the Planetary Governor with a
proposal from British Prime Minister Blackwood, and tentatively
approved by Parliament, to lend military assistance in the crisis.  He
was received with the stiff politeness characteristic of modern
English-Irish relations, and conducted to a polished oak drawing room
to wait.

After a short time the Governor entered with an assistant, looking
haggard and worn, and skeptical as to the meaning of his visit.  A
butler came when called, and brought them brandy.  Consul Witherspoon
spoke first, intending to address the issue at once.

"Governor Gale," he began, unable yet to relinquish the formality of
his profession.  "I know you have many things on your mind and that
your time is short, so I shall come directly to the point."

"Please do."

"Very well.  The assault brought upon you by the French is both
formidable and determined, and though your defenses are strong and your
men fight bravely, you cannot hope to withstand them much longer.  Your
shields won't absorb the pounding forever, and you've not the resources
for a serious counter-attack on the adversarial fleets."

"You said you'd be coming to the point."

"And I intend to do just that.  Your help from outer-Earth will not
arrive for several weeks at least, and when it does New Belfast may no
longer be yours to defend."  Gale grumbled something about 'pointless'
and 'salt in our wounds', but Witherspoon pushed forward.

"Prime Minister Blackwood, then, has sent me to make the following
proposal.  The United Kingdoms have a strength of three hundred ships
stationed at Drake Outpost, which could be brought to your aid
within---"

"Oh, I dare say.  And what, pray, shall good Minister Blackthorne (for
some reason Gale always called him this) and the noble English receive
in return?"

"I won't lie to you, Governor.  That's not why I've come.  We are not
acting entirely unselfishly, of course.  That is not the point."

"Then what is the point?  And first I'd be pleased to know what it is
you're after."

"The point is survival, Governor, the lessons of which.....  Nevermind.
 As for Britain's further intentions, I can only say that we want
nothing from the Irish of New Belfast, except perhaps a posture more
open to diplomacy and trade."

"And now you'll be telling us how to survive," stole Gale gruffly.

"There are many kinds of survival, Governor, and many threats to them
all, as we both know.  There is undoubtedly a kind of survival that the
English could learn from you:  faith in life, perhaps, or the freeing
of caged emotions."  Witherspoon was himself aware that his tone had
grown more confidential, and that he was violating the learned rules of
diplomacy.

But he let it happen.  He loved this place and its people, if not
always understanding them, and instinct, or something deeper, told him
that calm indifference would get him nowhere.  "If I may say this much,
man to man, I would advise you. . .ask you. . .to accept help where and
how you find it.  We were in a similar position once ourselves, not so
very long ago.  During the Blitzkrieg our need was every bit as
desperate.  We had to relearn a good deal that we thought we knew, and
reassess what was truly strong in ourselves."

"That was an entirely different matter."  With this Gale's assistant
tapped his watch, as if to remind him of something.

"You will excuse me, Consul."

"Yes, Governor.  I will return tomorrow and we may discuss it further.
I'll leave the full proposal here for you to study, if you wish."
Witherspoon reached into a leather briefcase, pulled forth a bound
manuscript.  "Is two o'clock agreeable?"

"Of course."

They shook hands at parting, and Gale could not help noticing, almost
in spite of himself, that the Englishman's grip was firm, and that he
looked him straight in the eye.


*


The next day at (precisely) two o'clock he returned.  The same haggard
look on Gale's wrinkled face, the same deep oak paneling, the same
brandy.  Only this time, Witherspoon noted, the Governor drank
considerably more of it.  Also, there was no assistant.

"I have been reading Blackthorne's proposal, Consul, so that now I know
the details of what you're offering, though little more of what you
intend."  He looked up searchingly, surprisingly, into the other's
eyes.  "Listen to me, John.  Man to man, as you said before, I NEED TO
KNOW WHAT HE'S AFTER."  

Witherspoon felt a spark of hope.

"I honestly don't know, Governor.  I suspect it has more to do with
hurting the French than helping you.  Blackwood is, in fact, a
throwback of sorts:  an adventurer, an aggressive doer.  But whatever
his reasons, you have to believe me:  I wouldn't be here, speaking to
you like this, if I thought they were to your detriment.  And it is
help unlooked-for in an hour of need.  Won't you take it?"

This did not satisfy the Irishman, and as if to further voice his
doubts, or play them once more through his mind, he returned to an
earlier, seemingly irrelevant point.

"You said yesterday that England under the Blitz was similar to our
plight now, and that if you hadn't swallowed your pride long enough to
take help from the Yanks you'd have gone under, and we'd all be
speaking German."

"You read more than I in---"

"No, John.  I read WHAT you intend.  Forget your English arrogance, and
give me credit for half a brain at least."  The consul nodded.  "That,
as I'm telling you, was an entirely different matter.  The Brits had
their empire then, their corruption, and oppression of peoples they
thought less of than themselves."  His eyes glinted.  "Imperial
Destiny, and a lot of other high-sounding rot.  Well.  You were only
paying your dues for taking more than was given you, and reaping your
own bitter harvest."

"If you'll forgive my frankness, Governor, that's a lot of stuff and
your know it.  Whether our leaders did right or wrong in ruling the
Empire, the PEOPLE of Britain were hardly to blame.  As if cause and
effect, or God's justice, had anything to do with it."  He spoke now
with a passion that was strange for the Irishman to see.

"We were buckled to our knees, with all we thought strong and
everlasting crumbling around us.  V-2 missiles, wave after wave of the
Luftwaffe, propeller bombs falling silently and unexpectedly. . .our
fleets and supply convoys decimated by U-boats, bad news, and the word
of loved ones lost coming in every day.

"And if we fell, Governor, who would have guarded the rest of Europe?
or even the thick-headed Irish, that the Germans were so fond of?  The
Americans?  It took the loss of half their Pacific fleet at Pearl
Harbor before most of them even knew there was a war on.  Churchill
wept the day it happened, because he knew that they had finally been
roused.  You're a hard and shrewd old father, Gale, but you leave the
path of wisdom when you speak lightly of England's part in that Debate."

"Yes," put in the other, trying to be indignant.  "But at least the
Americans didn't rub it in your face."

"So now we're talking about pride, are we?"  Without realizing it,
Witherspoon had begun to speak (and think) in the way of the natives.
He had lived there for seven years, from the time he was thirty.

"If you think we liked being in their debt, both literally and
figuratively, you're mistaken.  But we had to survive.  We had to hang
on, so we did what we had to do.  Don't you see, it's not a question of
principles, or faith, or anything else at all.  It's reality; it's war;
and the extinction of lives and irreplaceable treasures is final.
Didn't we learn that all too well?

"And what did we get in return for our heroic stand?  We took all the
early pounding, along with the Russians, absorbed the enemy's worst
blows, only to have the Yanks come charging in late in the game, and
take all the credit for final victory.  Financially we'd have been
better off to declare war on the Americans ourselves, and then lose.
They went in afterward like good Samaritans and rebuilt the factories
of Germany and Japan, and set them well on their feet for a run at the
modern age.  And what was left for England, not so very long before the
most powerful nation on Earth?  Naught but a mountain of debt, a
crumbled economy, and the laughter of the world for the aging lion, no
longer able even to hold its own among the shifting tides of fate.

"You say we were only paying our dues.  Well if that's so then we paid
them in full, and not an ha'penny short.  Not that the Irish wasted any
tears on our behalf."  Now it was his eyes that glowered.

The Irishman drained his snifter and let it fall wearily to the woven
rug.  He looked now truly old and weather beaten, proud still, but with
very little hope left.  Witherspoon had time to recover himself.

"Please, Bryan.  Won't you at least pass the message on to your
approaching fleets?"  He knew their Commander's name and (complete)
authority, even his current location; but this was no time to flaunt
the thoroughness of British intelligence.  "I love New Belfast as much
as anyone.  You don't know what it's given me.  If it goes down to the
bloody French Elite, a part of me will die as well."

Gale looked up, and saw to his astonishment that there were standing
tears in the younger man's eyes.  He lowered his head again, shook it,
and said finally, heavily.  "I'll think about it."

"Do this one thing for me, Bryan, I beg.  Don't think too long.  Or
there will be nothing left to defend."  He rose and left the room.

The next day, Gale relayed Blackwood's proposal to Commander Donovan,
venturing to suggest that the way things were---desperate---perhaps it
could be considered as a fall-back position.  After the necessary
