


[Page 276]
CHAUTAUQUA OUTLINE FOR STUDENTS.

As an aid to comprehension, every student should draw illustrative
figures of the various circles, planes, and situations described.
(For example, see Fig. 45, page 112.) As an aid to memory, the
portion of this outline referring to each chapter should be examined
at the close of the reading, and this mere sketch filled up to a
perfect picture from recollection.

I. _Creative Processes._--The dial-plate of the sky. Cause or different
weights--on sun, moon. Two laws of gravity. Inertia. Fall of earth
to sun per second. Forward motion. Elastic attraction. Perturbation
of moon; of Jupiter and Saturn. Oscillations of planets.

II. _Light._--From condensation. Number of vibrations of red; violet.
Thermometer against air. Aerolite against earth. Two bolides against
the sun. Large eye. Velocity of light. Prism. Color means different
vibrations. Music of light. Light reports substance of stars. Force
of; bridge, rain, dispersion, intensities, reflection, refraction,
decomposition.

III. _Astronomical Instruments._--Refracting telescope. Reflecting;
largest. Spectroscope. Spectra of sun, hydrogen, sodium, etc. E
made G by approach; C by departure. Stars approach and recede.

IV. _Celestial Measurements._-Place and time by stars. Degrees,
minutes, seconds. Mapping stars. Mural circle. Slow watch. Hoosac
Tunnel. Fine measurements. Sidereal time. Spider-lines. Personal
equation. Measure distance--height. Ten-inch base line. Parallax
of sun, stars. Longitude at sea. Distance of Polaris, a Centauri,
61 Cygni. Orbits of asteroids.

V. _The Sun._--World on fire. Apparent size from planets. Zodiacal
light. Corona. Hydrogen--how high? Size. How many earths? Spots:
1. Motion; 2. Edges; 3. Variable; 4. Periodic; 5. Cyclonic; 6.
Size; 7. Velocities. What the sun does. Experiments.

VI. _The Planets from Space._--North Pole. Speed. Sizes. Axial
revolution. Man's weight on. Seasons. Parallelism of axis. Earth
near [Page 277] sun in winter. Plane of ecliptic. Orbits inclined
to. Earth rotates. Proof. Sun's path among stars. Position of
planets. Motion--direct, retrograde. Experiments.

VII. _Meteors._--Size; number; cause of; above earth; velocity;
colors; number in space; telescopic view of. Aerolites: Systems
of; how many known. Comets: Orbits; number of comets; Halley's;
Biela's lost; Encke's. Resisting medium. Whence come comets? Composed
of what? Amount of matter in. [Symbol].

VIII. _The Planets._--How many? Uranus discovered? Neptune? Asteroids?
Vulcan? Distance from sun. Periodic time. Mercury: Elements; shapes,
as seen from earth; transits. Venus: Elements; seen by day; how
near earth? how far from? phases; Galileo. Earth: Elements; in
space; Aurora; balance of forces. Tides: Main and subsidiary causes;
eastern shores; Mediterranean Sea. Moon: Elements; hoax; moves east;
see one side; three causes help to see more than half. Revolution:
Why twenty-nine and a half days: heat--cold; how much light? Craters
and peaks lighted; measured. Eclipses--Why not every new and full
moon? Periodicity. Mars: Elements; how near earth? How far from?
Apparent size; ice-fields; which end most? Satellites--Asteroids:
How found? When? By whom? How many? Jupiter: Elements; trade-winds;
how much light received? Own heat. Satellites: How many? Colors.
Saturn: Elements; habitability; rings; flux; satellites. Uranus:
Elements; discoverer; seen by; moon's motion. Neptune: Elements;
discovered by; how? Review system.

IX. _The Nebular Hypothesis._--State it; facts confirmatory.
Objections--1. Heat; 2. Rotation; 3. Retrograde; 4. Martial moons;
5. Star of 1876. Evolution: Gaps in; conclusion.

X. _The Stellar System._-Motto. Man among stars; open page; starry
poem; stars located; named. Thuban. Etanin. Constellations: Know
them; number of stars; double; e Lyrae, Sirius, Procyon, Castor,
61 Cygni, g Virginis. Colored stars; change color. Clusters: Two
theories. Nebulae: Two visible; composed of; shapes; where? Variable
stars. Sun. b Lyrae, Mira, Betelguese, Algol; cause. Temporary;
1572. New star of 1866: Two theories. Star of 1876. Movements of
stars; Sirius; sun; 1830 Groombridge. Stars near Pleiades: Orion,
Great Dipper, Southern Cross. Centre of gravity.

XI. _The Worlds and the Word._--Rich. Number. Erroneous allusions.
Truth before discovery: 1. A beginning; 2. Creation before arrangement;
3. Light before sun; 4. Mountains under water; 5. Order of
development; [Page 278] 6. Sphere of earth; 7. How upheld; 8. Number
of stars; 9. Weight of air; 10. Meteorology; 11. Queries to Job; 12.
Sun to end of heaven; 13. View of Mitchell; 14. Herschel. What is
matter? Force? End of earth. Way to knowledge. Work of light.
Transfiguration of matter. Uniformitarianism. A whisper of Him. Man
for mastery. Each a type of higher. Survival of fittest. Uranus.
Worlds and Word one language.

XII. _The Ultimate Force._--Universe shows power: 1. Rain; Niagara;
2. Vegetable growth; 3. Worlds carried; 4. Sun; fill dome with worlds;
5. Double suns; 6. Galaxies. Correlation. What ultimate? Mind and
will. What continuous relation? Watch. Theories of gravitation:
Newton's, Le Sage's, Bible's. High-class energy deteriorates. Search
for atoms: 1. Microscope; 2. Gold; 3. Infusoria; 4. Musk. Properties
of atoms: 1. Impenetrable; 2. Indivisible; 3. Shape; 4. Quality; 5.
Crystallization; 6. Not touch each other; 7. Active; 8. Attractive;
9. Intelligent. Whose? Relation of matter to God; rock to soil.
Push upward. Highest has mastery. Man advances by highest. Matter
recapacitated. Refined habitations. Inhabitants. All force leads
back to mind. Personal and infinite.




[Page 279]
GLOSSARY OF ASTRONOMICAL TERMS AND INDEX.

ABBREVIATIONS used in astronomies, 275.
ABERRATION OF LIGHT (_a wandering away_), an apparent
  displacement of a star, owing to the progressive motion of light
  combined with that of the earth and its orbit, 199.
AEROLITE (_air-stone_), 122.
AIR, refraction of the, 40.
ALGOL, the variable star, 222.
ALMANAC, Nautical, 71; explanation of signs used, 275.
ALPHABET, Greek, 275.
ALTITUDE, angular elevation of a body above the horizon.
ANGLE, difference in directions of two straight lines that meet.
ANNULAR (_ring-shaped_) ECLIPSES, 158; nebulae, 218, 220.
APHELION, the point in an orbit farthest from the sun.
APOGEE, the point of an orbit which is farthest from the earth.
APSIS, plural _apsides_, the line joining the aphelion and
  perihelion points; or the major axis of elliptical orbits.
ARC, a part of a circle.
ASCENSION, RIGHT, the angular distance of a heavenly body from
  the first point of Aries, measured on the equator.
ASTEROIDS (_star-like_), 162; orbits of interlaced, 74.
ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS, 43.
ASTRONOMY, use of, 57.
ATOM, size of, 255; power of, 256.
AURORA BOREALIS, 143.
AXIS, the line about which a body rotates.
AZIMUTH, the angular distance of any point or body in the horizon
  from the north or south points.
BAILEY'S BEADS, dots of light on the edge of the moon seen in a
  solar eclipse, caused by the moon's inequalities of surface.
BASE LINE, 68.
BIELA'S COMET, 129.
BINARY SYSTEM, a double star, the component parts of which
  revolve around their centre of gravity.
BODE'S LAW of planetary distances is no law at all, but a study
  of coincidences.
BOLIDES, small masses of matter in space. They are usually
  called meteors when luminous by contact with air, 120.
[Page 280]
CELESTIAL SPHERE, the apparent dome in which the heavenly bodies
  seem to be set; appears to revolve, 3.
CENTRE OF GRAVITY, the point on which a body, or two or more
  related bodies, balances.
CENTRIFUGAL FORCE (_centre fleeing_).
CHROMOLITHIC PLATE of spectra of metals, to face 50.
CIRCUMPOLAR STARS, map of north, 201.
COLORS OF STARS, 214.
COLURES, the four principal meridians of the celestial sphere
  passing from the pole, one through each equinox, and one through
  each solstice.
COMETS, 126; Halley's, 128; Biela's lost, 129; Encke's, 130;
  constitution of, 131; will they strike the earth? 133.
CONJUNCTION. Two or more bodies are in conjunction when they
  are in a straight line (disregarding inclination of orbit) with the
  sun. Planets nearer the sun than the earth are in inferior
  conjunction when they are between the earth and the sun; superior
  conjunction when they are beyond the sun.
CONSTELLATION, a group of stars supposed to represent some figure:
  circumpolar, 201; equatorial, for December, 202; for January, 203;
  April, 204; June, 205; September, 206; November, 207; southern
  circumpolar, 208.
CULMINATION, the passage of a heavenly body across the meridian
  or south point of a place; it is the highest point reached in its
  path.
CUSP, the extremities of the crescent form of the moon or an
  interior planet.
DECLINATION, the angular distance of a celestial body north or south
  from the celestial equator.
DEGREE, the 1/360 part of a circle.
DIRECT MOTION, a motion from west to east among stars.
DISK, the visible surface of sun, moon, or planets.
DISTANCE OF STARS, 70.
DOUBLE STARS, 210.
EARTH, revolution of, 109; in space, 142; irregular figure, 145.
ECCENTRICITY OF AN ELLIPSE, the distance of either focus from centre
  divided by half the major axis.
ECLIPSE (_a disappearance_), 157.
ECLIPTIC, the apparent annual path of the sun among the stars;
  plane of, 106.
EGRESS, the passing of one body off the disk of another.
ELEMENTS, the quantities which determine the motion of a planet:
  data for predicting astronomical phenomena; table of solar, 274.
ELEMENTS, chemical, present in the sun, 270.
ELONGATION, the angular distance of a planet from the sun.
EMERSION, the reappearance of a body after it has been eclipsed or
  occulted by another.
[Page 281]
EQUATOR, terrestrial, the great circle half-way between the poles of
  the earth. When the plane of this is extended to the heavens,
  the line of contact is called the celestial equator.
EQUINOX, either of the points in which the sun, in its apparent
  annual course among the stars, crosses the equator, making days
  and nights of equal length.
EVOLUTION, materialistic, 182; insufficient, 189.
FIZEAU determines the velocity of light, 23.
FORCES, delicate balance of, 144.
GALILEO, construction of his telescope, 43.
GEOCENTRIC, a position of a heavenly body as seen or measured from
  the earth's centre.
GEODESY, the art of measuring the earth without reference to the
  heavenly bodies.
GOD, relation of, to the universe, 258.
GRAVITATION, laws of, 6; extends to the stars, 13; theories of, 253.
GRAVITY on different bodies, 6, 274.
HELICAL, rising or setting of a star, as near to sunrise or sunset
  as it can be seen.
HELIOCENTRIC, as seen from the centre of the sun.
HOOSAC TUNNEL, example of accuracy, 62.
HORIZONTAL PENDULUM, 272.
IMMERSION, the disappearance of one body behind another, or in
  its shadow.
INCLINATION OF AN ORBIT, the angle between its plane and the plane
  of the ecliptic.
INFERIOR CONJUNCTION, when an interior planet is between the earth
  and the sun.
JUPITER, apparent path of, in 1866, 112; elements of, 164;
  satellites of, 165; positions of satellites, 166; elements of satellites,
  166; the Jovian system, 167.
KEPLER'S LAWS--1st, that the orbits of planets are ellipses, having
  the sun or central body in one of the foci; 2d, the radius-vector
  passes over equal spaces in equal times; 3d, the squares of the
  periodic times of the planets are in proportion to the cubes of
  their mean distances from the sun.
LATITUDE, the angular distance of a heavenly body from the ecliptic.
LIGHT, the child of force, 17; number of vibrations of, 18, 25;
  velocity of, 22; undulatory and musical, 26; chemical force of, 30;
  experiments with, 37; approach and departure of a light-giving
  body measured, 51; aberration of, 199.
LIMB, the edge of the disk of the moon, sun, or a planet.
LONGITUDE. If a perpendicular be dropped from a body to the
  ecliptic, its celestial longitude is the distance of the foot of the
  perpendicular from the vertical equinox, counted toward the east;
  mode of ascertaining terrestrial, 72.
MAGELLANIC CLOUDS, 208.
[Page 282]
MARS, 159; snow spots of, 160; satellites of, 161.
MASS, the quantity of matter a body contains.
MEAN DISTANCE OF A PLANET, half the sum of the aphelion and
  perihelion distances.
MEASUREMENTS, celestial, 57.
MERCURY, 138.
MERIDIAN, terrestrial, of a place, a great circle of the heavens
  passing through the poles, the zenith, and the north and south points
  of the horizon; celestial, any great circle passing from one pole
  to the other.
METEORS, 119; swarm of, meeting the earth, 118; explosion of, 120;
  systems of, 123; relation of, to comets, 124.
MICROMETER, any instrument for the accurate measurement of very
  small distances or angles.
MIND, origin of force, 252; continuous relation of, to the
  universe, 252.
MILKY WAY, 210, 215.
MIRA, the Wonderful, 221.
MOON, the, 151; greatest and least distance from the earth, 10;
  telescopic appearance of, 155.
MURAL CIRCLE, 61.
NADIR, the point in the celestial sphere directly beneath our feet,
  opposite to zenith.
NEBULAE, 217.
NEBULAR HYPOTHESIS, not atheistic, 182; stated, 182; confirmatory
  facts, 183; objections to, 185.
NEPTUNE, elements of, 175.
NODE, the point in which an orbit intersects the ecliptic, or
  other plane of reference; ascending, descending, line of, 107.
OCCULTATION, the hiding of a star, planet, or satellite by the
  interposition of a nearer body of greater angular magnitude.
OPPOSITION. A superior planet is in opposition when the sun,
  earth, and the planet are in a line, the earth being in the middle.
ORBIT, the path of a planet, comet, or meteor around the sun, or of
  a satellite around a primary; inclination of, 106; earth's, seen
  from the stars, 70.
OUTLINE FOR STUDENTS, 276.
PARALLAX, the difference of direction of a heavenly body as seen
  from two points, as the centre of the earth and some point of its
  surface, 69.
PARALLELS, imaginary circles on the earth or in the heavens parallel
  to the equator, having the poles for their centre.
PERIGEE, nearest the earth; said of a point in an orbit.
PERIHELION, the point of an orbit nearest the sun.
PERIODIC TIME, time of a planet's, comet's, or satellite's
  revolution.
PERSONAL EQUATION, 65.
PERTURBATION, the effect of the attractions of the planets or other
[Page 283]
  bodies upon each other, disturbing their regular motion; of Saturn
  and Jupiter, 11; of asteroids, 13; of Uranus and Neptune, 176.
PHASES, the portions of the illuminated half of the moon or
  interior planet, as seen from the earth, called crescent, full, and
  gibbous.
PHOTOSPHERE of the sun, 89.
PLANET (_a wanderer_), as seen from space, 99; speed of, 101;
  size of, 102; movements retrograde and direct, 112.
POINTERS, the, 197.
POLE, NORTH, movement of, 198.
POLES, the extremities of an imaginary line on which a celestial
  body rotates.
QUADRANT, the fourth part of the circumference of a circle, or 90 deg..
QUADRATURE, a position of the moon or other body when 90 deg. from
  the sun.
RADIANT POINT, that point of the heavens from which meteors seem
  to diverge, 118.
RADIUS-VECTOR, an imaginary line joining the sun and a planet or
  comet in any part of its orbit.
RAIN, weight of, 249.
REFLECTING TELESCOPE, 44.
REFRACTING TELESCOPE, 43.
REFRACTION, a bending of light by passing through any medium, as
  air, water, prism.
RETROGRADE MOTION, the apparent movement of a planet from east
  to west among the stars.
REVOLUTION, the movement of bodies about their centre of gravity.
ROTATION, the motion of a body around its axis.
SATELLITES, smaller bodies revolving around planets and stars.
SATURN, elements of, 167; revolution of, 168; rings of, 169;
  decreasing, 171; nature of, 171; satellites of, 172.
SEASONS, of the earth, 102; of other planets, 105.
SELENOGRAPHY (_lunography_), a description of the moon's
  surface.
SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC, the twelve equal parts, of 30 deg. each, into
  which the zodiac is divided.
SOLAR SYSTEM, view of, 100, 177.
SOLSTICES, those points of the ecliptic which are most distant from
  the equator. The sun passes one about June 21st, and the other
  about December 21st, giving the longest days and nights.
SPECTROSCOPE, 46.
SPECTRUM OF SUN AND METALS, 50.
STARS, chemistry of, 28; distance of, 70-73; mode of naming, 196;
  number of, 210; double and multiple, 210; colored, 214; clusters
  of, 215; variable, 220; temporary, new, and lost, 223; movements
  of lateral, 226; in line of sight, 269.
STATIONARY POINTS, places in a planet's orbit at which it has no
  motion among the stars.
[Page 284]
STELLAR SYSTEM, the, 195.
SUMMARY OF RECENT DISCOVERIES, 269.
SUN, fall of two meteoric bodies into, 19; light from contraction
  of, 20; as seen from planets, 79; corona, 81; hydrogen flames of, 84;
  condition of, 89; spots, 90; experiments, 95; apparent path among
  the stars, 111; power of, 250.
SYMBOLS USED IN ASTRONOMY, 275.
TELESCOPE, refracting, 43; reflecting, 44; Cambridge equatorial, 46.
TELESCOPIC WORK, clusters, 210; double stars, 212.
TEMPORARY STARS, 223.
TERMINATOR, the boundary-line between light and darkness on the
  moon or a planet.
TIDES, 146.
TRANSIT, the passage of an object across some fixed line, as the
  meridian, or between the eye of an observer and an apparently
  larger object, as that of Mercury or Venus over the disk of the
  sun, and the satellites of Jupiter over its disk; of a star, 65.
ULTIMATE FORCE, the, 249.
URANUS, elements of, 173; moons of, retrograde, 174; perturbed by
  Neptune, 176.
VARIABLE STARS, 220.
VENUS, 139.
VERNIER, a scale to measure very minute distances.
VERTICAL CIRCLE, one that passes through the zenith and nadir of
  the celestial sphere. The prime vertical circle passes through the
  east and west points of the horizon.
VULCAN, discovery of, 137.
WORLDS, THE, AND THE WORD, teach the same truth, 231-245.
YEAR, the, length of, on any planet, is determined by the periodic
  time.
ZENITH, the point in the celestial sphere directly overhead.
ZODIAC, a belt 18 deg. wide encircling the heavens, the ecliptic being
  the middle. In this belt the larger planets always appear. In
  the older astronomy it was divided into twelve parts of 30 deg.
  each, called signs of the zodiac.
ZODIACAL LIGHT, 80.




TO FIND THE STARS IN THE SKY.

Detach any of the following maps, appropriate to the time of year,
hold it between you and a lantern out-of-doors, and you have an
exact miniature of the sky. Or, better, cut squares of suitable
sizes from the four sides of a box; put a map over each aperture;
provide for ventilation, and turn the box over a lamp or candle
