will you take the prisoners off our hands?"

"Yes to both. Anything else?"

"We'll need some rocket fuel. Terra says we have to correct course. Also,
we'll need a nuclear charge to throw us into a braking ellipse. And we
need a new landing boat. The sun baked the equipment out of ours."

MacFife nodded. "So be it. I'll send men to the asteroid to bring back
the prisoners and your Planeteers." He smiled. "We'll let yon rock go by
itself while hot showers and a good meal are had by all. Ye've earned it,
lad."

Rip started to thank the Scot, but his stomach suddenly turned over, and
black dizziness flooded in on him. He heard MacFife's sudden exclamation,
felt hands on him.

White light blinded him. He shook his head and tried to keep his stomach
from acting up. A voice asked, "Were you shielded from those nuclear
blasts?"

"No," he said past a constricted throat. "Not from the last. We got some
prompt radiation."

"When was that? The exact time?"

Rip tried to remember. He felt horrible. "It was twenty-three-oh-five."

"Bad," the voice said. "He must have taken enough roentgens of gamma and
neutrons to reach or exceed the median-lethal dose."

Rip found his voice again. "Santos," he said urgently. "On the asteroid.
He got it, too. The rest were shielded."

MacFife snapped orders. The ball-bat would have Santos in the ship within
minutes. Being sick in a space suit was about the most unpleasant thing
that could happen.

A hypospray tingled against Rip's arm. The drug penetrated, caught
a quick lift to all parts of his body through the bloodstream.
Consciousness slid away.




CHAPTER NINETEEN

Spacefall


Rip was never more eloquent. He argued, he begged, and he wheedled.

The _Aquila's_ chief physician listened with polite interest, but he
shook his head. "Lieutenant, you simply are not aware of the close call
you've had. Another two hours without treatment, and we might not have
been able to save you."

"I appreciate that," Rip assured him. "But I'm fine now, sir."

"You are not fine. You are anything but fine. We've loaded you with
antibiotics and blood cell regenerator, and we've given you a total
transfusion. You feel fine, but you're not."

The doctor looked at Rip's red hair. "That's a fine thatch of hair you
have. In a week or two it will be gone, and you'll have no more hair
than an egg. A well person doesn't lose hair. Your head will shine like
a space helmet."

The ship's radiation safety officer had put both Rip's and Santos'
dosimeters into his measuring equipment. They had taken over a hundred
roentgens of hard radiation above the tolerance limit. This was the
result of being caught unshielded when the last nuclear charge went
off.

"Sir," Rip pleaded, "you can load us with suppressives. It's only a few
days more before we reach Terra. You can keep us going until then. We'll
both turn in for full treatment as soon as we get to the space platform.
But we have to finish the job; can't you see that, sir?"

The doctor shook his head. "You're a fool, even for a Planeteer. Before
you get over this, you'll be sicker than you've ever been. You have a
month in bed waiting for you. If I let you go back to the asteroid, I'll
only be delaying the time when you start full treatment."

"But the delay won't hurt if you inject us with suppressives, will it?"
Rip asked quickly. "Don't they keep the sickness checked?"

"Yes, for a maximum of about ten days. Then they no longer have
sufficient effect, and you come down with it."

"But it won't take ten days," Rip pointed out. "It will only take a
couple, and it won't hurt us."

MacFife had arrived to hear the last exchange. He nodded sympathetically.
"Doctor, I can appreciate how the lad feels. He started something, and he
wants to finish it. If y'can let him, safely, I think ye should."

The doctor shrugged. "I can let him. There's a nine to one chance it will
do him no harm. But the one chance is what I don't like."

"I'll know it if the suppressives start to wear off, won't I?" Rip asked.

"You certainly will. You'll get weaker rapidly."

"How rapidly?"

"Perhaps six hours. Perhaps more."

Rip nodded. "That's what I thought. Doctor, we're less than six hours
from Terra by ship. If the stuff wears off, we can be in the hospital
within a couple of hours. Once we go into a braking ellipse, we can reach
a hospital in less than an hour by snapper-boat."

"Let him go," MacFife said.

The doctor wasn't happy about it, but he had run out of arguments. "All
right, Commander--if you'll assume responsibility for getting him off the
asteroid and into a Terra or space platform hospital in time."

"I'll do that," MacFife assured him. "Now get your hyposprays and fill
him full of that stuff you use. The corporal, too."

"Sergeant," Rip corrected. His first action on getting back to the
asteroid would be to recommend Santos' promotion to Terra base. He
intended to recommend Kemp for corporal, too. He was sure the Planeteers
at Terra would make the promotions.

The two Federation cruisers were still holding course along with the
asteroid, the Connie cruiser between them.

Within an hour, Rip and Santos, both in false good health, thanks to
medical magic, were on their way back to the asteroid in a ball-bat boat.

The remaining time passed quickly. The sun receded. The Planeteers
corrected course. Rip sent in his recommendations for promotions and
looked over the last nuclear crater to see why the blast had started the
asteroid spinning.

The reason could only be guessed. The blast probably had opened a fault
in the crystal, allowing the explosion to escape partially in the wrong
direction.

Once the course was corrected, Rip calculated the position for the final
nuclear charge. When the asteroid reached the correct position relative
to Earth, the charge would not change its course but only slow its speed
somewhat. The asteroid would go around Earth in a series of ever
tightening ellipses, using Terra's gravity, plus rocket fuel, to slow
it down to orbital speed.

When it reached the proper position, tubes of rocket fuel would change
the course again, putting it into an orbit around Earth, close to the
space platform. It wasn't practical to take the thorium rock in for a
landing. They would lose control, and the asteroid would flame to Earth
like the greatest meteor ever to hit the planet.

Putting the asteroid into orbit around Earth was actually the most
delicate part of the whole trip, but Rip wasn't worried. He had the
facilities of Terra base within easy reach by communicator. He dictated
his data and let them do the mathematics on the giant electronic
computers.

He and his men rode the gray planet past the moon, so close they could
almost see the Planeteer lunar base, circled Terra in a series of
ellipses, and finally blasted the asteroid into its final orbit within
sight of the space platform.

Landing craft and snapper-boats swarmed to meet them, and within an hour
after their arrival the Planeteers were surrounded by spacemen, cadets
from the platform, and officers and men wearing Planeteer black.

A cadet approached Rip and looked at him with awe. "Sir, I don't know how
you ever did it!"

And Rip, his eyes on the great curve of Earth, answered casually,
"There's one thing every space chick has to learn if he's going to be a
Planeteer. There's always a way to do anything. To be a Planeteer, you
have to be able to figure out the way."

A new voice said, "Now, that's real wisdom!"

Rip turned quickly and looked through a helmet at the grinning face of
Maj. Joe Barris.

Barris spoke as though to himself, but Rip turned red as his hair. "Funny
how fast a man ages in space," the Planeteer major remarked. "Take
Foster. A few weeks ago he was just a cadet, a raw recruit who had never
met high vack. Now he's talking like the grandfather of all space. I
don't know how the Special Order Squadrons ever got along before he
became an officer."

Rip had been feeling a little too proud of himself.

"It's good to get back," Rip said.




CHAPTER TWENTY

On the Platform


There were two things Rip could see from his hospital bed on the space
platform. One was the great curve of Earth. He was anxious to get out
of the hospital and back to Terra.

The second thing was the asteroid. Spacemen were at work on it, slowly
cutting it to pieces. The pieces were small enough to be carried back to
Earth in supply rockets. It would be a long time before the asteroid was
completely cut up and transported to Terra base.

Sergeant Major Koa came into the hospital ward and sat on Rip's bed. The
plastifoam mattress compressed under his weight. "How are you feeling,
sir?"

"Pretty good," Rip replied. The worst of the radiation sickness was over,
and he was mending fast. Here and there were little bloodstains, just
below the surface of his skin, and he had no more hair than a plastic
ball. Otherwise he looked normal. The stains would go away, and his hair
would grow back in a few weeks.

Santos, now officially a sergeant, was in the same condition. The rest of
Rip's Planeteers had resumed duties on the space platform. He saw them
frequently, because they made a point of dropping in whenever they were
near the hospital area.

Koa looked out at the asteroid. "I sort of hate to see that rock cut up.
There isn't much about a chunk of thorium to get sentimental over, but
after fighting for it the way we did, it doesn't seem right to cut it
into blocks."

"I know how you feel," Rip admitted, "but, after all, that's what we
brought it back for."

He studied Koa's dark face. The sergeant major had something on his mind.
"Got vack worms chewing at you?" he asked. Vack worms were a spaceman's
equivalent of "the blues."

"Not exactly, sir. I happened to overhear the doctor talking today.
You're due for a leave in a week."

"That's good news!" Rip exclaimed. "You're not unhappy about it, are
you?"

Koa shrugged. "We were all hoping we'd be together on our next
assignment. The gang liked serving under you. But we're overdue for
shipment to somewhere, and if you take eight weeks' leave, we'll be gone
by the time you come back to the platform."

"I liked serving with all of you, too," Rip replied. "I watched the way
you all behaved when the space flap was getting tough, and it made me
proud to be a Planeteer."

Maj. Joe Barris came in. He was carrying an envelope in his hand.

"Hello, Rip. How are you, Koa? Am I interrupting a private talk?"

"No, Major," Koa replied. "We're just passing the time. Want me to
leave?"

"Stay here," Barris said. "This concerns you, too. I've been reassigned.
My eight years on the platform are up, and that's all an instructor gets.
Now I'm off for space on another job."

Rip knew that instructors were assigned for eight-year periods. And he
knew that the major's specialty was the Planeteer science of exploration,
a specialty which required him to be an expert in biology, zoology,
anthropology, navigation and astrogation, and land fighting--not to
mention a half dozen lesser things. Only ten Planeteers rated expert in
exploration, and all were captains or majors.

"Where are you going?" Rip asked. "Off to explore something?"

"That's it." Major Barris smiled. "Remember once I said that when they
gave me the job of cleaning up the goopies on Ganymede, I'd ask for you
as a platoon leader?"

Rip stared. "Don't tell me that's your assignment!"

"Almost. Tell me, would you recommend any more of your men for promotion?
I'll need a new sergeant and two more corporals."

Rip thought it over. "Koa can check me on this. I'd suggest making
Pederson a sergeant and Dowst and Dominico corporals. Kemp and Santos
already have promotions."

"That would be my choice, too," Koa agreed.

"Fine." Barris tapped the envelope. "I'll correct the orders in here
and recommend the promotions. We'll get sixteen new recruits from the
graduating class at Luna, and that will complete the platoon I'm supposed
to organize. Two full platoons are waiting, and the new platoon will give
me a full-strength squadron, except for new officers. How about Flip
Villa for a platoon commander, Rip?"

Rip knew the Mexican officer was among the best of his own graduating
class. "I have to admit prejudice," he warned. "Flip is a pal of mine.
But I don't think you could do better." His curiosity got the better of
him, and he asked "Can you tell me what this is all about?"

Joe Barris reached over and rubbed Rip's bald head. "By the time fur
grows back on that irradiated dome of yours, I'll be on my way with
Koa, Pederson, and the new recruits. Santos and the rest of your crew
will report to Terra base. Flip Villa will join them there. You'll be
on Earth leave for eight weeks, but it will take about that much time for
Flip and the men to assemble the supplies and equipment we'll need."

He pulled a sheaf of papers out of the envelope. "Koa, here are orders
for you and your men. They say you're to report to Special Order Squadron
Seven, on Ganymede. SOS Seven is a new squadron, the first one organized
exclusively for exploration duties, and I'm its commanding officer. Koa,
you'll be my senior noncommissioned officer. I want you and Pederson with
me, because you can organize the new recruits en route. They have a lot
more to learn from you than they got in their two years of training.
You'll make real Planeteers out of 'em."

He picked a paper from the sheaf and waived it at Rip. "This is for you,
Lieutenant Foster." He read, "Foster, R. I. P., Lieutenant, SOS. Serial
seven-nine-four-three. Authorized eight weeks' leave upon discharge from
hospital. Upon completion of leave, subject officer will report to Terra
base for transportation to SOS Seven on Ganymede."

Joe Barris handed Rip his new orders. "You'll be on the same ship with
Flip Villa and your men. Flip will be another of my platoon leaders.
I'll be waiting for you on Ganymede. The moons of Jupiter are going to be
our home for quite a while, Rip. Our first assignment is to explore
Callisto from pole to pole."

Rip didn't know what to say. To serve under Barris, to have his own men
in a regular squadron platoon, to have Flip Villa in the same outfit,
and to be assigned to exploration duty--dirtiest but most exciting of all
Planeteer jobs--was just too much. He couldn't say anything. He could
only grin.

Maj. Joe Barris looked at Rip's shiny head and chuckled. "From what I
hear of Callisto, we're in for a rough time. Your hair will probably
grow back just in time to turn gray!"



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIP FOSTER IN RIDE THE GRAY PLANET***

