"Strip markings," Adari said. "They're usually
located to orient folks coming in from the outside.
My guess is we're close to a strip or an air lock."

"Any idea which one?" Brad asked.

"Not from appearances," Adari replied, "but I kept
track of our twists and turns to this point, and
the way I figure, we're in the western quadrant of
the city. The sector has more air locks than the
others because it's on the main route to landing
pads for the maintenance shops. We've lucked out
-- maybe."

"What do you mean by 'maybe'? Don't hold back."

"The traffic. More people about."

The silence was heavy.

"If we can make it to an air lock without being
challenged," Brad said, "we'll get Ram to a taxi.
Hodak, can you rig a taxi to manual control and
leave it with enough power for a one-time flight
through the depot's cocoon?"

Hodak, Zolan and Adari put their heads together.
Ram shoved his head in among them, and vigorous
hand motions cut the air. Ram nodded as Hodak
turned back to Brad.

"Can do," he said.

"Next item," Brad said. "Ram, can you get your
long frame into a standard suit?"

"Once we get into the air lock I'll look for the
biggest suit on the rack. Then I'll just have to
push, pull and squeeze. Won't be the first time."

Brad looked up at Kumiko, holding the scope in
place.

"Got it?" He called up.

"Yep."

"Comments?"

"As long as I'm up here, how about me taking point?"

"OK. Now, all of you. Set weapons at max. If
we're seen and tied to Ram, the whole operation
is compromised. So we'll have no witnesses. Act
accordingly."

Kumiko pushed the manhole lid aside, climbed out
and darted forward to where she could see along
the street. She took in the scene quickly.

Several people passed on a nearby strip. They did
not notice Kumiko. She waited until they passed
where they could have seen into the cul-de-sac,
then signaled the others up.

As Zolan came abreast of Kumiko he drew
a pencil-thin tube from a pocket in his tunic.
Holding it in one hand he twisted the knurled knob
that formed one end, and returned it to his pocket.
He winked at Brad who had come up beside him.

Brad saw the question in Ram's eyes.

"One of Zolan's home-grown gadgets," he said.
"Sets up an omni-interference field for a couple
of hundred meters. We'll be moving through
comm-override chatter until he switches it off."

Then to Kumiko, "Which way?"

"Left. Air lock. Hundred meters." She crouched
and darted away.

"Ram, stoop, bend, whatever it takes to shrink.
Stay close to the wall for as long as you can.
Everyone keep a few meters apart. Hodak, you stay
close to Ram and watch the rear. OK, let's do it."

Two burly men came around the end of a nearby
structure, stopped, stared at Ram as he rose
through the manhole, and then at each other. Zolan
caught both in a conical burst as they backed away.
They fell in silence.

Hodak and Zolan dashed forward. Each grasped a
set of ankles, hauled the bodies into the cul-de-sac
and dumped them down the utility hole.

Brad took a quick look in both directions and
nudged Adari.

"Go," he said.

Kumiko was at the air lock. Brad, Hodak and
Ram were well away from the cul-de-sac. Kumiko
stepped into the enclosure containing the suit racks,
her weapon up and level, safety off, finger a tiny
space from the trigger.

Two guards, sitting on a bench, rifles across their
thighs, gaped at her.

"What the hell," one of them yawped, raising his
rifle.

The other guard flipped the switch on a hand-held
transmitter and started to raise it to his lips.
Kumiko cut them down with a single sweep. She
raced up and across the long room, checking
alcoves, corridors and behind suit racks. Empty.

Ram entered, quickly followed by the others. Hodak
remained at the door, alert for intruders. Adari
moved across to the keypad control for the outer
air lock, and peered through the visi-screen. She
thumbed up.

Ram rummaged hastily among the space suits on
the rack. Adari left her position, grabbed a suit and
worked herself into it. Brad, Kumiko and Zolan were
halfway into theirs. Zolan moved to the outer door.
Hodak, suited up, called to Ram, who hurried over.

"Here's one you might squeeze into. C'mere, give it
a try."

Ram looked distastefully at the suit. "Well," he
muttered, "that's what happens to a giant among
pygmies. I couldn't find anything bigger than what
you've come up with. Give a hand here."

Adari joined them. Together, she and Hodak
shoehorned Ram into the suit and closed the seals.
Helmets fitted, they ran quickly through air tank
and suit connections security and pressure checks.
Minutes later they were ready for departure.

Brad motioned Kumiko closer, and they opened their
faceplates.

"Stay here until we return," Brad instructed,
"but keep your suit on. Now that we're all wearing
suits we can't be identified. So, if you get innocent
visitors, just incapacitate them. If anyone comes
looking for a fight, don't wait for an invitation."

Kumiko nodded and closed her faceplate. Weapon
in hand, she took up a position where she would
not be seen from the entryway.

Brad lumbered to the air lock and, a moment
later, the panel to the buffer space slipped aside.
Gesturing Ram, Zolan, Hodak and Adari through, he
stepped after them and closed and dogged the panel
leading back into the dome. He lifted the safety
cover and pressed a wall plate. With a swish of
escaping air, the outer doors slid up. They stepped
out.

 ##

A dozen taxis and space tugs were scattered about
on the ramp. Choosing the taxi most distant from
the others Zolan beckoned Hodak and Adari to follow
him. Moving as quickly as their suits and the light
gravity would allow, they reached the taxi and
climbed aboard. Brad and Ram brought up the rear,
turning often to watch other suited people moving
about. A ramp guard was some distance away,
gesturing among a knot of people. The Sentinels
remained unnoticed.

Reaching the taxi, Zolan and Hodak began to
adjust its controls, vector and power instruments.
Adari's helmet filled in the pilot position. Raising her
glove she beckoned frantically to Ram. He climbed
in beside her. Her hand on his helmet she spoke
rapidly, pointing at the instrument panel.

Brad watched Adari move back and out as Ram moved
into the seat she vacated. Bending forward, her
helmet touched Ram's as her gloved hands pointed to
where the depot was visible. She slapped Ram on the
shoulder and stepped back.

The jerry-rigged taxi rose slowly at first, gained
speed and disappeared into the backdrop of black
velvet and stars.





 Chapter THIRTY-ONE


Camari strode into the Conference Room, took
his seat at the head of the long table, and stared
bleakly at his advisors. The faces of the Ministers
of Diplomatic Protocols and Intelligence were grim;
the Commander of the Space Forces ready to explode.

"I suppose you've all studied Ram's report," Camari
said in a low, angry voice. "What do you think?
Selvin?"

"If they take the depot," Admiral Selvin said,
"we're out of business. Even if we get the depot
back undamaged, we'll be unable to make up the
time lost. The construction and launch schedules
are that tight."

"What do you suggest?"

"Stop them -- now."

"They'll know we're coming when our fleet lines up
to enter the spunnel. The gateway can handle our
military craft, no problem there. What we cannot
count on is INOR's failing to see us on the move."

"How do we get around that?"

"Diversionary tactics; draw their attention to
a major initiative on our part in which all of INOR
has role vital to its interests, if not survival.
Risky, but we have no choice."

The Strategic Concepts Computer recorded, analyzed,
and reported. They listened, then talked.

 ##

The Solar Spunnel Communications Control flashed
a Category One Alert across the system. The Alert
was directed to all planets, satellites, stations,
outposts, and all ships in space from Mercury to
deep within the Oort Cloud far beyond the Slingshot
construction sites.

Rymer Camari, President of the United Inner
Planetary System wished to address the citizens
of all nations on a matter of extreme urgency, one
that affects humankind throughout the entire Solar
System. The INOR Chiefs of State were urged to
convene their Executive and Legislative Councils
and to listen to the UIPS President.

Interplanetary comm-spunnel boosters were raised to
maximum power and range. The added power cleared
Camari's image and speech for override into all
open aud-viz transmitters and receivers throughout
the system.

When Camari's features formed in view tanks or on
screens his manner was grave, and his tone solemn
and deliberate. The message was brief.

"Greetings to all citizens and Governments of our
Solar Community," he began. "We wish you well.
I have chosen this time and this means to speak
to you directly because the threat to all of use is
real and our peril increases by the hour. Unless we
act immediately and in concert, disaster will befall
us all.

"Not long ago two of our manned recon craft were
attacked and destroyed near Planet Pluto. These
ships were part of a small protective force that
the UIPS maintains in the Plutonian Special Zone
for the safety of the Slingshot terminals and its
logistics depot.

"The Government of Planet Pluto has been familiar
with the patrollers' mission to protect Slingshot
assets in the Construction Zone since the Program
was in its early planning stages. In these latest
operations, one of our patrols was known to be
scouting the Plutonian outback for subsurface
tunnels and galleries where unscrupulous
adventurers sneak off to hide after preying on our
outposts and transports. The other UIPS patroller
had identified a cache of contraband weapons in
space that presented a clear threat to Slingshot.

"The attack on the two UIPS ships could not have
occurred without the prior knowledge, approval
and very likely, the direct orders from the highest
authorities in the Plutonian Government."

The President sat forward in his chair and his face
loomed larger across the system. His voice lowered,
and increased its intensity.

"We cannot consider these incidents in isolation.
Our transports to the Slingshot depot and
construction site are being raided and harassed
by terrorists and pirates who are directed by
and provided sanctuary by both official and
non-official entities. We are compelled to conclude
that INOR criminal adventurers and pirates act in
the context of agreements among their Governments.
Doing so constitutes direct military and economic
warfare against the UIPS and is an attempt to
sabotage the Slingshot mission.

"I must tell you now we are outraged by this
conspiracy and these attacks. The UIPS does
have recourse. It can respond in kind.

"What then? Warships carrying weapons of
unprecedented destructive power are at the ready
in both regions. Have we no choice but to keep
escalating provocation, sneak attacks and reprisals
until our full military fleets are unleashed in
their fury against each other? If we get to this,
citizens of INOR, do not rule out reprisals on your
encapsulated communities. Be aware: history clearly
shows us that there are indeed few, if any, real
sanctuaries for civilian populations in times of
war."

He paused to let the words sink in. His voice
became crisp and forceful.

"I am now faced with this decision: Should the UIPS
retaliate against Planet Pluto and all other members
of INOR that interfere with innocent passage of our
transports to and from the Slingshot sites?

"That is one course open to us; it would bring
death and havoc all across this star system we
know as our home. We must look to alternatives. The
creators and wielders of weapons must demonstrate
reason along with valor. War, in any form and at
any level, is a blind evasion of the real problems
that confront humankind.

"When the old United Planetary System was replaced
by the UIPS and INOR, the relationships among
governments and peoples deteriorated. We drifted
apart. The few interregional agreements that did
evolve supported special interests. Once ingrained,
they became acceptable, even generally attractive,
practices. Now we each have our spheres of
influence, and we guard them jealously -- and often
with apprehension.

"There remains, to this day, a deep distrust and
fear that one nation or independent colony, or any
collective, will attempt to secure advantage over
another. Each of us, focused on our own interests,
sees the danger and seeks to avoid being its
victim. This infectious distrust and fear must be
cleansed from our system-wide community of nations
if we are ever to live in peace with each other.

"Misunderstandings have arisen over the centuries
concerning the intentions for Slingshot facilities
and personnel in place throughout what has now
become INOR territories or jurisdictions. We accept
our share of blame for these misconceptions.
Let us dispel them.

"The Collector Terminal, as you all know, will be
disengaged upon completion and take its position
on the system's rim. When the launch window
opens, and it will be open to us for only a very brief
time, the Extractor must depart -- there will be no
second chance for several centuries. The Extractor
must fly as fast and as true as the missile did
from the sling of David to the head of Goliath.
The Extractor is our missile, Alpha Centauri is
our target and, as David's leather sling was the
instrument to save an ancient civilization. The
orbit of Planet Pluto powers the sling that will
save our civilizations for the ages which extend
before us, but only if we act in unity.

"What happens afterward? When the Extractor
has departed, we will no longer need the logistics
depot, and UIPS citizens in the Zone will return
home. All but a small portion of our facilities,
equipment, and supplies will be transferred on site
to the Plutonian Government or INOR generally.
Whatever is not wanted by its new owners we
will remove and help Planet Pluto to convert and
reconstruct Coldfield and the rest of the planet
to fit the needs of its citizens. We will provide
material support and training for transition to
an infrastructure and administration of Pluto's
choice. We invite all of INOR to share in this
task."

Camari leaned back for a short pause. His eyes
looked beseechingly at his unseen audience. His
voice softened.

"That was the past and, admittedly, a poor
foundation upon which to build; let us now look to
a more positive future. I make this proposal to all
Governments of our star system, the common
heritage of humankind.

"We are in disarray. As history has demonstrated
time and again there are no real winners in
contests of military might, to the contrary. Our
response to the incidents off Planet Pluto is that
we reject reprisal merely for vengeance, or for
imposing ourselves on the Plutonian people. In the
same vein, we reject war against any Government
within INOR. Not because we cannot wage war, but
because war would annihilate cities and lives on
both sides. Further, Slingshot would be lost to us,
and ultimately, the entire solar civilization would
wane and disappear.

"I propose we meet in space, along the border
between our Regions at a place of mutual agreement.
Let us convene as equals to examine our differences.
We must give greater credence to each other's needs
and aspirations and arrive at consensus on sharing
in the responsibilities for this, our family of
planets and satellites. Let us search for ways
to combine our diverse interests into a new and
majestic pioneering spirit for the great leap to
the stars yet to come.

"This is the challenge and the opportunity."





 Chapter THIRTY-TWO


Narval's rage spluttered from his lips in a
viperous hiss as he pointed at a baffled Drummer.
Brad, straight-faced behind Drummer, stood easy.
Scarf, off to the side, stiff and erect, stared
blankly at the wall behind Narval, his features
twitching to depress a smirk.

"You were responsible for Camari's emissary,
Drummer. I've had you notified that I am ready to
