to admit sadly. The terrific heat would have burned them. But what about
the others? Why couldn't he contact them?

"Excuse me, sir," he addressed the High Admiral. "What about the mines
and factories?"

"All under control without any trouble, outside of a few individual
casualties. Light cruisers and scouts took care of those while the main
battle was on."

"I'd like a small cruiser to take me to the mine where I worked," he
said, and one was ordered to come down and place itself on special
assignment at his disposal.

"Want to come with me, Dad?" he asked.

The two admirals exchanged glances, and Ferguson nodded. "Go ahead if
you want to. We won't need you here for now."

In the airlock of the cruiser Hanlon removed the disguising makeup, and
it was as his Algonian-known self, dressed in civvies he had brought for
that purpose, that he descended at the familiar little spaceport.

His father was intensely interested in that fantastic, seemingly-alive
jungle through which they walked to the mine clearing. "I've never seen
anything like this," he commented in amazement. "Are these trees and
bushes conscious, too?"

"Very slightly," his son told him. "The Guddus call them their 'little
cousins,' and I believe can communicate to some extent, but I never
could."

As they broke from the jungle's fringe, they saw a double-squad of
marines on guard. The two were allowed through the lines, and entered
the office. Behind his desk, his face dead white from suspense, sat
Peter Philander, and about the room sprawled the engineers, guards and
other workers.

"Hi, Mr. Philander!" Hanlon called cheerfully, and at sound of that
remembered voice, the superintendent's head, as well as those of all the
others, snapped up.

"You!" There was incredulity in the super's voice and manner.

"Yep, it's me," Hanlon grinned. "I'm glad nothing happened to any of
you."

"_Hmmpff!_" Philander snorted defeatedly. "What's the difference between
being killed cleanly in a fight, as against a lifetime in prison, or a
firing squad?"

"You'll get neither one," Hanlon said quietly, remembering the power he,
as a Secret Service operative, carried. "There'll be a trial, of course,
but I know that you, at least, are all okay."

"He's boss, ain't he?" one of the guards growled truculently. "Why
should he get off free iffen th' rest of us don't?"

"None of you will be harmed because of your part in the plot His
Highness Gorth Bohr was scheming. That is broken, and we know you were
all just his tools. All any of you will be tried for are your actions as
regards the Greenies. If brutality against them is proven, you'll be
properly punished for that alone."

He turned to Philander. "Are the natives all right?"

The man looked up hopelessly, unable to believe Hanlon's statement about
himself. "How do I know?" his voice was dispirited. "When the Corps
captured us, they dragged us from wherever we were working, and as far
as I know left the Greenies untended. They've probably all run back to
the woods."

Hanlon looked at his father. "I'm going out to look. I have a
feeling ..." and he walked out without saying more. Nor was he greatly
surprised to see the natives all sitting or standing quietly in their
compounds, some feeding from the fertilizer Hanlon was glad to see was
still being fed them, others merely resting, waiting.

The gates, of course, were unlocked and wide open, so Hanlon walked
quickly back to the hut his crew occupied and stepped inside the
doorway. While waiting for his eyes to adjust to the dimness he saw a
figure launching itself at him. But as he quickly stepped back outside,
in case it was an attack, he saw that it was Geck.

"You came back, you came back!" the native was babbling telepathically
in an excess of joy. "When the new humans came and took the old humans
prisoners, me said it was your work. Me knew you would come. Me tell
other Guddu to wait for you here."

"What about those near the places where the ships were being built?"
Hanlon's mind asked anxiously. "I tried to get into contact with them
but couldn't."

"Many of they were killed, yet most ran to forests when great fires that
destroy were started," was the sad response.

Hanlon was silent a moment, then telepathed again. "There is no need for
you all to stay here any longer. Tell all your people to go back to
their forests, for they are all free."

Geck turned to the other natives who were crowding close, and Hanlon
could see him talking swiftly with that peculiar-looking little
triangular-shaped mouth. Soon his mind was suffused with a tremendous
wave of joy and ecstasy, and they began dashing out. Hanlon could see
them talking to the natives in all the huts, and in moments all the
natives except Geck were streaming happily toward the nearby forests.

Hanlon turned to Geck. "I'd like to have you stay with me or where I can
reach you for a while. As soon as we can get straightened around, we'll
make arrangements to do anything we can for you."

"Me stay with friend An-yon," Geck said simply, and Hanlon was glad and
proud of that friendship with this strange alien.

They walked back to the mine office, and there Hanlon told his father
about what he had done with the natives.

Admiral Newton was intensely interested, and frankly studied the
strange, weird Geck. It was his first sight of these "vegetable"
creatures. "Animated trees," Hanlon had first called them, although now
they were so familiar to him, and he knew them so well that he thought
of them, naturally and without question, as "people."

The young Secret Serviceman explained to the elder about the
frequency-transformer he had built--but dismantled before leaving Algon.
He suggested that specialists be sent here to see what could be done
about teaching the natives any of the things they might want to know.

"But don't let them try to force the Guddus into a mechanical
civilization," he pleaded. "Let 'em grow in their own way, and make what
progress they can in whatever way comes natural to them."

"Of course," his father agreed quickly. "That's the way we always work
with such primitives. We tell them and show them what we have, but only
give them what they specifically ask for, whether we think it is what
they 'ought to have' or not. Don't worry, your friends will be in good
hands. But," there was a peculiar light in his eyes, "I sure would like
to watch an autopsy on one of them. A vegetable brain ..."

"Yes, it would be interesting," Hanlon admitted, "but I'm glad you treat
them that way." He turned back to Geck and explained, telepathically, as
best he could.

"You stay here with we," the Guddu asked hopefully.

"I'm sorry, but I have other work to do," and then, as he saw how the
other lost heart. Hanlon hastened to add, "I have to go help other
enslaved peoples on other worlds."

"Then us not try to keep you. But us hope you come to see we many time."

"I'll do that, Geck my friend, every chance I get."




Chapter 25


"We've got a problem here," Admiral Newton said as they followed the
marines who were taking the mine operatives to the cruiser to be taken
back to Simonides for their trials.

"I know it," Hanlon said thoughtfully. "The Guddus are too high in the
scale for the planet to be colonized, and too low at present to be
admitted to the Federation as true members. Yet they have immense wealth
and resources the Federation can use, and something will have to be done
to protect them from thieves and others who might again try to enslave
them."

"That will never be allowed again. We'll have to make some sort of a
treaty with them, probably establish a small base here, and perhaps make
some arrangements to mine their ores--if we have anything we can give
them in repayment. I imagine you'd better hold yourself in readiness to
head the commission that comes to handle that treaty."

"Gee, thanks for that, Dad. They're such swell people when you get to
know them. Ordinarily they live like 'children of nature,' in the
forests, without need of homes or tools or anything. They feed from the
elements in the soil, so there's no food problem. We did give them
nitrates here, but that was because they had exhausted the elements in
the dirt floors of their prison huts. In the woods that won't be needed.
Oh, well, when we get technies here, with transformers, we can find out
what to do with them."

"I'm going back to the fleet now," the elder SS man said. "I suppose you
want to go back to Simonides to handle the details of the trials of
these men. Incidentally, what about this ... Philander, did you say his
name was? Why don't you think he'll need punishment?"

Hanlon explained rapidly, finishing, "So you see, with some psychiatric
treatments, I'm sure that inferiority can be cleaned up and then he'll
be a real asset to us or whoever hires him." A sudden gleam came into
his eyes. "Say, if we make that treaty with the Guddus, he'd be just the
man to take charge here, under Corps direction."

"Well, run along and see to it, then. And Spence, did I remember to tell
you how proud I am of you?"

Hanlon hugged his father. "Thanks, Dad. I hope you always will be. I
suppose the cruiser Commander will let me ride with him?"

Newton smiled fondly. "Not 'let you,' Son. You merely tell him you're
going to go along. Admiral Ferguson assigned that ship to you on special
duty."

Hanlon's smile was embarrassed. "I still think I'm too much of a kid for
so much responsibility."

"Quit looking for sympathy." It was an affectionate growl.

"Okay, then. Safe flights, Dad--see you on Sime soon."

"Yes, I'll probably be there a day or so after you. Safe flights."

       *       *       *       *       *

Once the cruiser was in space, and the pressure of acceleration abated,
Hanlon sent word to the guards to bring Philander to his cabin. When
they had done so, he excused them, saying he would be responsible for
the safety of their prisoner.

"Sit down, sir," Hanlon said kindly to the wondering man.

"What's this all about, Hanlon?" Philander puzzled. "Who are you,
anyway?"

"I was assigned to find out what it was centering on Simonides that
seemed inimical to the peace of the Federation. The trail led me to
Algon."

"Where you used me to further your schemes, eh?" the tone was bitter.

"Please, Mr. Philander, don't misjudge me until you know all about it.
First, let me ask you, did you know who 'His Highness' really was?"

The mining engineer shrugged. "You probably know already, so why ask me?
Prime Minister of Simonides, of course ... but you said 'was'?"

"He's dead now. Did you also know he wasn't human--that he was an alien
from some ..."

"Not human? You're crazy. He was as human as any of us."

"When we get back I'll show you a full-length X-ray of him if you wish.
He was planning the conquest of our entire Federation and Galaxy. The
Corps experts are still working to find out just what the details of his
scheme were, but that much we do know. Did you know about all the
warships he was building on Algon?"

"Ships? On Algon?" The surprises were coming too fast for Philander to
adjust to them.

"Yes. Did you think your mine was all there was there? We know of nine
mines of one kind or another, a number of factories, smelters, and three
great shipyards. Incidentally, everything is now in the hands of the
Corps."

Philander shook his head in stupefaction. "I'm not calling you a liar,
sir, but it's hard to believe you. I knew there were several mines, but
not that many, nor about the rest."

"It's all true enough. And I'm still 'George' to you, my good friend,
not 'sir'."

That was a little too much for the older man. "What a mess I've made of
my life," he groaned.

Hanlon was intensely sorry and sympathetic, but in a way he was glad to
see this present mood. It would undoubtedly make easier what he wanted
to do. He went over, sat on the arm of Philander's chair and put his arm
about the other's shoulder. He gently touched that terrible scar. "When
and how did you get this?"

Philander shrank away from him, but the story raced across the surface
of his mind, and Hanlon read it.

When he (Philander) was about eight, a gang of boys were playing about
an old, tumbled-down building, and somehow knocked out the prop holding
up its remains. Three others were hurt, Philander got that cut-scar, and
his brother was killed.

"And you've felt all these years you were to blame for his death!"
Hanlon exclaimed. "When we get back I'm going to have the best plastic
surgeon remove that scar, so it will no longer be a constant reminder.
Then a top psychiatrist will give you some therapy, and help you get
your mind at rest. After that you'll be ready to take your place in
society as a very valuable citizen."

"You forget what's going to happen to me because of my part in this
plot," Philander was still bitter and unconvinced.

"Nothing's going to happen to you--you weren't guilty of anything except
having been hypnotized by an alien supermentality," Hanlon said
convincingly. "I'll see to that, myself."

Philander looked up in surprise. "You mean you ... a young fellow like
you ... can tell the ..."

"Not exactly," Hanlon interrupted with a grin. "But this was my
assignment, and my recommendations will govern. The main thing is, will
you consent to the plan I've suggested?"

Philander sat for long, thoughtful minutes, then looked up piteously.
"If you only can do it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

When the cruiser reached Simonides and Hanlon had seen the other mine
workers safely in the Corps prison at Base, and Philander installed in a
room next to his at the hotel, he called Admiral Hawarden.

"Congratulations on the mop-up, which I understand was one hundred point
oh oh oh percent," the officer said.

"Yes, the other end's under control. How about Bohr's notes?"

"They finished last night. We've got a complete list of all the
underlings who knew any of the main parts of the conspiracy, and the SS
agents have jugged them all."

"Good work."

"You did a grand job, sir. Again, my congratulations."

"Thanks, Admiral Hawarden. I've got to get busy now, on my report to the
Council."

"Call on me for any help I can give. I'd offer you my confidential
secretary to dictate them to, if it wasn't so secret."

"Thanks. She would be a big help, but we'd better not."

"How'd you know it was a 'she'?"

"Even a pigeon can admire a shapely shape," Hanlon quipped as he
disconnected.

The young SS man was just finishing his report the next day when Admiral
Newton walked into his hotel room.

"Gosh, Dad, am I _especially_ glad to see you this time!" his son
enthused. "I need you to check this report."

"Let's see what you've got." Newton settled down in a big chair to study
the report, while Hanlon fidgetted about the room, anxiously.

"A very clear, concise and complete report, Spence," Newton applauded
when he finished reading.

"Where do I send it, and to whom?"

His father looked at him quizzically. "Have you forgotten about the
special mail box for SS men?"

The younger man looked astounded. "You mean, even a thing like this
merely goes in there?"

Newton nodded. "However, in this case, since I would have been the one
to pick it up, I'll take it to Base and transmit it to the Council.
Incidentally, future reports should be marked on the envelope 'Report to
Federated Council'."

A couple of hours later Admiral Hawarden called Hanlon at the hotel,
where he had just finished making arrangements for Philander's operation
and treatments.

"Your father and I want you to come to Base at once, sir."

When he arrived in Hawarden's private office, the admiral handed him a
pair of silver bars. "These are yours now, Captain Hanlon."

The young man looked up in surprise.

"You were told promotions were swift in the SS--for those who produce,"
his father chuckled. "The Council was very gratified with your report,
and ordered the promotion."

Hanlon looked at the two insignia, and his fingers stroked them almost
tenderly.

"You miss the uniform, don't you, Spence?" sympathetically.

Hanlon gulped and nodded silently, very close to tears.

"Are you sorry you made the choice you did--to give all that up?"

A long, poignant moment of silence, then Hanlon threw back his head in a
gesture of pride. "No, Dad. I'm honestly glad I did it. To be able to
free those fine Guddus from slavery, and to save the Federation from
that horrible plot--it was well worth the little suffering it'll cost
me. But," and his smile was pathetic, "I do miss the uniform. I was so
proud, wearing it."

A moment, then Hawarden spoke. "Here are the transcripts of the Bohr
notes," and soon the two SS men were deep in the study of them. When
they had finished some time later, they agreed it was a very
comprehensive plan.

"But did you notice," Hanlon's eyes were cloudy, "he doesn't say a thing
anywhere about the part his planet or system were to play in the
conquest?"

"Yes, I'd noticed that." It was a duet from the two others, and Newton
added, "For all there is here, you'd almost feel sure he was playing a
lone hand."

"If that's true," Hawarden said thankfully, "none of the other men we've
picked up matter--we might as well let them go."

"I'd say so," Newton agreed, "if we can prove Bohr was in this for
himself, and was controlling them."

"From what I saw of him," Hanlon said seriously after a long moment of
thought, "I'd say he was capable of trying it. He certainly had 'the
will to power.' And he was no dummy--he had a really powerful mind. But
he was cold beneath that suave, soft-seeming exterior. He was utterly
without compassion, mercy, or any feeling of justice. He wouldn't care
who or what was damaged as long as he could get what he wanted. I doubt
if there was anyone he could really call a friend, or to whom he could
talk in full confidence."

"Except possibly that bird you told ..." his father began, absently,
when Hanlon interrupted with a whoop.

"Hey, that's it!" He jumped up and ran to the visiphone, and dialed the
zoo. "Bring that toogan of Bohr's back to Base!"

"What, again?" the indignant curator asked.

"I'm sorry, sir, but this is probably the last time we'll need it.
Please get it here immediately."

