"Oh, I didn't get a chance to tell you about that. This is only the
operating end," Conn said, and then asked Shanlee if there were
inspection-screens. When Shanlee indicated them, he began putting them
on. "This is the real computer."

They all gave the same view, with minor differences--long corridors,
ten feet wide, between solid banks of steel cabinets on either side.
Conn explained where they were, and added:

"Kurt and the rest of them were sitting here, all this time, wondering
where Merlin was; it was all around them."

"Well, how did you get up here?" Fawzi asked. "We couldn't find
anything from below."

"No, you couldn't." Shanlee was amused. "Watch this."

It was so simple that nobody had ever guessed it. Below, back of the
Commander-in-chief's office, there was a closet, fifteen feet by
twenty. They had found it empty except for some bits of discarded
office-gear, and had used it as a catch-all for everything they wanted
out of the way. Shanlee went to where four thick steel columns rose
from floor to ceiling in a rectangle around a heavy-duty lifter,
pressing a button on a control-box on one of them. The lifter, and the
floor under it, rose, with a thick mass of vitrified rock underneath.
The closet, full of the junk that had been thrown into it, followed.

"That's it," he said. "We just tore out the controls inside that and
patched it up a little. There's a sheet of collapsium-plate under the
floor. Your scanners simply couldn't detect anything from below."

Confident that Merlin would decree its own destruction, Shanlee gave
his parole; the others accepted it. The newsmen were admitted to the
circular operating room and encouraged to send out views and
descriptions of everything. Then the lift controls were reinstalled,
the lid was put back on top, and the only access to the room was
through the office below. The entrance to this was always guarded by
Zarel's soldiers or Brangwyn's police.

There were only a score of them who could be let in on the actual
facts. For the most part, they were the same men who had been in
Fawzi's office on the afternoon of Conn's return, a year and a half
ago. A few others--Anse Dawes, Jerry Rivas, and five computermen Conn
had trained on Koshchei--had to be trusted. Conn insisted on letting
Sylvie Jacquemont in on the revised Awful Truth About Merlin. They
spent a lot of their time together, in Travis's office, for the most
part sunk in dejection.

They had finally found Merlin; now they must lose it. They were trying
to reconcile themselves and take comfort from the achievement, empty
as it was. They could see no way out. If Merlin said that Merlin had
to be destroyed, that was it. Merlin was infallible. Conn hated the
thought of destroying that machine with his whole being, not because
it was an infallible oracle, but because it was the climactic
masterpiece of the science he had spent years studying. To destroy it
was an even worse sacrilege to him than it was to the Merlinolators.
And Rodney Maxwell was thinking of the public effects. What the Travis
statement had started would be nothing by comparison.

"You know, we can keep the destruction of Merlin a secret," Conn said.
"It'll take some work down at the power plant, but we can overload all
the circuits and burn everything out at once." He turned to Shanlee.
"I don't know why you people didn't think of that."

Shanlee looked at him in surprise. "Why, now that you mention it,
neither do I," he admitted. "We just didn't."

"Then," Conn continued, "we can tinker up something in the operating
room that'll turn out what will look like computation results. As far
as anybody outside ourselves will know, Merlin will still be solving
everybody's problems. We'll do like any fortuneteller; tell the
customer what he wants to believe and keep him happy."

More lies; lies without end. And now he'd have a machine to do his
lying for him, a dummy computer that wouldn't compute anything. And
all he'd wanted, to begin with, had been a ship to haul some brandy to
where they could get a fair price for it.

Peace had returned. At first, it had been a frightened and uneasy
peace. The bluff--he hoped that was what it had been--by the Koshchei
colonists had shocked everybody into momentary inaction. In the
twenty-four hours that had followed, the forces of sanity and order
had gotten control again. Merlin existed and had been found. As for
Travis's statement, the old general had been bound by a wartime oath
of secrecy to deny Merlin's existence. The majority relaxed, ashamed
of their hysterical reaction. As for the Cybernarchists and
Armageddonists and Human Supremacy Leaguers, government and private
police, vastly augmented by volunteers, speedily rounded up the
leaders; their followers dispersed, realizing that Merlin was nothing
but a lot of dials and buttons, and interestedly watching the
broadcast views of it.

The banks were still closed, but discreet back-door withdrawals were
permitted to keep business going; so was the Stock Exchange, but word
was going around the brokerage offices that Trisystem Investments was
in the market for a long list of securities. Nobody was willing to do
anything that might upset the precarious balance; everybody was
talking about the bright future, when Merlin would guide Poictesme to
ever greater and more splendid prosperity.

Conn's father and sister flew to Litchfield; Flora stayed with her
mother, and Rodney Maxwell returned to Force Command, shaking his head
gravely.

"She's still unconscious, Conn," he said. "She just lies there, barely
breathing. The doctors don't know.... I wish Wade hadn't gone on the
ship."

The price of what he had wanted to do was becoming unendurably high
for Conn.

They ran off the computations Merlin had made forty years before, and
rechecked them. There had been no error. The Terran Federation,
overextended, had been cracking for a century before the War; the
strain of that conflict had started an irreversible breakup. Two
centuries for the Federation as such; at most, another century of
irregular trade and occasional war between independent planets, Galaxy
full of human-populated planets as poor as Poictesme at its worst. Or,
aware of the future, sudden outbursts of desperate violence, then
anarchy and barbarism.

It took a long time to set up the new computation. Forty years
of history for almost five hundred planets had to be abstracted
and summarized and translated from verbal symbols to the
electro-mathematical language of computers and fed in. Conn and Sylvie
and General Shanlee and the three men and two women Conn had taught on
Koshchei worked and rested briefly and worked again. Finally, it was
finished.

"General; you're the oldest Merlin hand," Conn said, gesturing to the
red button at the main control panel, "You do it."

"You do it, Conn. None of us would be here except for you."

"Thank you, General."

He pressed the button. They all stood silently watching the output
slot.

Even a positronic computer does not work instantaneously. Nothing
does. Conn took his eyes from the slot from which the tape would come,
and watched the second-hand of the clock above it. The wait didn't
seem like hours to him; it only seemed like seventy-five seconds, that
way. Then the bell rang, and the tape began coming out.

It took another hour and a half of button-punching; the Braille-like
symbols on the tape had to be retranslated, and even Merlin couldn't
do that for itself. Merlin didn't think in human terms.

It was the same as before. In ignorance, the peoples of the Federation
worlds would go on, striving to keep things running until they wore
out, and then sinking into apathetic acceptance. Deprived of hope,
they would turn to frantic violence and smash everything they most
wanted to preserve. Conn pushed another button.

The second information-request went in: _What is the best course to be
followed under these conditions by the people of Poictesme?_ It had
taken some time to phrase that in symbols a computer would find
comprehensible; the answer, at great length, emerged in two minutes
eight seconds. Retranslating it took five hours.

In the beginning and for the first ten years, it was, almost item for
item, the Maxwell Plan. Export trade, specialized in luxury goods.
Brandies and wines, tobacco; a long list of other exportable
commodities, and optimum markets. Reopening of industrial plants;
establishment of new industries. Attainment of economic
self-sufficiency. Cultural self-sufficiency; establishment of
universities, institutes of technology, research laboratories. Then
the Maxwell Plan became the Merlin Plan; the breakup of the Federation
was a fact that entered into the computation. Build-up of military
strength to resist aggression by other planetary governments. Defense
of the Gartner Trisystem. Lists of possible aggressor planets. Revival
of interstellar communications and trade; expeditions, conquest and
re-education of natives....

"We can't begin to handle this without Merlin," Conn said. "If that
means blowing up the Federation, let it blow. We'll start a new one
here."

"No; if there's a general, violent collapse of the Federation, it'll
spread to Poictesme," Shanlee told him. "Let's ask Merlin the big
question."

Merlin took a good five minutes to work that one out. The question had
to include a full description of Merlin, and a statement of the
information which must be kept secret. The answer was even more
lengthy, but it was summed up in the first word: _Falsification_.

"So Merlin's got to be a liar, too, along with the rest of us!" Sylvie
cried. "Conn, you've corrupted his morals!"

The rest of it was false data which must be taped in, and lists of
corrections which must be made in evaluating any computation into
which such data might enter. There was also a statement that, after
fifty years, suppression of the truth and circulation of falsely
optimistic statements about the Federation would no longer have any
importance.

"Well, that's it," Conn said. "Merlin thought himself out of a death
sentence."

They crowded into the lift and went down to the office below.
Everybody who knew what had been going on upstairs was there. Most of
them were nursing drinks; almost everybody was smoking. All of them
were silent, until Judge Ledue took his cigar from his mouth.

"Has the jury reached a verdict?" he asked, clinging with courtroom
formality to his self-control.

"Yes, your Honor. We find the defendant, Merlin, not guilty as
charged."

In the uproar his words released, Rodney Maxwell got to his feet and
came quickly to Conn.

"Flora called just a while ago. Your mother is conscious; she's asking
for us. Flora says she seems perfectly normal."

"We'll go right away; take a recon-car. General, will you explain
things till I get back? Sylvie, do you want to come with us?"




XXII


It was autumn again, the second autumn since he had landed from the
_City of Asgard_ at Storisende and taken the _Countess Dorothy_ home
to Litchfield. Again the fields were bare and brown; all up and down
the Gordon Valley the melons were harvested, and the wine-pressing was
ready to start.

The house was crowded today. All top-level Litchfield seemed to have
turned out, and there were guests from Storisende, and even a few who
had made the trip from Koshchei to be there, Simon Macquarte, the
president of Koshchei Tech; Conn would always remember him in the
screen threatening a whole planet with devastation. Luther Chen-Wong,
the chief executive of Koshchei Colony. Clyde Nichols, the president
of Koshchei Airlines.

He almost bumped into Yves Jacquemont, coming in from the hall.
Jacquemont's beard had been trimmed down to a small imperial, and he
was wearing the uniform of Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines,
nothing at all like a Federation Space Navy uniform. He was laughing
about something; he threw an arm over Conn's shoulder, and they went
into the front parlor together.

"Oh, Gehenna of a big crop!" he heard Klem Zareff's voice, chuckling
happily, above the babble in the room. "You wouldn't believe it. Why,
we had to build six new vats...."

The thin-faced, white-haired man in the chair beside him said
something. Mike Shanlee and Klem Zareff, old enemies, were now fast
friends. Shanlee had come in from Force Command with Conn that
morning. He had stayed on Poictesme as nominal head of Project Merlin,
and intended to remain there for the rest of his life.

"Oh, there aren't any more farm-tramps," Zareff replied. "Everybody's
getting factory jobs off-planet. I have an awful time getting help,
and what I can get won't work for less than ten sols a day. Why,
they're even organizing a union...."

There were feminine shrieks from across the room, and a stampede. The
housecleaning-robot had come in, running its vacuum-cleaning hose
around and brandishing its mops. He saw his mother break away from a
group of older ladies and shout:

"_Oscar!_"

The robot stopped dead. "Yash'm?" a voice came out of it,
Sheshan-accented.

"Go out!" his mother commanded. "Go to kitchen. Stay there."

"Yash'm." The robot floated out the door to the hall.

His mother rejoined her friends. Probably telling them, for the
thousandth time, that her boy Conn fixed up the sound receptors and
voice for Oscar. Or harping on how Conn had been telling everybody the
truth, all along, and people wouldn't believe him.

Sylvie came up to him and caught his arm. "Come on, Conn; they're
going to start the rehearsal," she said.

"They've been going to start it for an hour," her father told her.

"Well, they're really going to start it now."

"All right. You two run along," Yves Jacquemont said. "And you'd
better start rehearsing for your own wedding before long. The _Genji_
will be ready to hyper out in another month, and I don't want to be at
space when my only daughter gets married."

They pushed through the crowd, dragging Conn's mother with them toward
the big living room beyond. On the way, Mrs. Maxwell stopped to try to
drag Judge Ledue out of a chair.

"Judge, the rehearsal is starting; they can't do it without you."

Ledue clung to his chair. "They daren't do it with me, Mrs. Maxwell.
If I get into it, it won't be a rehearsal; they'll be really married,
and then there won't be any point in having a wedding tomorrow."

"Oh, Morgan!" Conn called across the room to Gatworth. "You've just
been appointed temporary judge for the wedding rehearsal!"

There was a big crowd around Wade Lucas, in the next room; he was
telling them about the voyage to Baldur, from which he had returned,
and the one to Irminsul, with a cargo of arms, machine tools and
contragravity vehicles, on which he and his bride would go for their
honeymoon. There was another crowd around Flora; she was telling them
about the new fashions on Baldur, which had been brought back on the
_Ouroboros II_.

"Where's your father?" his mother was asking him. "He has to rehearse
giving the bride away."

"Probably in his office. I'll go get him."

"You'll get into an argument with somebody and forget to come back,"
his mother said. "Sylvie, you go with him, and bring both of them
back."

"When'll we have our wedding, Sylvie?" he asked as they went off
together.

"Well, before Dad goes to Aditya with the _Genji_. That'll have to be
in a month."

"Two weeks? That ought to be plenty of time to get ready, and let
people recover from this one."

"Everybody's here now. Let's make it a double wedding tomorrow," she
suggested.

He hadn't been prepared for that. "Well, I hadn't expected.... Sure!
Good idea!" he agreed.

There was a crowd in Rodney Maxwell's little office--Fawzi and some
others, and some Storisende people. One of the latter was
vociferating:

"Jake Vyckhoven's no good, and he never was any good!"

"Well, you have to admit, if he hadn't ordered the banks and the Stock
Exchange closed that time, we'd have had a horrible panic--"

"Admit nothing of the kind! Jethro, you were there, you'll bear me
out. About a dozen of us were at Executive Palace for hours, bullying
him into that. Why, we almost had to twist one of his arms while he
was signing the order with the other. And now he has the gall to run
for re-election on the strength of his heroic actions at the time of
the Travis Hoax!"

"I know who we want for President!" another Storisende man exclaimed.
"He's right here in this room!"

"Yes!" Rodney Maxwell almost bellowed, before the other man could say
anything else. "Here he is!" He grabbed Kurt Fawzi by the arm and
yanked him to his feet. "Here's the man most responsible for finding
Merlin; the man who first suggested sending my son Conn to Terra to
school, the man who, more than anyone else, devoted his life to the
search for Merlin, the man whose inextinguishable faith and
indomitable courage kept that search alive through its darkest hours.
Everybody, get a drink; a toast to our next President, Kurt Fawzi!"

Conn was sure he heard his father add: "Ghu, what a narrow escape!"

Then he and Sylvie began chanting, in unison, "_We want Fawzi! We want
Fawzi!_"



If you enjoyed this novel, you will also want to read:

SPACE VIKING
by
H. BEAM PIPER


After a galaxy-wide war had left the planetary federation in ruins,
every surviving civilized world was on its own. And that was a perfect
setup for the marauders from the far-out rim.

Trask was one of those dreaded Space Vikings, a warrior spaceman with
a crew and a ship that struck terror to a thousand worlds. But Trask
had a special personal interest In scourging the stars--he wanted to
draw upon himself the fire of a certain enemy--a renegade
planet-wrecker with a yen for galactic empire building.

Ace Book F-225 40 cent

Available at this price (plus 5 cent handling fee) from Ace Books, Inc.
(Dept. MM), 1120 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10036

Here's a quick checklist of recent releases of

ACE SCIENCE-FICTION BOOKS

40 cent


F-231 STAR GATE by Andre Norton

F-236 THE TIME TRADERS by Andre Norton

F-237 THE SHIP FROM OUTSIDE by A. Bertram Chandler
_and_ BEYOND THE GALACTIC RIM by A. Bertram Chandler

F-239 TIME AND AGAIN by Clifford D. Simak

F-240 WHEN THE SLEEPER WAKES by H. G. Wells

F-241 STAR BRIDGE by Jack Williamson and J. Gunn

