_Crataegus subvillosa, Schr. Crataegus coccinea,_ var. _mollis, T. & G._

THORN.

=Habitat and Range.=--Bordering on low lands and along streams.

     Provinces of Quebec and Ontario.

Maine,--as far north as Mattawamkeag on the middle Penobscot, Dover on
the Piscataquis, and Orono on the lower Penobscot; reported also from
southern sections; Vermont,--Charlotte (Hosford); Massachusetts,--in the
eastern part infrequent; no stations reported in the other New England
states.

     South to Pennsylvania, Louisiana, and Texas; west to Michigan and
     Missouri.

=Habit.=--Shrub or often a small tree, 20-30 feet high, with trunk 6-12
inches in diameter, often with numerous suckers; branches at 4-6 feet
from the ground, at an acute angle with the stem, lower often horizontal
or declining; head spreading, widest at base, spray short, angular, and
bushy; thorns slender, 1-3 inches long, straight or slightly recurved.

=Bark.=--Bark of the whole tree, except the ultimate shoots, light gray,
on the trunk and larger branches separating lengthwise into thin narrow
plates, in old trees dark gray and more or less shreddy; season's shoots
reddish or yellowish-brown, glossy.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, ovate, reddish-brown, shining;
scales broad, glandular-edged. Leaves simple, alternate, 3-5 inches
long, light green above, lighter beneath, broad-ovate to
broad-elliptical; rather regularly and slightly incised with fine,
glandular-tipped teeth; apex acute; base wedge-shaped, truncate, or
subcordate; roughish above and slightly pubescent beneath, especially
along the veins; leaf-stalk pubescent; stipules linear,
glandular-edged, deciduous.

=Inflorescence.=--May to June. In cymes from the season's growth;
flowers white, 3/4 inch broad, ill-smelling; calyx lobes 5, often
incised, pubescent; petals roundish; stamens indefinite, styles 3-5;
flower stems pubescent; bracts glandular.

=Fruit.=--A drupe-like pome, 1/2-1 inch long, bright scarlet, larger
than the fruit of the other New England species; ripens and falls in
September.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England. An attractive and useful
tree in low plantations; rarely for sale by nurserymen or collectors;
propagated from the seed.

[Illustration: PLATE LX.--Crataegus mollis.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Branch with thorns.
  3. Flowering branch.
  4. Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  5. Fruiting branch.

     =Note.=--The New England plants here put under the head of
     _Crataegus mollis_ have been referred by Prof. C. S. Sargent to
     _Crataegus submollis_ (_Bot. Gaz_., XXXI, 7, 1901). The new species
     differs from the true _Crataegus mollis_ in its smaller ovate leaves
     with cuneate base and more or less winged leafstalk, in the smaller
     number of its stamens, usually 10, and in its pear-shaped
     orange-red fruit, which drops in early September.

     It is also probable that _C. Arnoldiana_, Sargent, new species, has
     been collected in Massachusetts as _C. mollis_. It differs from _C.
     submollis_ "in its broader, darker green, more villose leaves which
     are usually rounded, not cuneate at the base, in its smaller
     flowers, subglobose, not oblong or pear-shaped, crimson fruit with
     smaller spreading calyx lobes, borne on shorter peduncles and
     ripening two or three weeks earlier, and by its much more zigzag
     and more spiny branches, which make this tree particularly
     noticeable in winter, when it may readily be recognized from all
     other thorn trees."--C. S. Sargent in _Bot. Gaz._, XXXI, 223, 1901.




DRUPACEAE. PLUM FAMILY.


Trees or shrubs; bark exuding gum; bark, leaves, and especially seeds of
several species abounding in prussic acid; leaves simple, alternate,
mostly serrate; stipules small, soon falling; leafstalk often with one
to several glands; flowers in umbels, racemes, or solitary, regular;
calyx tube free from the ovary, 5-lobed; petals 5, inserted on the
calyx; stamens indefinite, distinct, inserted with the petals; pistil 1,
ovary with 1 carpel, 1-seeded; fruit a more or less fleshy drupe.


=Prunus nigra, Ait.=

_Prunus Americana_, var. _nigra, Waugh._

WILD PLUM. RED PLUM. HORSE PLUM. CANADA PLUM.

=Habitat and Range.=--Native along streams and in thickets, often
spontaneous around dwellings and along fences.

     From Newfoundland through the valley of the St. Lawrence to Lake
     Manitoba.

Maine,--abundant in the northern sections and common throughout; New
Hampshire and Vermont,--frequent, especially in the northern sections;
Massachusetts,--occasional; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--not reported.

     Rare south of New England; west to Wisconsin.

=Habit.=--A shrub or small tree, 20-25 feet high; trunk 5-8 inches in
diameter; branches stout, ascending, somewhat angular, with short, rigid
branchlets, forming a stiff, narrow head.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk grayish-brown, smooth in young trees, in old
trees separating into large plates; smaller branches dark brown,
season's shoots green.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, ovate, acute, dark brown.

Leaves 3-5 inches long, light green on the upper side, paler beneath,
pubescent when young; outline ovate-obovate or orbicular,
crenulate-serrate; teeth not bristle-tipped; apex abruptly acuminate;
base wedge-shaped, rounded, somewhat heart-shaped, or narrowing to a
short petiole more or less red-glandular near the blade; stipules
usually linear, ciliate, soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--Appearing in May before the leaves, in lateral,
2-3-flowered, slender-stemmed umbels; flowers about an inch broad, white
when expanding, turning to pink; calyx 5-lobed, glandular; petals 5,
obovate-oblong, contracting to a claw; stamens numerous; style 1, stigma
1.

=Fruit.=--A drupe, oblong-oval, 1-1-1/2 inches long, orange or
orange-red, skin tough, flesh adherent to the flat stone and pleasant to
the taste. The fruit toward the southern limit of the species is often
abortive, or develops through the growth of a fungus into monstrous
forms.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England, and will grow,
when not shaded, in almost any dry or moist soil. It has a tendency to
sucker freely, forming low, broad thickets, especially attractive from
their early spring flowers and handsome autumn leaves.

[Illustration: PLATE LXI.--Prunus nigra.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Flower with petals removed.
  4. Petal.
  5. Fruiting branch.
  6. Stone.


=Prunus Americana, Marsh.=

A rare plant in New England, scarcely attaining tree-form. The most
northern station yet reported is along the slopes of Graylock,
Massachusetts, where a few scattered shrubs were discovered in 1900 (J.
R. Churchill). In Connecticut it seems to be native in the vicinity of
Southington, shrubs, and small trees 10-15 feet high (C. H. Bissell _in
lit._, 1900); New Milford and Munroe, small trees (C. K. Averill).

Distinguished from _P. nigra_ by its sharply toothed leaves, smaller
blossoms (the petals of which do not turn pink), and by its globose
fruit.

[Illustration: PLATE LXII.--Prunus Americana.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4. Petal.
  5. Flowering branch.
  6. Stone.

=Prunus Pennsylvanica, L. f.=

 RED CHERRY. PIN CHERRY. PIGEON CHERRY. BIRD CHERRY.

=Habitat and Range.=--Roadsides, clearings, burnt lands, hill slopes,
occasional in rather low grounds.

     From Labrador to the Rocky mountains, through British Columbia to
     the Coast Range.

Throughout New England; very common in the northern portions, as high up
as 4500 feet upon Katahdin, less common southward and near the seacoast.

     South to North Carolina; west to Minnesota and Missouri.

=Habit=.--A slender tree, seldom more than 30 feet high; trunk 8-10
inches in diameter, erect; branches at an angle of 45 deg. or less; head
rather open, roundish or oblong, characterized in spring by clusters of
long-stemmed white flowers, and in autumn by a profusion of small red
fruit.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk in fully grown trees dark brownish-red,
conspicuously marked with coarse horizontal lines; the outer layer
peeling off in fine scales, disclosing a brighter red layer beneath; in
young trees very smooth and shining throughout; lines very conspicuous
in the larger branches; branchlets brownish-red with small horizontal
lines; spray and season's shoots polished red, with minute orange dots.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, broad-conical, acute. Leaves
numerous, 3-4 inches long, 1-2 inches wide, light green and shining on
both sides, ovate-lanceolate, oval or oblong-lanceolate, finely
serrate; teeth sharp-pointed, sometimes incurved; apex acuminate; base
obtuse or roundish; midrib depressed above; leafstalks short, channeled;
stipules falling early.

=Inflorescence.=--June. Appearing with the leaves, in lateral clusters,
the flowers on long, slender, somewhat branching stems; calyx 5-cleft;
segments thin, reflexed; petals 5, white, obovate, short-clawed; stamens
numerous; pistil 1; style 1.

=Fruit.=--About the size of a pea, round, light red, thin-meated and
sour: stone oval or ovate.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers a light
gravelly loam, but grows in poor soils and exposed situations; habit so
uncertain and tendency to sprout so decided that it is not wise to use
it in ornamental plantations; sometimes very useful in sterile land. A
variety with transparent yellowish fruit is occasionally met with, but
is not yet in cultivation.

[Illustration: PLATE LXIII.--Prunus Pennsylvanica.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4. Petal.
  5. Fruiting branch.


=Prunus Virginiana, L.=

CHOKECHERRY.

=Habitat and Range.=--In varying soils; along river banks, on dry
plains, in woods, common along walls, often thickets.

     From Newfoundland across the continent, as far north on the
     Mackenzie river as 62 deg..

Common throughout New England; at an altitude of 4500 feet upon Mt.
Katahdin.

     South to Georgia; west to Minnesota and Texas.

=Habit.=--Usually a shrub a few feet high, but occasionally a tree 15-25
feet in height, with a trunk diameter of 5-6 inches; head, in open
places, spreading, somewhat symmetrical, with dull foliage, but very
attractive in flower and fruit, the latter variable in color and
quantity.

=Bark.=--Trunk and branches dull gray, darker on older trees, rough with
raised buff-orange spots; branchlets dull grayish or reddish brown;
season's shoots lighter, minutely dotted. Bitter to the taste.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds 1-1-1/4 inches long, conical,
sharp-pointed, brown, slightly divergent from the stem.

Leaves 2-5 inches long and two-thirds as wide, dull green on the upper
side, lighter beneath, obovate or oblong, thin, finely, sharply, and
often doubly serrate; apex abruptly pointed; base roundish, obtuse or
slightly heart-shaped; leafstalk round, grooved, with two or more glands
near base of leaf; stipules long, narrow, ciliate, falling when the
leaves expand.

=Inflorescence.=--Appearing in May, a week earlier than _P. serotina_,
terminating lateral, leafy shoots of the season in numerous handsome,
erect or spreading racemes, 2-4 inches long; flowers short-stemmed,
about 1/3 inch across; petals white, roundish; edge often eroded; calyx
5-cleft with thin reflexed lobes, soon falling; stamens numerous; pistil
1; style 1.

=Fruit.=--In drooping racemes; varying from yellow to nearly black,
commonly bright red, edible, but more or less astringent; stem somewhat
persistent after the cherry falls.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in almost
any soil, but prefers a deep, rich, moist loam. Vigorous young trees are
attractive, but in New England they soon begin to show dead branches,
and are so seriously affected by insects and fungous diseases that it is
not wise to use them in ornamental plantations, or to permit them to
remain on the roadside.

[Illustration: PLATE LXIV.--Prunus Virginia.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Flowering branch.
  3. Flower with part of perianth and stamens removed.
  4. A petal.
  5. Fruiting branch.


=Prunus serotina, Ehrh.=

RUM CHERRY. BLACK CHERRY.

=Habitat and Range.=--In all sorts of soils and exposures; open places
and rich woods.

     Nova Scotia to Lake Superior.

Maine,--not reported north of Oldtown (Penobscot county); frequent
throughout the other New England states.

     South to Florida; west to North Dakota, Kansas, and Texas,
     extending through Mexico, along the Pacific coast of Central
     America to Peru.

=Habit.=--Usually a medium-sized tree, 30-50 feet in height, with a
