There's always a way to do anything. To be a Planeteer you have to be able
to figure out the way."

A new voice said, "Now that's real wisdom!"

Rip turned quickly and looked through a helmet at the grinning face of
Major Joe Barris.

Barris spoke as though to himself, but Rip turned red as his hair. "Funny
how fast a man ages in space," the Planeteer major remarked. "Take Foster.
A few weeks ago he was just a cadet, a raw recruit who had never met high
vack. Now he's talking like the grandfather of all space. I don't know how
the Special Order Squadrons ever got along before he became an officer."

Rip had been feeling a little too proud of himself.

"It's good to get back," Rip said.





CHAPTER TWENTY - ON THE PLATFORM


There were two things Rip could see from his hospital bed on the space
platform. One was the great curve of earth. He was anxious to get out of
the hospital and back to Terra.

The second thing was the asteroid. Spacemen were at work on it, slowly
cutting it to pieces. The pieces were small enough to be carried back to
earth in supply rockets. It would be a long time before the asteroid was
completely cut up and transported to Terra base.

Sergeant-major Koa came into the hospital ward and sat on Rip's bed. The
plastifoam mattress compressed under his weight. "How are you feeling,
sir?"

"Pretty good," Rip replied. The worst of the radiation sickness was over
and he was mending fast. Here and there were little blood stains just
below the surface of his skin, and he had no more hair than a plastic
ball. Otherwise he looked normal. The stains would go away and his hair
would grow back within a matter of weeks.

Santos, now officially a sergeant, was in the same condition. The rest of
Rip's Planeteers had resumed duties on the space platform. He saw them
frequently because they made a point of dropping in whenever they were
near the hospital area.

Koa looked out at the asteroid. "I sort of hate to see that rock cut up.
There isn't much about a chunk of thorium to get sentimental over, but
after fighting for it the way we did, it doesn't seem right to cut it into
blocks."

"I know how you feel," Rip admitted, "but after all, that's what we
brought it back for."

He studied Koa's brown face. The big Hawaiian had something on his mind.
"Got vack worms chewing at you?" he asked. Vack worms were a spaceman's
equivalent of "the blues."

"Not exactly, sir. I happened to overhear the doctor talking today. You're
due for a leave in a week."

"That's good news!" Rip exclaimed. "You're not unhappy about it, are you?"

Koa shrugged. "We were all hoping we'd be together on our next assignment.
The gang liked serving under you. But we're overdue for shipment to
somewhere, and if you take eight weeks' leave, we'll be gone by the time
you come back to the platform."

"I liked serving with all of you, too." Rip replied. "I watched the way
you all behaved when the space-flap was getting tough and it made me proud
to be a Planeteer."

Major Joe Barris came in. He was carrying an envelope in his hand.

"Hello, Rip. How are you, Koa? Am I interrupting a private talk?"

"No, Major," Koa replied. "We're just passing the time. Want me to leave?"

"Stay here," Barris said. "This concerns you, too. I've been reassigned.
My eight years on the platform are up, and that's all an instructor gets.
Now I'm off for space on another job."

Rip knew that instructors were assigned for eight-year periods. And he
knew that the major's specialty was the Planeteer science of exploration.
Barris's specialty required him to be an expert in biology, zoology,
anthropology, navigation and astrogation, and in land fighting. Not to
mention a half dozen other lesser things. Only ten Planeteers rated expert
in exploration and all were captains or majors.

"Where are you going?" Rip asked. "Off to explore something?"

"That's it." Major Barris smiled. "Remember once I said that when they
gave me the job of cleaning up the goopies on Ganymede I'd ask for you as
a platoon leader?"

Rip stared. "Don't tell me that's your assignment!"

"Almost. Tell me, would you recommend any more of your men for promotion?
I'll need a new sergeant and two more corporals."

Rip thought it over. "Koa can check me on this. I'd suggest making
Pederson a sergeant and Dowst and Dominico corporals. Kemp and Santos
already have promotions."

"That would be my choice, too," Koa agreed.

"Fine." Barris tapped the envelope. "I'll correct the orders in here and
recommend the promotions. We'll get sixteen new recruits from the
graduating class at Luna and that will complete the platoon I'm supposed
to organize. Two full platoons are waiting, and the new platoon will give
me a full-strength squadron. Except for new officers. How about Flip Villa
for a platoon commander, Rip?"

Rip knew the Mexican officer was among the best of his own graduating
class. "I have to admit prejudice," he warned. "Flip is a pal of mine. But
I don't think you could do better." His curiosity got the best of him and
he asked, "Can you tell me what this is all about?"

Joe Barris reached over and rubbed Rip's bald head. "By the time fur grows
back on that irradiated dome of yours, I'll be on my way with Koa,
Pederson, and the new recruits. Santos and the rest of your crew will
report to Terra base. Flip Villa will join them there. You'll be on
earth-leave for eight weeks, but it will take about that much time for
Flip and the men to assemble the supplies and equipment we'll need."

He pulled a sheaf of papers out of the envelope. "Koa, here are orders for
you and your men. They say you're to report to Special Order Squadron
Seven, on Ganymede. SOS Seven is a new squadron, the first one organized
exclusively for exploration duties, and I'm its commanding officer. Koa,
you'll be my senior noncommissioned officer. I want you and Pederson with
me because you can organize the new recruits enroute. They have a lot more
to learn from you than they got in their two years of training. You'll
make real Planeteers out of 'em."

He picked a paper from the sheaf and waved it at Rip. "This is for you,
Lieutenant Foster." He read, "Foster, R.I.P., Lieutenant, SOS. Serial
seven-nine-four-three. Authorized eight weeks' earth-leave upon discharge
from hospital. Upon completion of leave subject officer will report to
Terra base for transportation to SOS Seven on Ganymede."

Joe Barris handed Rip his new orders. "You'll be on the same ship with
Flip Villa and your men. Flip will be another of my platoon leaders. I'll
be waiting for you on Ganymede. The moons of Jupiter will be our home for
quite a while, Rip. Our first assignment is to explore Callisto from pole
to pole."

Rip didn't know what to say. To serve under Barris, to have his own men in
a regular squadron platoon, to have Flip Villa in the same outfit, and to
be assigned to exploration duty--dirtiest but most exciting of all
Planeteer jobs--it was just too much. He couldn't say anything. He could
only grin.

Major Joe Barris looked at Rip's shiny head and chuckled. "From what I
hear of Callisto, we're in for a rough time. Your hair will probably grow
back just in time to turn gray!"





WHITMAN BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS


                   NEW STORIES OF ADVENTURE AND MYSTERY

Up-to-the-minute novels for boys and girls about favorite characters, all
popular and well known--

      ROY ROGERS and the Rimrod Renegades
      ROY ROGERS and the Gopher Creek Gunman
      ROY ROGERS and the Raiders of Sawtooth Ridge
      ROY ROGERS and the Outlaws of Sundown Valley
      ROY ROGERS and the Ghost of Mystery Rancho

      GENE AUTRY and the Big Valley Grab
      GENE AUTRY and the Bad Men of Broken Bow
      GENE AUTRY and the Thief River Outlaws
      GENE AUTRY and the Redwood Pirates
      GENE AUTRY and the Golden Ladder Gang

      TARZAN and the City of Gold
      TARZAN and the Forbidden City

      THE BOBBSEY TWINS: Merry Days Indoors and Out
      THE BOBBSEY TWINS in the Country
      THE BOBBSEY TWINS at the Seashore

The books listed above may be purchased at the same store where you
secured this book.





WHITMAN BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS


                   NEW STORIES OF ADVENTURE AND MYSTERY

      THE WALTON BOYS in High Country
      THE WALTON BOYS in Rapids Ahead
      THE WALTON BOYS and Gold in the Snow

      SAND DUNE PONY

      RIP FOSTER Rides the Gray Planet

      TOM STETSON and the Blue Devil
      TOM STETSON and the Giant Jungle Ants
      TOM STETSON on the Trail of the Lost Tribe

      GINNY GORDON and the Mystery at the Old Barn
      GINNY GORDON and the Mystery of the Missing Heirloom
      GINNY GORDON and the Disappearing Candlesticks

      TRIXIE BELDEN and the Gatehouse Mystery
      TRIXIE BELDEN and the Red Trailer Mystery
      TRIXIE BELDEN and the Secret of the Mansion

      ZANE GREY'S The Spirit of the Border
      ZANE GREY'S The Last Trail

The books listed above may be purchased at the same store where you
secured this book.






***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIP FOSTER RIDES THE GRAY PLANET***



CREDITS


December 20, 2006

            Project Gutenberg Edition
            Greg Weeks
            Joshua Hutchinson
            Online Distributed Proofreading Team



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 20147.txt or 20147.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/1/4/20147/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
