
One of our tower vehicles was preparing to rise. Its ray, following the
search-beams upward, was aimed at the invaders, but they were beyond its
effective range. Their weapons of attack? I knew now.

"Suicides!"

Whether Elza said it, or merely thought it I do not know. One of the
figures came down as though falling. A few seconds only; but though our
search-beam showed it, the smaller rays for those seconds missed it.
Down--until no more than five hundred feet above us it checked its fall.
A giant of a man; and with his hand cylinder--in range now--he shot a
bolt at our power house. It struck; I could see the flash, saw an aerial
shatter before the charge went harmlessly into the body of the building.
Then one of our rays caught the man; his figure crumpled; the shower of
sparks as his barrage was broken, exploded like a tiny bursting bomb;
and as the sparks died, there was nothing where the man had been.

A suicide; but one of our aerials was shattered. And then others came
down--not many, for it was grim business and the courage of them must
have failed at the last. Falling bodies; tiny bolts striking the power
house; the sparks--then empty air where living men had been.

Our tower left the ground. Some of our men, with small flying platforms
strapped to them, were crowding its top. Its beams preceded it--but I
saw the beams breaking intermittently as the bolts struck the power
house. The invaders wavered with indecision. Some of them came down to
voluntary death; others strove for the cliff-top; some took flight. Our
tower swept into them; one of them, injured but not annihilated, fell
with a crash into the encampment.

Above Elza and me was a maze of flashing beams; futile bolts; the puffs
of myriad sparks. A bolt seemed to strike quite near where we were
sitting; I drew Elza back and we crouched in the hollow of a rock. A
body came hurtling down, crashed to the cliff-ledge almost at our feet
with the sickening thump of mangled flesh and broken bones--hung an
instant to give me a momentary glimpse of a face contorted in death
agony; then rolled over and fell further down the jagged cliff.

Then above us presently there was silence and the drab empty sky. Our
tower was back beyond the cliff-top. Soon it appeared; apparently
unharmed, it came dropping down to its former place on the ground.

The first attack was over. And off in the distance a few solitary
figures were winging their way back to the City of Ice.




CHAPTER XXXVI

_City of Ice Besieged_


We were not greatly harmed by this surprise attack; the power house was
superficially damaged, but soon repaired. That night--I call it that
though the constant weak daylight made the term incongruous--activity
showed in the City of Ice.

It came with a vertical spray of light rising from the ice wall which
encircled the city. Spreading light beams rising from points a hundred
feet apart along the wall. The beams spread fan-shape, so that within
fifty feet above their source they met and merged into a thin sheet of
effulgence rising into the sky. Tarrano's barrage.

It seemed then that beyond suicidal sorties of the kind we had just
repulsed, Tarrano was planning to stand purely on the defensive. It was
our own plan to surround the city with our towers; even those on the
further side would be within range of our power house; and with the city
thus beleaguered, we would attack the wall from every side at once.

We tested now this barrage Tarrano had thrown up. Sprays of its
insulated area came down to protect the wall in front; and protected
also the triangular spaces between the sources of the main beams.
Tentatively one of our towers approached within range; but our rays only
beat into the barrage with the hiss of molten metal plunged into water,
and with a burst of interference sparks. Even at a horizontal thousand
feet we could do nothing. Then we tried altitude. Our projectors,
mounted individually on small platforms automatically controlled to fly
without human pilot, went up and we strove to get them over the barrage.

At five thousand feet one went over safely. But the electronic bomb it
dropped into the city was an easy mark for Tarrano's watchful defense
rays. He exploded it harmlessly when it was still high above him.

After the next time of sleep we invested the city. Our towers were set
in a ring about it, two thousand feet from the wall. They were mobile
units, ready to sail forward or back or upward at any moment. Georg
stayed in command of the instrument room. It was never placed, but
sailed continuously in slow circular flight around the city above our
line. The power house remained in its place, with our largest projector
mounted on the cliff beside it in order to frustrate any further
attacks.

They were solemn moments as we broke our encampment. The girls, far more
agile in the air than men, were lightly dressed, with the supporting
mechanism strapped to them. The heating units enveloped them in an
invisible cloak of warm air. To their left arms a strapped cylinder gave
off a fan-shape area of insulation--an almost invisible shield of
protective barrage some five feet long. It showed as a faint glow of
light; and in flight their left arms could swing it like a shield to
protect their bodies. They had telephonic ear-pieces available; a tiny
mirror fastened to their chests to face them, upon which Georg or
Geno-Rhaalton could project images; a mouthpiece for talking to Georg;
and a belt of offensive weapons, useful within a range of five hundred
feet but no further.

Very alert and agile, twisting and turning in the air were these girls.
We men were similarly equipped, but our movements in the air were
heavier, clumsier. Elza and I had practiced with the others for days;
and with our harmless duelling rays I had found that I could never hope
to hit her while she dealt me mortal blows.

Elza, commanding a squad of twenty girls, was assigned to a portion of
the line some helans from me. My own place, with a hundred men under me,
was near a tower almost on the opposite side from the power house.

It was a solemn parting from Elza. I wrapped her in my arms, tried to
smile. "Be very--careful, Elza."

She kissed me, clung to me; then cast me off and was gone.

With the city invested, we rested idly for another time of sleep.
Occasionally we made a tentative tower attack which came to nothing.
Tarrano waited; his barrage remained the same. We tried to provoke a
move from him, but could not.

The snow-plain where I was stationed here was similar to the other side,
save that there were no mountains. From the power house to Tarrano's
wall there was a dip, so that the wall stood upon higher ground. On my
side, however, the reverse was true. The wall lay in a hollow in one
place, with a steady upward slope back from it to uplands behind us, as
though in some better day a broad watercourse had flowed down here, now
long since buried in solid ice and snow.

I mention this topography because it had a vital bearing upon what so
soon was to transpire.

Rhaalton desired that Tarrano come out and attack us; but Tarrano would
not. We thought perhaps that his offense was inadequate and the one move
that he made strengthened that belief. From the city beside the palace,
a rectangle of black metal some fifty feet square, rose slowly up. In
aspect it was a square, windowless room--a room without a ceiling, open
at the top. It rose to a height of five hundred feet and hung level. And
from it depended dangling power cables connecting it with the ground.

It was the presence of these cables that made us feel Tarrano was
offensively weak. He could not aerially transport his power; hence, for
offense he could only rely upon individual batteries which, unless
permanently stationed within the city, we knew would have a short range
at best. We watched this thing in the air for hours. It did not move; it
was soundless. What was its purpose? We could not guess.

And then at last, Geno-Rhaalton ordered us all to the attack.




CHAPTER XXXVII

_Battle_


I found myself in the air; with my men around me we hovered. Then
Georg's command from the instrument room sounded in my ears. I gave the
signal; and flying wedge-shaped, we hurled ourselves forward. It was
like lying on the air, diving head foremost. The rush of wind sang past
me; the ground, a hundred feet below, was a white surface flowing
backward.

We were heading for the base of one of Tarrano's barrage projectors. It
was mounted within the wall; but the wall itself was protected merely by
a fan-shaped subsidiary beam--a weaker barrage over that small area,
which by concentrated effort we hoped to break.

From a helan away on both sides of me I saw other wedges of our men
coming slanting in to assail the same point; overhead a corps of girls
was hovering. Our towers, three of them concentrated here, had risen to
a moderate height; their rays were playing upon the threatened area; a
steady fountain of sparks showed where they were striking the barrage.

A silent bombardment of flashing beams and sparks. At five hundred feet
we added our own smaller rays to the turmoil. If the barrage would break
at this point....

The instrument room, watchful of everything, sailed over me. On my
mirror I saw Georg's intent face; his voice said:

"Careful, Jac! They may come out."

Prophetic words! The segment of barrage here suddenly vanished. A ray
darted out. Beside it, a cloud of flying figures came out of the city
like insects from a hive.

An inferno of almost hand to hand fighting. It was everyone for himself;
and I gave the order for my men to break formation. Ordered them to get
up close to the wall if they could ... to strike, with the closest
possible range at the base of the enemy ray....

I flung myself forward. Tarrano's men soon were around me. Twisting,
darting figures ... tiny beams of death to be fended off with my
shield....

A body fell past me in the air ... others, while I looked at them, in
the blink of an eyelid, vanished into nothingness ... One of our towers
sailing high, suddenly went dark, turned over, wavered down, dismembered
with leprous missing parts--and then in a puff was obliterated.

I found myself nearly up to the wall, and higher than its top. The
segment of barrage remained broken. I could see into the city--the Ice
Palace, still seemingly deserted. And near it, the base of the powerful
ground ray which was assailing our towers ... If I could get past the
wall, unnoticed, get within range of that projector....

Most of the fighting was now behind me. We seemed to be holding our
own ... the squad of girls was coming down; I prayed that Elza might not
be among them....

The instrument room had vanished beyond my sight; but Georg's voice
said:

"We're sending reinforcements! Gather your men--hold off for a moment!"

From every pan of our line other units of men and towers were coming. We
had broken through the barrage here. If we could now, by a concerted
rush, get our force over the wall, into the city....

Within the instrument room, Georg sat watching. The inactivity of his
own part, the comparative lack of personal danger, galled him. But he
was too occupied with his duties to give it more than passing thought.
We had broken the barrage at one point ... from every quarter he was
rushing reinforcements there to take advantage of the break....

And then Tarrano's trickery became apparent. We had not broken his
barrage; he had deliberately withdrawn it, to encourage us, to bring our
other units to the spot.... Our power house, neglected, was momentarily
comparatively defenseless. The enemy barrage at the point of the wall
nearest it, suddenly lifted. Beams darted from the opening ... men came
out in a cloud....

I held back momentarily from the wall and gathered my remnant of men
about me. Only half my former strength; but with sinking heart I tried
to assure myself that the others had not heeded my call. The fighting
here had slackened; Tarrano's men had risen high, engaged at long range
by our girls, from whom they were slowly, trickily retreating as though
to lure the girls above the city; and my heart was thankful when I heard
the relayed order from Rhaalton for the girls to withdraw--not to pass
above the wall, even at high altitude. The order came just in time; the
barrage here flashed on again, trapping a few of our men behind it.

I was aware of this new attack on the power house. Our units were
hurriedly being ordered back. Georg, in desperation, had flung his
instrument vehicle at the enemy ray ... My connection broke; and then
another connection brought me someone's voice with the report that the
instrument room had darkened that main enemy ray, but had itself crashed
to the ground ... I wondered if Georg were killed ... later, I heard
someone say that he was safe within the power house....

I disobeyed my final orders; I did not swing back toward the power
house; instead, with my men around me, we fled back from this segment of
the wall to the higher lying white plain behind it.

I have spoken of the down-grade of this land here, culminating in the
depression which marked this part of the wall. It was that depression
which gave me my idea. Our heat-ray cylinders had so far been useless.
They had a range of only two hundred feet, and no power to attack a
barrage. Some of them had futilely been used; the snow and ice on the
ground above our recent fighting was melted in patches--pools of boiling
water lay on the naked rock; and the water, flowing down the depression,
had reached the ice-wall--a tiny stream of it, eating into the wall,
slowly, surely....

With my men I flew up the slope. The ice and snow here melted under
the close-range play of our heat-cylinders. Rivulets of boiling water
began creeping toward the city. Other men at my call joined us. Two
hundred of us soon were melting the ice. The rivulets merged into
brooks, to streams--and soon a river torrent of hissing, boiling water
gathering volume as it went, was surging at the wall. The wall
began melting--itself feeding this monster which was eating at its
vitals ... a yawning hole began opening at the base of the wall ... it
began sagging at the top ... crumbling....

The segment of barrage here went dark. No trickery now; the barrage at
this point actually was broken. The boiling river went through the wall,
swept down the slope into the city. Through the great clouds of steam I
could see the Ice Palace with its brittle outlines softening under the
heat ... one of its thin spires broke off and fell....

Feverishly we added to the river source. The whole area here was grey
with steam. Girls had joined us ... Elza was not among them ... Elza!
With my triumph there lay always in the background of my consciousness
the weight of my fear for Elza....

The fighting in the other sector had continued desperately. Our power
house was hopelessly damaged; the towers, with their power gone, were
using their batteries; soon they would be exhausted. But now we
abandoned that sector; our remaining towers--all our flying forces--came
to this melting area where the vanishing city lay defenseless before
us.... We hurled ourselves into it, using only our heat-rays. Everywhere
we added to the boiling torrent; even the interference heat of the
fighting was to our advantage. This brittle city which owed its very
existence to the congealing cold, lay enveloped in a cloud of steam.

Then Tarrano played his last card. The cubical building of metal with
the cables depending from it, still hung motionless. It now burst into
sound. A low electrical hum; then louder to a whine--a scream. Our men
and girls were in the air around it. I too was there. Tarrano's men--the
remaining few who were desperately fighting--had suddenly withdrawn.

And then we knew the purpose of this hanging room. A strange form of
some tremendous electro-magnet. I could feel it pulling at me. My power
to guide myself in the air was wavering.

From my height I could see down into this ceilingless rectangle. It was
un-manned by humans. A room of whirling, flashing knives! Above it, even
then some of our men were struggling in its magnetic grip ... being
drawn down into it ... a girl's power must suddenly have collapsed; she
was sucked in with a rush--torn to fragments by the whirling knives....

The area of magnetism seemed to spread for a helan or more. Everywhere
around me I saw our men and girls struggling with it, fighting to keep
away, but closing in a ring around it ... faster, continually more
helpless until at last, their bodies out of control whirling end over
end, they were sucked in like water rushing into a turbine.... One of
our weakened towers attacked it; but some of the remnants of Tarrano's
projectors caught the tower and darkened it.

Through the rising clouds of steam I could see the magnet vaguely now.
But I could feel it pulling; and soon, in spite of myself, I was fairly
close above it. I strove to keep my wits. The others who were meeting
their death lost control of their bodies at the last and could not use
their cylinders. I had some battery power remaining; I snapped on my
disintegrating ray to test it. It was my last desperate recourse.

I righted my body, and yielding to the magnetic pull, ceasing to
struggle, I dove head first at that yawning rectangle. A gleaming blur
of knives ... blood-stained now ... within these rectangular walls
horrible carnage....

A second of despair; but my ray struck true ... Around me was chaos; my
senses reeled, went black for an instant. But I recovered, found myself
whirling in the empty air....

The city was melting into a turmoil of boiling water and surging steam.
The fighting everywhere had ceased. Wavering figures were
rising--fugitives struggling away. With my senses still confused, I
righted myself, undecided where to go or what to do. Above me two
figures were still in combat. One of them--a man--assailed by a
heat-ray, came hurtling down past me. The other wavered--a girl with her
flying mechanism out of control. She was a hundred feet or more above
me, wavering downward. Elza! I shot myself up to her, seized her in my
arms, my own supporting mechanism sustaining us both. Elza, spent, but
uninjured, I held her close.

"Elza dear! My Elza!"

We hung there in the air. From out the vanishing city, rising through
the steam came a small metal vehicle. A pointed cylinder, in height no
more than twice that of a man. It came up slowly. Its rectangular door
was open. As it reached our level and went past us quite close, I saw a
man's figure standing there. Tarrano! Tarrano alone! From the wreckage
of his city, making his escape alone!

Without thought--holding Elza tightly within my arms--I flung us upward.
Tarrano saw us, recognized us. He slackened his upward pace. With my
sober reason gone, I strove to overtake him; saw the sardonic leer on
his face but did not realize that he was waiting for us. We caught up
with his vehicle; he pulled us through the doorway, to the floor of the
narrow circular room with its heavy translucent panes.

He was bending over me, leering. "Jac Hallen! And my little Lady Elza!
How fortunate!"

I cast off Elza and gained my feet. For an instant we stood--Tarrano and
I--measuring each other. He seemed calm; his face bore a slow sardonic
smile; he was unarmed, drawn back against the concavity of the wall,
watching me with his steady, keen eyes. Behind him through the low
window, I saw the white ground now far below us; we were rising swiftly.

"So you brought my Lady Elza back to me, Jac Hallen?"

He got no further, for with a leap I was upon him. To use my weapons in
these narrow quarters would have been suicide. My body pinned him
against the wall as I lunged; my fingers strove for his throat.

He was no larger than I, but the strength of him was extraordinary. His
body stiffened to resist my impact; one of his hands gripped my wrist;
his other hand--the heel of it--came up beneath my chin, forcing my head
back.

He fought silently, with movements that seemed almost deliberate. Into
the center of the room we struggled. I saw that Elza was upon her feet,
a hand pressed to her mouth in terror.

"Elza!"

I had meant to tell her to use the control levers which were on a small
table nearby--to bring us back to the ground; but with this momentary
diverting of my attention, Tarrano's fist struck me full in the face. I
staggered back. Elza screamed--called something to Tarrano. I staggered,
but I did not fall; and as Tarrano stood there, still with his slow
smile, I recovered myself and was again upon him. Locked together we
swayed to the control table. My back was to it. Tarrano's slender
fingers with a grip like alemite, had found my throat. Slowly,
irresistibly he forced me backward over the table. I was helpless; my
breath was stopped; Tarrano's triumphant face bending over me was fading
with my senses.

"In just a moment, Lady Elza...."

He was telling her calmly that in a moment he would be finished with me.
Did the man's egotism, here at the last, delude him into the belief that
Elza wanted him to conquer me? With all the weapons of science
discarded--this primitive struggle of man against man with the woman as
prize--did the thought of that delude him into the belief that her love
was his, now that he was killing me?

I never knew. But beneath the roaring of my head, I heard his gentle
words to her. And then, behind him, I saw her coming forward. A heavy
metal object which she had picked up from the floor was in her hand.
Tarrano saw her also--in a mirror on the table--saw her raise the jagged
weapon. Raise it to strike; not at me--at himself. His face was close
