arrow has only a small effect, if  any, on the quality of the threads.

Feathering the arrow, in my experience, tends, if anything to make it
spin more;  for one thing, because it is practically impossible to lay
the feathering on straight.

After the arrow is shot, it remains to gather in the thread, and if
the latter is at all thin, we have a rather troublesome job.  In a
thread thirty or forty feet long, the most uniform part generally lies
in the middle if the thread is thin, i.e.  of the order of a
ten-thousandth of an inch in diameter.  If the thread is thick the
most uniform part may be anywhere.  The part of the thread required is
generally best isolated by passing a slip of paper under it at each
end and cementing the thread to the paper by means of a little
paraffin or soft wax, and then cutting off the outer portions.  One
bit of paper may then be lifted off the calico, and the thread will
carry the other bit.  In this way the thread may be taken to a
blackened board, where it may be mounted for stock.

By passing the two ends of the thread under a microscope, or rather by
breaking bits off the two ends and examining them together, it is easy
to form an Opinion as to uniformity.

Mr. Boys has employed an optical method of examining threads, but the
writer has invariably found a  high-power microscope more convenient
and capable of giving more exact information as to the diameter of the
threads.

The beginner--or indeed the practised hand--need not expect to get a
thread of the exact dimensions required at the first shot.  A little
experience is necessary to enable one to judge of the right thickness
of the needle for a thread of given diameter.  The threads are so
easily shot, however, that a few trials take up very little time and
generally afford quite sufficient experience to enable a thread of any
required diameter to be prepared.

It is no use attempting to heat an appreciable length of needle; if
this be done the thread almost invariably has a thick part about the
middle of its length..  It is sufficient to fuse at most about
one-twentieth of an inch along the needle before firing off the bow.
This can be done by means of the smaller oxygas blow-pipe jet
described in the article on blow-pipes for glass-blowing, Sec. 14.  The
flame must of course be turned down so as to be of a suitable size.  A
sufficiently small flame may be got from almost any jet.

If the needle be not equally heated all round, the thread tends to be
curly;  indeed by means of the catapult, threads may be pulled which,
when broken, tend to coil up like the balance-springs of watches, if
only care be taken to have one side of the needle much hotter than the
other.

Sec. 85.  When examining bits of threads, say thicker than the
two-thousandth of an inch, under the microscope it is convenient to
use a film of glycerine stained with some kind of dye, in order to
render the thread more sharply visible.  The thread is mounted beneath
a cover slip, and a drop of the stained glycerine allowed to run in.
Such a treatment gives the image of the thread a sharply defined edge
3 and the contrast between the whiteness of the thread and the colour
of the background allows measurements to be made with great ease.

On the whole the easiest way of measuring the diameter of a thick
thread is to use a measuring microscope, i.e.  one in which the lens
system can be displaced along a plane bed by means of a finely cut
micrometer screw.  The instruments made by the Cambridge Scientific
Instrument Company do fairly well.  Direct measurements up to 0.0001
inch are easily made by means of a microscope provided with a Zeiss
"A" objective, and rather smaller differences of thickness can be made
out by it.  For thin threads the method next to be described is more
fitting, because higher powers can be more conveniently used.

In this method an ordinary microscope is employed together with a
scale micrometer, and either an eyepiece micrometer, or a camera and
subsidiary scale.  The eyepiece micrometer is the more convenient.  If
a camera be employed, i.e.  such an one as is supplied by Zeiss, it is
astonishing how the accuracy of observation may be increased by
attending carefully to the illumination of both the subsidiary scale
and of the thread.  The two images should be as far as possible of
equal brightness, and for this purpose it will be found requisite to
employ small screens.

The detail of making a measurement by means of the micrometer eyepiece
is very simple.  The thread is arranged on the stage so as to point
towards the observer, and the apparent diameter is read off on the
eyepiece scale.  In order to calibrate the latter it is only necessary
to replace the thread by the stage micrometer, and to observe the
number of stage micrometer divisions occupying the space in the
eyepiece micrometer formerly occupied by the thread.  It is essential
that both thread and stage micrometer should occupy the same position
in the field, for errors due to unequal distortion may otherwise
become of importance.  For this reason it is best to utilise the
centre of the field only.

The same remark applies to measurements by means of the camera, where
the image of the thread is projected against the reflected image of
the subsidiary scale laid alongside the microscope.  In this case the
value of the subsidiary scale divisions must be obtained from the
divisions of the stage micrometer, coinciding as nearly as possible
with the position occupied by the thread.  Before commencing a
measurement the screens are moved about till both images appear
equally bright.

Threads up to about one twenty-thousandth of an inch in diameter may
be sufficiently well measured by means of a Zeiss "4 centimetre
apochromatic object-glass" and an eyepiece "No. 6" with sixteen
centimetre tube length. [Footnote: The objective certainly had "4 cm."
marked on it, but the focal length appeared to be about I.5 mm. only.]

Sec. 86.  Drawing Threads by the Catapult.

The bow-and-arrow method fails when threads of a greater diameter than
about 0.0015 inch are required--at least if any reasonable uniformity
be demanded, and no radical change in the bow and arrow be carried
out.

Thus in the writer's laboratory a thread of about this diameter,
within 1/10000  of an inch-13 inches long and free from air
bubbles--was required.  A fortnight's work by a most skilful operator
only resulted in the production of two lengths satisfying the
conditions.

The greatest loss of time occurs in the examination of the thread by
means of the microscope.

Threads for galvanometer suspensions are conveniently from 0.0001 to
0.0004 inch in diameter, and are much more easily made and got uniform
than thicker threads, to the production of which the catapult method
applies.

A reference to the diagram will make the construction of the
instrument quite clear.  The moving end of the quartz is attached to a
small boxwood slider working on a tubular girder or between wires.
The quartz is secured in position by clamps shown at A and B, and
motion is imparted to the slider by a stretched piece of catapult
elastic (C).  An easy means of regulating the pull of the elastic is
to hold it back by a loop of string whose length can be varied by
twisting it round a pin.

Fig.  69.  [Footnote: For greater clearness of drawing, the tube
carrying the slider is shown somewhat higher above the base than is
convenient in practice;  and the slide itself is shown too thin in the
direction of the hole through it.]

Since it is not permissible to allow the slider to rebound at the end
of its journey, some such arrangement of breaks as is shown must be
adopted.  In the diagram the bottom of the slider runs on to a brass
spring between the girder and the base of the appliance, and so gets
jammed; the spiral spring acts merely as an additional guard.  The
diagram does not show the lower spring very clearly;  it is a mere
strip lying in the groove.

A rod of quartz, with a needle at one end, is prepared as before and
secured in the clamps.  During the operation of fastening down the
clamps, there is some danger of breaking the needle, and consequently
it is advisable to soften the latter before and while adjusting the
second clamp.

The process of drawing a thread by this method is exactly similar to
the operation already described in connection with the arrow method.
Though short thick threads form the product generally obtained from
the catapult, it must not be supposed that thin threads cannot be
obtained in this way.  If a short length of a very fine needle be
heated, it will be found to yield threads quite fine enough for
ordinary suspension purposes, but naturally not so uniform as those
obtained from the 40-foot lengths obtainable by the bow-and-arrow
method.

It is easy to make spiral quartz springs resembling watch
balance-springs by means of the catapult.  All that is necessary is to
see that the quartz is rather unequally heated before the shot is
fired.  In the future it is by no means impossible that such springs
may have a real value, for the rigidity of quartz is known to increase
as temperature rises.  Hence it is probable that the springs would
become stiffer as temperature rises, even though they work chiefly by
bending, and little or not at all by twisting.  As this is the kind of
temperature variation required to compensate an uncompensated watch
balance wheel, it may turn out to have some value.

Sec. 87.  Drawing Threads by the Flame alone.

A stick of quartz is drawn down to a fine point, and the tip of this
point is held in the blow-pipe flame in the position shown in Fig.
70.

Fig.  70.

The friction of the flame gases is found to be sufficient to carry
forward the fused quartz and to draw it into threads in spite of the
influence of the capillary forces.  If a sheet of paper be suspended
at a distance of two or three feet in front of the blow-pipe flame, it
will be found to be covered with fine threads tangled together into a
cobwebby mass.  As this method is an exceedingly simple one of
obtaining threads, I have endeavoured to reduce it to a systematic
operation.

A sheet of cardboard, about two feet square, is painted dead black and
suspended horizontally, painted side downwards (Fig.  70, A), at a
height of about two feet above the blow-pipe flame.  The latter is
adjusted so as to point almost vertically upwards and towards the
centre of the cardboard.  A few half-inch pins are thrust through the
card from the upper surface and pushed home; about one dozen pins
scattered over the surface will be sufficient.  Their object is to
prevent the threads being carried away round the edge of the screen.

The flame from the jet described so often is fed from gas bags
weighted to about eighty pounds per square foot of  (one) surface,
i.e.  "4-foot" bags require from three to four hundredweight to give
an advantageous pressure. [Footnote: The resulting threads were really
too fine for convenient manipulation, so that unless extremely fine
threads are required it will be better to reduce the pressure of the
gases considerably.]

Two sticks of quartz are introduced and caused to meet just in front
of the inner cone--the hottest part of the flame.  They are then
drawn apart so as to form a fine neck, which softens and is bent in
the direction of motion of the flame gases.  When fusion is complete
the neck separates into two parts, and a thread is drawn from each of
them. By alternately lightly touching the rods together, and drawing
them apart, quite a mass of threads may be obtained in two or three
minutes, when the process should be stopped.  If too many threads get
entangled in the pins, one gives one's self the unnecessary trouble of
separating them. On taking down the card it will be found that the
threads have been caught by the pins;  but the card now being laid
black side upwards, the former easily slip off the points.

Threads at least a foot long, and perhaps vastly longer, may be
obtained by this method, and are extraordinarily fine.  When I first
read Professor Nichols' statement (Electric Power, 1894) as to the
value of these fibres for galvanometer purposes, I was rather
sceptical on the ground that the threads would tend to get annealed by
being drawn gradually, instead of suddenly, from a place of intense
heat to regions of lower temperature.

Now annealing threads by a Bunsen makes them rotten.  The threads
being immersed in the hot flame gases could only cool at the same rate
as the gas, and it was not--and is not--clear to me that annealing
of the threads can be avoided.  On the other hand, it may be possible
that a thread cooled slowly from the first does not suffer in the same
way as a cold thread would do when annealed in a Bunsen flame.

Again the velocity of the gases is beyond doubt exceedingly high, so
that the annealing, even supposing it to be deleterious, might not be
carried very far.  Threads drawn by this method and measured "dry,"
i.e.  by mounting them on a slide without the addition of any liquid,
turned out to have a diameter of about 1/20000 of an inch.

I do not think I could manage to mount such fine threads without very
special trouble.  All the threads lying on the board, however, were
found in reality to consist of three or four separate threads, and
there is no reason why several threads should not be mounted in
parallel, provided, of course, that they are equally stretched and
touching each other.  Equality of tension in the mounting could be
secured by making one attachment good, then cementing the other
attachment to the other end of the threads, and "drawing" the two
attachments slightly apart at the moment the cement commences to set.
This method may turn out to be very valuable, for, so far as I can
see, the carrying power would be increased without an increase of
torsional stiffness of anything like so high an order as would be the
case were one thread only employed.  On the other hand, the law of
torsion could hardly be quite so simple, at all events, to the second
order of approximations.

Sec. 88.  Properties of Threads.

A large number of experiments on the numerical values of the elastic
constants of quartz threads have been made by Mr. Boys and his
students, and by the writer.  As the methods employed were quite
distinct and the results wholly independent, and yet in good agreement
with each other, a rounded average may be accepted with considerable
confidence.

TENACITY OF QUARTZ FIBRES (BOYS).

Diameter of Thread.

Tenacity in Tons' Weight per Square Inch of Section.

Tenacity in Dynes per Square Centimetre.

Inches

Centimetres

0.00069

0.00175

51.7

8 X 109

0.00019

0.00048

74.5

11.5 X 109

Rounded mean of Boys' and Threlfall's results:

Young's Modulus at 20 deg. C,

5.6   X 1011 C.G.S.

Modulus of Simple Rigidity at 20 deg. C,

2.65 X 1011 C.G.S.

Modulus of Incompressibility,

1.4   X 1011 C.G.S.

Modulus of Torsion,

3.7   X 1011 C.G.S.

Approximate coefficient of linear expansion of quartz per degree
between 80 deg. C.  and 30 deg. C.  is 0.0000017 (Threlfall = loc. cit.).

This must be regarded with some suspicion, as the data were not
concordant.  There is no doubt, however, about the extreme
inexpansibility of quartz.

Temperature coefficient of modulus of torsional rigidity per degree
centigrade, 22 deg. to 98 deg. C, 0.000133

Ditto, absolute simple rigidity, 0.000128 (Threlfall).

Limit of allowable rate of twist in round numbers is, one-third turn
per centimetre, in a fibre 0.01 cm. diameter.

The limiting rate is probably roughly inversely as the diameter.

Attention must be called to the rapid increase in the torsional
rigidity of these threads as the temperature rises.  A quartz spiral
spring-balance will be appreciably stronger in hot weather.

Sec. 89.  In the majority of instances in which quartz threads are
applied in the laboratory, it is desirable to keep the coefficient of
torsion as small as possible, and hence threads are used as fine as
possible.

It is convenient to remember that a thread 0.0014 cm. or 0.0007 inch
in diameter breaks with a weight of about ten grammes, and may
conveniently be employed to carry, say, five grammes.  With threads
three times finer the breaking strength per unit area increases, say,
50 per cent.  In ordinary practice--galvanometric work for
instance--where it is desirable to use a thread as fine and short as
possible to sustain a weight up to, say, half a gramme, it will be
found that fibres five centimetres long or over give no trouble
through defect of elastic properties.  A factor of safety of two is
