
In the lively arts the impact of the Grass was more overt. On the
comicpage, Superman daily pushed it back and there was great regret his
activities were limited to a fourcolor process, while Terry Lee and
Flash Gordon, everinspirited by the sharp outlines of mammaryglands,
also saved the country. Even Lil Abner and Snuffy Smith battled the
vegetation while no one but Jiggs remained absolutely impervious. The
_Greengrass Blues_ was heard on every radio and came from every
adolescent's phonograph until it was succeeded by _Itty Bitty Seed Made
Awfoo Nasty Weed_.

Perhaps the most notable feature of this period was a preoccupation with
permanency. Jerrybuilding, architectural mode since the first falsefront
was erected over the first smalltown store, practically disappeared. The
skyscrapers were no longer steel skeletons with thin facings of stone
hung upon them like a slattern's apron, while the practice of daubing
mud on chickenwire hastily laid over paper was discontinued. Everyone
wanted to build for all time, even though the Grass might seize upon
their effort next week. In New York the Cathedral of St John the Divine
was finally completed and a new one dedicated to St George begun. The
demand for enduring woods replaced the market for green pine and men
planned homes to accommodate their greatgrandchildren and not to attract
prospective buyers before the plaster cracked.

Naturally, forwardlooking men like Stuart Thario and myself, though we
had every respect for culture, were not swamped by this sudden urge to
encourage the effervescent side of life. Our feet were still upon the
ground and though we knew symphonies and novels and cathedrals had their
place, it was important not to lose sight of fundamentals; while we
approved in principle the desire for permanency, we took reality into
account. We had every faith in the future of the country, being certain
a way would be found before long to stop the encroachments of the weed;
nevertheless, as a proper precaution--a safeguarding counterbalance to
our own enthusiastic patriotism--we invested our surplus funds in
Consols and European bonds, while hastening our plans for new factories
on other continents.

I'm sure George Thario must have been a great cross to his father
although the general never spoke of him save in the most affectionate
terms. Living like a tramp--he sent a snapshot once showing him with a
long starveling beard, dressed in careless overalls, his arm over the
shoulder of a slovenly looking girl--he stayed always on the edge of the
advancing weed, moving eastward only when forced. He wrote from Galena:

"Eagle forgotten. The rejected accepted, for yesterday's eagle is
today's, the hero is man and man his own hero. I was with him when he
died and when he died again and a hundred miles to the south is another
eagle forgotten and all the prairies, green once more, will be as they
were before men insulted them. O eagle forgotten. O stained prairie, O
gallows, thirsty mob, knife, torch, revolver. Contumely, parochialism,
the shortvision forever gone; and the long vision too, the eagle
forgotten is the national bird, the great merging with the greater, so
gained too late a vision and saw the hope that was despair.

"I named the catalogue of states and the great syllables rolled from my
tongue to echo silence. My sister, my bride. Gone and gone; the
Conestoga wagons have no more faint ruts to follow, the Little Big Horn
is a combination of letters, the marking sunflowers exist no more. We
destroyed, we preempted; we are destroyed and we have been thrust out.
Illinois admitted to the Union on suchandsuch a date, the Little Giant
rubbed stubby fingers through pompous hair heavy with beargrease, the
Honorable Abe in Springfield's most expensive broadcloth, necktie in the
latest mode but pulled aside to free an eager adamsapple; the drunken
tanner, punctual with the small man's virtues, betrayed and dying
painfully with so much blood upon his hands; and the eagle himself,
forgotten and now again forgotten.

"I move once more. Step by step I give it up, the land we took and the
land we made. Each foot I resign leaves the rest more precious. O
precious land, O dear and fruitful soil. Its clods are me, I eat them,
give them back; the bond is indissoluble. Even the land gone is still
mine, my bones rest in it, I have eaten of its fruits and laid my mark
on it...."

All of which was a longwinded way of saying the Grass was overrunning
Illinois. In contrast I cannot forbear to quote Le ffacase, though his
faults, at the opposite end of the scale, were just as glaring: "It is
in Kentucky now, birthstate of Abraham Lincoln, sixteenth president of
the United States, a country which once stretched south of the
Forty-ninth Parallel from the Atlantic to the Pacific. I have been
traveling extensively in what is left of Lincoln's nation. 'Dukes,'
remarked Chesterton, 'don't emigrate.' This country was settled by the
poor and thriftless and now few more than the poor and thriftless remain
in it.

"Let me try to present an overall picture: What is left of the country
has become a nineteenth century Ireland, with all economic power in the
hands of absentees. It is not that everyone below the level of a
millionaire is too stupid to foresee possibility of complete
destruction; or the middle and lower classes virtuously imbued with such
fanatical patriotism they are prepared for mass suicide rather than
leave. Because dukes _are_ emigrating and sending the price of
shippingspace into brackets which make the export of any commodity but
diamonds or their own hides a dubious investment, even the pawning of
all the family assets would not buy steerage passage for a year old
baby. Besides there are not enough bottoms in the world to transport a
hundred and fifty million people. If the Grass is not stopped, except
for a negligible few, it will cover Americans when it covers America.

"No wonder a strange and conflicting spirit animates our people. Apathy?
Yes, there is apathy; you can see it on the faces in a line of relief
clients wondering how long an industrially stagnant country can continue
their dole--even though now it consists of nothing but unpalatable
chemicals--socalled 'Concentrates.' Despair? Certainly. The riots and
lootings, especially the intensified ones recently in Cleveland and
Pittsburgh, are symptoms of it. The overcrowded churches, the terrific
increase in drugging and drinking, the sex orgies which have been taking
place practically in the open in Baltimore and Philadelphia and Boston
are stigmata of desperation.

"Hope? I suppose there is hope. Congress sits in uninterrupted session
and senators lend their voices night and day to the destruction of the
Grass. The Federal Disruptions Commission has published the eleventh
volume of its report and is currently holding hearings to determine how
closely the extinct buffalograss is related to _Cynodon dactylon_. Every
research laboratory in the country, except those whose staffs and
equipment have been moved with their proprietary industries, is
expending its energies in seeking a salvation.

"Perhaps only in the Deep South, as yet protected by the width of the
lower Mississippi, is there something approaching a genuine hope,
although ironically that may be the product of ignorance. Here the
overlords have gone and the poor whites, unsupported by an explicit
kinship, have withdrawn into complete listlessness. Some black men have
fled, but to most the Grass is a mere bogey, incapable of frightening
those who have survived so much. Now, for the first time since 1877 the
polls are open to all and there are again Negro governors, and black
legislatures. And they are legislating as if forever. Farm tenancy has
been abolished, the great plantations have been expropriated and made
cooperative, the Homestead Act of 1862 has been applied in the South and
every citizen is entitled to claim a quartersection. There is a great
deal of laughter at this childish lawmaking, but it goes on, changing
the face of the region, the lawmakers themselves not at all averse to
the joke."

Everything Le ffacase wrote was not only dull, but biased and unjust as
well. It was true capital was leaving the country rapidly, but what
other course had it? To stay and attempt to carry on industry in the
midst of the demoralization was obviously impractical. The plants
remained and when a way was found to conquer the Grass we would be glad
to reopen them, for this would be a practical course, just as the flight
of capital was a practical course; standards of living were now so
reduced in the United States it would be more profitable to employ cheap
American labor than overpaid Latin or European.


_55._ I had now no fixed abode, dividing my time between Rio and Buenos
Aires, Melbourne and Manchester. General Thario and his family lived in
Copenhagen, overseeing our continental properties, now of equal
importance with the South American holdings. Before leaving, and indeed
on every trip back home, he visited his son--no easy thing to do, what
with the young man's constant movement and the extreme difficulty of
going from east to west against the torrent pouring in the opposite
direction. Joe had married the female of the snapshot, or contracted
some sort of permanent alliance with her--I never got it quite straight
and the Tharios were deplorably careless about such details; and she
proved as eccentric as he was. No appeal to selfinterest, no pleading he
forgo his morbid preoccupation with the Grass for the sake of his
family, could move them.

"A W--you have seen it, heard it, smelled it. Can't you
explain--miraculously touched with the gift of lucidity for fact as you
are for the fictions of production, overhead and dividends? Oh, not to
Mama--either she understands better than I or not at all--but to the Old
Man or Connie?

"As a child you learn for the first time of death: the heart is
shuttered in a little cell, too cruel for breathing; the sun is gray. In
an instant you forget; the sky is bright; the blood pounds. Years later
the adolescent falls in love with death; primps his spirit for it;
recalls in unpresumptuous brotherhood Shelley and Keats and Chatterton.
Afterward the flush fades; we are reconciled to life, but the promise is
still implicit. Now, however, it must be earned, awaited. Haste would
destroy the savor. The award assured, pace becomes dignified.

"But death is not death; life is never mocked. The Grass is not death
any more than it is evil. The Grass is the Grass. It is me and I am it;
'in my father's house there are many mansions, if it were not so I would
not have told you.'

"No, I suppose not; yet it hurts my liver to offer the old boy
incomprehensible reasons or verbiage like 'compulsion neurosis' when all
he wants is to protect me from my own impulses as he protected me from
the army. Florence and I delight in him--he comes again next week if
possible--but we cannot convey to him the unthinkableness of
leaving...."

I heard about this visit later from the general. Joe had scoured Chicago
for the alcoholic commodities now practically unprocurable, and returned
in triumph to the couple's furnished room. There they entertained him
with two bottles of cointreau and a stone demijohn of cornwhisky.
"Touched ... filial affection ... even drank the cointreau--fiddling
stuff, no wonder it was still available in the drought ... better son a
man never had....

"Girl's all right. Moved in circles ... perhaps not accustomed ... bit
rough in speech, but heart of gold ... give you the shirt right off her
back ... hum ... manner of speaking ... know what I mean...."

But she would not add her persuasions to those of the general. "Joe's
got to stay. It's not something he sat down and thought up, the way you
plan dinner or whether blue goes good with your new permanent. He's got
to stay because he's got to stay. And of course, so do I. We couldnt be
satisfied anywhere we couldnt see the Grass. Life's too dull away from
it ... but of course that's only part--it's too big to explain...."

"But George--Joe as you call him ... highly talented ... sensitive ...
shouldnt be allowed to decay," the general argued. "Fascination ...
understand, but effort of will ... break the spell. Europe ...
birthplace of culture ... reflection ... give him a proper perspective
... chance to do things...."

Even when the evening lengthened and he became more lucid under the
stimulus of cornwhisky and cointreau he could not shake them. "Judicious
retreat, especially in the face of overwhelming superiority, has always
been a military weapon and no captain, no matter how valiant, has ever
feared to use it."

"Pop," George Thario had retorted goodhumoredly, "you dragged in the
metaphor, not I. Youve heard of the Alamo and Vicksburg and Corregidor?
Well, this is them--all rolled into one."


_56._ The first snows of this ominous winter halted progress of the
Grass. It went sluggish and then dormant first in the far north, where
only the quick growingseason, once producing cabbages big as hogsheads,
had allowed it to spread at a rate at all comparable to its progress
farther south. But by now there could be no doubt left that _Cynodon
dactylon_, once so sensitive to cold that it had covered itself, even in
the indistinguishable Southern California winter, with a protective
sheath, had become inured to frost and chill, hibernating throughout the
severest cold and coming back vigorously in the spring.

It now extended from Alaska to Hudson Bay, covering all Manitoba and
parts of Ontario. It had taken to itself Minnesota, the northern
peninsula of Michigan, Wisconsin, a great chunk of Illinois, and stood
baffled on the western bank of the Mississippi from Cairo to its mouth.
The northwestern, underpopulated half of Mexico was overrun, the Grass
moving but sluggishly into the estados bordering the Gulf Coast.

I cannot say this delusive safety was enjoyed, for there was
unbelievable hardship. In spite of the great bulk of the country's
coalfields lying east of the Grass and the vast quantities of oil and
natural gas from Texas, there was a fuel famine, due largely to the
breakdown of the transportation system. People warmed themselves after a
fashion by burning furniture and rubbish in improvised stoves. Of course
this put an additional strain on firedepartments, themselves suffering
from the same lack of new equipment, tires, and gasoline, afflicting the
general public and great conflagrations swept through Akron, Buffalo and
Hartford. Garbage collection systems broke down and no attempt was made
to clear the streets of snow. Broken watermains, gaspipes and sewers
were followed by typhus and typhoid and smallpox, flux, cholera and
bubonic plague. The hundreds of thousands of deaths relieved only in
small degree the overcrowding; for the epidemics displaced those
refugees sheltered in the schoolhouses, long since closed, when these
were made auxiliary to the inadequate hospitals.

The strangely inappropriate flowering of culture, so profuse the year
before, no longer bloomed. A few invincible enthusiasts, mufflered and
raincoated, still bore the icy chill of the concert hall, a quorum of
painters besieged the artist supply stores for the precious remaining
tubes of burntumber and scarletlake, while it was presumed that in
traditionally unheated garrets orthodox poets nourished their muse on
pencil erasers. But all enthusiasm was individual property, the reaction
of single persons with excess adrenalin. No common interests united
doctor and stockbroker, steelworker and truckdriver, laborer and
laundryman, except common fear of the Grass, briefly dormant but ever in
the background of all minds. The stream of novels, plays, and poems
dried up; publishers, amazed that what had been profitable the year
before was no longer so, were finally convinced and stopped printing
anything remotely literate; even the newspapers limped along crippledly,
their presses breaking down hourly, their circulation and coverage alike
dubious.

The streets were no more safe at night than in sixteenth century London.
Even in the greatest cities the lighting was erratic and in the smaller
ones it had been abandoned entirely. Holdups by individuals had been
practically given up, perhaps because of the uncertainty of any footpad
getting away with his loot before being hijacked by another, but small
compact gangs made life and property unsafe at night. Tempers were
extraordinarily short; a surprised housebreaker was likely to add
battery, mayhem and arson to his crimes, and altercations which commonly
would have terminated in nothing more violent than lurid epithets now
frequently ended in murder.

Since too many of the homeless took advantage of the law to commit petty
offenses and so secure some kind of shelter for themselves, all law
enforcement below the level of capital crimes went by default. Prisoners
were tried quickly, often in batches, rarely acquitted; and sentences of
death were executed before nightfall so as to conserve both prison space
and rations.

In rural life the descent was neither so fast nor so far. There was no
gasoline to run cars or tractors, but carefully husbanded
storagebatteries still provided enough electricity to catch the news on
the radio or allow the washingmachine to do the week's laundry. To a
great extent the farmer gave up his dependence on manufactured goods,
except when he could barter his surplus eggs or milk for them, and
instead went back to the practices of his forefather, becoming for all
intents and purposes practically selfsufficient. Soap from woodashes and
leftover kitchen grease might scratch his skin and a jacket of rabbit or
wolverine hide make him selfconscious, but he went neither cold nor
hungry nor dirty while his urban counterpart, for the most part, did.

One contingency the countrydweller prepared grimly against: roaming
hordes of the hungry from the towns, driven to plunder by starvation
which they were too shiftless to alleviate by purchasing concentrates,
for sale everywhere. Shotguns were loaded, corncribs made tight, stock
zealously guarded. But except rarely the danger had been overestimated.
The undernourished proletariat lacked the initiative to go out where the
food came from. Generations had conditioned them to an instinctive
belief that bread came from the bakery, meat from the butcher, butter
from the grocer. Driven by desperation they broke into scantily supplied
food depots, but seldom ventured beyond the familiar pavements. Famine
took its victims in the streets; the farmers continued to eat.

I arrived in New York on the clipper from London in mid-January of this
dreadful winter. I had boarded the plane at Croydon, only subconsciously
aware of the drive from London through the traditionally neat
hedgerows, of the completely placid and lawabiding England around me,
the pleasant officials, the helpful yet not servile porters. Long Island
shocked me by contrast. It had come to its present condition by slow
degrees, but to the returning traveler the collapse was so woefully
abrupt it seemed to have happened overnight.

Tension and hysteria made everyone volatile. The customs officials,
careless of the position of those whom they dealt with, either inspected
every cubic inch of luggage with boorish suspicion and resultant damage
or else waved the proffered handbags airily aside with false geniality.
The highways, repeating a pattern I had cause to know so well, were
nearly impassable with brokendown cars and other litter. The streets of
Queens, cluttered with wreckage and refuse, were bounded by houses in a
state of apathetic disrepair whose filthy windows refused to look upon
the scene before them. The great bridges over the East River were not
being properly maintained as an occasional snapped cable, hanging over
the water like a drunken snake, showed; it was dangerous to cross them,
but there was no other way. The ferryboats had long since broken down.

At the door of my hotel, where I had long been accustomed to just the
right degree of courteous attention, a screaming mob of men and boys
wrapped in careless rags to keep out the cold, their unwashed skins
showing where the coverings had slipped, begged abjectly for the
privilege of carrying my bags. The carpet in the lobby was wrinkled and
soiled and in the great chandeliers half the bulbs were blackened.
Though the building was served by its own powerstation, the elevators no
longer ran, and the hot water was rationed, as in a fifthrate French
pension. The coverlet on the bed was far from fresh, the window was
dusty and there was but one towel in the bathroom. I was glad I had not
brought my man along for him to sneer silently at an American luxury
hotel.

I picked up the telephone, but it was dead. I think nothing gave me the
feeling that civilization as we knew it had ended so much as the blank
silence coming from the dull black earpiece. This, even more than the
automobile, had been the symbol of American life and activity, the
essential means of communication which had promoted every business deal,
every social function, every romance; it had been the first palliation
of the sickbed and the last admission of the mourner. Without telephones
we were not even in the horse and buggy days--we had returned to the
oxcart. I replaced the receiver slowly in its cradle and looked at it a
long minute before going back downstairs.


_57._ I had come home on a quixotic and more or less unbusinesslike
mission. It had long been the belief of Consolidated Pemmican's chemists
that the Grass might possibly furnish raw material for food concentrates
and we had come to modify our opinion about the necessity for a
processing plant in close proximity. However, at secondhand, no
practicable formula had been evolved. Strict laws against the
transportation of any specimens and even stricter ones barring them from
every foreign country made experiment in our main research laboratories
infeasible; but we still maintained a skeleton staff in our Jacksonville
plant and I had come to arrange the collection of a large enough sample
for them to get to work in earnest. It was a tricky business and I had
no one beside myself whom I could trust to undertake it except General
Thario, and he was fully occupied.

In addition to being illegal it also promised little profit, for while
dislocation of the normal foodsupply made the United States our main
market for concentrates, American currency had fallen so low--the franc
stood at $5, the pound sterling at $250--it was hardly worthwhile to
import our products. Of course, as a good citizen, I didnt send American
money abroad, content to purchase Rembrandts, Botticellis, Titians or El
Grecos; or when I couldnt find masterpieces holding a stable price on
the world market, to change my dollars into some of the gold from Fort
Knox, now only a useless bulk of heavy metal.

My first thought was Miss Francis. Though she had more or less dropped
from public sight, my staff had ascertained she was living in a small
South Carolina town. My telegrams remaining unanswered, there was
nothing for me to do but undertake a trip there.

Despite strict instructions my planes had not been kept in proper
condition and I had great difficulty getting mechanics to service them.
There were plenty of skilled men unemployed and though they were not
eager to earn dollars they were willing to work for other rewards. But
the pervading atmosphere of tension and anxiety made concentration
difficult; they bungled out of impatience, committed stupidities they
would normally be incapable of; they quit without cause, flew into rages
at the machines, the tools, their fellows, fate, at or without the
slightest provocation.

My pilot was surly and hilarious by turn and I suspected him of
drinking, which didnt add to my confidence in our safety. We flew low
over railroadtracks stretching an empty length to the horizon, over
smokeless factorychimneys, airports whose runways were broken and whose
landinglights were dark. The land was green and rich, the industrial
life imposed upon it till yesterday had vanished, leaving behind it the
bleaching skeleton of its being.

The field upon which we came down seemed in slightly better repair than
others we had sighted. The only other ship was an antique biplane which
deserved housing in a museum. As I looked around the deserted
landingstrip a tall Negro emerged leisurely from one of the buildings
and walked toward us.

"Where are the airport officials?" I asked rather sharply, for I didnt
relish being greeted by a janitor.

"I am the chief dispatcher. In fact, I am the entire personnel at the
moment."

My pilot, standing behind me, broke in. "Boy, where're the white folks
around here?"

The chief dispatcher looked at him steadily a long moment before
answering. "I imagine you will find people of various shades all over
town, including those allegedly white. Was there anyone in particular
you were interested in or are you solely concerned with pigmentation?"

"Why, you goddam--"

I thought it advisable to prevent a possible altercation. I recalled Le
ffacase's articles on the Black South which I had considered vastly
overdrawn. Evidently they were not, for the chocolatecolored man spoke
with all the ease and assurance of unquestioned authority. "I want to
get to a Miss Francis at--" I consulted my notes and gave him the
address. "Can you get me a taxi or car?"

He smiled gravely. "We are without such luxuries at present, I regret to
say. But there will be a bus along in about twenty minutes."

It had been a long time since I suffered the wasted time and
inconvenience of public transportation. However, there was no help for
it and I resigned myself philosophically. I walked with the chief
dispatcher into the airport waitingroom, dull with the listless air, not
of unoccupancy, but disuse.

"Not much air travel," I remarked idly.

"Yours is the first plane in a month."

"I wonder you bother to keep the airport open at all."

"We do what we can to preserve the forms of civilization. The substance,
unfortunately, cannot be affected by transportation, production,
distribution, education or any other such niceties."

I smiled inwardly. What children these black people were, afterall. I
was relieved from further ramblings by the arrival of the bus which was
as laughable as the chief dispatcher's philosophizing. The dented and
rusty vehicle had been disencumbered of its motor and was hitched to
four mules who seemed less than enthusiastic over their lot. I got in
