the action produced by different substances, as well as the
exhaustion of excitability which follows, is proportioned to the
quantity of hydrogen they contain.

There is another circumstance which seems to strengthen this idea.
The intoxicating powers of spirits are diminished by the addition of
vegetable acids, or substances which contain oxygen, which will
counteract the effects of the hydrogen. Thus it is known that the
same quantity of spirit, made into punch, will not produce either the
same ebriety, or the same subsequent exhaustion, as when simply mixed
with water.

Recollect however that I propose this only as a hypothesis: its truth
may be confirmed by future observations and experiments, or it may be
refuted by them: but it is certainly capable of explaining many of
the phenomena, which is one of the conditions required by Newton's
first rule of philosophizing.

Heat, and light, and other stimuli, may perhaps exhaust the
excitability, by facilitating the combination of oxygen in the fibres
with the hydrogen and carbon in the blood.

There are several substances which cause a diminution or exhaustion
of the excitability, without producing any previous increased
excitement. These substances have by physicians been called
sedatives: and though the existence of such bodies is denied by Dr.
Brown, yet we are constrained to admit them; nor do their effects
seem incapable of being explained on the principle laid down,
especially if we call in the aid of chemistry.

Any substance which is capable of combining rapidly with oxygen, and
diminishing its quantity, will be a sedative. But the action of some
of the animal and vegetable poisons is difficult to explain in the
present state of our knowledge; such very minute portions of these
produce great exhaustion of the excitability, and even death, that we
can scarcely explain their action on the supposition that they
combine with the oxygen. They may perhaps act as ferments, and
occasion throughout the whole system a new and rapid combination of
oxygen with the hydrogenous, carbonic, and perhaps azotic parts of
the blood and fluids, and even of the solids, which will speedily
destroy the excitability, and even the organization.

Many of the vegetable narcotics, though they will destroy life when
given in considerable doses, yet when exhibited in less quantities
become very powerful remedies, particularly in cases where the
excitability is accumulated, in consequence of which violent spasms
and inordinate actions take place, which are very quickly calmed by
opium, camphor, musk, asafoetida, ether, &c. medicines that occasion
a speedy exhaustion of the excitability. In diseases of exhaustion,
however, these remedies are improper. The indication here is to
accumulate the irritability, by the introduction of oxygen, and by
the diminution of the action of the stimulants which support life. In
this idea too I dissent from Dr. Brown, who taught that diseases of
exhaustion are to be cured by stimulants, a little less powerful than
those which produced the disease. This subject will however be more
fully discussed hereafter.

This doctrine of animal life, which I have been attempting to
illustrate, and render familiar, exhibits a new view of the manner in
which it is constantly supported. It discovers to us the true means
of promoting health and longevity, by proportioning the number and
force of stimuli to the age, climate, situation, habits, and
temperament, of the human body. It leads us to a knowledge of the
causes of diseases: these we shall find consist either in an
excessive or preternatural excitement in the whole or part of the
human body, accompanied generally with irregular motions, and induced
by natural or artificial stimuli, or in a diminished excitement or
debility in the whole, or in part. It likewise teaches us that the
natural and only efficacious cure of these diseases depends on the
abstraction of stimuli, from the whole, or from a part of the body,
when the excitement is in excess: and in the increase of their number
and force when the contrary takes place.

The light which the discoveries of Galvani, and others who have
followed his steps, begin to throw on physiology, promises, when
aided by the principles of chemistry, and the knowledge of the laws
of life, to produce all the advantages that would result from a
perfect knowledge of the animal functions.

From what has been said, it does not seem improbable that muscular
contraction may depend upon the combination of oxygen with hydrogen
and azote, in consequence of a sort of explosion or discharge
produced by nervous electricity. According to this hypothesis, animal
motion, at least that of animals analogous to man, would be produced
by a beautiful pneumatic structure. This hypothesis, though not
perhaps at this moment capable of strict demonstration, seems
extremely probable, it being countenanced by every observation and
experiment yet made on the subject. It accounts likewise for the
perpetual necessity of inhaling oxygen, and enables us to trace the
changes which this substance undergoes, from the moment it is
received into the system, till the moment it is expelled. By the
lungs it is imparted to the blood; by the blood to the muscular
fibres; in these, during their contraction, it combines with the
hydrogen, and perhaps carbon and azote, to form water and various
salts, which are taken up by the absorbents, and afterwards exhaled
or excreted. We know the necessity of oxygen to muscular motion, and
likewise that this motion languishes when there is a deficiency of
the principle, as in sea scurvy. Thus a boundless region of discovery
seems to be opening to our view: the science of philosophy, which
began with remote objects, now promises to unfold to us the more
difficult and more interesting knowledge of ourselves. Should this
kind of knowledge ever become a part of general education, then the
causes of many diseases being known, and the manner in which the
external powers, with which we are surrounded, act upon us, a great
improvement not only in health, but in morality must be the
consequence.

With respect to its influence on the science of medicine, we may
observe that, from the time of Hippocrates till almost the present
day, medicine has not deserved the name of a science but, as he
called it, of a conjectural art. At present however, by the
application of the laws of life, and of the new chemistry, there is
beginning to appear in physiology and pathology, something like the
simplicity and certainty of truth. In proportion as the laws of
animal nature come to be ascertained, the study of them will excite
more general attention, and will ultimately prove the most popular,
as well as the most curious and interesting branch of philosophy.

This must be productive of beneficial consequences to society, since
these truths, once impressed upon the mind by conviction, will
operate as moral motives, by which the sum of disease and human
misery cannot fail to be greatly diminished.

LECTURE XI.
OF THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF DISEASES.

In the two last lectures I have attempted to investigate the laws of
life. I now proceed to the most important part of our course, and for
which all the preceding lectures were intended to prepare us; I mean
the application of the laws of life to explain the nature and causes
of diseases, and the methods of curing them, which must always be
imperfect, and conjectural, unless the nature of the diseases
themselves be well understood.

We have already seen that life is constantly supported by the action
of the external powers which surround us, and that if the action of
these powers be properly regulated, and at the same time no other
powers be suffered to act on the body, we shall enjoy perfect health,
but if, on the contrary, the exciting powers which support life, act
either too feebly or too powerfully, then the functions will not be
performed with precision and vigour, but irregularly; the mind and
body will become deranged, and death will often take place many years
before the natural period at which that event might be expected.

As health is the greatest blessing which man can enjoy, it is natural
to think, that in the early ages of society, when men began to lose
sight of the dictates of nature, and feel the torture of disease,
they would regard with gratitude those who had contributed towards
their relief, and that they would place their physicians among their
heroes and their gods. In the early ages, however, diseases would be
very few, for it would not be till civilisation had made considerable
progress, that such unnatural modes of life as conduce to their
production, would take place.

As the first professors of physic knew nothing of the animal economy,
and little of the theory of diseases, it is evident that whatever
they did, must have been in consequence of mere random trials. Indeed
it is impossible that this or any other art could originate in any
other manner. Accordingly history informs us that the ancient nations
used to expose their sick in temples, and by the sides of highways,
that they might receive the advice of every one that passed.

It would take up too much time to pursue the history of medicine from
this rude origin, through all its changes and revolutions, till the
present time: let it therefore suffice to say, that after various
theories had been invented and overturned, and after one age had
destroyed the labours of another, though different branches of the
healing art, and particularly anatomy, had been enriched with
valuable discoveries, still a rational theory was wanting; there was
nothing to guide the practitioner in his way, and we may truly say
that till the laws of life, which I have been endeavouring to
illustrate, were investigated by Dr. Brown, medicine could boast of
no theory which had a title to be called philosophical.

The theories of Stahl, Boerhaave, and Cullen, have passed away, and
are almost forgotten, but this, which is founded on nature, and on
fact, will, like the Newtonian philosophy, last for ever. It has
already influenced the practice of medicine, and is taught in almost
all the schools of Europe and America. In this country it seems to
have had less attention paid to it than it deserved, because its
influence was counteracted by the arrogance and profligacy of its
author, as if the grossness of a man's manner affected the
conclusiveness of his arguments; but this influence did not extend
beyond Britain, while the light of his theory illuminated the
opposite hemisphere. And when the manner in which he was persecuted
is recollected, the liberal mind will allow something to the deep
consciousness of neglected merit.

A circumstance much in favour of this doctrine is, that those who
understand its principles thoroughly, are guided by it in their
practice with a certainty and success before unknown. I say those who
understand its principles, for these were not perfectly understood
even by the author himself. He first saw with his mind's eye the
grand outline of the system, from which, for want of proper
reflection, he often drew wrong deductions, and which he often
applied improperly. But whatever errors Brown may have committed in
the application of his system, and however short his doctrines may
fall of a perfect system of medicine, we may venture to predict that
the grand outlines will remain unshaken.

From what has been already shown, it must be evident that if the just
degree of excitement could be kept up, mankind would enjoy continual
health. But it is difficult, if not impossible, to regulate the
action of the exciting powers in this equable manner, and if their
action is increased, the first effect they produce on the functions
is to increase them, and the next is, to render them disturbed or
uneasy; or, in other words, to bring on diseases of increased action,
or what have been called inflammatory or phlogistic, both of which
terms are improper, as they convey false ideas, and are connected
with erroneous theories: Dr. Brown has given the name of sthenic to
these diseases, from their consisting in increased strength or
action, and this is certainly a more appropriate term. On the
contrary, when the action of the exciting powers is diminished more
than is natural, the functions become languid and disturbed, and by a
still further decrease of the action of these powers, they become
irregular and inordinate. This state of the body, which is opposite
to the former, Dr. Brown has denominated asthenic.

But the stimulant powers may act so powerfully, and exhaust the
excitability to such a degree, that they may overstep the bounds of
sthenic or inflammatory disease and bring on debility. Debility may
therefore arise either from the stimuli acting too weakly, or from a
deficient excitability, while the stimulus is not deficient. Debility
produced in the former manner is called direct debility, and in the
latter indirect debility.

To explain this more clearly, let us take a common instance. If a
person by any means be deprived of the proper quantity of food, he
will feel himself enfeebled, and the functions will gradually grow
more and more languid, and at last become irregular, and be performed
with pain. This state is called direct debility. Here is excitability
enough, and even too much, for it has accumulated by the subtraction
of a stimulus; but here is a deficiency of excitement from defect of
stimulus.

If now we suppose that a person, in good health, begins to take a
greater quantity of food than usual, and adds a quantity of wine, all
the functions will at first be increased in vigour, but at last they
will be irregularly performed, and inflammation, with other symptoms
of too great excitement, will be the consequence. This state is
called sthenic diathesis or disease. But if the stimulant power be
pushed still further, the excitability will become gradually
exhausted, till at last there will be too little to produce the
healthy actions, even though there may be plenty of stimulus. This
state of asthenic diathesis is called indirect debility, because it
is not produced by directly subtracting the powers which support
life, but indirectly, by over stimulating. An instance of this latter
state is afforded by that debility which is the consequence of
intoxication.

There is a state however between perfect health and disease, which is
called predisposition; and in which, though the functions are
undisturbed, the slightest cause will bring on disease. Strictly
speaking, there is perhaps only one point, or one degree of
excitement, at which the health is perfect: the first alterations
from this point, on either side, are scarcely perceptible, but if the
morbid causes be continued, the functions will become gradually more
and more disturbed, till at last they become so uneasy or painful
that they are termed disease.

In order to render what has been said still more plain, it may be
proper to make use of an illustration by means of numbers: we must
recollect however that it is merely for the sake of illustration, for
we have not data to enable us to reduce either the excitability, or
excitement, or stimulus, to numerical calculation; if we could do
this, the science of medicine would be perfect, and we could cure
diseases as easily as we could perform any chemical or philosophical
experiment. A very principal object however is to understand the
nature of predisposition, and the kind of diathesis, whether sthenic
or asthenic, to which it inclines: this not only throws light on the
nature of the disease, but affords us the only means of preventing
it. When a slight uneasiness or predisposition is felt, it is almost
impossible to say from our feelings whether it leads to a sthenic or
an asthenic state: here we must be guided chiefly by the exciting
powers. If we find that these have acted too powerfully; that is, if
we have lived freely, been exposed to heat, and perhaps indulged in
some of the unnatural stimuli, such as wine and spirits; and
particularly if we previously to the present time perceived the
functions to go on with more vigour, our spirits and strength
greater, before we experienced the slight disturbance of which we
complain, we are verging towards sthenic or inflammatory disease, and
therefore to prevent the disease we ought immediately to diminish the
action of the exciting powers; the quantity of food ought to be
diminished, wine and other liquors abstained from, heat carefully
avoided; and even the quantity of blood in the circulating system
diminished, if the habit is full and the pulse strong.

On the contrary, if the exciting powers have acted more feebly than
is natural; that is, if we have lived on a less nourishing diet, or
have taken it in less quantity; if we have been long exposed to cold,
without alternating with heat, and other debilitating causes; and if
at the same time we find the vigour of the functions diminished,
though they are not yet become much disturbed, we are verging towards
asthenic disease. To prevent which, we must take a more nutritious
diet, and join a portion of wine, and perhaps take some tonic
medicines. This however ought to be done gradually, for fear of
exhausting the excitability, which in these cases is morbidly
accumulated.

It must be evident that the great difficulty here is to determine the
nature of the predisposition; for if we make a mistake, instead of
preventing, we shall accelerate the disease. For instance, the first
slight disturbance of the functions which rises from a sthenic state,
often resembles those verging towards a state of debility or
asthenia. I have seen various instances arising from plethora, or a
sthenic state, where the patient complained of depression of spirits,
and inability to move; and, in short, from his own account was
labouring under asthenic diathesis: but by inquiring carefully into
the action of the exciting causes, examining minutely the state of
the pulse and of the functions, I have been convinced that the
depression of spirits which he felt, and other symptoms of weakness,
depended on fullness, and they have been quickly removed by lowering
the diet, administering a laxative, or taking a little blood: whereas
if, apprehending from the symptoms that he had laboured under
debility, I had ordered him a more generous diet and tonic remedies,
an inflammatory disease would have been the consequence, which might
have terminated in death.

I have seen various instances where patients have complained of this
unusual depression, and inability to move: they have shown me
prescriptions in which the stimulant or tonic plan was recommended,
but instead of any alleviation the symptoms had become worse from
their use. This hint was generally sufficient, for if the disease of
predisposition had been asthenic, cordials and tonics ought to have
relieved it: if, on inquiry, I found the exciting powers had acted
too powerfully, I then, without hesitation, had recourse to the
debilitating plan, and with the greatest certainty of success. Before
I viewed diseases and their causes in this way, I must confess that I
often felt great hesitation in practice; and judging merely from
symptoms, which are frequently very fallacious, the operation of a
remedy often disappointed me, and I could not pretend to predict the
event with the certainty that I now can. This observation is of the
greatest consequence in the cure both of predisposition and of
disease. Though excitement regulates all the phenomena of life, yet
the symptoms of diseases which either its excess or deficiency
produces, do not of themselves lead to any proper judgment respecting
it. On the contrary their fallacious appearance has proved the source
of infinite error.

As excitement both depends on exciting powers and excitability, it is
evident that when a middle degree of stimulus acts upon a middle
degree of excitability, the most perfect effect will be produced.
This point, could we ascertain it, might be called the point of
health. For the sake of illustration, we may suppose that the
greatest excitability of which the living body is capable is 80
degrees: this may be supposed to be the excitability possessed by the
body at the commencement of its life, because no part has then been
wasted or exhausted by the action of stimuli. Now, if we suppose a
scale of excitability to be formed, and divided into 80 equal parts
or degrees, the excitability will be wasted or exhausted in
proportion to the application of stimuli, from the beginning to the
end of the scale. One degree of exciting power applied takes off one
degree of excitability, and every subsequent degree impairs the
excitability in proportion to its degree of force. Thus a degree of
stimulus or exciting power equal to 10 will reduce the excitability
to 70, 20 to 60, 30 to 50, 40 to 40, 50 to 30, 60 to 20, 70 to 10, 80
to 0; and, on the contrary, the subtraction of stimulant power will
allow the excitability to accumulate.

[DIAGRAM]

The range of good health is ranked from 30 to 50 degrees in the
scale; for perfect health, which consists in the middle point only,
or at 40 degrees, rarely occurs; in consequence of the variation of
the stimuli to which man is continually exposed, such as meat and
drink, heat, exercise, and the emotions of the mind, the excitement
commonly fluctuates between 30 and 50 degrees, and yet no particular
disturbance of the functions takes place. But when at these points,
30 or 50, predisposition commences, the slightest debilitating cause
in the former case, and the slightest stimulating cause in the
latter, brings on disease, in which the functions begin to be
disturbed in various ways, and this disturbance is always in
