
He moved slowly toward Stutsman and the man cringed.

"Stutsman," he said, "you're a butcher. You're a stench in the nostrils
of humanity. You aren't fit to live."

"Those," said Craven, "are my sentiments exactly."

"You hate me," screamed Stutsman. "All of you hate me. You are doing
this because you hate me."

"Everyone hates you, Stutsman," said Greg. "Every living person hates
you. You have a cloud of hate hanging over you as black and wide as
space."

The man closed his eyes, trying to break free of the bonds.

"Bring me a spacesuit," snapped Greg, watching Stutsman's face.

Craven brought it and dropped it at Stutsman's feet.

"All right, Russ," said Greg. "Turn him loose."

Stutsman swayed and almost fell as the bands of force released him.

"Get into that suit," ordered Greg.

Stutsman hesitated, but something he saw in Greg's face made him lift
the suit, step into it, fasten it about his body.

"What are you going to do with me?" he whimpered. "You aren't going to
take me back to Earth again, are you? You aren't going to make me stand
trial?"

"No," said Greg, gravely, "we aren't taking you back to Earth. And
you're standing trial right now."

Stutsman read his fate in the cold eyes that stared into his. Chattering
frightenedly, he rushed at Greg, plunged through him, collided with the
wall of the ship and toppled over, feebly attempting to rise.

Invisible hands hoisted him to his feet, gripped him, held him upright.
Greg walked toward him, stood facing him.

"Stutsman," he said, "you have four hours of air. That will give you
four hours to think, to make your peace with death." He turned toward
the other two. Chambers nodded grimly. Craven said nothing.

"And now," said Greg to Craven, "if you will fasten down his helmet."

The helmet clanged shut, shutting out the pleas and threats that came
from Stutsman's throat.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stutsman saw distant stars, cruel, gleaming eyes that glared at him.
Empty space fell away on all sides.

Numbed by fear, he realized where he was. Manning had picked him up and
thrown him far into space ... out into that waste where for hundreds of
light years there was only the awful nothingness of space.

He was less than a speck of dust, in this great immensity of emptiness.
There was no up or down, no means of orientation.

Loneliness and terror closed in on him, a terrible agony of fear. In
four hours his air would be gone and then he would die! His body would
swirl and eddy through this great cosmic ocean. It would never be found.
It would remain here, embalmed by the cold of space, until the last clap
of eternity.

There was one way, the easy way. His hand reached up and grasped the
connection between his helmet and the air tank. One wrench and he would
die swiftly, quickly ... instead of letting death stalk him through the
darkness for the next four hours.

He shivered and his hand loosened its hold, dropped away. He was afraid
to hasten death. He wanted to put it off. He was afraid of death ...
horribly afraid.

The stars mocked him and he seemed to hear hooting laughter from
somewhere far away. Curiously, it sounded like his own laughter....

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'll make it easy for you, Manning," Chambers said. "I know that all of
us are guilty. Guilty in the eyes of the people and the law. Guilty in
your eyes. If we had won, there would have been no penalty. There's
never a penalty for the one who wins."

"Penalty," said Greg, his eyes half smiling. "Why, yes, I think there
is. I'm going to order you aboard the _Invincible_ for something to eat
and to get some rest."

"You mean to say that we aren't prisoners?"

Greg shook his head. "Not prisoners," he said. "Why, I came out here to
guide you back to Earth. I hauled you out here and got you into this
jam. It was up to me to get you out of it. I would have done the same
for Stutsman, too, but ..."

He hesitated and looked at Chambers.

Chambers stared back and slowly nodded.

"Yes, Manning," he said. "I think I understand."




_CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE_


Chambers lit his cigar and leaned back in his chair.

"I wish you could see it my way, Manning," he said. "There's no place
for me on Earth, no place for me in the Solar System. You see, I tried
and failed. I'm just a has-been back there."

He laughed quietly. "Somehow, I can't imagine myself coming back in the
role of the defeated tribal leader, chained to your chariot, so to
speak."

"But it wouldn't be that way," protested Greg. "Your company is gone,
true, and your stocks are worthless, but you haven't lost everything.
You still have a fleet of ships. With our new power, the Solar System
will especially need ships. Lots of ships. For the spacelanes will be
filled with commerce. You'd be coming back to a new deal, a new Solar
System, a place that has been transformed almost overnight by power
that's practically free."

"Yes, yes, I know all that," said Chambers. "But I climbed too high. I
got too big. I can't come back now as something small, a failure."

"You have things we need," said Greg. "The screen that blankets out our
television and tele-transport, for example. We need your screen as a
safeguard against the very thing we have created. Think of what criminal
uses could be made of the tele-transport. No vault, no net of charged
wires, nothing, could stop a thief from taking anything he wanted.
Prisons would cease to be prisons. Criminals could reach in and pick up
their friends, no matter how many guards there were. Prisons and bank
vaults and national treasuries could be cleaned out in a single day."

"Then there's the super-saturated space fields," added Russ, ruefully.
"Those almost got us. If I hadn't thought of moving the televisor
through time, we would have had to pull stakes and run for it."

"No, you wouldn't," pointed out Craven. "You could have wiped us out in
a moment. You can disintegrate matter. Send it up in a puff of smoke ...
rip every electron apart and send it hurtling away."

"Of course we could have, Craven," said Greg, "but we wouldn't."

Chambers laughed softly. "Not quite mad enough at us to do that, eh?"

Greg looked at him. "I guess that must have been it."

"But I'm curious about the green space fields," persisted Russ.

"Simple," said Craven. "They were just fields that had more energy
packed into a certain portion of space than space could take. Space
fields that had far more than their share of energy, more than they
could hold. A super-saturated solution will crystalize almost
immediately onto the tiniest crystal put into it. Those fields acted the
same way. They crystalized instantly into hyper-space the moment they
came into contact with other energy, whether as photons of radiation,
matter or other space fields. Your anti-entropy didn't stand a chance
under those conditions. When they crystalized, they took a chunk of the
field along with them, a small chunk, but one after another they ate a
hole right through your screen."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Something like that would have a commercial value," said Greg. "Useful
in war, too, and now that mankind has taken to space, now that we're
spreading out, we must think of possible attack. There must be life on
other planets throughout the Galaxy. Someday they'll come. If they
don't, someday we'll go to them. And we may need every type of armament
we can get our hands on."

Chambers knocked the ash off his cigar and was staring out the vision
port. The ship had swung so that through the port could be seen the
distant star toward which the _Interplanetarian_ had been driving.

"For my part," said Chambers, slowly, measuring each word, "you can have
those findings of ours. We'll give them to you, knowing you will use
them as they should be used. Craven can tell you how they work. That is,
if Craven wants to. He is the man who developed them."

"Certainly," said Craven. "They'll be something to remember us by."

       *       *       *       *       *

"But you are coming back with us, aren't you?" asked Greg.

Craven shook his head. "No, I'm going with Chambers. I don't know what
he's thinking of, but whatever it is, it's all right with me. We've been
together too long. I'd miss someone to fight with."

Chambers was still staring out the vision port. He was talking, but he
did not seem to be talking to them.

"I had a dream, you see. I saw the people struggling against the
inefficiency and stupidity of popular government. I saw the periodic
rise of bad leaders. I saw them lead the people into blunders. I read
history and I saw that since the time man had risen from the ape, this
had been going on. So I proposed to give the people scientific
government ... a business administration. An administration that would
have run the government exactly as a successful businessman runs his
business. The people would have resented it if I had told them they
didn't know how to run their affairs. There was only one way to do
it ... gain control and force it down their throats."

Chambers was no longer a beaten man, no longer a man with a white
bandage around his head and his power stripped from him. Once again he
was the fighting financier who had sat back at the desk in the
Interplanetary building on Earth and issued orders ... orders that sped
across millions of miles of space.

He shrugged his shoulders. "They didn't want it. Man doesn't want to
live under scientific government. He doesn't want to be protected
against blunders. He wants what he calls freedom. The right to do the
things he wants to do, even if it means making a damn fool of himself.
The right to rise to great heights and tumble to equally low depths.
That's human nature and I ruled it out. But you can't rule out human
nature."

They sat in silence, no one speaking. Russ cupped his pipe bowl in his
hand and watched Chambers. Chambers leaned back and slowly puffed at
the cigar. Greg just sat, his face unchanging.

Craven finally broke the silence. "Just what are you planning to do?"

Chambers flicked his hand toward the distant sun that gleamed through
the vision port.

"There's a new solar system out there," he said. "New worlds, a new sun.
A place to start over again. You and I discovered it. It's ours by right
of discovery. We'll go there and stake out our claim."

"But there may be nothing there," protested Greg. "That sun is younger
than our Sun. The planets may not have cooled as yet. Life may not have
developed."

"In such a case," said Chambers, "we shall find another planetary system
around another sun. A system that has cooled, where there is life."

Russ gasped. Here was something important, something that should set a
precedent. The first men to roam from star to star seeking new worlds.
The first men to turn their backs on the old solar system and strike out
in search of new worlds swinging in their paths around distant suns.

Greg was saying, "All right, if that's the way you want it. I was hoping
you'd come back with us. But we'll help you repair your ship. We'll give
you all the supplies we can spare."

Russ rose to his feet. "That," he said, "calls for a little drink."

He opened a cabinet and took out bottles and glasses.

"Only three," said Chambers. "Craven doesn't drink."

Craven interrupted. "Pour one for me, too, Page."

Chambers looked at the scientist, astounded. "I never knew you to take a
drink in your life."

Craven twisted his face into a grin. "This is a special occasion."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Invincible_ was nearing Mars, heading for Earth, which was still a
greenish sphere far to one side of the flaming Sun.

Russ watched the little green globe, thinking.

Earth was home. To him it always would be home. But that would be
changed soon. Just a few more generations, and, to millions upon
millions of human beings, Earth no longer would be home.

With the new material energy engines, life on every planet would be
possible now, even easy. The cost of manufacture, mining, shipping
across the vast distances between the planets would be only a fraction
of what it had been when man had been forced to rely upon the unwieldy,
expensive accumulator system of supplying life-giving power.

Now Mars would have power of her own. Even Pluto could generate her own.
And power was ... well, it was power. The power to live, the power to
work, to establish and maintain commerce, to adjust gravity to Earth
standard or to any standard. The power to remake and reshape and rebuild
planetary conditions to suit man exactly.

Earthmen and Earthwomen would be moving out en masse now to the new and
virgin fields of endeavor--to the farms of Venus, to the manufacturing
centers that were springing up on Mars, to the mines of the Jovian
worlds, to the great laboratory plants that would spring up on Titan and
on Pluto and on the other colder worlds.

The migration of races had started long ago. In the Old Stone Age, the
Cro-Magnon had swept out of nowhere to oust the Neanderthal. Centuries
later the barbarians of the north, in another of those restless
migrations, had overwhelmed and swept away the Roman Empire. And many
centuries later, migration had turned from Europe to a new world across
the sea, and fighting Americans had battled their way from east to west,
conquering a continent.

And now another great migration was on--man was leaving the Earth,
moving into space. He was leaving behind him the world that had reared
and fostered him. He was striking out and out. First the planets would
be overrun, and then man would leap from the planets to the stars!

       *       *       *       *       *

For years after America had become a country, had built a tradition of
her own, Europe was regarded by millions as the homeland. But as the
years swept by, this had ceased to be and the Americas were a world unto
themselves, owing nothing to Europe.

And that was the way it would be with Earth. For centuries, for
thousands of years, Earth would be the Mother Planet, the homeland for
all the millions of roaming men and women who dared the gulfs of space
and the strangeness of new worlds. There would be trips back to the
Earth for sentimental reasons ... to see the place where one's ancestors
were born and had lived, to goggle at the monument which marked the
point from which the first spaceship had taken off for the Moon, to
visit old museums and see old cities and breathe the air that men and
women had breathed for thousands of years before they found the power to
take them anywhere.

In the end, Earth would be just a worn-out planet. Even now her
minerals were rapidly being exhausted; her oil wells were dry and all
her coal was mined; her industry stabilized and filled; her businesses
interlocking and highly competitive. A world that was too full, that had
too many things, too many activities, too many people. A world that
didn't need men and women. A world where even genius was kept from
rising to the top.

And this was what was driving mankind away from the Earth. The
competition, the crowded conditions, in business and industrial fields,
the lack of opportunity for new development, the everlasting struggle to
get ahead, fighting for a place to live when millions of others were
fighting for the same thing. But not entirely that, not that alone.
There was something else--that old adventuresome spirit, the driving
urge to face new dangers, to step over old frontiers, to do and dare, to
make a damn fool of one's self, or to surpass the greatest
accomplishments of history.

But Earth would never die, for there was a part of Earth in every man
and woman who would go forth into space, part of Earth's courage, part
of Earth's ideals, part of Earth's dreams. The habits and the virtues
and the faults that Earth had spawned and fostered ... these were things
that would never die. Old Earth would live forever. Even when she was
drifting dust and the Sun was a dead, cold star, Earth would live on in
the courage and the dreams that by that time would be spreading to the
far corners of the Galaxy.

Russ dug the pipe out of his pocket, searched for the pouch, found it on
the desk behind him. It was empty.

"Hell," he said, "my tobacco's all gone."

Greg grinned. "You won't have to wait long. We'll be back on Earth in a
few more hours."

Russ put the stem between his teeth, bit down on it savagely. "I guess
that's right. I can dry smoke her until we get there."

Earth was larger now. Mars had swung astern.

Suddenly a winking light stabbed out into space from the night side of
