go through a wedding ceremony. Then no one will be allowed to bother
you."

"A wedding!" She let go of him and stepped away quickly.

His heartbeat quickened with anxiety over her apparent shock.

"Nothing to be afraid of. A simple ceremony." He recalled his wedding to
Redbird last fall. He might be a shaman, but he'd not had the slightest
premonition that he would go through the same ceremony with a different
woman less than a year later.

"But you already have a wife. That pretty little woman who is ...
expecting." She reddened. "You told me she was your wife." Soaking wet,
she turned forlornly away from him.

"In our tribe men may have more than one wife."

He expected to see contempt in her eyes, her pale eyes' morality
outraged.

Instead she said sadly, "Is she the reason you would not do what I
wanted the night you left Victor? Were you married to her even then?"

He had to force the words out. "No, but I did love her even then. And
she-- That blue-eyed boy you've seen in our wickiup--he is our son. He
was born after my father took me to Victoire."

She shook her head, the blond braids swinging. "You were honest with me.
You didn't tell me about Redbird, but you didn't make a fool of me, as
another man might have. A man like your uncle. But how does your wife
feel about me?"

What did she mean, _A man like your uncle_? Had Raoul approached her? He
put that question aside while he framed an answer to her question.

"Redbird agrees to this wedding. She, too, wants to help you. If you are
part of our family you will be protected. She wants that."

She stared at him. "But I'm a Christian! I can't go through a pagan
wedding ceremony to be your _second wife_. How could I do that to my
father, a minister?"

He tried to sound reassuring. "We will all know, you and I and Redbird,
that it is not a real marriage. I've no doubt your Christian God will
see and understand. And your father, if he sees you, surely he wants you
to live."

_No, Philip Hale, as I remember him, might well expect her to die for
her faith. He might well want his daughter to join him in the other
world. But never mind._

He went on quickly, "Of course, you will not have to--know me, as your
Bible says. In the sight of the tribe you will be my wife, that is all.
In our wickiup your virtue will be respected."

She laughed ruefully, but tears were running down her cheeks. "Oh,
Auguste, remember how I begged you to marry me? I even prayed for it,
would you have imagined that? And now my prayer has been answered. Only
it didn't turn out exactly the way I hoped, did it?"

White Bear's heart filled up with a dark foreboding. Nothing had turned
out as any of them hoped, but much had happened as they feared.




17

Uncle Sam's Men


Tears filled Raoul's eyes, blurring the newspaper and the letter on his
candlelit camp table. His hands were cold as a corpse's as he pressed
them against the sides of his head.

_Oh, God! A drink! I need a drink!_

He reached for the jug beside the letter. A hand lifted the tent flap
and Eli Greenglove slouched in.

The sight of him frightened Raoul. Did he know yet?

Not much chance there'd be a letter for Eli in the sack of two-week-old
mail that had just caught up with Raoul's battalion. No one in Victor
likely to write to Eli. Not now.

Eli's mouth was drawn hard. It was a hot night, and he wore no jacket,
only a plain brown calico work shirt, with a pistol and a knife at his
wide brown belt.

"Levi Pope got a letter from his missuz. There was an Injun raid on
Victor. You hear anything?" Eli's voice was as flat as the prairie. He
sat on Raoul's camp trunk.

"Yes," Raoul said, choking on the single word. "A war party attacked
Victoire."

He took a swallow from the jug. A cold, aching space was growing in the
pit of his stomach. The whiskey settled in the middle of the ache like a
tiny campfire in the middle of a blizzard.

He handed the jug to Eli, and Eli sipped and put the jug back on the
table.

"Goddammit, don't just sit there staring at me." Eli displayed his
ruined teeth as his lip curled back in a snarl. "_What 'n hell
happened?_"

Raoul picked up the letter in a shaking hand and read aloud--horrible
words, written in a flowing black script.

"'It is my sad duty as your sister to send you the news that Clarissa
Greenglove and your two sons have perished at the hands of Indians.'"

"Oh, Lord God an' Savior," Eli groaned. His head fell back on his neck,
his mouth open. His Adam's apple stuck out.

"'Also that our beloved Victoire has burned to the ground.'"

Raoul went on:

    "Clarissa and Andrew and Philip, along with other people who lived
    at Victoire and in Victor, were murdered on the morning of June
    seventeenth.

    "In your sorrow, may it comfort you to know that your fortified
    trading post, where we took shelter and defended ourselves, saved
    the lives of most of us. The cannon that you set in the blockhouse
    was employed to good effect, even though we hesitated at first to
    use it, since no one here knew how to fire such a weapon.
    Nevertheless, fire it we did, and broke the Indians' last charge and
    drove them off.

    "Mr. Burke Russell, whom you placed in charge of the trading post,
    was killed whilst fighting on the parapet. Mr. David Cooper, whom
    you also appointed as caretaker, gave us the leadership and strength
    we badly needed to see us through. He was the only experienced
    fighting man among us.

    "I cannot bear to write more. The sights we saw when we came out of
    the blockhouse will haunt my dreams forever.

    "Though the Indians could not lay hands on our bodies, they
    destroyed our property. Our house was burned down and our printing
    press and woodworking machines ruined.

    "When it was all over, Frank rode to Galena, though I begged him not
    to, for fear there were Indians yet lurking about. But he must needs
    publish his paper. He arranged to have an edition of the _Visitor_
    printed on the press of the Galena _Miners Gazette_, and brought the
    copies back here on a wagon. I am sending you a copy of the paper
    under this cover. Frank's account will tell you everything there is
    to know about the raid, and more perhaps than you would wish to
    know.

    "Our father is well. He and Guichard fought bravely in our defense.

    "I do not reproach you. My heart goes out to you, Brother, for I
    know you must be suffering. Remember that all happens as God
    ordains. May He grant you peace."

_What the hell does she mean, "All happens as God ordains?" God wanted
my woman and my kids murdered by Indians?_

"Oh, Christ Jesus," Eli said. He shook his head, then resting his elbows
on his knees, pressed his hands to the top of his head.

_Even Papa had to fight._

Raoul's heart felt bruised, as if beaten with a hammer.

_I do not reproach you._ That was reproach enough. He had taken every
man who would sign up for the militia. He had promised them their wives
and children would be safe. He'd led them away in pursuit of Black Hawk,
vengeance and glory.

Eli looked up. "What does it say in the newspaper?"

Raoul started to hand it to him.

"You read it to me."

Raoul had forgotten that Eli couldn't read. Clarissa couldn't either.
Now she'd never learn. Nor would the boys.

He shook his head and brushed his hand across his forehead. "I _can't_
read this out loud."

Greenglove's eyes were hard as bullets. "You wipe your damned eyes and
read that damned newspaper."

Raoul rubbed his eyes and took another pull from the jug. Greenglove
held out his hand and Raoul passed him the jug.

Raoul picked up the newspaper, hating the sight of it, and began to read
the column headed with the single word, MASSACRE!

Frank's story told how the people in the trading post held the Indians
off all day and finally drove them away by firing the cannon. Then came
the grievous task of finding and burying those who had not had time to
reach safety.

Then, for Raoul, the most dreadful lines of all:

    In the ashes of Victoire, it appeared from examination of the
    charred remains that the skulls of the men and women had been cloven
    by tomahawk blows. Parts of the children's bodies were scattered
    about the ruins, as if they had been chopped to bits before the
    Indians set fire to the great house.

Why hadn't Clarissa gotten away? She'd taken to drinking heavily in the
last year, so much so that he'd had to hit her more than once for
letting the boys run loose without keeping an eye on them. She had
probably been lying abed in a drunken stupor while everyone was fleeing
the chateau, the boys sleeping in the room with her. Hadn't anyone tried
to wake them?

Those faithful French servants who loved Elysee and Pierre so much, they
didn't give a damn about Raoul's whore and his bastard sons. After all,
he had thwarted Pierre's dying wishes. And he had struck his aged father
with his fist in front of all those Victoire people.

Still, they'd have been human enough to try to do _something_. If they'd
had time. They'd holler and bang on the door. Try to wake them up. But
there wouldn't have been time. A hundred or more Indians galloping down
on the chateau. The servants who saw them coming would barely have time
to get away. Some of them hadn't made it. Some of them had died with
Clarissa and the boys; maybe the ones who'd stayed behind to try to warn
them.

That was how it must have been.

Frank's article in the _Visitor_ said that some of the people in the
distant farms had saved themselves by hiding in root cellars or in
nearby woods. The Indians were in too much of a hurry to get to Victor
to bother searching carefully. One family, the Flemings, had ridden to
the shut-down lead mine. Some Indians pursued them to the mine but
didn't follow them in. The Flemings hid so deep in the mine they had
trouble finding their way out again, but they did survive.

But one person had neither hidden nor been killed:

    While the body of the Reverend Philip Hale, D.D., was found in the
    burnt wreckage of his house, his daughter, Miss Nancy Hale, has not
    been found. It is feared Miss Hale may have been kidnapped by the
    Indians. Both the church and the house Reverend Hale built on the
    prairie were burned down.

As Raoul read aloud the list of the dead, he thought of Nancy and then
of his sister Helene. Did they do _that_ to Nancy? The red devils!
Probably did. Horrible!

He saw the naked, slashed, violated body lying on the prairie. Nancy
Hale's body. Just like Helene's.

But it could be, too, she was alive. And if he kept after Black Hawk, he
might be the one to rescue her. There was comfort in that.

A little comfort.

And then a black bile of hatred for himself trickled up into his throat.

Great God in Heaven, this man he was sitting with--he'd had this man's
daughter in his bed for six years. And now she was murdered. And already
he was figuring how to replace her.

_Maybe I am as bad a man as Papa said I was._

_That's what Nicole meant by "All happens as God ordains." This was to
punish me._

He took a drink to wash that thought away.

He winced when he came to the name Marchette Perrault on the list of
dead. Maybe she had died trying to help Clarissa. Did Armand know yet?

Eli stood up. "Well, poor Clarissa. Poor little boys. It was a black day
in our lives when Clarissa and me met up with you, Raoul de Marion."

The words tore at a wound that was fresh and bleeding.

"Look here, now, Eli. Don't you know that I feel as bad as you do?"

"No, I don't know that. Clarissa was all I had in the world. I kept
hoping you'd find it in your heart to marry her, but you never treated
her decent. Never cared enough for them kids to give them your name.
Your brother, he did more for that half-Injun son of his than you did
for your two that was all white."

_All white they were, but half Puke_, Raoul thought, feeling his disdain
for the man who stood slumped before him.

Puke, a good nickname for Greenglove's breed. Missouri puked up the
worst of its people, and they landed in Illinois. Clarissa's breasts
flattening and sagging, her shoulders round, her teeth stained by pipe
smoke. So slatternly she'd gotten to be, he hardly cared to take her to
bed. And Phil and Andy growing up with that same washed-out, weak-boned
Greenglove look.

_How could I think that way about my own kids? What kind of a man am I?
And now they've been murdered, and I'm still despising them._

He had to quit this. He was torturing himself. Wasn't it bad enough? It
was the goddamned Indians he should be hating.

"We'll have our revenge, Eli. We'll kill a hundred Indians for each of
ours who died."

"Like you murdered them three at Old Man's Creek. I warned you not to do
that. That was what got Clarissa and her kids killed. I won't be helping
you get your vengeance, Colonel Raoul de Marion. Because if I did stay
around you, sooner or later I'd want blood for blood of mine that's been
spilled."

Raoul felt a chill, facing Greenglove's implacable, dull-eyed hatred.
But he was damned if he'd back down before this human weed.

"You'll leave this company when your term of enlistment is up and not
one damned day sooner. You're captain of the Smith County company."

Greenglove's mouth curled in a cold smile.

"By tomorrow there won't be any company. The Smith County boys heard
about what happened at Victor. Most of them'll be quitting."

Raoul felt the heat rising in his neck and head.

"The hell they will! My Smith County boys will want Indian blood just
like I do. And just like you would if you hadn't taken a notion to blame
Clarissa's death on me."

Auguste. The half-breed. Raoul felt his blood boiling as he saw the
olive-skinned face mingling Pierre's features with Indian looks. The
face he'd never stopped hating from the moment he first saw it. Auguste
was dead. Eli, here, had shot him. His body was rotting away somewhere
on the prairie behind them.

But the Indians of the British Band were alive--Auguste's people. They
snuck up on Victoire, Raoul's home. Burned it to the ground. Tomahawked
his woman. Chopped his children, his two boys, Andy and Phil, to pieces.

To pieces.

He saw that, for a moment, too vividly, and almost screamed. He grabbed
the jug and burned the bloody picture out of his mind with a swallow.

Auguste's band, skulking around up the river somewhere.

Why, Auguste might have given them the idea. Told them all about
Victoire and Victor. Lots of helpless women and children there. A rich
trading post. A big white man's house to burn down.

_My uncle kicked me off the land_, Auguste might have said. _Avenge me.
Go kill his woman and his children and burn his house down. And while
you're at it, kill every one of those white dogs in Smith County._

Sure, he probably put the idea in those devils' heads before he got
shot.

It hadn't been enough to kill Auguste. Wasn't enough.

He had to kill off every last one of Black Hawk's Indians. Exterminate
the whole band--bucks, squaws and papooses.

And he would shoot any shirker who refused to go with him.

Greenglove shrugged. "Go chase Injuns, then, if that's your heart's
desire." Then he smiled in a knowing way Raoul found strangely
disturbing. "But you'll maybe find a surprise waiting for you up there
in Michigan Territory. Almost makes me want to stay with you, just so's
I could see the look on your face."

Raoul felt a chill. Why the hell was Greenglove grinning like that?

"Damn you, you can't just walk off, Eli! You took an oath. You signed up
for another thirty days when your enlistment was up in May. I can have
you shot for desertion."

"Go ahead. Shoot me yourself."

Eli slowly raised the tent flap and stood there a moment, turning to
give Raoul one last, strange, unmirthful smile. Raoul eyed the pistol at
Eli's belt. Most likely all primed and loaded. His own pistol, unloaded,
was hanging from a tent pole behind him.

_If I went for my pistol, that'd give him an excuse to put a ball in me.
And he'd do it before I could even get a damned cap in place._

Eli gave Raoul one final nod, as if he knew what Raoul had been
thinking, and let the tent flap fall behind him.

Raoul reached for the jug. It felt light in his hand, and he shook it.
Empty.

Everything. Empty, empty, empty!

He got up, weaving slightly, and walked to the opening of the tent.

"Armand!" he shouted.

_Oh my God, now I'll have to give Armand the news about Marchette._

       *       *       *       *       *

Raoul awakened, sweating. One side of his tent was glowing white, the
sun beating down on it; he had been sleeping in an oven. He sat up, and
his vision went black and his head spun. He swung his feet, still in
dirty gray stockings, over the side of his cot. He nearly stepped on
Armand, who was lying flat on his back on the straw-covered floor, his
beard fluttering as he snored through his open mouth.

Standing, Raoul saw Nicole's letter and the _Victor Visitor_ lying on
his camp table beside a burned-down candle and four empty jugs. He
remembered what had happened at Victor. He fell back onto his cot and
pounded his fist on his chest, trying to numb the pain in his heart.

_God damn the Sauk! Damn them! Damn them!_

Armand, when he learned what happened at Victoire, had not blamed Raoul
as Eli had. He'd wept over Marchette--whom he'd beaten almost daily when
she was alive--and had sworn vengeance on her murderers, the British
Band. And he had sat with Raoul till both of them were drunk enough to
sleep.

Raoul's head and body felt as if they were on fire. His fingers curled,
grasping at empty air.

He buckled on his belt with his pistol and his Bowie knife, stumbled out
of his tent and stood beside it, pissing in the tall grass.

He was facing the Rock River, less than a quarter-mile wide here, a
sheet of sparkling blue water bordered by forest. Lined up along the
bank before him were a dozen big box-shaped flatboats. The tents of his
own militia battalion and of two others were spread over the grassland
around him.

He suddenly sensed that something was wrong. He hadn't heard the bugler
blow the dozen notes signaling the start of the day. He saw now that the
men weren't assembled but were wandering aimlessly about the camp.

What the hell was it Greenglove had said?

_By tomorrow there won't be any company._

Down near the flatboats a big crowd was gathered. One man, standing on a
barrel, was addressing them. His voice, shrill and insistent, carried to
Raoul on the warm June air, but he couldn't make out what the man was
saying.

Raoul didn't like this. He didn't like this at all.

He started walking toward the river and found Levi Pope and Hodge Hode
squatting in front of a fire, making coffee simply by boiling water with
coffee grounds in it.

"Sorry for your loss, Colonel," said Pope.

Hearing Pope speak of what happened at Victoire was like being kicked in
a spot that was already bruised. Raoul had to pause a moment before he
could speak.

"Thank you. Your family come through all right?" He dreaded what he
might hear in answer.

"Your sister wrote a letter for my missuz," Pope said. "They came
through tolerably. Thanks to the way you fortified the trading post.
That was mighty foresighted, Colonel."

Raoul's chest expanded and he felt a little better. This was how he'd
hoped the men would react, not blaming him for the tragedy as that
bastard Greenglove had.

"Levi's letter told as how my boy Josiah made it to the trading post
too," Hodge said. "Mr. Cooper even let him do some shootin' at the
redskins."

_Mr. Cooper? Since when did David Cooper get to be so high and mighty?_

"I need some of that coffee," Raoul said. Hodge strained the grounds out
of the coffee by pouring it through a kerchief into a tin cup and handed
the cup to Raoul.

The black liquid scalded Raoul's lips and tongue, and didn't treat him
any better when it bit into his whiskey-burned stomach.

"Anything to eat?"

With a bitter grunt, Levi Pope took a square biscuit out of a paper
wrapper and held it out. "These worm cakes is pretty lively, but dip 'em
in the coffee a couple of times and you'll boil the little buggers to
death."

Raoul shut his eyes and waved the weevil-riddled hardtack away.

"What the hell is that bunch doing down by the river?"

Hodge Hode grinned. "They call it a 'pub-lic in-dig-nation' meeting." He
drawled out the words, amused. "Say they won't go across the river into
Michigan Territory. Say they want to go home."

"Any of our men talking that way?"

"Oh, a heap of them, Colonel," said Levi.

"I'll see about that."

"Hodge and me ain't quittin'. We won't go home till we've killed us some
Injun trash." Levi lovingly stroked the handles of his six holstered
pistols, three on each side of his belt.

But Levi and Hodge made no move to get up and join Raoul. They would go
with him across the river, he saw, but they were not about to help him
discipline the other men. He thought of ordering them to come with him,
but decided not to test their loyalty that far. Eli had walked out on
him. He didn't know who he could trust.

Hell, he could do it without these two, anyway.

For reassurance Raoul took a grip on the handle of his Bowie knife as he
approached the crowd. Could he cow dozens of men if they were determined
not to obey him?

_Sure. Might have to carve a few bellies, but the rest will fall into
line._

That was how he ran Smith County.

The man standing on the barrel was saying, "You know what the Injuns
call that country up there? The Trembling Lands. It's all swamp, water
and quicksand. You take a horse out on what looks like solid ground,
before you can blink, he sinks belly deep."

That kind of talk made Raoul want to use his knife. But that would
probably only rile these rebellious bastards all the more.

_Got to put a stop to this. Line them all up by the boats. Tell the
first man to get in. If he won't, shoot him. Then go on to the next.
That'll change their minds in a hurry._

He told himself disgustedly to quit dreaming. Not even in Smith County
could he get away with shooting white men just because they wouldn't
obey him. Not in broad daylight, anyway.

The man standing on the barrel said, "If Black Hawk has holed up in that
country, that means he's finished. Hell, his people will starve to death
up there. What do we got to follow him for?"

Pushing his way through the crowd, Raoul heard a man near him call out,
"Volunteers is what we are. That means we serve at our own pleasure.
Well, I'm not volunteering for any more."

A chorus--"Right!" "Yeah!" "Me neither!" "That's telling 'em!"--rose all
around Raoul, maddening him as a swarm of biting flies would madden a
horse.

He saw a familiar stoop-shouldered back in the crowd--Justus Bennett.
Ever since Old Man's Creek, Bennett had been whining about the fine suit
of clothes and the two expensive law books he'd lost, demanding that the
state of Illinois pay for them. Now he was standing here, encouraging
would-be deserters just by listening to them.

Raoul grabbed his shoulder and pulled him around. "You're a lawyer. You
know damned well this meeting is illegal. Get over there with Pope and
Hode, or you're no more a lieutenant in my battalion."

Bennett stared back at him with beady eyes. "That's immaterial, seeing
as we're all going home."

"No one's going home," said Raoul, loud enough to make the men around
him turn to look. "Get the hell back to your outfit."

He gave Bennett a shove. The lawyer glowered at him, but slunk away.

Raoul pushed his way to the front of the crowd. The men fell back,
making way for his blue jacket with its officer's gold stripes. But the
sun beat down on his head. He realized that he had forgotten to put on
his hat, and he wasn't shaved and his jacket was unbuttoned.

And, nothing. Hell, he could handle men. He didn't have to dress up for
that. He drew his knife and faced the man on the barrel.

"Get down off there."

"Now listen, Colonel, this is a public meeting."

Raoul waved the knife. "You've had your say. Jump."

The man stared defiantly at Raoul. Raoul thought he might have to cut
him up a little, and wondered if he was up to it. The man's eyes wavered
from Raoul's down to the thirteen-inch blade. And he jumped.

But he wasn't quite done talking. "It's a free country, Colonel. Man's
got a right to speak his mind."

Raoul said, "Tell that to Black Hawk."

He wasn't quite sure what he meant by that, but he heard several
chuckles and was encouraged.

He scrambled up on the three-foot-high barrel. It rocked under him, and
the dregs of whiskey sloshing around in his body made him feel dizzy. He
decided, after he got his feet set near the rim of the barrel, that he
would be safer if he sheathed his knife.

"You men's term of enlistment is not up. Any man who won't cross that
river is a coward and a deserter, and I'll see you're dealt with."

"Go to hell!" one man shouted.

"You talk about cowards," another man called. "Didn't your whole
battalion run all the way from Old Man's Creek to Dixon's Ferry, from
forty Injun bucks?"

"They don't call it Old Man's Creek no more," a raucous voice cried.
"Now it's de Marion's Run."

Raoul pulled his knife again.

"The man who said that about de Marion's Run--come up here and say it
again." He shook the knife.

"Quit wavin' that pig sticker around and get down off that barrel, de
Marion. We heard enough from you." Raoul saw a rifle pointed at him. The
blood pumping through his body suddenly went from hot to cold.

A new voice broke in.

"Lower that rifle!"

The tone was deep, easy and confident in command. It offered no
alternative. The rifle came down as quickly as if in response to a drill
sergeant's order.

A short, plump officer with thick black eyebrows came up to stand beside
Raoul's barrel. He wore a stained, broad-brimmed wool hat and a blue
Army jacket over fringed buckskin trousers. The gold stripes on his
upper arm identified him as a colonel. The saber at his side nearly
dragged on the ground. He might have been comical looking, but somehow
he wasn't. Raoul had seen the officer at command meetings and knew that
despite his mixed dress, he was Regular Army. This morning, though, he
couldn't remember his name.

Movement in the distance caught Raoul's eye. A long line of
blue-uniformed troops was marching across the prairie about a hundred
yards away, their shakoes bobbing. They came to a halt, turned and faced
the militiamen. They came to parade rest, each man with a rifle at his
side. The morning sun glittered on bayonets.

Some militiamen glanced over their shoulders at the line of Federal
soldiers, and a nervous muttering of "Bluebellies!" spread through the
crowd.

"You can get down from there now, Colonel de Marion," said the short
officer. "I'd appreciate it if you'd let me handle this."

Raoul hated to admit it to himself, but he was relieved. Crouching
slowly and carefully, so as not to make an ass of himself by falling, he
climbed down from the barrel.

"That's Zachary Taylor," Raoul heard someone in the crowd say as he
moved, now unnoticed, to stand apart on the riverbank. Raoul felt
foolish that he had forgotten Taylor's name, especially when Taylor knew
his.

Instead of standing on the barrel, Taylor hitched himself up and sat on
it, gesturing in a friendly way to the men to gather around him.

He spoke with an easy southern drawl, but he made his voice carry.

"Now, men, I don't set myself up as your superior, even though I am a
Federal officer. We're all equal Americans here." He nodded as if
thinking something over. "In fact, many of you are important men in
civilian life, and I have no doubt some of you will hold public office
and be giving orders to _me_ some day."

Raoul's eyes traveled over the crowd, and he noticed one figure taller
than most, eyes grave as he listened intently to Taylor. That Lincoln
fellow, who had been such a nuisance at Prophet's Town. Raoul wondered
if the young man was for or against crossing the Rock River today.

Taylor said, "The best assurance you have that I'll obey your orders
when it comes your turn is that I'm obeying the orders I've got now. I
will tell you in a moment what those orders are. But let me refresh your
memory about what Black Hawk and his savages have done to the people you
and I are sworn to defend."

He pulled a folded paper from the side pocket of his blue jacket and
read from it.

"One man killed at Bureau Creek. One man at Buffalo Grove, another at
the Fox River. Two on the Checagou Road. A woman and two men killed on
the outskirts of Galena. Apple River Fort besieged, four dead. Seven men
massacred at Kellogg's Grove. Three whole families, fifteen people,
wiped out at Indian Creek. Victor besieged, and seventeen men, women and
children massacred."

Raoul saw the shamefaced glances of men who knew him shift his way. He
looked down at the ground angrily. He didn't want these men pitying him.

But an image of burned and scattered flesh and bones reared up suddenly
in his mind. It struck at him like a rattlesnake. He almost threw up. He
clenched his fists and held himself rigid.

One man called out, "Colonel Taylor, that's why we don't want to cross
the state line. The Indians are attacking all over the place, and we
want to be back home to protect our people."

Taylor nodded. "That's understandable. But I've been fighting Indians
for a long time. I came up against old Black Hawk nearly twenty years
ago in the war against the British. I've got a score to settle with him,
because he whipped me then, and I promise you he will not whip _us_ this
time. Yes, that's wild country up there, no doubt about it. But we'll
have a band of Potawatomi scouts led by one of their chiefs, Billy
Caldwell, to guide us. And General Winfield Scott is coming across the
Great Lakes with five hundred more Federal troops. With all that help,
we'll finish Black Hawk.

"And we must finish him. The murders and massacres will not stop as long
as Black Hawk and his tribe are on the loose. If you go back to your
farms and settlements, there'll be a dozen of you in one place and
twenty in another. And one morning or night you'll find yourself facing
a war party of a hundred, hundred fifty braves, like the people at Apple
River and Victor did. Our strength is in our numbers, and while we are
three thousand and more together, we've got to seek out the British Band
of the Sauk and Fox and destroy them."

Raoul heard a murmur of assent. His heart lifted. The little colonel was
winning them over, and the war would go on.

"In plain English, gentlemen and fellow citizens, my orders from
Washington City are to pursue Black Hawk wherever he goes, and to take
the Illinois militia with me. I mean to do both. Now, there are the
flatboats drawn up on the shore." He paused, then slid down from his
perch on the barrel and, standing very straight, pointed over their
heads. "And here are Uncle Sam's men, drawn up behind you on the
prairie."

Taylor was so short that only the men near him could see where he was
pointing. They turned first, and then in an ever-widening ring the men
in the farther reaches of the crowd turned to look at the long,
blue-clad line stretched behind them like a chain.

Raoul heard resignation in the militiamen's voices.

"Boys, I'm for the flatboats."

"Me too. I signed up to fight Injuns, not Americans."

A man called out, "Hell, Colonel, we're _all_ Uncle Sam's men."

Taylor smiled, reached up to settle his mottled hat on his head, and
said, "Then I will be proud to lead you."

He strode through the assembly.

At the edge of the crowd he turned and raised his voice. "Officers,
assemble your men. We'll take the troops over first, then the horses. I
want everyone on the other side by noon."

Taylor walked over to Raoul, squinted at him and sniffed audibly.

"You look like the backside of hell, sir. You been drinking this early
in the day?"

"I haven't touched whiskey this morning," Raoul said, not adding that it
was only because when he woke up all the jugs in his tent were empty.

"Well, then you were drinking damned late last night. Appearing in front
of these unruly men looking like a sot is no way to get them to obey
you."

Raoul eyed the short colonel's mismatched uniform parts and wondered
where he got the gall to criticize. But he wanted to be on this man's
good side.

"My wife and two sons were murdered by the redskins. At Victor. They've
been dead for two weeks, and I just found out about it last night."

Taylor reached out and gripped his arm. "Damn! I am sorry, Colonel de
Marion. I should have realized you might have lost loved ones there.
I'll see that _you_ get leave to go home."

Back to Victor? Raoul trembled at the thought of having to see the ruins
of Victoire and the town--the graves of Clarissa and Phil and Andy.
Having to face people who, like Eli, might believe that he put them in
harm's way. Besides, he had a mission to carry out. Kill Indians. And
there were no Indians to kill in Victor now.

"No, Colonel, no," he stammered. "I want to go after Black Hawk's
people. We can't let them get away."

"Nor will we. General Atkinson and I were talking about that just
yesterday--and about you, as it happens. You own a Mississippi
steamboat, don't you?"

Puzzled, Raoul answered, "Yes, the _Victory_. It makes a regular run
from St. Louis to Galena."

"We're certain that if we don't catch up with Black Hawk, wherever he's
hiding up in the Michigan Territory, that he'll try to take his band
west, to the Mississippi. If he gets across it, we'll have a hell of a
time catching him." Taylor's eyes glinted hard as glass marbles. "We are
determined, Colonel, not to allow him to make a successful retreat. We
have to show all the tribes that they can't murder white people and then
light out for Indian country and get off scot-free."

Taylor's words, now that the near-mutiny was over, lifted Raoul's heart.
He had left Victor in April hoping for revenge for Helene and for his
own sufferings of years ago. But now there were more slaughtered
innocents to avenge--and now he had the army of the United States to
help him do it.

"I'll do anything to get those redskins."

"With your ship patrolling the stretch of river where they're likely to
cross, we could be sure that Black Hawk won't escape us."

"You want me to go back and get the _Victory_ ready?" He felt himself
trembling again.

"For now you'll go along with us into the Michigan Territory," Taylor
said. "But if it looks as if Black Hawk is making a run for the
Mississippi, you'll see that we cut them off. The _Victory_, eh? Aptly
named."

Raoul's grieving, vengeful heart rejoiced. When the time came, he'd have
the cannon from the trading post mounted in the bow of the _Victory_.
Then let any damned Indians try to cross the Mississippi. He'd pay them
back for what they did to Victoire.

But he remembered Nicole and Frank coming to him, telling him the
militia was needed to guard Victor. He'd laughed at their fears. If he'd
listened to them, Clarissa and Andy and Phil and those other people
might still be alive. Victoire and Victor would still be standing.
Hadn't he had some hand in bringing death and destruction upon his home?

No, it was all the Indians' doing.

_I'll get you, Black Hawk. If I have to follow you all the way to
