
"Hadn't we better notify the police?" asked the building manager, who
had broken out in a sweat when he heard the dire disaster which might be
in store for the stately Acme building.

"Not yet," said Linane. "You see, we are not sure: we have just been
putting two and two together."

"We'll get the building detective, anyway," insisted the manager.

"Let him come along, but do not let him know until we are sure. If we
are right we will find a most unusual infernal machine," said Linane.

       *       *       *       *       *

The three men entered the suite with a pass-key. The detective was left
outside in the hall to halt anyone who might disturb the searchers. It
was as Jenks had thought. In an inner room they found a diabolical
machine--a single string stretched across two bridges, one of brass and
one of wood. A big horsehair bow attached to a shaft operated by a motor
was automatically sawing across the string. The note resulting was
evidently higher than the range of the human ear, because no audible
sound resulted. It was later estimated that the destructive note was
several octaves higher than the highest note on a piano.

The entire machine was enclosed in a heavy wire-net cage, securely
bolted to the floor. Neither the string or bow could be reached. It was
evidently the Mad Musician's idea that the devilish contrivance should
not be reached by hands other than his own.

How long the infernal machine had been operating no one knew, but the
visitors were startled when the building suddenly began to sway
perceptibly. Jenks jumped forward to stop the machine but could not find
a switch.

"See if the machine plugs in anywhere in a wall socket!" he shouted to
Linane, who promptly began examining the walls. Jenks shouted to the
building manager to phone the police to clear the streets around the big
building.

"Tell the police that the Acme Theater building may crash at any
moment," he instructed.

The engineers were perfectly cool in face of the great peril, but the
building manager lost his head completely and began to run around in
circles muttering: "Oh, my God, save me!" and other words of
supplication that blended into an incoherent babel.

Jenks rushed to the man, trying to still his wild hysteria.

The building continued to sway dangerously.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jenks looked from a window. An enormous crowd was collecting, watching
the big building swinging a foot out of plumb like a giant pendulum. The
crowd was growing. Should the building fall the loss of life would be
appalling. It was mid-morning. The interior of the building teemed with
thousands of workers, for all floors above the third were offices.

Teddy Jenks turned suddenly. He heard the watchman in the hall scream in
terror. Then he heard a body fall. He rushed to the door to see the Mad
Musician standing over the prostrate form of the detective, a devilish
grin on his distorted countenance.

The madman turned, saw Jenks, and started to run. Jenks took after him.
Up the staircase the madman rushed toward the roof. Teddy followed him
two floors and then rushed out to take the elevators. The building in
its mad swaying had made it impossible for the lifts to be operated.
Teddy realized this with a distraught gulp in his throat. He returned to
the stairway and took up the pursuit of the madman.

The corridors were beginning to fill with screaming men and wailing
girls. It was a sight never to be forgotten.

Laboriously Jenks climbed story after story without getting sight of the
madman. Finally he reached the roof. It was waving like swells on a lake
before a breeze. He caught sight of the Mad Musician standing on the
street wall, thirty stories from the street, a leer on his devilish
visage. He jumped for him.

The madman grasped him and lifted him up to the top of the wall as a cat
might have lifted a mouse. Both men were breathing heavily as a result
of their 15-story climb.

The madman tried to throw Teddy Jenks to the street below. Teddy clung
to him. The two battled desperately as the building swayed.

The dense crowd in the street had caught sight of the two men fighting
on the narrow coping, and the shout which rent the air reached the ears
of Jenks.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mind of the engineer was still working clearly, but a wild fear
gripped his heart. His strength seemed to be leaving him. The madman
pushed him back, bending his spine with brute strength. Teddy was forced
to the narrow ledge that had given the two men footing. The fingers of
the madman gripped his throat.

He was dimly conscious that the swaying of the building was slowing
down. His reason told him that Linane had found the wall socket and had
stopped the sawing of the devil's bow on the engine of hell.

He saw the madman draw a big knife. With his last remaining strength he
reached out and grasped the wrist above the hand which held the weapon.
In spite of all he could do he saw the madman inching the knife nearer
and nearer his throat.

Grim death was peering into the bulging eyes of Teddy Jenks, when his
engineering knowledge came to his rescue. He remembered the top stories
of the Acme building were constructed with a step of ten feet in from
the street line, for every story of construction above the 24th floor.

"If we fall," he reasoned, "we can only fall one story." Then he
deliberately rolled his own body and the weight of the madman, who held
him, over the edge of the coping. At the same time he twisted the
madman's wrist so the point of the knife pointed to the madman's body.

There was a dim consciousness of a painful impact. Teddy had fallen
underneath, but the force of the two bodies coming together had thrust
the knife deep into the entrails of the Mad Musician.

Clouds which had been collecting in the sky began a splattering
downpour. The storm grew in fury and lightning tore the heavens, while
thunder boomed and crackled. The rain began falling in sheets.

       *       *       *       *       *

This served to revive the unconscious Teddy. He painfully withdrew his
body from under that of the madman. The falling rain, stained with the
blood of the Mad Musician, trickled over the edge of the building.

Teddy dragged himself through a window and passed his hand over his
forehead, which was aching miserably. He tried to get to his feet and
fell back, only to try again. Several times he tried and then, his
strength returning, he was able to walk.

He made his way to the studio where he had left Linane and found him
there surrounded by police, reporters and others. The infernal machine
had been rendered harmless, but was kept intact as evidence.

Catching sight of Teddy, Linane shouted with joy. "I stopped the damned
thing," he chuckled, like a pleased schoolboy. Then, observing Teddy's
exhausted condition he added:

"Why, you look like you have been to a funeral!"

"I have," said Teddy. "You'll find that crazy fiddler dead on the
twenty-ninth story. Look out the window of the thirtieth story," he
instructed the police, who had started to recover the body. "He stabbed
himself. He is either dead or dying."

It proved that he was dead.

No engineering firm is responsible for the actions of a madman. So the
Muller Construction Company was given a clean bill of health.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jenks and Elaine Linane were with the girl's father in his study. They
were asking for the paternal blessing.

Linane was pretending to be hard to convince.

"Now, my daughter," he said, "this young man takes $500 of my good money
by sounding me out, as he calls it. Then he comes along and tries to
take my daughter away from me. It is positively high-handed. It dates
back to the football game--"

"Daddy, dear, don't be like that!" said Elaine, who was on the arm of
his chair with her own arms around him.

"I tell you, Elaine, this dates back to the fall of 1927."

"It dates back to the fall of Eve," said Elaine. "When a girl finds her
man, no power can keep him from her. If you won't give me to Teddy
Jenks, I'll elope with him."

"Well, all right then. Kiss me," said Linane as he turned towards his
radio set.

"One and one makes one," said Teddy Jenks.

Every engineer knows his mathematics.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Have you written in to_

  ASTOUNDING STORIES

  _Yet, to Tell the Editors Just What Kind of Stories You Would
  Like Them to Secure for You?_

       *       *       *       *       *




The Thief of Time

_By Captain S. P. Meek_


    The teller turned to the stacked pile of bills. They were gone!
    And no one had been near!

[Illustration: "_That man never entered and stole that money as the
picture shows, unless he managed to make himself invisible._"]


Harvey Winston, paying teller of the First National Bank of Chicago,
stripped the band from a bundle of twenty dollar bills, counted out
seventeen of them and added them to the pile on the counter before him.

"Twelve hundred and thirty-one tens," he read from the payroll change
slip before him. The paymaster of the Cramer Packing Company nodded an
assent and Winston turned to the stacked bills in his rear currency
rack. He picked up a handful of bundles and turned back to the grill.
His gaze swept the counter where, a moment before, he had stacked the
twenties, and his jaw dropped.

"You got those twenties, Mr. Trier?" he asked.

"Got them? Of course not, how could I?" replied the paymaster. "There
they are...."

His voice trailed off into nothingness as he looked at the empty
counter.

"I must have dropped them," said Winston as he turned. He glanced back
at the rear rack where his main stock of currency was piled. He stood
paralyzed for a moment and then reached under the counter and pushed a
button.

The bank resounded instantly to the clangor of gongs and huge steel
grills shot into place with a clang, sealing all doors and preventing
anyone from entering or leaving the bank. The guards sprang to their
stations with drawn weapons and from the inner offices the bank
officials came swarming out. The cashier, followed by two men, hurried
to the paying teller's cage.

"What is it, Mr. Winston?" he cried.

"I've been robbed!" gasped the teller.

"Who by? How?" demanded the cashier.

"I--I don't know, sir," stammered the teller. "I was counting out Mr.
Trier's payroll, and after I had stacked the twenties I turned to get
the tens. When I turned back the twenties were gone."

"Where had they gone?" asked the cashier.

"I don't know, sir. Mr. Trier was as surprised as I was, and then I
turned back, thinking that I had knocked them off the counter, and I saw
at a glance that there was a big hole in my back racks. You can see
yourself, sir."

The cashier turned to the paymaster.

"Is this a practical joke, Mr. Trier?" he demanded sharply.

"Of course not," replied the paymaster. "Winston's grill was closed. It
still is. Granted that I might have reached the twenties he had piled
up, how could I have gone through a grill and taken the rest of the
missing money without his seeing me? The money disappeared almost
instantly. It was there a moment before, for I noticed when Winston
took the twenties from his rack that it was full."

"But someone must have taken it," said the bewildered cashier. "Money
doesn't walk off of its own accord or vanish into thin air--"

A bell interrupted his speech.

"There are the police," he said with an air of relief. "I'll let them
in."

       *       *       *       *       *

The smaller of the two men who had followed the cashier from his office
when the alarm had sounded stepped forward and spoke quietly. His
voice was low and well pitched yet it carried a note of authority and
power that held his auditors' attention while he spoke. The voice
harmonized with the man. The most noticeable point about him was the
inconspicuousness of his voice and manner, yet there was a glint of
steel in his gray eyes that told of enormous force in him.

"I don't believe that I would let them in for a few moments, Mr.
Rogers," he said. "I think that we are up against something a little
different from the usual bank robbery."

"But, Mr. Carnes," protested the cashier, "we must call in the police in
a case like this, and the sooner they take charge the better chance
there will be of apprehending the thief."

"Suit yourself," replied the little man with a shrug of his shoulders.
"I merely offered my advice."

"Will you take charge, Mr. Carnes?" asked the cashier.

"I can't supersede the local authorities in a case like this," replied
Carnes. "The secret service is primarily interested in the suppression
of counterfeiting and the enforcement of certain federal statutes, but I
will be glad to assist the local authorities to the best of my ability,
provided they desire my help. My advice to you would be to keep out the
patrolmen who are demanding admittance and get in touch with the chief
of police. I would ask that his best detective together with an expert
finger-print photographer be sent here before anyone else is admitted.
If the patrolmen are allowed to wipe their hands over Mr. Winston's
counter they may destroy valuable evidence."

"You are right, Mr. Carnes," exclaimed the cashier. "Mr. Jervis, will
you tell the police that there is no violence threatening and ask them
to wait for a few minutes? I'll telephone the chief of police at once."

       *       *       *       *       *

As the cashier hurried away to his telephone Carnes turned to his
companion who had stood an interested, although silent spectator of the
scene. His companion was a marked contrast to the secret service
operator. He stood well over six feet in height, and his protruding jaw
and shock of unruly black hair combined with his massive shoulders and
chest to give him the appearance of a man who labored with his
hands--until one looked at them. His hands were in strange contrast to
the rest of him. Long, slim, mobile hands they were, with tapering
nervous fingers--the hands of a thinker or of a musician. Telltale
splotches of acid told of hours spent in a laboratory, a tale that was
confirmed by the almost imperceptible stoop of his shoulders.

"Do you agree with my advice, Dr. Bird?" asked Carnes deferentially.

The noted scientist, who from his laboratory in the Bureau of Standards
had sent forth many new things in the realms of chemistry and physics,
and who, incidentally, had been instrumental in solving some of the most
baffling mysteries which the secret service had been called upon to
face, grunted.

"It didn't do any harm," he said, "but it is rather a waste of time. The
thief wore gloves."

"How in thunder do you know that?" demanded Carnes.

"It's merely common sense. A man who can do what he did had at least
some rudiments of intelligence, and even the feeblest-minded crooks know
enough to wear gloves nowadays."

Carnes stepped a little closer to the doctor.

"Another reason why I didn't want patrolmen tramping around," he said in
an undertone, "is this. If Winston gave the alarm quickly enough, the
thief is probably still in the building."

"He's a good many miles away by now," replied Dr. Bird with a shrug of
his shoulders.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carnes' eyes opened widely. "Why?--how?--who?" he stammered. "Have you
any idea of who did it, or how it was done?"

"Possibly I have an idea," replied Dr. Bird with a cryptic smile. "My
advice to you, Carnes, is to keep away from the local authorities as
much as possible. I want to be present when Winston and Trier are
questioned and I may possibly wish to ask a few questions myself. Use
your authority that far, but no farther. Don't volunteer any information
and especially don't let my name get out. We'll drop the counterfeiting
case we were summoned here on for the present and look into this a
little on our own hook. I will want your aid, so don't get tied up with
the police."

"At that, we don't want the police crossing our trail at every turn,"
protested Carnes.

"They won't," promised the doctor. "They will never get any evidence on
this case, if I am right, and neither will we--for the present. Our
stunt is to lie low and wait for the next attempt of this nature and
thus accumulate some evidence and some idea of where to look."

"Will there be another attempt?" asked Carnes.

"Surely. You don't expect a man who got away with a crime like this to
quit operations just because a few flatfeet run around and make a
hullabaloo about it, do you? I may be wrong in my assumption, but if I
am right, the most important thing is to keep all reference to my name
or position out of the press reports."

The cashier hastened up to them.

"Detective-Captain Sturtevant will be here in a few minutes with a
photographer and some other men," he said. "Is there anything that we
can do in the meantime, Mr. Carnes?"

"I would suggest that Mr. Trier and his guard and Mr. Winston go into
your office," replied Carnes. "My assistant and I would like to be
present during the questioning, if there are no objections."

"I didn't know that you had an assistant with you," answered the
cashier.

Carnes indicated Dr. Bird.

"This gentleman is Mr. Berger, my assistant," he said. "Do you
understand?"

"Certainly. I am sure there will be no objection to your presence, Mr.
Carnes," replied the cashier as he led the way to his office.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later Detective-Captain Sturtevant of the Chicago police
was announced. He acknowledged the introductions gruffly and got down to
business at once.

"What were the circumstances of the robbery?" he asked.

Winston told his story, Trier and the guard confirming it.

"Pretty thin!" snorted the detective when they had finished. He whirled
suddenly on Winston.

"Where did you hide the loot?" he thundered.

"Why--uh--er--what do you mean?" gulped the teller.

"Just what I said," replied the detective. "Where did you hide the
loot?"

"I didn't hide it anywhere," said the teller. "It was stolen."
