wedding night_.

Indeed, her own mother, months before she died, had already explained
much of this to Rachel. But the thought of her mother fairly broke her
heart now. Her mother would cut her own throat if she could see Rachel
in this place, about to let a man do this thing to her for money.

Her body shrank with dread.

She would rather, far rather, be the ignorant bride of a carpenter or a
traveling merchant like her poor Angelo, who had been her husband in
name only, or even the wife of a butcher, than to lie here in this
gorgeously decorated room and give her most precious gift to a stranger
who had bought the right to deflower her.

She found herself wishing poor old Angelo had asserted his right as her
husband so that she could not now let her virginity be defiled.

_Thank God Angelo is not alive to see this! But if he had lived, I would
not be doing this._

_God will never forgive me._

_But if God does not want me to do what I am doing, why did He let this
happen to me?_

Tilia sat beside the bed in a big chair with a curved bottom. The
jeweled cross she wore--which reminded Rachel that she was among
Christians here and therefore not safe--rested on her bosom, half
covered by the gold lace bordering the neckline of her gown. The cross
quivered minutely with Tilia's heartbeat.

"You are probably wondering, child, whether you are doing the right
thing."

"Yes." Rachel was so choked with fear that she could only whisper the
word.

"Well, I can tell you there are thousands of women who would give
anything to be in your place."

"In my place? To become a putana?"

Tilia laughed. "You think most women are contentedly married, with
husbands to take care of them, with children who love them and neighbors
who respect them--while only a few like me and the women who work for me
are putane, whom the rest look down on. Well, listen to me, little one,
other women _envy_ us. A married woman sells herself, body and soul, to
be some man's slave for life. And she gets damned little in return. We
rent out this little part of our anatomy"--she patted her lap--"for a
moment, and we keep the profit for ourselves. If we are clever, as I
have been, we learn how to keep and increase our money. So when we no
longer have youth and beauty to sell, we can take care of ourselves. And
I tell you that a woman in her later years is likely to be a better
friend to herself than any husband."

_She speaks with conviction. But I cannot trust her, either. I have not
had a true friend in this world since Angelo was killed._

Rachel sighed. "It is just that after tonight there is no turning back.
This is for the rest of my life."

"That is right," said Tilia. "You will give up something that you can
lose only once. When you have a commodity as unique as that, my child,
you owe it to yourself to get the most you can for it." Her eyes
hardened. "Every man wants to be the first to pierce a woman and hear
her cry out and make her bleed. But what woman gets anything worth
having in return? She gives it away on a dark night to some furfante
with a smooth tongue and a handsome leg, or else the tonto she married
takes it from her and then tells her to go wash the bed linen." She
turned to stare at Rachel. "Do you know what I got for my virginity?"
Her cheeks were red with anger.

"What did you get, Signora?" The heat with which Tilia spoke reassured
Rachel. This was what the woman really felt. She was not just talking to
lead Rachel astray.

"Blows and slavery." Tilia thrust her face close to Rachel's to
underline her words. "Blows and slavery. The Genoese, may leprosy devour
their limbs and may their prickles fall off in their hands, raided
Otranto. They raped me--that was how I lost _my_ virginity. They sold me
to the Turks."

"You were a slave to the Turks?" Rachel gasped. "Where?" And how did she
escape them and come to Orvieto and grow so rich and fat?

Tilia looked away. "Never mind. It would take too long to tell you."
Rachel sensed that there was something here Tilia did not want to talk
about. But she resolved to pry the story out of her one day.

Tilia's head swung back to face her. "Have I told you what you are
getting this night for giving this man this proud moment of possessing a
virgin?"

"I--I do not remember." Tilia had named a figure, but it had been so
outrageous and Rachel had been so frightened by the prospect that she
had promptly forgotten it.

"By the five wounds of Jesus, you truly are a child, not to remember
something so important! Well, fix it in your mind this time, and think
of it when you are wondering whether you are doing right. Five hundred
golden florins. Five hundred, newly minted in Florence. That is your
share. That is half of what he is paying. The other half is mine, as is
only just. Think of it. He pays the price of a palazzo for you because
you are a very young, beautiful virgin, and that is what he most
desperately desires. Compare that with what most women get when they let
a man have them for the first time."

_That is far more money than Angelo ever saw in his whole life. Who is
this man who will pay so much to have me?_ Rachel supposed Tilia would
tell her who the man was if she asked, but she had decided it was better
not to know anything about him ahead of time. That way she could imagine
that he would be someone kind and gentle.

"I do not know what I will do with all that money," Rachel said softly.

_If I lose it, all this will have been for nothing._

Tilia's wide mouth stretched even wider in a grin. "I will show you how
to plant it."

"Plant it?"

"Yes, and then watch it grow. There are many, many fields in which to
plant money. You can place it with the Templars or certain Lombards or
men I know among your own Jews, and they use it, and when they give it
back to you there is more. Miracolo! Or you can buy beautiful and
valuable things with it, whose worth increases as they get older. Or you
can buy shares in a ship of Venice or Pisa, or even"--she spat--"Genoa,
or a German caravan, and when the caravan or the ship comes back, if it
comes back, you get your money back tenfold. That is risky, but it is
the quickest way to great wealth."

Rachel felt a momentary excitement. Then she remembered how she was
going to get the money. Her body felt colder than ever, cold as death.
This, she thought, must be the way that poor man they killed last week
felt when he was waiting for the torturers to come for him. She
shuddered and hugged her knees tight against her chest under the gauzy
gown Tilia had given her to wear.

Tilia must have seen the sudden darkening of her mood. She moved over to
the bed and sat down beside Rachel, making the frame of the bed groan
alarmingly. She put a hand lightly on Rachel's arm.

"Listen, Rachel. I was raped. I will not be party to the rape of
another. You do not have to do this. Just tell me that you do not want
to."

A sudden heat rushed through Rachel's body. She was no longer cold. She
burned with anger.

"Stop saying that!" she screamed. "Will you leave me alone?" Being
reminded over and over again that she was doing this of her own free
will was an even worse torture than imagining what the man would do to
her.

_Oh, God, I am going to cry and make myself ugly, and he will not want
me and I will not get the five hundred florins._

She pressed her hands against her face, trying to stop tears.

"I was asking you to think, not carry on," said Tilia reprovingly. "If
you want to walk well in life, you had better learn not to burst into
tears when you have an important decision to make."

Rachel took deep breaths to calm herself.

"I decided days ago that I could not do any better for myself than this,
Signora Tilia. But I am so afraid. Perhaps the man will not want me when
he sees how afraid I am."

Tilia grinned broadly. "Nonsense. The more innocent and timid you
appear, the more you will delight him."

Rachel heard a light tapping at the door, and her heart beat so hard she
thought it would burst.

Tilia rose, brushing down her green satin gown. "The signal that he has
arrived. I thought he would never get here. It's almost morning. I must
go down and greet him, child. But remember, I will be watching
everything."

_I do not really like that._

Tilia winked and pushed on what looked like a plaster panel between two
gold-painted beams in the wall. It swung away from her and she squeezed
through.

Rachel sat in the bed, drawn up into the corner of it that was farthest
from the door, and waited. She played nervously with fingers that felt
like icicles.

A short time later she caught a glimpse of Tilia pushing open the door,
but her eyes fixed on the man standing in the doorway.

She drew in a deep, gasping breath. She wanted to scream.

The man standing in the doorway was short and broad. He wore a long,
brightly colored silk robe. His skin was brown, his eyes little black
slits. A white mustache drooped below his flat nose. A thin white beard
like a goat's hung from his chin.

She had seen this man once before, when she watched from the window of
Sophia's room at Cardinal Ugolini's, the day he arrived in Orvieto in a
great procession.

Rachel's breath, so long held, burst out of her in a moan.

The man who had come to take her virginity was a Tartar.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It was as much by my choice as the cardinal's that I did not attend the
contessa's reception," said Friar Mathieu, yawning. "How could a Little
Brother of San Francesco stay up till all hours with people stuffing
themselves with rich food and drinking wine? And gambling, and kissing
each other in dark corners?"

The old Franciscan's eyes were watery with sleepiness, but the corners
of his mouth quirked with humor under his white mustache. He sat on the
edge of the cot, which, as he had insisted when he moved into the
Palazzo Monaldeschi, was the only piece of furniture in the room. Simon
paced the floor, unable to stand still.

Simon felt the barb in the mention of kissing, but he did not mind it.
When he routed Friar Mathieu out of his narrow bed in a remote corner of
the palace, he admitted at once that he had been in the atrium with
Ugolini's niece, Sophia, while David of Trebizond was so disastrously
baiting the Tartars.

"I was wrong to pay court to the cardinal's niece." He could still feel
her lips under his, still taste them, and his body tingled at the
remembrance. "I am as much at fault as de Verceuil. But it was he who
found that ignorant woman to replace you as interpreter, and then he
went off to gamble--with David's servant, of all people--and left the
Tartars alone and unprotected."

Friar Mathieu shook his head. "Yes, and drinking that wine of
Montefiascone. I wonder why God chose to make those particular grapes so
irresistible."

Simon pounded his fist into his palm. "We must confront de Verceuil,
Friar Mathieu."

A deep crease appeared between the thick white eyebrows. "At this hour?"

Simon saw the fatigue in Mathieu's wrinkled face and felt guilty. "I am
most heartily sorry for awakening you at this ungodly time of night. It
was just--"

"Just that you could not sleep yourself." The friar laughed. "But it is
a most Godly time of night. The fact is, I would have had to get up soon
to say the first part of my office. Were I living with my brother
Franciscans--as I wish I were--I would be up chanting lauds with them.
But I fear the cardinal will be neither willing nor able to talk to us
if we go to him now."

"So much damage has been done, Friar Mathieu. The contessa is furious. I
could not begin to reason with her. She went on and on, talking about
murderers of babies. I would not be surprised if tomorrow morning she
ordered us to leave her palazzo."

The old man raised a hand. "Pope Urban would not let her do that. It
would be an insult to the ambassadors."

"Cardinal le Gros told me the pope looked pale and shaken when he left.
He might not care whether the ambassadors are insulted. We can have no
more of de Verceuil's blundering."

_Or mine._

Friar Mathieu shook a finger at him. "What happened tonight is not the
cardinal's doing. None of this is accidental. What happened tonight
shows that Ugolini will do everything in his power to block this
alliance."

"But Ugolini did nothing tonight. It was all that man from Trebizond."

"That is like saying that the axe chops the tree down, and not the
woodsman wielding it. Ugolini brought David to the contessa's reception.
He brought David's servant, an accomplished gambler as well as a
recruiter of brigosi. And he brought his niece, Sophia."

At the mention of Sophia a sharp pain went through Simon's chest.

_Sophia cannot be part of it. Not when I have just found her._

Was it possible that the passion she had showed in their time together
in the atrium was a sham? That would be too cruel. And yet, how could he
prove that she was innocent?

"It is just a coincidence that Sophia is here in Orvieto now," he said.
"She is as undecided about this matter of the Tartars as the pope
himself is."

_But is the pope still undecided_, Simon wondered as he spoke.

The wrinkles around Friar Mathieu's faded blue eyes deepened a little.
"Well, I would not expect you to say otherwise. A knight does not doubt
the honor of a lady he has kissed."

Simon sensed Friar Mathieu's skepticism, but he could not bring himself
to believe that Sophia had knowingly been the cardinal's agent. This
woman had made Italy a place of enchantment for him.

Friar Mathieu went on. "We both agree, do we not, that the luring of
Cardinal de Verceuil by David's man, Giancarlo, was planned by Ugolini?"

Glad to be on safer ground, Simon nodded vigorously. "We agree on that,
to be sure."

"But we cannot simply go to de Verceuil, as you proposed, and denounce
him for having left the room with Giancarlo. Not when he can at once
point out that you also left the room--with Sophia."

Simon turned his back on Friar Mathieu and stared out, almost unseeing,
toward the window. It had neither glass nor shutters nor parchment, only
a gauze curtain to discourage insects, iron bars to keep out larger
intruders. He felt furious with himself.

The mention of Giancarlo reminded him that he had heard nothing from
Sordello. By now the old mercenary should have insinuated himself into
the band Giancarlo was gathering. Perhaps through Sordello Simon could
prove Sophia's innocence.

He noticed now that some light was coming through the curtain, and he
thought he heard birds singing. He had been up all night.

"Then you think it pointless for us to confront de Verceuil? I suppose
you do not think I should write to Count Charles, either."

"I think it very unlikely that Count Charles would give the cardinal's
responsibilities in this to someone else. I think it very likely that
Cardinal de Verceuil has his intriguers around the count who would learn
of your message and might set themselves to do you harm. No, I do not
think we can rid ourselves of the cardinal. But I agree that we should
meet with him."

Simon was bewildered. "To do what?"

Friar Mathieu shrugged. "No man is beyond redemption. He must realize
that because of his blundering tonight--our blundering--the mission is
perilously close to failing. Perhaps we can convince him that in the
future we must work together. Otherwise there will be no glory for him
to steal from us."

The old friar had been sleeping only in a robe of gray frieze. He pulled
a sleeveless brown mantle over his head and tied a white cord around his
waist, and he was dressed for the day. Simon envied him the simplicity
of his apparel. It took him a good deal longer to dress himself in the
morning, and he knew noblemen who spent hours in their wardrobes, with
servants to help them, before they felt ready to face the world.

"We will go now, then?" he asked.

"Well, you are up. If the cardinal is as upset about this disaster as
you are, he may well have spent a sleepless night, too. Let us go and
see."

They walked side by side down dim corridors cluttered with battered old
chairs and tables, past walls covered with tattered hangings, dented
shields, and rusty coats of mail. The Monaldeschi family, it seemed,
never threw away anything. The rooms set aside for the cardinal and his
entourage were on the third floor of the palazzo, where the windows were
larger and set with white glass. A man wrapped in a blanket lay on a
sack of straw outside the door to the cardinal's rooms. The top of his
head, shaved in a tonsure, gleamed dully in the light of the one fat
candle that illuminated the corridor. A cleric in minor orders, no
doubt. Simon shook him.

"No, Your Signory," the cleric said, yawning and stretching as he stood
up to bow properly to the count. "The cardinal is not sleeping, but
neither is he here. After the contessa's reception he and the Tartars
and their guards all went out. His Eminence did not choose to tell me
where they were bound."

Simon felt the wind knocked out of him, as if he had been running full
tilt and tripped. He looked at Friar Mathieu, who wore a pained, even
sad expression.

After everything else that had gone wrong, how could de Verceuil take
the Tartars into the streets late at night? They might run afoul of
bravos or some of the wild young men of Orvieto's feuding families. Why
would de Verceuil take such a risk?

Then Simon understood the reason for Friar Mathieu's look of sadness.
Men would leave the Palazzo Monaldeschi at this hour for only one
reason--loose women.

Simon had heard that in the darkest hours a corrupt, secret world
glowed brightly in Orvieto, hidden behind discreet walls. Rumor told of
high-ranking churchmen who ventured behind those walls; indeed, it was
said that the secret world existed because of the patronage of such men.
Of course de Verceuil would be a patron of that sinful night world. And
of course he would draw the Tartars into it. Barbarians that they were,
they no doubt expected the attentions of harlots as their due.

_That I am surprised only proves, I suppose, what a bumpkin I am_,
thought Simon, annoyed at himself and disgusted with de Verceuil.

He must pray, he thought with a chill, that the Tartars' guards were
well armed and alert.




XXV


Swords drawn, Daoud and Lorenzo stood back-to-back in the shadowy
courtyard. Lorenzo faced the six men who had emerged from the end of the
alley and were now fanning out to surround them. Daoud confronted the
four who had jumped down into the campiello.

A shutter opened on the overhanging second floor of a house, and Daoud
glanced up to see a face. The shutter slammed with a finality that
declared the householder wanted nothing to do with what was going on
below.

It was too dark to see the faces of the men before him. They wore dark
capes, and two of them carried long daggers in one hand and swords in
the other. One shadowy figure stepped forward now, and Daoud wondered if
they were going to challenge him.

"Messere, let us speak quickly. You are David of Trebizond, are you
not?"

The man had asked the question in an urgent but respectful tone.

Feeling a bit more hopeful, Daoud answered, "Yes, I am David."

"Who the devil are _you_?" called a voice from behind Daoud.

The man addressed his answer to Daoud. "I am Andrea Sordello of Rimini,
Messer David. These three men are my comrades. It would honor us if you
would accept our service."

"Accept his service," Lorenzo said at once from behind Daoud. "We have
nothing to lose."

Daoud made himself decide at once. "If you are willing to help me, I am
grateful."

"Be off with you, Messer Sordello," called one of the original pursuers.
"This is no quarrel of yours."

"And what is _your_ quarrel with these men?" Sordello replied.

"That is no affair of yours, Messere!" It was the voice of a very young
man, intense, passionate.

Daoud turned to face the young voice. At once Sordello moved to take a
position at his side.

Daoud realized that he could see better; the first hint of dawn. And not
only was there more light, but his head was clearer as well. The heat of
his body, aroused to fight, was burning away the intoxicating spirits in
his blood.

The men opposite were spread far apart. The one who spoke for them was
slender and wore a cap that fell over one ear. A silver badge glittered
on the cap.

Sordello spoke again. "Since you will not say, Messere, I will tell
_you_ what your affair is. You are of the famiglia Filippeschi. You saw
these gentlemen leaving the Palazzo Monaldeschi and decided that any
guest of the Monaldeschi must be an enemy of yours. And so you decided
to hunt down and kill these good gentlemen, who have done you no harm
and are not even citizens of Orvieto, for the offense of having enjoyed
the hospitality of your rivals."

Filippeschi. Daoud had been wanting to make contact with them ever since
his arrival in Orvieto. Now he had met them, and--accursed luck--they
wanted to kill him.

"Lorenzo, they are Filippeschi," he muttered. "Talk to them."

"There is no talking to _them_, Messer David," said Sordello. "They are
out for your blood."

"Be still," said Daoud. The man had offered his services. Let him
confine himself to serving, then.

Lorenzo stepped out in front of Daoud, his sword still out before him,
but angled toward the ground.

"Messeres, at least you should know who it is that you have set out to
kill. I am Giancarlo of Naples, and this is my master, David. He is a
merchant from Trebizond, which is very far away. Much too far for him
to have any connection with the quarrels of Orvieto."

One of the Filippeschi bravos, a short man standing to the left of the
slender leader, said, "You spin a tale to try to fool us. Anyone can see
your master is a Frenchman. Too many damned French in Italy. The
Monaldeschi are toadies of the French. Death to the Monaldeschi, and
death to the French!"

What a bitter fate it would be, Daoud thought, if his Frankish looks,
which caused him to be sent here, earned him his death in a stupid
street fight.

"There are six of you," said Lorenzo. "But now that these four men have
joined us, there are six of us. Bad odds for you, because no matter how
much you harm us, you will certainly come out of this quarrel worse off
than you went into it." Lowering his sword even more, he stepped closer
to the young man with the silver badge on his cap. "Signore. Which of
these men are you willing to lose, to pay for the privilege of hurting
us?" With his free hand he pointed from man to man in the circle of six.
"That man? That one? That one? Yourself?"

"We will start with you!" the short man shouted.

He lunged at Lorenzo, his sword thrusting straight for Lorenzo's chest.

Lorenzo's sword was up in an instant, parrying the short man's attack.
At the same moment, out of the corner of his eye Daoud saw Sordello's
arm flash up, then down.

The short man gave a cry and stumbled. He staggered a few steps, then
collapsed in a heap at the feet of one of the other Filippeschi bravos.

Lorenzo stepped back so that he and Sordello flanked Daoud. Sordello's
three men moved up beside them, one to the left, two to the right.

"You may see to the man who is hurt," said Lorenzo. "Unless you want to
continue."

"If he is only hurt, I should retire to a monastery." Sordello laughed.
Indeed, Daoud saw that the man on the ground was not moving.

_I do not like this Sordello_, Daoud thought. _He comes out of nowhere
wanting to work for me. He kills in haste and boasts about it._

The young man with the silver badge on his cap knelt by the fallen
bravo and felt under his cape. "Morte," he said harshly, and stood
again.

"Well, Messeres," said Lorenzo, "we are now six to five. We did not
choose to quarrel. We still do not wish to fight. In fact, we ourselves
are at odds with the Monaldeschi."

"How might that be?" said the young man.

"Are we done fighting? I wish to make a proposal to you."

The Filippeschi spokesman glanced at his fellows. "What say you?"

"Alfredo was my cousin," said a tall bravo in a rust-colored cape. "But
I cannot avenge him alone."

"Alfredo was impetuous," said the young man. "He acted before I gave an
order."

"You are no leader, Marco, if you will not undertake the vendetta for
one of your men."

_The vendetta. These Italians are like the desert tribesmen. Kill one of
them, and you have his family to deal with._

"I will show you what kind of a leader I am if you speak that way to me
again," said Marco.

"Enough, enough," said one of the other bravos, and the man in the
rust-colored cape shrugged.

It was now almost daylight, and Daoud studied the face of the young man
called Marco. He could not be more than seventeen, Daoud thought,
looking at his smooth cheeks and downy black mustache.

_Marco!_ He had heard that the head of the Filippeschi family was a
young Conte Marco di Filippeschi.

"What do you propose, Messere?" said Marco.

"Meet me in front of the Church of Sant' Agnes," Lorenzo said. "This
evening at Compline. Come alone, as I will. There are things we can
discuss, I think, to our mutual profit."

Marco bowed to Lorenzo. "I shall expect you, Messere." He gestured, and
the man in the reddish cape and one other picked up the body of Alfredo.

"Momento, Messeres," said Sordello, moving to the body in three quick
strides. He bent down, reached under the body, and with a jerk of his
hand pulled free a long, thin throwing knife, which he wiped on his
cape.

"I can ill afford to lose so well-balanced a knife as this."

Alfredo's cousin, holding the body by the shoulders, said, "I know your
name, Andrea Sordello, and your face. You will not need that knife much
longer."

Sordello made a mock bow. "Be assured, Messere, this knife will not miss
_you_, if we should meet again."

A moment later the Filippeschi and their burden had disappeared into the
alley.

Daoud studied the dark irregular stain where the fallen man had bled on
the rain-damp paving stones of the campiello. It was dawn, already past
Fajr, the time for morning prayer.

_God is great. In the name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful. All
praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds._

"I advise you not to have any dealings with the Filippeschi, Messeres,"
Sordello said suddenly. "They'll betray you."

Even though he had given no outward sign that he was praying, Daoud was
angered at being interrupted. He eyed Sordello. The man was shorter than
he, about fifty years of age, Daoud judged. His hair was a good deal
grayer than Lorenzo's, and it hung lankly down to his jawline under a
shabby maroon cap. The bones of Sordello's nose and brows were thickened
and flattened, as if they had been broken many times. It was the face of
an old fighter, the sort of face that usually commanded Daoud's respect,
be it borne by Christian or Muslim. But when Daoud looked at him,
Sordello stared back fixedly, unnaturally, as if it were an effort to
look Daoud in the eye.

"Was your advice asked, Messere?" Lorenzo growled.

_He feels about the man as I do_, Daoud thought. Now, Daoud thought,
Sordello would bluster about saving their lives, and he would ask for
employment.

"Forgive me," Sordello said. "I presumed too much." He pulled off his
cap and bowed to the surprised Daoud. Either he was a better man than he
seemed at first glance, or he was much more devious.

"Forgive _us_," Daoud said, bowing back, though not as deeply, and
drawing a disapproving grunt from Lorenzo. "We owe you our deepest
gratitude. How came you leaping down from the housetops when we needed
help so badly?"

"I have been looking for a chance to meet Messer Giancarlo. Tonight I
waited outside the Monaldeschi palace, hoping that you would emerge from
the reception in a good mood. While I and my fellows were hanging about
the palace, we chanced to see those brigosi lurking in the shadows
nearby. When you came out, it was you they chose to follow, so we
followed them. When you went down this alley, we took to the rooftops,
the better to surprise your enemies."

"Why were you looking for me?" Lorenzo asked gruffly.

"I heard that you pay well for men who are adept with sword and dagger
and who ask no questions about what they might be hired for."

"I also like a man who does not talk much," said Lorenzo. "You talk a
great deal."

"Yes, Messer Giancarlo." Sordello lowered his eyes. Again, that
disarming humility.

The man was resourceful and quick-thinking. He was arrogant one moment,
humble the next.

"How did you come to Orvieto, Sordello?" Daoud asked him.

"I served Sigismundo Malatesta, governor of Rimini, until his death,"
said Sordello. "Since then I have not found a suitable master. I was
traveling south, thinking perhaps of offering my sword to King Manfred,
when I heard of you, Messer Giancarlo, while passing through Viterbo."

Daoud felt uneasy, hearing that Lorenzo's recruiting expeditions were
being gossiped of in the cities around here. And how easily Sordello had
been able to make the connection between Giancarlo and David of
Trebizond. Just as Tilia had said, it was impossible to hire men without
attracting attention.

He realized Lorenzo was waiting for him to speak.

"You may walk with us to Cardinal Ugolini's mansion," Daoud said.

When they emerged from the alley, there was no sign of the Filippeschi.
Two of Sordello's men walked in front of Daoud and Lorenzo, and Sordello
and the other man followed behind them. The wine had worn off
altogether, but Daoud felt a throbbing pain behind his eyes and a great
need to sleep.

"Well?" Lorenzo said, keeping his voice low. "The man wants us to hire
him."

"We need more men, and we want clever street fighters," said Daoud. "He
is that."

"Yes, but he is the type of man I detest," said Lorenzo. "I did not need
him to kill that Filippeschi bravo for me. He acts before he thinks."

"After tonight we may not have to attack the French directly," Daoud
said. "On the other hand, we are sure to have further need of
bodyguards, and I think Sordello and his three companions would suit.
Let us give ourselves time to think. Tell him you will meet him and give
him our answer in two days."




XXVI


It could not be worse, Rachel thought. She could not be more degraded.
An old man, and a Tartar. Were the Tartars even human, she wondered, or
was she about to commit the further abominable sin of mating with an
animal?

The door had closed behind him with a terribly final sound, and he was
standing in front of it, showing his teeth, large and strong and very
white, in a broad grin.

She wondered if he could see her knees and hands trembling. If only she
had accepted Signora Tilia's offer to release her from this. Was it too
late? Could she rush past the Tartar to the door and pull it open and
run away? If she did that now, doubtless the Tartar would be insulted.
From what she knew about these creatures, it would be very dangerous to
make him angry.

_I will pretend to be sick. When he is not looking, I will stick my
finger down my throat and throw up. That will disgust him so, he will
leave me alone._

Or it might antagonize him enough to kill her. Her body broke out in a
cold sweat. Her eyes were shut, but she heard the monster coming closer.
She thought of what he would do to her, and her stomach heaved--she
would throw up even without trying to. She hoped he _would_ kill her.
Better that than his animal's thing inside her.

She opened her eyes, to see that he had stopped halfway between the
closed door and the bed.

Actually, he was not so hideous. He had a round brown face and bright
black eyes, and his beard was white, as Angelo's had been.

_Ah, Rachel, Rachel, the joy of my old age_, Angelo would say. _My beard
was white before you were born._

_He would not rejoice in his old age if he could see me now._

The Tartar's beard and mustache were not full and flowing, as Angelo's
had been, but stringy. The beard almost seemed like a false beard,
pasted on that small, sharp chin.

He said, "Buona sera, berra feeria." He had learned some Italian. But it
was not evening. It was almost morning. And what was he trying to
say--"bella figlia?" Beautiful daughter? He had probably asked someone
what he should say, and they had told him the wrong things.

"Buona sera, Mio Signore," she answered, inclining her head slightly.
Her voice was a terrified whisper. When she heard how frightened she
sounded, she became more frightened still and huddled into the farthest
corner of the bed, wishing she could squeeze through a crack in the wall
beside her and disappear.

The Tartar tapped his chest, smiling and nodding. "John." He wore a
crimson silk tunic that fell to his knees, and over it a pale green
gown, open in front, with wide sleeves. When she had stood by a window
in the cardinal's palazzo and watched the Tartars' arrival in Orvieto,
he and the other Tartar had worn foreign-looking silk robes, blood red,
covered with blue birds with long golden tails. Now he was dressed like
an Italian.

He was still nodding at her, with a questioning look on his face. He
wanted her to say her name.

"Rachel," she said, touching her chest. How small her breasts were, she
thought. He could not possibly want a girl with such small breasts. He
certainly would not want to devour them. She felt sick to her stomach
again.

"Reicho. Buona sera, Reicho." He could not pronounce the letter _l_.

"Buona sera, John," she answered. She was about to smile, but she
checked herself. If she seemed to be encouraging him, he would come at
her. Cold sweat broke out over her skin.

_He is going to come at me anyway._

A silver pitcher of wine with two silver goblets stood on a small
marble-topped table beside the bed. Wine might make this easier for her.
Except that too much wine would make her sick. Well, was that not what
she wanted? She stretched a trembling hand toward it.

"Will you take some wine, Messer John?" _Where on earth did he get a
name like John?_

