hilarious bandits in the center of the cave. But there were only a few
left now; most of them had fallen into heavy slumber. I had been
asleep for several hours, I figured. The daylight shadows outside the
cave entrance showed that it was at least noon.

I lay listening to the voices which had awakened me. De Boer was
saying:

"But why, Jetta, should I bother with your ideas? I know what is best.
This ransom is too dangerous to arrange." His voice sounded calmly
good humored; I could hear in it now more than a trace of alcoholic
influence. He added, "I think we had better kill him and have done. My
men think so, too; already I have caused trouble with them, by
bringing him."

It jolted me into full wakefulness.

Jetta's voice: "No! I tell you it can be arranged, Hendrick. I have
been thinking of it, planning it--"

"Child! Well what? The least I can do is listen; I am no pig-headed
American. Say it out. What would you do to ransom him safely?"

       *       *       *       *       *

They were just at the foot of my ledge, in front of De Boer's tent.
Their voices rose so that I could hear them plainly. For all my start
at being awakened to hear my death determined upon, I recall that I
was almost equally startled by Jetta's voice. Her tone, her manner
with De Boer. Whatever opportunities they had had for talking
together, the change in their relationship was remarkable. De Boer was
now flushed with drink, but for all that he had obviously still a firm
grip upon his wits. And I heard Jetta now urging her ideas upon him
with calm confidence. An outward confidence; yet under it there was a
vibrant emotion suppressed within her even tone; a hint of tremulous
fright; a careful calculation of the effect she might be making upon
De Boer. Had he not been intoxicated--with drink and with her--he
might have sensed it. But he did not.

"Hendrick, it can be done. A big price. Why not?"

"Because if we are trapped and caught, of what use is the price we
might have gotten? Tell me that, wise one?"

"We will not be trapped. And suppose you kill him--won't they track
you just the same, Hendrick?"

"No. We would leave his body on some crag where it would be found. The
patrols would more quickly tire of chasing a killer when the damage is
done. They want Grant alive."

"Then let them have him alive--for a big price. Hendrick, listen--"

"Well, what?" he demanded again. "What is your plan?"

"Why--well, Hendrick, like this--"

She stammered, and I realized that she had no plausible plan. She was
fumbling, groping, urging upon De Boer that I must be ransomed alive.
But she had not good reason for it.

"Well?" he prompted impatiently.

"You--can you raise Great New York on the audiphone, Hendrick?"

"Yes," he said.

"Hanley's office?"

"Yes, no doubt. Chah--that would give him a start, wouldn't it? De
Boer calmly calling him!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He was laughing. I heard what sounded as though he were gulping
another drink. "By damn, Jetta, you are not the timid bird you look.
Call Hanley, eh?"

"Yes. Can it be done and still bar his instruments from locating us?"

"Yes, and bar his television. Believe it, Jetta. I have every device
for hiding. But--call Hanley!"

"Why not? ... Hendrick, stop!"

I started. It seemed that he was embracing her; forcing half drunken
caresses upon her.

I scrambled through my tent doorway, but Gutierrez, who had come back
on guard, at once seized me.

"_Hui_--so haste! Back, you."

The Spaniard spoke softly, and he was grinning. "The chief plays with
woman's words, no? Charming senorita, though she dresses like a boy.
But that is the more charming, eh? Listen to her, Grant."

He gripped me, and prodded my side with the point of his knife blade.
"Lie down Americano: we will listen."

Jetta was insisting. "Hendrick, stop!"

"Why?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I could see them now. They were seated before the opening of De Boer's
tent. A little stove in front of them. Coffee for Jetta, who was
seated cross-legged, pouring it; a bowl of drink for De Boer. And some
baked breadstuff dainties on a platter.

"Hendrick--"

She pushed him away as he leaned to embrace her. Although she was
laughing with him, I could only guess at the chill of fear that might
be in her heart.

"Foolish, Hendrick!"

"Foolish little bird, Jetta mine."

"You--it is you who are foolish, Hendrick." She slid from his embrace
and held her brimming coffee cup balanced before her, to ward him off.
"You think I am really clever, so trust me, Hendrick. Oh there is a
great future for us: you say I inspire you; let me! Hendrick De Boer,
Chieftain of the Lowlands! My father would have helped you become
that. You can build a little empire. Hendrick--why not? Father wanted
to make you President of Nareda. Why not build your own Lowland
Empire? We have a hundred men now? Why not gather a thousand? Ten
thousand? An empire!"

"_Ave Maria_," from Gutierrez. "This _nina_ thinks big thoughts!"

De Boer raised his bowl. "An empire--De Boer of the Lowlands! Go on;
you amuse me. We have a nice start, with this treasure."

"Yes. And the ransom money. But you will take me first to Cape Town,
Hendrick? We can be married there: I am seventeen in a month."

"Of course, Jetta. Haven't I promised?" There was no convincingness to
me in the way he said it. "Of course. To Cape Town for our marriage."

"Stop! Hendrick, be serious!" He had reached for her again. "Don't be
a fool, Hendrick."

"Very well," he said. "I am all serious. What is your plan?"

       *       *       *       *       *

She was more resourceful this time. She retorted, "This craven Grant,
he fears for his life--but he is very smart, Hendrick. I think he is
scheming every moment how he can be safely ransomed."

"Hah! No doubt of that!"

"And he has had experience with Chief Hanley. He knows Hanley's
methods, how Hanley will act. Let us see what Grant says of this."

She had no plan of her own, but she hoped that by now I had one! And
she was making an opportunity for me to put it before De Boer.

He said, "There is sense to that, Jetta. If there is any way to fool
Hanley, that craven American has no doubt thought it out."

She held another drink before him. "Yes. Let us see what he says."

He drank; and again as they were near together he caressed her.

"What a schemer you are, little bird. You and I are well matched, eh?"

"Gutierrez may be watching us!" she warned.

They suddenly looked up and saw Gutierrez and me.

"Hah!" Fortunately it struck De Boer into further good humor. "Hah--we
have an audience! Bring down the prisoner, Gutierrez! Let us see if
his wits can get him out of this plight. Come down, Grant!"

Gutierrez shoved me down the ladder ahead of him. De Boer stood up and
seized me. His great fingers dug into my shoulders.

"Sit down, American! It seems you are not to die. _Perhaps_ not."

The strength of his fingers was hurting me: he hoped I would wince.
Mine was now an ignominious role, indeed, yet I knew it was best.

I gasped. "Don't do that: you hurt!"

He chuckled and cast me loose. I added, with a show of spirit, "You
are a bullying giant. Just because you are bigger than I am--"

"Hear that, Jetta? The American finds courage with his coming ransom!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He shoved me to the ground. Gutierrez grinned, and withdrew a trifle.
Jetta avoided meeting my gaze.

"Have some coffee," De Boer offered. "Alcohol is not good for you. Now
say: have you any suggestions on how I can safely ransom you?"

It seemed that Jetta was holding her breath with anxiety. But I
answered with an appearance of ready eagerness. "Yes. I have. I can
arrange it with complete safety to you, if you give me a chance."

"You've got your chance. Speak out."

"You promise you will return me alive? Not hurt me?"

"De duvel--yes! You have my promise. But your plan had better be very
good."

"It is."

I told it carefully. The details of it grew with my words. Jetta
joined in it. But, most of all, it did indeed sound feasible. "But it
must be done at once," I urged. "The weather is right; to-night it
will be dark; overcast; not much wind. Don't you think so?"

He sent Gutierrez to the cave's instrument room to read the weather
forecast instruments. My guess was right.

"To-night then," I said. "If we linger, it only gives Hanley more time
to plan trickery."

"Let us try and raise him now," Jetta suggested.

The Dutchman, Hans, had joined us. He too, seemed to think my ideas
were good.

Except for the guards at the cave entrance, all the other bandits were
far gone in drink. With Hans and Gutierrez, we went to the instrument
room to call Hanley. As we crossed the cave, with Hans and De Boer
walking ahead together, De Boer spoke louder than he realized, and the
words came back to me.

"Not so bad, Hans? We will use him--but I am not a fool. I'll send him
back dead, not alive! A little knife-thrust, just at the end! Safest
for us, eh, Hans?"


CHAPTER XVII

_Within the Black Sack_

We left the bandit stronghold just after nightfall that same day.
There were five of us on the X-flyer. Jetta and De Boer, Hans and
Gutierrez and myself. The negotiations with Hanley had come through
satisfactorily; to De Boer, certainly, for he was in a triumphant mood
as they cast off the aero and we rose over the mist-hung depths.

It was part of my plan, this meager manning of the bandit ship. But it
was mechanically practical: there was only Hans needed at the controls
for this short-time flight: with De Boer plotting his course, working
out his last details--and with Gutierrez to guard me.

De Boer had been quite willing to take no other men--and most of them
were too far gone in their cups to be of much use. I never have
fathomed De Boer's final purpose. He promised Jetta now that when I
was successfully ransomed he would proceed to Cape Town by comfortable
night flights and marry her. It pleased Gutierrez and Hans, for they
wanted none of their comrades. The treasure was still on the flyer.
The ransom gold would be added to it. I think that De Boer, Gutierrez
and Hans planned never to return to their band. Why, when the treasure
divided so nicely among three, break it up to enrich a hundred?

I shall never forget Hanley's grim face as we saw it that afternoon on
De Boer's image-grid. My chief sat at his desk with all his location
detectors impotent, listening to my disembodied voice explaining what
I wanted him to do. My humble, earnest, frightened desire to be
ransomed safely at all costs! My plea that he do nothing to try and
trap De Boer!

It hurt me to appear so craven. But with it all, I knew that Hanley
understood. He could imagine my leering captor standing at my elbow,
prompting my words, dictating my very tone--prodding me with a knife
in the ribs. I tried, by every shade of meaning, to convey to Hanley
that I hoped to escape and save the ransom money. And I think that he
guessed it, though he was wary in the tone he used for De Boer to
hear. He accepted, unhesitatingly, De Boer's proposition: assured us
he would do nothing to assail De Boer; and never once did his grim
face convey a hint of anything but complete acquiescence.

       *       *       *       *       *

We had President Markes on the circuit. De Boer, with nothing to lose,
promised to return Jetta with me. In gold coin, sixty thousand U. S.
dollar-standards for me; a third as much from Nareda, for Jetta.

The details were swiftly arranged. We cut the circuit. I had a last
look at Hanley's face as the image of it faded. He seemed trying to
tell me to do the best I could; that he was powerless, and would do
nothing to jeopardize my life and Jetta's. Everything was ready for
the affair to be consummated at once. The weather was right; there was
time for Hanley and De Boer each comfortably to reach the assigned
meeting place.

We flew, for the first hour, nearly due west. The meeting place was at
35 deg. N. by 59 deg. W., a few hundred miles east by north of the
fairy-like mountaintop of the Bermudas. Our charts showed the Lowlands
there to run down to what once was measured as nearly three thousand
fathoms--called now eighteen thousand feet below the zero-height. A
broken region, a depth-ridge fairly level, and no Lowland sea, nor
any settlements in the neighborhood.

The time was set at an hour before midnight. No mail, passenger or
freight flyers were scheduled to pass near there at that hour, and,
save for some chance private craft, we would be undisturbed. The
ransom gold was available to Hanley. He had said he would bring it in
his personal Wasp.

       *       *       *       *       *

The details of the exchange were simple. Hanley, with only one
mechanic, would hover at the zero-height, his Wasp lighted so that we
could see it plainly. The wind drift, according to forecast, would be
southerly. At 11 P.M. Hanley would release from his Wasp a small
helium-gas baloon-car--a ten-foot basket with the supporting gas bag
above it, weighted so that it would slowly descend into the depths,
with a southern drift.

Our flyer, invisible and soundless, would pick up the baloon-car at
some point in its descent. The gold would be there, in a black casket.
De Boer would take the gold, deposit Jetta and me in the car, and
release it again. And when the balloon finally settled to the rocks
beneath, Hanley could pick it up. No men would be hidden by Hanley in
that basket. De Boer had stipulated that when casting loose the
balloon, its car must be swept by Hanley with a visible electronic
ray. No hidden men could withstand that blast!

Such was the arrangement with Hanley. I was convinced that he intended
to carry it out to the letter. He would have his own invisible X-flyer
in the neighborhood, no doubt. But it would not interfere with the
safe transfer of Jetta and me.

That De Boer would carry out his part, Hanley could only trust. He had
said so this afternoon bluntly. And De Boer had laughed and interposed
his voice in our circuit.

"Government money against these two lives, Hanley! Of course you have
to trust me!"

