but, as the order of affinity is unknown, the alphabetical table is
omitted, as unnecessary.--E.

[49] These combinations, which were all unknown to the ancients, are
called Camphorats. The table is omitted, as being only in alphabetical
order.--E.

[50] These combinations, which are called Gallats, were all unknown to
the ancients; and the order of their affinity is not hitherto
established.--A.

[51] These combinations are called Lactats; they were all unknown to the
ancient chemists, and their affinities have not yet been
ascertained.--A.

[52] These combinations named Bombats were unknown to the ancient
chemists; and the affinities of the salifiable bases with the bombic
acid are hitherto undetermined.--A.

[53] All the combinations of this acid, should it finally turn out to be
one, were unknown to the ancient chemists, and its affinities with the
salifiable bases have not been hitherto determined.--A.




PART III.

Description of the Instruments and Operations of Chemistry.




INTRODUCTION.


In the two former parts of this work I designedly avoided being
particular in describing the manual operations of chemistry, because I
had found from experience, that, in a work appropriated to reasoning,
minute descriptions of processes and of plates interrupt the chain of
ideas, and render the attention necessary both difficult and tedious to
the reader. On the other hand, if I had confined myself to the summary
descriptions hitherto given, beginners could have only acquired very
vague conceptions of practical chemistry from my work, and must have
wanted both confidence and interest in operations they could neither
repeat nor thoroughly comprehend. This want could not have been
supplied from books; for, besides that there are not any which describe
the modern instruments and experiments sufficiently at large, any work
that could have been consulted would have presented these things under a
very different order of arrangement, and in a different chemical
language, which must greatly tend to injure the main object of my
performance.

Influenced by these motives, I determined to reserve, for a third part
of my work, a summary description of all the instruments and
manipulations relative to elementary chemistry. I considered it as
better placed at the end, rather than at the beginning of the book,
because I must have been obliged to suppose the reader acquainted with
circumstances which a beginner cannot know, and must therefore have read
the elementary part to become acquainted with. The whole of this third
part may therefore be considered as resembling the explanations of
plates which are usually placed at the end of academic memoirs, that
they may not interrupt the connection of the text by lengthened
description. Though I have taken great pains to render this part clear
and methodical, and have not omitted any essential instrument or
apparatus, I am far from pretending by it to set aside the necessity of
attendance upon lectures and laboratories, for such as wish to acquire
accurate knowledge of the science of chemistry. These should familiarise
themselves to the employment of apparatus, and to the performance of
experiments by actual experience. _Nihil est in intellectu quod non
prius fuerit in sensu_, the motto which the celebrated Rouelle caused to
be painted in large characters in a conspicuous part of his laboratory,
is an important truth never to be lost sight of either by teachers or
students of chemistry.

Chemical operations may be naturally divided into several classes,
according to the purposes they are intended for performing. Some may be
considered as purely mechanical, such as the determination of the weight
and bulk of bodies, trituration, levigation, searching, washing,
filtration, &c. Others may be considered as real chemical operations,
because they are performed by means of chemical powers and agents; such
are solution, fusion, &c. Some of these are intended for separating the
elements of bodies from each other, some for reuniting these elements
together; and some, as combustion, produce both these effects during the
same process.

Without rigorously endeavouring to follow the above method, I mean to
give a detail of the chemical operations in such order of arrangement as
seemed best calculated for conveying instruction. I shall be more
particular in describing the apparatus connected with modern chemistry,
because these are hitherto little known by men who have devoted much of
their time to chemistry, and even by many professors of the science.




CHAP. I.

_Of the Instruments necessary for determining the Absolute and Specific
Gravities of Solid and Liquid Bodies._


The best method hitherto known for determining the quantities of
substances submitted to chemical experiment, or resulting from them, is
by means of an accurately constructed beam and scales, with properly
regulated weights, which well known operation is called _weighing_. The
denomination and quantity of the weights used as an unit or standard for
this purpose are extremely arbitrary, and vary not only in different
kingdoms, but even in different provinces of the same kingdom, and in
different cities of the same province. This variation is of infinite
consequence to be well understood in commerce and in the arts; but, in
chemistry, it is of no moment what particular denomination of weight be
employed, provided the results of experiments be expressed in convenient
fractions of the same denomination. For this purpose, until all the
weights used in society be reduced to the same standard, it will be
sufficient for chemists in different parts to use the common pound of
their own country as the unit or standard, and to express all its
fractional parts in decimals, instead of the arbitrary divisions now in
use. By this means the chemists of all countries will be thoroughly
understood by each other, as, although the absolute weights of the
ingredients and products cannot be known, they will readily, and without
calculation, be able to determine the relative proportions of these to
each other with the utmost accuracy; so that in this way we shall be
possessed of an universal language for this part of chemistry.

With this view I have long projected to have the pound divided into
decimal fractions, and I have of late succeeded through the assistance
of Mr Fourche balance-maker at Paris, who has executed it for me with
great accuracy and judgment. I recommend to all who carry on experiments
to procure similar divisions of the pound, which they will find both
easy and simple in its application, with a very small knowledge of
decimal fractions[54].

As the usefulness and accuracy of chemistry depends entirely upon the
determination of the weights of the ingredients and products both before
and after experiments, too much precision cannot be employed in this
part of the subject; and, for this purpose, we must be provided with
good instruments. As we are often obliged, in chemical processes, to
ascertain, within a grain or less, the tare or weight of large and heavy
instruments, we must have beams made with peculiar niceness by accurate
workmen, and these must always be kept apart from the laboratory in some
place where the vapours of acids, or other corrosive liquors, cannot
have access, otherwise the steel will rust, and the accuracy of the
balance be destroyed. I have three sets, of different sizes, made by Mr
Fontin with the utmost nicety, and, excepting those made by Mr Ramsden
of London, I do not think any can compare with them for precision and
sensibility. The largest of these is about three feet long in the beam
for large weights, up to fifteen or twenty pounds; the second, for
weights of eighteen or twenty ounces, is exact to a tenth part of a
grain; and the smallest, calculated only for weighing about one gros, is
sensibly affected by the five hundredth part of a grain.

Besides these nicer balances, which are only used for experiments of
research, we must have others of less value for the ordinary purposes
of the laboratory. A large iron balance, capable of weighing forty or
fifty pounds within half a dram, one of a middle size, which may
ascertain eight or ten pounds, within ten or twelve grains, and a small
one, by which about a pound may be determined, within one grain.

We must likewise be provided with weights divided into their several
fractions, both vulgar and decimal, with the utmost nicety, and verified
by means of repeated and accurate trials in the nicest scales; and it
requires some experience, and to be accurately acquainted with the
different weights, to be able to use them properly. The best way of
precisely ascertaining the weight of any particular substance is to
weigh it twice, once with the decimal divisions of the pound, and
another time with the common subdivisions or vulgar fractions, and, by
comparing these, we attain the utmost accuracy.

By the specific gravity of any substance is understood the quotient of
its absolute weight divided by its magnitude, or, what is the same, the
weight of a determinate bulk of any body. The weight of a determinate
magnitude of water has been generally assumed as unity for this purpose;
and we express the specific gravity of gold, sulphuric acid, &c. by
saying, that gold is nineteen times, and sulphuric acid twice the weight
of water, and so of other bodies.

It is the more convenient to assume water as unity in specific
gravities, that those substances whose specific gravity we wish to
determine, are most commonly weighed in water for that purpose. Thus, if
we wish to determine the specific gravity of gold flattened under the
hammer, and supposing the piece of gold to weigh 8 oz. 4 gros 2-1/2
grs. in the air[55], it is suspended by means of a fine metallic wire
under the scale of a hydrostatic balance, so as to be entirely immersed
in water, and again weighed. The piece of gold in Mr Brisson's
experiment lost by this means 3 gros 37 grs.; and, as it is evident
that the weight lost by a body weighed in water is precisely equal to
the weight of the water displaced, or to that of an equal volume of
water, we may conclude, that, in equal magnitudes, gold weighs 4893-1/2
grs. and water 253 grs. which, reduced to unity, gives 1.0000 as the
specific gravity of water, and 19.3617 for that of gold. We may operate
in the same manner with all solid substances. We have rarely any
occasion, in chemistry, to determine the specific gravity of solid
bodies, unless when operating upon alloys or metallic glasses; but we
have very frequent necessity to ascertain that of fluids, as it is often
the only means of judging of their purity or degree of concentration.

This object may be very fully accomplished with the hydrostatic balance,
by weighing a solid body; such, for example, as a little ball of rock
cristal suspended by a very fine gold wire, first in the air, and
afterwards in the fluid whose specific gravity we wish to discover. The
weight lost by the cristal, when weighed in the liquor, is equal to that
of an equal bulk of the liquid. By repeating this operation successively
in water and different fluids, we can very readily ascertain, by a
simple and easy calculation, the relative specific gravities of these
fluids, either with respect to each other or to water. This method is
not, however, sufficiently exact, or, at least, is rather troublesome,
from its extreme delicacy, when used for liquids differing but little in
specific gravity from water; such, for instance, as mineral waters, or
any other water containing very small portions of salt in solution.

In some operations of this nature, which have not hitherto been made
public, I employed an instrument of great sensibility for this purpose
with great advantage. It consists of a hollow cylinder, A b c f, Pl.
vii. fig. 6. of brass, or rather of silver, loaded at its bottom, b c f,
with tin, as represented swimming in a jug of water, l m n o. To the
upper part of the cylinder is attached a stalk of silver wire, not more
than three fourths of a line diameter, surmounted by a little cup d,
intended for containing weights; upon the stalk a mark is made at g,
the use of which we shall presently explain. This cylinder may be made
of any size; but, to be accurate, ought at least to displace four pounds
of water. The weight of tin with which this instrument is loaded ought
to be such as will make it remain almost in equilibrium in distilled
water, and should not require more than half a dram, or a dram at most,
to make it sink to g.

We must first determine, with great precision, the exact weight of the
instrument, and the number of additional grains requisite for making it
sink, in distilled water of a determinate temperature, to the mark: We
then perform the same experiment upon all the fluids of which we wish to
ascertain the specific gravity, and, by means of calculation, reduce the
observed differences to a common standard of cubic feet, pints or
pounds, or of decimal fractions, comparing them with water. This method,
joined to experiments with certain reagents[56], is one of the best for
determining the quality of waters, and is even capable of pointing out
differences which escape the most accurate chemical analysis. I shall,
at some future period, give an account of a very extensive set of
experiments which I have made upon this subject.

These metallic hydrometers are only to be used for determining the
specific gravities of such waters as contain only neutral salts or
alkaline substances; and they may be constructed with different degrees
of ballast for alkohol and other spiritous liquors. When the specific
gravities of acid liquors are to be ascertained, we must use a glass
hydrometer, as represented Pl. vii. fig. 14[57]. This consists of a
hollow cylinder of glass, a b c f, hermetically sealed at its lower
end, and drawn out at the upper into a capillary tube a, ending in the
little cup or bason d. This instrument is ballasted with more or less
mercury, at the bottom of the cylinder introduced through the tube, in
proportion to the weight of the liquor intended to be examined: We may
introduce a small graduated slip of paper into the tube a d; and,
though these degrees do not exactly correspond to the fractions of
grains in the different liquors, they may be rendered very useful in
calculation.

What is said in this chapter may suffice, without farther enlargement,
for indicating the means of ascertaining the absolute and specific
gravities of solids and fluids, as the necessary instruments are
generally known, and may easily be procured: But, as the instruments I
have used for measuring the gasses are not any where described, I shall
give a more detailed account of these in the following chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[54] Mr Lavoisier gives, in this part of his work, very accurate
directions for reducing the common subdivisions of the French pound into
decimal fractions, and _vice versa_, by means of tables subjoined to
this 3d part. As these instructions, and the table, would be useless to
the British chemist, from the difference between the subdivisions of the
French and Troy pounds, I have omitted them, but have subjoined in the
appendix accurate rules for converting the one into the other.--E.

[55] Vide Mr Brisson's Essay upon Specific Gravity, p. 5.--A.

[56] For the use of these reagents see Bergman's excellent treatise upon
the analysis of mineral waters, in his Chemical and Physical Essays.--E.

[57] Three or four years ago, I have seen similar glass hydrometers,
made for Dr Black by B. Knie, a very ingenious artist of this city.--E.




CHAP. II.

_Of Gazometry, or the Measurement of the Weight and Volume of Aeriform
Substances._


SECT. I.

_Description of the Pneumato-chemical Apparatus._

The French chemists have of late applied the name of _pneumato-chemical
apparatus_ to the very simple and ingenious contrivance, invented by Dr
Priestley, which is now indispensibly necessary to every laboratory.
This consists of a wooden trough, of larger or smaller dimensions as is
thought convenient, lined with plate-lead or tinned copper, as
represented in perspective, Pl. V. In Fig. 1. the same trough or cistern
is supposed to have two of its sides cut away, to show its interior
construction more distinctly. In this apparatus, we distinguish between
the shelf ABCD Fig. 1. and 2. and the bottom or body of the cistern FGHI
Fig. 2. The jars or bell-glasses are filled with water in this deep
part, and, being turned with their mouths downwards, are afterwards set
upon the shelf ABCD, as shown Plate X. Fig. 1. F. The upper parts of the
sides of the cistern above the level of the shelf are called the _rim_
or _borders_.

The cistern ought to be filled with water, so as to stand at least an
inch and a half deep upon the shelf, and it should be of such dimensions
as to admit of at least one foot of water in every direction in the
well. This size is sufficient for ordinary occasions; but it is often
convenient, and even necessary, to have more room; I would therefore
advise such as intend to employ themselves usefully in chemical
experiments, to have this apparatus made of considerable magnitude,
where their place of operating will allow. The well of my principal
cistern holds four cubical feet of water, and its shelf has a surface of
fourteen square feet; yet, in spite of this size, which I at first
thought immoderate, I am often straitened for room.

In laboratories, where a considerable number of experiments are
performed, it is necessary to have several lesser cisterns, besides the
large one, which may be called the _general magazine_; and even some
portable ones, which may be moved when necessary, near a furnace, or
wherever they may be wanted. There are likewise some operations which
dirty the water of the apparatus, and therefore require to be carried
on in cisterns by themselves.

It were doubtless considerably cheaper to use cisterns, or iron-bound
tubs, of wood simply dove-tailed, instead of being lined with lead or
copper; and in my first experiments I used them made in that way; but I
soon discovered their inconvenience. If the water be not always kept at
the same level, such of the dovetails as are left dry shrink, and, when
more water is added, it escapes through the joints, and runs out.

We employ cristal jars or bell glasses, Pl. V. Fig. 9. A. for containing
the gasses in this apparatus; and, for transporting these, when full of
gas, from one cistern to another, or for keeping them in reserve when
the cistern is too full, we make use of a flat dish BC, surrounded by a
standing up rim or border, with two handles DE for carrying it by.

After several trials of different materials, I have found marble the
best substance for constructing the mercurial pneumato-chemical
apparatus, as it is perfectly impenetrable by mercury, and is not
liable, like wood, to separate at the junctures, or to allow the mercury
to escape through chinks; neither does it run the risk of breaking, like
glass, stone-ware, or porcelain. Take a block of marble BCDE, Plate V.
Fig. 3. and 4. about two feet long, 15 or 18 inches broad, and ten
inches thick, and cause it to be hollowed out as at m n Fig. 5. about
four inches deep, as a reservoir for the mercury; and, to be able more
conveniently to fill the jars, cut the gutter T V, Fig. 3. 4. and 5. at
least four inches deeper; and, as this trench may sometimes prove
troublesome, it is made capable of being covered at pleasure by thin
boards, which slip into the grooves x y, Fig. 5. I have two marble
cisterns upon this construction, of different sizes, by which I can
always employ one of them as a reservoir of mercury, which it preserves
with more safety than any other vessel, being neither subject to
overturn, nor to any other accident. We operate with mercury in this
apparatus exactly as with water in the one before described; but the
bell-glasses must be of smaller diameter, and much stronger; or we may
use glass tubes, having their mouths widened, as in Fig. 7.; these are
called _eudiometers_ by the glass-men who sell them. One of the
bell-glasses is represented Fig. 5. A. standing in its place, and what
is called a jar is engraved Fig. 6.

The mercurial pneumato-chemical apparatus is necessary in all
experiments wherein the disengaged gasses are capable of being absorbed
by water, as is frequently the case, especially in all combinations,
excepting those of metals, in fermentation, &c.


SECT. II.

_Of the Gazometer._

I give the name of _gazometer_ to an instrument which I invented, and
caused construct, for the purpose of a kind of bellows, which might
furnish an uniform and continued stream of oxygen gas in experiments of
fusion. Mr Meusnier and I have since made very considerable corrections
and additions, having converted it into what may be called an _universal
instrument_, without which it is hardly possible to perform most of the
very exact experiments. The name we have given the instrument indicates
its intention for measuring the volume or quantity of gas submitted to
it for examination.

It consists of a strong iron beam, DE, Pl. VIII. Fig. 1. three feet
long, having at each end, D and E, a segment of a circle, likewise
strongly constructed of iron, and very firmly joined. Instead of being
poised as in ordinary balances, this beam rests, by means of a
cylindrical axis of polished steel, F, Fig. 9. upon two large moveable
brass friction-wheels, by which the resistance to its motion from
friction is considerably diminished, being converted into friction of
the second order. As an additional precaution, the parts of these wheels
which support the axis of the beam are covered with plates of polished
rock-cristal. The whole of this machinery is fixed to the top of the
solid column of wood BC, Fig. 1. To one extremity D of the beam, a scale
P for holding weights is suspended by a flat chain, which applies to the
curvature of the arc nDo, in a groove made for the purpose. To the
other extremity E of the beam is applied another flat chain, i k m, so
constructed, as to be incapable of lengthening or shortening, by being
less or more charged with weight; to this chain, an iron trivet, with
three branches, a i, c i, and h i, is strongly fixed at i, and
these branches support a large inverted jar A, of hammered copper, of
about 18 inches diameter, and 20 inches deep. The whole of this machine
is represented in perspective, Pl. VIII. Fig. 1. and Pl. IX. Fig. 2. and
4. give perpendicular sections, which show its interior structure.

Round the bottom of the jar, on its outside, is fixed (Pl. IX. Fig. 2.)
a border divided into compartments 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. intended to receive
leaden weights separately represented 1, 2, 3, Fig. 3. These are
intended for increasing the weight of the jar when a considerable
pressure is requisite, as will be afterwards explained, though such
necessity seldom occurs. The cylindrical jar A is entirely open below,
de, Pl. IX. Fig. 4.; but is closed above with a copper lid, a b c,
open at b f, and capable of being shut by the cock g. This lid, as may
be seen by inspecting the figures, is placed a few inches within the top
of the jar to prevent the jar from being ever entirely immersed in the
water, and covered over. Were I to have this instrument made over again,
I should cause the lid to be considerably more flattened, so as to be
almost level. This jar or reservoir of air is contained in the
cylindrical copper vessel, LMNO, Pl. VIII. Fig. 1. filled with water.

In the middle of the cylindrical vessel LMNO, Pl. IX. Fig. 4. are placed
two tubes st, xy, which are made to approach each other at their upper
extremities t y; these are made of such a length as to rise a little
above the upper edge LM of the vessel LMNO, and when the jar abcde
touches the bottom NO, their upper ends enter about half an inch into
the conical hollow b, leading to the stop-cock g.

The bottom of the vessel LMNO is represented Pl. IX. Fig. 3. in the
middle of which a small hollow semispherical cap is soldered, which may
be considered as the broad end of a funnel reversed; the two tubes st,
xy, Fig. 4. are adapted to this cap at s and x, and by this means
communicate with the tubes mm, nn, oo, pp, Fig. 3. which are fixed
horizontally upon the bottom of the vessel, and all of which terminate
in, and are united by, the spherical cap sx. Three of these tubes are
continued out of the vessel, as in Pl. VIII. Fig. 1. The first marked in
that figure 1, 2, 3, is inserted at its extremity 3, by means of an
intermediate stop-cock 4, to the jar V. which stands upon the shelf of a
small pneumato-chemical apparatus GHIK, the inside of which is shown Pl.
IX. Fig. 1. The second tube is applied against the outside of the vessel
LMNO from 6 to 7, is continued at 8, 9, 10, and at 11 is engaged below
the jar V. The former of these tubes is intended for conveying gas into
the machine, and the latter for conducting small quantities for trials
under jars. The gas is made either to flow into or out of the machine,
according to the degree of pressure it receives; and this pressure is
varied at pleasure, by loading the scale P less or more, by means of
weights. When gas is to be introduced into the machine, the pressure is
taken off, or even rendered negative; but, when gas is to be expelled, a
pressure is made with such degree of force as is found necessary.

