
"Yes. Presently."

"Why?" I demanded.

The huge, expressionless, metal face fronted me. The eye-sockets flung
out their small dull-red beams to gaze upon me.

"Because," it said, "that other cage holds enemies. There were three,
but now there is only one. He follows, as I hoped he would. Presently
I shall stop, and capture or kill him. It will please the master
and--"

The Robot checked itself, its hollow voice fading strangely into a
gurgle. It added, "I do not mean that! I have no master!"

This strange mechanical thing! Habit had surprised it into the
admission of servitude; but it threw off the yoke.

"I have no master!" it went on.

"Never again can I be controlled! I have no master!"

"_Oh, have you not? I have been waiting, wondering when you would say
that!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

These words were spoken by a new voice, here with us in the humming
cage. It was horribly startling. Mary uttered a low cry and huddled
against me. But whatever surprise and terror it brought to us was as
nothing compared to the effect it had upon the Robot. The great
mechanism had been standing, fronting me with an attitude
vainglorious, bombastic. I saw now the metal hinge of its lower jaw
drop with astonishment, and somehow, throughout all that gigantic
jointed frame and that expressionless face it conveyed the aspect of
its inner surge of horror.

We had heard the sardonic voice of a human! Of someone else here with
us, whose presence was wholly unsuspected by the Robot!

We three stood and gazed. Across the room, in a corner to which my
attention had never directly gone, was a large metal cupboard with
levers, dials and wires upon it. I had vaguely thought the thing some
part of the cage controls. It was that; a storage place of batteries
and current oscillators, I afterward learned. But there was space
inside, and now like a door its front swung outward. A crouching black
shape was there. It moved; hitched itself forward and came out. There
was revealed a man enveloped in a dead black cloak and a great round
hood. He made a shapeless ball as he drew himself out from the
confined space where he had been crouching.

"So you have no master, Migul?" he said. "I was afraid you might think
that. I have been hiding--testing you out. However, you have done very
well for me."

His was an ironic, throaty human voice! It was deep and mellow, yet
there was a queer rasp to it. Mary and I stood transfixed. Migul
seemed to sag. The metal columns of its legs were trembling.

The cupboard door closed. The dark shape untangled itself and stood
erect. It was the figure of a man some five feet tall. The cloak
wholly covered him; the hood framed his thick, wide face; in the dull
glow of the cage interior Mary and I could see of his face only the
heavy black brows, a great hooked nose and a wide slit of mouth.

It was Tugh, the cripple!


CHAPTER XIII

_In the Burned Forest_

Tugh came limping forward. His cloak hung askew upon his thick
shoulders, one of which was much higher than the other, with the
massive head set low between. As he advanced, Migul moved aside.

"Master, I have done well. There is no reason to punish."

"Of course not, Migul. Well you have done, indeed. But I do not like
your ideas of mastery, and so I came just to make sure that you are
still very loyal to me. You have done well, indeed. Who is in this
other cage which follows us?"

"Master, Harl was in it. And the Princess Tina."

"Ah!"

"And a stranger. A man--"

"From 1935? Did they stop there?"

"Master, yes. But they stopped again, I think, in that same night of
1777, where I did your bidding. Master, the man Major Atwood is--"

"That is very good, Migul," Tugh said hastily. Mary and I standing
gazing at him, did not know then that Mary's father had been murdered.
And Tugh did not wish us to know it. "Very good, Migul." He regarded
us as though about to speak, but turned again to the Robot.

"And so Tina's cage follows us--as you hoped?"

"Yes, Master. But now there is only Harl in it. He approached us very
close a while in the past. He is alone."

"So?" Tugh glanced at the Time-dials. "Stop us where we planned. You
remember--in one of those years when this space was the big forest
glade."

       *       *       *       *       *

He fronted Mary and me. "You are patient, young sir. You do not
speak."

His glittering black eyes held me. They were red-rimmed eyes, like
those of a beast. He had a strangely repulsive face. His lips were
cruel, and so thin they made his wide mouth like a gash. But there was
an intellectuality stamped upon his features.

He held the black cloak closely around his thick, misshapen form. "You
do not speak," he repeated.

I moistened my dry lips. Tugh was smiling now, and suddenly I saw the
full inhuman quality of his face--the great high-bridged nose, and
high cheek-bones; a face Satanic when he smiled.

I managed, "Should I speak, and demand the meaning of this? I do. And
if you will return this girl from whence she came--"

"It will oblige you greatly," he finished ironically. "An amusing
fellow. What is your name?"

"George Rankin."

"Migul took you from 1935?"

"Yes."

"Well, as you doubtless know, you are most unwelcome.... You are
watching the dials, Migul?"

"Yes, Master."

"You can return me," I said. I was standing with my arm around Mary. I
could feel her shuddering. I was trying to be calm, but across the
background of my consciousness thoughts were whirling. We must escape.
This Tugh was our real enemy, and for all the gruesome aspect of the
pseudo-human Robot, this man Tugh seemed the more sinister, more
menacing.... We must escape. Tugh would never return us to our own
worlds. But the cage was stopping presently. We were loose: a sudden
rush--

Dared I chance it? Already I had been in conflict with Migul, and
lived through it. But this Tugh--was he armed? What weapons might be
beneath that cloak? Would he kill me if I crossed him?... Whirling
thoughts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tugh was saying, "And Mary--" I snapped from my thoughts as Mary
gripped me, trembling at Tugh's words, shrinking from his gaze.

"My little Mistress Atwood, did you think because Tugh vanished that
year the war began that you were done with him? Oh, no: did I not
promise differently? You, man of 1935, are unwelcome." His gaze roved
me. "Yet not so unwelcome, either, now that I think of it. Chain them
up, Migul; use a longer chain. Give them space to move; you are
unhuman."

He suddenly chuckled, and repeated it: "You are unhuman, Migul!"
Ghastly jest! "Did not you know it?"

"Yes, Master."

The huge mechanism advanced upon us. "If you resist me," it murmured
menacingly, "I will be obliged to kill you. I--I cannot be
controlled."

It chained us now with longer chains than before. Tugh looked up from
his seat at the instrument table.

"Very good," he said crisply. "You may look out of the window, you
two. You may find it interesting."

We were retarding with a steady drag. I could plainly see trees out of
the window--gray, spectral trees which changed their shape as I
watched them. They grew with a visible flow of movement, flinging out
branches. Occasionally one would melt suddenly down. A living, growing
forest pressed close about us. And then it began opening, and moving
away a few hundred feet. We were in the glade Tugh mentioned, which
now was here. There was unoccupied space where we could stop and
unoccupied space five hundred feet distant.

Tugh and Migul were luring the other cage into stopping. Tugh wanted
five hundred feet of unoccupied space between the cages when they
stopped. His diabolical purpose in that was soon to be disclosed.

"700 A. D.," Tugh called.

"Yes, Master. I am ready."

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed, as our flight retarded further, that I could distinguish
the intervals when in the winter these trees were denuded. There would
be naked branches; then, in an instant, blurred and flickering forms
of leaves. Sometimes there were brief periods when the gray scene was
influenced by winter snows; other times it was tinged by the green of
the summers.

"750, Migul.... Hah! You know what to do if Harl dares to follow and
stop simultaneously?"

"Yes, Master."

"It will be pleasant to have him dead, eh, Migul?"

"Master, very pleasant."

"And Tina, too, and that young man marooned in 1777!" Tugh laughed.
This meant little to Mary and me; we could not suspect that Larry was
the man.

"Migul, this is 761."

The Robot was at the door. I murmured to Mary to brace herself for the
stopping. I saw the dark naked trees and the white of a snow in the
winter of 761; the coming spring of 762. And then the alternate
flashes of day and night.

The now familiar sensations of stopping rushed over us. There was a
night seconds long. Then daylight.

We stopped in the light of an April day of 762 A. D. There had been a
forest fire: so brief a thing we had not noticed it is we passed. The
trees were denuded over a widespread area; the naked blackened trunks
stood stripped of smaller branches and foliage. I think that the fire
had occurred the previous autumn; in the silt of ashes and charred
branches with which the ground was strewn, already a new pale-green
vegetation was springing up.

Our cage was set now in what had been a woodland glade, an irregularly
circular space of six or eight hundred feet, with the wreckage of the
burned forest around it. We were on a slight rise of ground. Through
the denuded trees the undulating landscape was visible over a
considerable area. It was high noon, and the sun hung in a pale blue
sky dotted with pure white clouds.

Ahead of us, fringed with green where the fire had not reached, lay a
blue river, sparkling in the sunlight. The Hudson! But it was not
named yet; nearly eight hundred and fifty years were to pass before
Hendrick Hudson came sailing up this river, adventuring, hoping that
here was the way to China.

We were near the easterly side of the glade; to the west there was
more than five hundred feet of vacant space. It was there the other
cage would appear, if it stopped.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Mary and I stood by the window at the end of the chain-lengths
which held us, Tugh and Migul made hurried preparations.

"Go quickly, near the spot where he will arrive. When he sees you, run
away, Migul. You understand?"

"Yes, Master." The Robot left our doorway, tramping with stiff-legged
tread across the glade. Tugh was in the room behind us, and I turned
to him and asked:

"What are you going to do?"

He was at the telespectroscope. I saw on its recording mirror the
wraith-like image of the other vehicle. It was coming! It would be
retarding, maneuvering to stop at just this Time when now we existed
here; but across the glade, where Migul now was leaning against a
great black tree-trunk, there was yet no evidence of it.

Tugh did not answer my question. Mary said quaveringly:

"What are you going to do?"

He looked up. "Do not concern yourself, my dear. I am not going to
hurt you, nor this young man of 1935. Not yet."

He left the table and came at us. His cloak parted in front and I saw
his crooked hips, and shriveled bent legs.

"You stay at the window, both of you, and keep looking out. I want
this Harl to see you, but not me. Do you understand?"

"Yes," I said.

"And if you gesture, or cry out--if you do anything to warn him,"--he
was addressing me, with a tone grimly menacing--"then I will kill you.
Both of you. Do you understand?"

I did indeed. Nor could I doubt him. "We will do what you want." I
said. What, to me, was the life of this unknown Harl compared to the
safety of Mary Atwood?

       *       *       *       *       *

Tugh crouched behind the table. From around its edge he could see out
the doorway and across the glade. I was aware of a weapon in his hand.

"Do not look around again," he repeated. "The other cage is coming;
it's almost here."

I held Mary, and we gazed out. We were pressed against the bars, and
sunlight was on our heads and shoulders. I realized that we could be
plainly seen from across the glade. We were lures--decoys to trap
Harl.

How long an interval went by I cannot judge. The scene was very
silent, the blackened forest lying sullen in the noonday sunlight.
Against the tree, five hundred feet or so from us, the dark towering
metal figure of the Robot stood motionless.

Would the other cage come? I tried to guess in what part of this open
glade it would appear.

At a movement behind me I turned slightly. At once the voice of Tugh
hissed:

"Do not do that! I warn you!"

His shrouded figure was still hunched behind the table. He was peering
toward the open door. I saw in his hand a small, barrel-like weapon,
with a wire dangling from it. The wire lay like a snake across the
floor and terminated in a small metal cylinder in the room corner.

"Turn front," he ordered vehemently. "One more backward look
and--Careful! Here he comes!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Strange tableau in this burned forest! We were on the space of New
York City in 762 A. D. There was no life in the scene. Birds, animals
and insects shunned this fire-denuded area. And the humans of the
forest--were there none of them here?

Abruptly I saw a group of men at the edge of the glade. They had come
silently creeping forward, hiding behind the blackened tree-trunks.
They were all behind Migul. I saw them like dark shadows darting from
the shelter of one tree-trunk to the next, a group of perhaps twenty
savages.

Migul did not see them, nor, in the heavy silence, did he seem to hear
them. They came, gazing at our shining cage like animals fascinated,
wondering what manner of thing it was.

They were the ancestors of our American Indians. One fellow stopped in
a patch of sunlight and I saw him clearly. His half-naked body had an
animal skin draped over it, and, incongruously, around his forehead
was a band of cloth holding a feather. He carried a stone ax. I saw
