bard, Jonathan E. Hoag. The dedication to Mr. Hoag is both worthy and
well merited. There are few whose qualities could evoke so sincere an
encomium, and few encomiasts who could render so felicitous an
expression of esteem. The entire production sustains the best traditions
of Mrs. Jordan's work, and forms the most creditable individual paper to
appear in the United since the dawn of the new year.

The issue opens with Mr. Hoag's stately and beautiful poem, "To the
Falls of Dionondawa," which describes in an exquisite way the supposed
history of a delightful cascade in Greenwich, New York. The lines, which
are cast in the heroic couplet, have all the pleasing pomp and fire of
the Augustan age of English verse; and form a refreshing contrast to the
harsh or languid measures characteristic of the present day. Mr. Hoag
brings down to our time the urbane arts of a better literary period.

"An Appreciation," by Verna McGeoch, is a prose-poetical tribute to Mr.
Hoag, whose literary merit is of such a quality that we must needs
lament the infrequency with which the author contributes to the amateur
press. Of this piece a reader of broad culture lately said: "I have
never read a production of this kind, more finely phrased, more
comprehensive, more effective, and withal, so terse, and throughout, in
such excellent taste." =Eurus= has good reason for self-congratulation
on carrying this remarkable bit of composition.

"Chores," by Winifred Virginia Jordan, displays this versatile writer in
a very singular vein; that of sombre, repellent, rustic tragedy. It has
all the compelling power which marks Mrs. Jordan's darker productions,
and is conveyed in an arresting, staccato measure which emphasizes the
homely horror of the theme. The phraseology, with its large proportion
of rural and archaic words and constructions, adds vastly to the general
effect and atmosphere. We believe that Mrs. Jordan analyses the
New-England rustic mind more keenly and accurately than any other
amateur writer; interpreting rural moods and sentiments, be they bright
or dark, with unvarnished simplicity and absolute verisimilitude,
notwithstanding the fact that most of her verse is of a much more
polished and classical character. In "Chores" we are brought vividly
face to face with the bleakest aspect of rusticity; the dull,
commonplace couple, dwelling so far from the rest of mankind that they
have become almost primitive in thought and feelings, losing all the
complex refinements and humanities of social existence. The poem
intensifies that feeling of hidden terror and tragedy which sometimes
strikes us on beholding a lonely farmer, enigmatical of face and sparing
of words, or on spying, through the twilight, some grey, unpainted,
ramshackle, cottage, perched upon a wind-swept hill or propped up
against the jutting boulders of some deserted slope, miles from the town
and remote from the nearest neighbour.

"Young Clare," by Edith Miniter, is a narrative poem of that power and
polish which might be expected of its celebrated author. The only
considerable objection which could possibly be brought against it is a
technical one, applying to the fourth line of the opening stanza:

    "To work a cabaret show."

Here we must needs wonder at the use of =work= as a transitive verb when
the intransitive sense is so clearly demanded, and at the evident
accentuation of =cabaret=. We believe that the correct pronunciation of
=cabaret= is trisyllabic, with the accent on the final syllable, thus:
"=cab-a-ray=." We will not be quite so dogmatic about =artiste= in line
2 of the last stanza, though we think the best usage would demand the
accent on the final syllable.

"Gentle Gusts," the quaintly named editorial section, contains much
matter of merit, clothed in a pleasantly smooth style. The classical
name of the publication is here ingeniously explained, and its
dedication formally made. The tribute to Mr. Hoag is as well rendered as
it is merited. The editorial note on amateur criticism is sound and
kindly; the author voicing her protests in a manner which disarms them
of malice, and putting us in a receptive attitude. Personally, the
present critic is in complete agreement with the remarks on poetical
elision and inversions; but we are confident that those of our board who
hold different views, will accept the dicta in the friendly spirit
intended.

"Someone--Somewhere," by Jennie E. T. Dowe, is a delightful lyric by an
authoress too well known in amateurdom to need an introduction. Mrs.
Dowe writes with the polish of long experience and genuine culture,
displaying an enviable poetic genius.

=Eurus= closes with some commendatory lines to Mr. Hoag from the pen of
H. P. Lovecraft. They are in heroics, and redolent of the spirit of two
centuries ago. We discern no striking violations of good taste or metre,
nor do we find any remarkable poetic power or elevation of thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Little Budget= for February and March is a double number, whose
size and quality are alike encouraging. The issue opens with an ornate
and felicitous Nature-poem by Rev. Eugene B. Kuntz, entitled "Above the
Clouds," in which the author for once breaks away from his favourite
Alexandrines and heptameters, presenting us with an ideally beautiful
specimen of the heroic quatrain. Despite the strong reasons which impel
Dr. Kuntz to adhere to long measures, we believe he should compose more
in pentameter. That his chosen metres have peculiar advantages, none
will deny; but it seems plain that the standard shorter line has other
advantages which amply outweigh them. It was not by chance that the line
of five iambuses became the dominant metre of our language. In the
present poem we discern a grace and flow far greater than any which
could pervade an Alexandrine piece; a condition well shown by parallel
perusal of this and one of the same author's more characteristic
efforts. As a creator of graphic, lofty, and majestic images, Dr. Kuntz
has no peer in amateurdom. His sense of colour and of music weaves a
rich and gorgeous element into the fabric of his work, and his sensitive
literary faculty gives birth to happy combinations of words and phrases
which not only please the imagination with their aptness, but delight
the ear with their intrinsic euphony.

"The Drama as a Medium of Education," by Lieut. Ernest L. McKeag, is a
short but terse essay on a neglected factor in liberal culture. It is
true that our ordinary curricula lay all too little stress on dramatic
art; and that as a result, this branch of aesthetic expression is grossly
and consistently undervalued. The low estimate of the dramatic
profession entertained by Dr. Johnson is a sad illustration of the
one-sided state of mind prevailing even amongst scholars, concerning an
art which is certainly not inferior to painting and sculpture, and
probably much superior to music, in the aesthetic and intellectual scale.

"The Wizard of the North," an essay on Sir Walter Scott, is the current
instalment of Miss Mappin's Modern Literature Series. It is marred by a
seeming hiatus, discernible not so much in the flow of words as in the
flow of the narrative, which leads us to believe that a considerable
portion has been left out, either through accident, or through an
attempt at abridgment.

"My Books," by Alfred H. Pearce is a sonnet of apt idea and perfect
construction.

"On Self-Sacrifice," by W. Townsend Ericson, is one of the "Essays of a
Dreamer" which are regularly appearing in the =Budget=. The effort is
marked by much sincerity and idealism, though in grammar and
practicability it is less distinguished. We might mention the erroneous
use of =whom= for =who= (a not uncommon defect amongst amateur writers),
the faulty use of the word =usurping= where =depriving= is meant, and
the split infinitive "to at least make;" all three of which mistakes
occur on page 138. Mr. Ericson should drill himself more thoroughly in
the principles of syntax. Other essays of this series are included in
the present issue. "On Contentment" gives an illustration which we fear
will injure Mr. Ericson's contention more than it will aid it. It is the
=reductio ad absurdum= of the typical "Pollyanna" school of philosophy.

"Down an' Out," by Ernest L. McKeag, is a very clever ballad of the
"rough and ready" school; picturesque in atmosphere, but somewhat
defective in technique. Lieut. McKeag should pay a trifle more attention
to his rhymes; which are not, however, worse than many of the rhymes in
"Hudibras" and other comic pieces.

"Why Roses are White," a children's story, by Margaret Mahon, is marked
by much grace and ingenuity; the central idea being quite original so
far as we know. Further contributions to the children's department are
made by Miss Birkmyre, whose woodland sketches will be appreciated by
older readers as well.

"Selfish Ambition," a poem, by Nell Hilliard, is as correct and fluent
in metre as we might expect from the author, though the expletive =does=
in the final line of the first stanza is not to be commended. The
sentiment is not precisely novel, but is well presented.

"The Flying Dutchman," a Romance of the Sea, by Joseph Parks, is more
replete with nautical verisimilitude than with literary force. As
compared with many of Mr. Parks' other tales, its plot is distinctly
weak and lacking in symmetry. We must, however, praise the generally
salty atmosphere. The picture of seafaring life is vivid and realistic.

The current =Budget= concludes with a summary of the year just closed,
displaying a record of achievement of which the editress may well be
proud.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Silver Clarion= for March is the publication of John Milton
Samples, of Macon, Ga., a new member of the United. In tone the paper is
quite serious and strongly inclined toward the religious; but so able
are the majority of the contributions, that it lacks nothing in
interest.

"Singing on the Way," a poem by James Larkin Pearson, opens the issue in
attractive fashion. The lines are tuneful and felicitous, the triple
rhymes giving an especially pleasing effect; though we must criticise
the line

    "Will certainly provide for us"

as being a trifle prosaic. We should recommend "plenteously provide," or
something of that nature, as more poetic. Mr. Pearson is a poet of
ability and experience, with a volume of published verse to his credit,
whose work never falls below a high standard of merit.

"Just Icicles," by Sarah Story Duffee, is a sort of fairy tale with a
juvenile exterior; which contains, however, more than a slight hint of
the vanity of human wishes and fruitlessness of human endeavour. Whilst
it exhibits no little cleverness in construction, we must own that it
possesses certain looseness, insipidity, and almost rambling quality,
which detract from its merit as a piece of literature. Mrs. Duffee would
profit from a closer study of classical models, and a slighter attention
to the more ordinary folk tales.

"The Blessings of Thorns," by Sallie M. Adams, is a religious poem of
considerable excellence, containing a pious and worthy sentiment well
expressed. The chief defects are technical. In the first stanza, line 3
lacks a syllable, whilst line 4 has one too many. Also, the =day-way=
rhyme is repeated too closely. To have but one rhyming sound through two
rhymes is a fault hard to excuse. All the defects above enumerated might
be removed with ease, as the following revised version of the opening
lines illustrates:

    When we thank our Heav'nly Father
      For the boons each day bestow'd;
    For the flowers that are scatter'd
      O'er the roughness of the road.

In the third stanza we find the =day-way= rhyme again repeated, also a
superfluity of syllables in the sixth line. The latter might be cut down
by the omission of the second =the=.

"Springtime in Dixieland," by John Milton Samples, is a tuneful pastoral
which justifies the author's right to his first two names. But one or
two defects mar the general delightful effect. The phrase "zephyr
breeze," in the opening stanza, strikes us as a trifle pleonastic; since
a =zephyr= is itself a =breeze=; not a quality of a breeze. The syntax
of the latter part of this stanza is somewhat obscure, but might be
cleared up if the seventh line were thus amended:

    "And save when cloud-ships cross their track."

The sixth and seventh lines of the last stanza each have a syllable too
many, and in line 6 the word =raise= is used incorrectly; =rise= being
the word needed. This, of course, would necessitate a change of rhyme.

"One Face is Passing," by Mamie Knight Samples, is a timely and
excellent sketch concerning soldiers.

"Co-ee," a poem by Harry E. Rieseberg, contains much genuine pathos, and
is generally smooth and commendable in technique.

"The Likeness of the Deity," by Arthur H. Goodenough, is one of the
characteristically excellent products of its author, who holds the proud
rank of "Literatus" in the United. The amount and quality of Mr.
Goodenough's work is very unusual; few other amateurs producing so much
verse of the first order. As a religious poet, he stands alone;
resembling the celebrated Dr. Watts. He invests every theme he touches
with an atmosphere truly and richly poetic.

"Astral Nights," by John Milton Samples, is a genuinely poetic piece of
prose arranged in lines resembling those of verse. We believe that the
loftiness and excellence of this composition would justify its
metamorphosis into real verse.

Also by Editor Samples is the prose sketch entitled "The Present War: A
Blessing in Disguise." From the title, one would expect Mr. Samples'
point of view to be akin to that of the esteemed Gen. von Bernhardi; but
such is not the case, since Mr. Samples means to say that he considers
the conflict a just Divine Punishment for a sinful world--a punishment
which will bring about a sinless and exemplary future. We wish it were
so.

"Lord, Keep My Spirit Sweet," by Mr. Samples, is a religious lyric of
substantial charm and grace.

The Editorials in this issue consist mainly of critical notes on
previous numbers, and in general show a gratifying soundness of opinion.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Spindrift= for January opens with "Mater Dolorosa," a poem, by Vere M.
Murphy, whose sentiment and technique are alike deserving of praise.

"The Spirit of January," a sketch by Jean Birkmyre, runs into the
February issue, and is quite acceptable from every point of view, though
not distinguished by that highly imaginative colouring which we find in
many of Miss Birkmyre's similar pieces.

"The Mystery of Murdor Grange" this month falls into the hands of Editor
McKeag, who furnishes one of the best chapters we have so far perused;
possibly the very best. It is exasperating to be cut off abruptly in the
midst of the exciting narrative, with the admonition to wait for page
47!

       *       *       *       *       *

=Spindrift= for February has as its leading feature an essay on
"Heredity or Environment," by the Editor. In this brief article many
truths are stated, though we fear Lieut. McKeag slightly underestimates
the force of heredity. We might remind him of the Darwin family,
beginning with the poet and physician, Erasmus Darwin. The grandson of
this celebrated man was the immortal Charles Darwin, whilst the sons of
Charles have all occupied places of eminence in the world of intellect.

"To the Enlisted men of the United States," by Edna Hyde, is an ode of
admirable spirit and faultless construction.

"A Fragment," by S. L. (whose identity is now known to us!) shows much
poetical ability, though the metre would move much more smoothly if
judiciously touched up here and there. The description of the crescent
moon sinking in the morning, is astronomically erroneous.

"The Estates of Authors," by Albert E. Bramwell, is a brief but
informative article. As the late Dr. Johnson said of the Ordinary of
Newgate's account, "it contains strong facts."

       *       *       *       *       *

=Spindrift= for March very appropriately commences with a poem on that
blustering month, from the pen of Annie Pearce. Apparently the piece is
a juvenile effort, since despite a commendably poetic atmosphere there
are some striking errors of construction. In the third line of the first
stanza there is a very awkward use of the impersonal pronoun =one=. This
pronoun has no place in good poetry, and should always be avoided by
means of some equivalent arrangement. In the second stanza it appears
that the authoress, through the exigencies of versification, has fallen
into the paradox of calling the "fair green shoots" "roots!" Perhaps we
are mistaken, but our confusion is evidence of the lack of perspicuity
in this passage. A rather more obvious error is the evidently transitive
use of the verb =abound= in the last line of this stanza. Be it known,
that =abound= is strictly an intransitive verb!

"The Soul of Newcastle," an historical article by John M'Quillen, begins
in this number; and describes the Roman period. We regret the misprint
whereby the name =Aelii= becomes =Aelu=. The presence of a Hunnish
=umlaut= over the =u= adds insult to injury! Mr. M'Quillen writes in an
attractive style, and we shall look forward to the remainder of the
present article.

"Heart Thirst," by Vere M. Murphy, is a very meritorious lyric,
containing an ingenious conceit worthy of a more classical age.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the literary contributions to the UNITED AMATEUR for January are
mainly in the form of verse, I shall devote most of my attention to
them. Poetry, like the poor, we have always with us; but the critic is
moved to remark, as he casts back in his mind over the last twenty years
of amateur publishing activity, that on the whole the tone of amateur
poetry is distinctly higher than it used to be. Banal verse we still
have in larger amounts than we should; but the amateur journals of a
decade or two ago had reams of it. On the other hand, they contained not
a few poems with more than a passing spark of the divine fire. The
promising fact is that in the poetry of today's journals we get much
more frequent glimpses of this true inspiration. In passing, the critic
cannot forbear calling attention to Mr. Kleiner's "Ruth" in the February
=Brooklynite=, which attains the highest levels of lyric expression,
although only the simplest of figure and diction are employed. It is not
often that one runs across a poem so simple and yet so pregnant with
sincere emotion.

The first poem in the UNITED AMATEUR arouses mixed feelings. "Give Aid,"
by Julia R. Johnson, presents a thought that cannot be too often or too
strongly stressed in this gloomy old world. Mrs. Johnson, furthermore,
has carved out her own poetic medium, alternating two tetrameter lines
with a single heptameter, a most unusual combination. It is always a
promising sign to find a new poet experimenting with unhackneyed verse
forms, although the experiments may not always be happy ones. But a word
about the thought of this poem. It is one of those "recipe" poems,
so-called because it can be produced in almost unlimited quantities by
any writer clever enough to follow the formula. Some day the critic is
going to take enough time off to write a book of poetic recipes, and
already he has his subject so well blocked out that he is sure his book
will contain the fundamental ingredients of a great majority of the
amateur poems now appearing. The poem under consideration belongs to the
"glad" recipe, an off-shoot of the Pollyanna school of fiction, and true
to type it contains its quota of "glad" ingredients such as "cheer,"
"merry song," "troubles," and "sorrows," the last two, of course, for
the sake of contrast.

"Astrophobos," by Ward Phillips, is another recipe poem; although his
recipe is so much more intricate that it is not to be recommended for
the Freshman. The critic would denominate a poem composed according to
this recipe, a ulalumish poem, as it has so many earmarks of Poe. True
to type, it is ulaluminated with gorgeous reds and crimsons, vistas of
stupendous distances, coined phrases, unusual words, and general touches
of either mysticism or purposeless obscurity. Such a poem is a feast for
epicures who delight in intellectual caviar, but is not half so
satisfying to the average poetic taste as Mr. Kleiner's "Ruth."

Theodore Gottlieb's "Contentment" is a clever and readable working out
in verse of Mr. Ruskin's theme in his "King's Treasures"; namely, the
satisfying companionship of great books. Mr. Gottlieb shows commendable
control of the felicitous phrase, while the literary allusions with
which his lines bristle mark a catholicity of taste entirely beyond the
ordinary.

Metrical versions of the Psalms are not at all new; they are used, in
fact, in Scotch Presbyterian churches in place of regular hymns. The
poetic paraphrase of the first Psalm by Wilson Tylor is well done, and
only in a few such phrases as "winds that blow" and "perish and shall
not be blest," does he get dangerously near redundancy for the sake of
rhyme and metre.
