sure!"

With undiminished velocity they were flashing downward in a long slant
toward the beleaguered Third City, and from the flying vessel there was
launched toward the city's central lagoon a torpedo. No missile this,
but a capsule containing a full ton of allotropic iron, which would be
of more use to the Nevian defenders than millions of men. For the Third
City was sore pressed indeed. Around it was one unbroken ring of
boiling, exploding water--water billowing upward in searing, blinding
bursts of super-heated steam, or being hurled bodily in all directions
in solid masses by the cataclysmic forces being released by the
embattled fishes of the greater deeps. Her outer defenses were already
down, and even as the Terrestrials stared in amazement another of the
immense hexagonal buildings burst into fragments; its upper structure
flying wildly into scrap metal, its lower half subsiding drunkenly below
the surface of the boiling sea.

The three Earth-people seized whatever supports were at hand as the
Nevian space-ship struck the water with undiminished speed, but the
precaution was needless--Nerado knew thoroughly his vessel, its strength
and its capabilities. There was a mighty splash, but that was all. The
artificial gravity was unchanged by the impact; to the passengers the
vessel was still motionless and on even keel as, now a submarine, she
snapped around like a very fish and attacked the rear of the nearest
fortress.

For fortresses they were; vast structures of green metal, plowing
forward implacably upon immense caterpillar treads. And as they crawled
they destroyed, and Costigan, exploring the strange submarine with his
visiray beam, watched and marveled. For the fortresses were full of
water; water artificially cooled and aerated, entirely separate from the
boiling flood through which they moved. They were manned by fish some
five feet in length. Fish with huge, goggling eyes; fish plentifully
equipped with long, armlike tentacles; fish poised before control panels
or darting about intent upon their various duties. Fish with brains,
waging war!

Nor was their warfare ineffectual. Their heat-rays boiled the water for
hundreds of yards before them and their torpedoes were exploding against
the Nevian defenses in one appallingly continuous concussion. But most
potent of all was a weapon unknown to Triplanetary warfare. From a
fortress there would shoot out, with the speed of a meteor, a long,
jointed, telescopic rod; tipped with a tiny, brilliantly-shining ball.
Whenever that glowing tip encountered any obstacle, that obstacle
disappeared in an explosion world-wracking in its intensity. Then what
was left of the rod, dark now, would be retracted into the fortress-only
to emerge again in a moment with a tip once more shining and potent.

Nerado, apparently as unfamiliar with the peculiar weapon as were the
Terrestrials, attacked cautiously; sending out far to the fore his
murkily impenetrable screens of red. But the submarine was entirely
non-ferrous, and its officers were apparently quite familiar with Nevian
beams which licked at and clung to the green walls in impotent fury.
Through the red veil came stabbing ball after ball, and only the most
frantic dodging saved the space-ship from destruction in those first few
furious seconds. And now the Nevian defenders of the Third City had
secured and were employing the vast store of allotropic iron so
opportunely delivered by Nerado.

From the city there pushed out immense nets of metal, extending from the
surface of the ocean to its bottom; nets radiating such terrific forces
that the very water itself was beaten back and stood motionless in
vertical, glassy walls. Torpedoes were futile against that wall of
energy. The most fiercely driven rays of the fishes flamed incandescent
against it, in vain. Even the incredible violence of a concentration of
every available force-ball against one point could not break through. At
that unimaginable explosion water was hurled for miles. The bed of the
ocean was not only exposed, but in it there was blown a crater at whose
dimensions the Terrestrials dared not even guess. The crawling
fortresses themselves were thrown backward violently and the very world
was rocked to its core by the concussion, but that iron-driven wall
held. The massive nets swayed and gave back, and tidal waves hurled
their mountainously destructive masses through the Third City, but the
mighty barrier remained intact. And Nerado, still attacking two of the
powerful tanks with his every weapon, was still dodging those flashing
balls charged with the quintessence of destruction. The fishes could not
see through the sub-ethereal veil, but all the gunners of the two
fortresses were combing it thoroughly with ever-lengthening,
ever-thrusting rods, in a desperate attempt to wipe out the new and
apparently all-powerful Nevian submarine whose sheer power was slowly
but inexorably crushing even their gigantic walls.

"Well, I think that right now's the best chance we'll ever have of doing
something for ourselves." Costigan turned away from the absorbing scenes
pictured upon the visiplate and faced his two companions.

"But what can we possibly do?" asked Clio.

"Whatever it is, we'll try it!" Bradley exclaimed.

"Anything's better than staying here and letting them analyze us--no
telling what they'd do to us," Costigan went on.

"I know a lot more about things than they think I do. They never did
catch me using my spy-ray--it's on an awfully narrow beam, you know, and
uses almost no power at all--so I've been able to dope out quite a lot
of stuff. I can open most of their locks, and I know how to run their
small boats. This battle, fantastic as it is, is deadly stuff, and it
isn't one-sided, by any means, either, so that every one of them, from
Nerado down, seems to be on emergency duty. There are no guards watching
us, or stationed where we want to go--our way out is open. And once out,
this battle is giving us our best possible chance to get away from them.
There's so much emission out there already that they probably couldn't
detect the driving force of the lifeboat, and they'll be too busy to
chase us, anyway."

"Once out, then what?" asked Bradley.

"We'll have to decide that before we start, of course. I'd say make a
break back for Earth. We know the direction and we'll have plenty of
power."

"But good Heavens, Conway, it's so far!" exclaimed Clio. "How about
food, water, and air--would we ever get there?"

"You know as much about that as I do. I think so, but of course anything
might happen. This ship is none too big, is considerably slower than the
big space-ship, and we're a long ways from home. Another bad thing is
the food question. The boat is well stocked according to Nevian ideas,
but it's pretty foul stuff for us to eat. However, it's nourishing, and
we'll have to eat it, since we can't carry enough of our own supplies to
the boat to last long. Even so, we may have to go on short rations, but
I think that we'll be able to make it. On the other hand, what happens
if we stay here? They will find us sooner or later, and we don't know
any too much about these ultra-weapons. We are land-dwellers, and there
is little if any land on this planet. Then, too, we don't know where to
look for what land there may be, and even if we could find it, we know
that it is all over-run with amphibians already. There's a lot of things
that might be better, but they might be a lot worse, too. How about it?
Do we try or do we stay here?"

"We try it!" exclaimed Clio and Bradley, as one.

"All right. I'd better not waste any more time talking--let's go!"

Stepping up to the locked and shielded door, he took out a peculiarly
built torch and pointed it at the Nevian lock. There was no light, no
noise, but the massive portal swung smoothly open. They stepped out and
Costigan relocked and reshielded the entrance.

"How ... what...." Clio demanded.

"I've been going to school for the last few weeks," Costigan grinned,
"and I've picked up quite a few things here and there--literally, as
well as figuratively. Snap it up, guys! Our armor is stored with the
pieces of the pirates' lifeboat, and I'll feel a lot better when we've
got it on and have hold of a few Lewistons."

They hurried down corridors, up ramps, and along hallways, with
Costigan's spy-ray investigating the course ahead for chance Nevians.
Bradley and Clio were unarmed, but the operative had found a piece of
flat metal and had ground it to a razor edge.

"I think I can throw this thing straight enough and fast enough to chop
off a Nevian's head before he can put a paralyzing ray on us," he
explained grimly, but he was not called upon to show his skill with the
improvised cleaver.

As he had concluded from his careful survey, every Nevian was at some
control or weapon, doing his part in that frightful combat with the
denizens of the greater deeps. Their path was open; they were neither
molested nor detected as they ran toward the compartment within which
was sealed all their belongings. The door of that room opened, as had
the other, to Costigan's knowing beam; and all three set hastily to
work. They made up packs of food, filled their capacious pockets with
emergency rations, buckled on Lewistons and automatics, donned their
armor, and clamped into their external holsters a full complement of
additional weapons.

"Now comes the ticklish part of the business," Costigan informed the
others. His helmet was slowly turning this way and that, and the others
knew that through his spy-ray goggles he was studying their route.
"There's only one boat we stand a chance of reaching, and somebody's
mighty apt to see us. There's a lot of detectors up there, and we'll
have to cross a corridor full of communicator beams. There, that line's
off--scoot!"

At his word they dashed out into the hall and hurried along for minutes,
dodging sharply to right or left as the leader snapped out orders.
Finally he stopped.

"Here's those beams I told you about. We'll have to roll under 'em.
They're less than waist high--right there's the lowest one. Watch me do
it, and when I give you the word, one at a time, you do the same. _Keep
low_--don't let an arm or a leg get up into a ray or they may see us."

He threw himself flat, rolled upon the floor a yard or so, and scrambled
to his feet. He gazed intently at the blank wall for a space.

"Bradley--now!" he snapped, and the captain duplicated his performance.

But Clio, unused to the heavy and cumbersome space-armor she was
wearing, could not roll in it with any degree of success. When Costigan
barked his order she tried, but stopped, floundering almost directly
below the network of invisible beams. As she struggled one mailed arm
went up, and Costigan saw in his ultra-goggles the faint flash as the
beam encountered the interfering field. But already he had acted.
Crouching low, he struck down the arm, seized it, and dragged the girl
out of the zone of visibility. Then in furious haste he opened a nearby
door and all three sprang into a tiny compartment.

"Shut off all the fields of your suits, so that they can't interfere!"
he hissed into the utter darkness. "Not that I'd mind killing a few of
them, but if they start an organized search we're sunk. But even if they
did get a warning by touching your glove, Clio, they probably won't
suspect us. Our rooms are still shielded, and the chances are that
they're too busy to bother much about us, anyway."

He was right. A few beams darted here and there, but the Nevians saw
nothing amiss and ascribed the interference to the falling into the beam
of some chance bit of charged metal. With no further misadventures the
fugitives gained entrance to the Nevian lifeboat, where Costigan's first
act was to disconnect one steel boot from his armor of space. With a
sigh of relief he pulled his foot out of it, and from it carefully
poured into the small power-tank of the craft fully thirty pounds of
allotropic iron!

"I pinched it off them," he explained, in answer to amazed and inquiring
looks, "and maybe you don't think it's a relief to get it out of that
boot! I couldn't steal a flask to carry it in, so this was the only
place I could put it. These lifeboats are equipped with only a couple of
grams of iron apiece, you know, and we couldn't get half-way back to
Tellus on that, even with smooth going; and we may have to fight. With
this much to go on, though, we could go to Andromeda, fighting all the
way. Well, we'd better break away."

Costigan watched his plate closely; and, when the maneuvering of the
great vessel brought his exit port as far away as possible from the
Third City and the warring tanks, he shot the little cruiser out and
away. Straight out into the ocean it sped, through the murky red veil,
and darted upward toward the surface. The three wanderers sat tense,
hardly daring to breathe, staring into the plates--Clio and Bradley
pushing at mental levers and stepping down hard upon mental brakes in
unconscious efforts to help Costigan dodge the beams and rods of death
flashing so appallingly close upon all sides. Out of the water and into
the air the darting, dodging lifeboat flashed in safety; but in the air,
supposedly free from menace, came disaster. There was a crunching,
grating shock and the vessel was thrown into a dizzy spiral, from which
Costigan finally leveled it into headlong flight away from the scene of
battle. Watching the pyrometers which recorded the temperature of the
outer shell, he drove the lifeboat ahead at the highest safe atmospheric
speed while Bradley went to inspect the damage.

"Pretty bad, but better than I thought," the captain reported. "Outer
and inner plates broken away on a seam. We wouldn't hold cotton waste,
let alone air. Any tools aboard?"

"Some--and what we haven't got we'll make," Costigan declared. "We'll
put a lot of distance behind us, then we'll fix her up and get away from
here."

"What are those fish, anyway, Conway?" Clio asked, as the lifeboat tore
along. "The Nevians are bad enough, Heaven knows, but the very idea of
intelligent and educated _fish_ is enough to drive one mad!"

"You know Nerado mentioned several times the 'semicivilized fishes of
the greater deeps'?" he reminded her. "I gather that there are at least
three intelligent races here. We know two--the Nevians, who are
amphibians, and the fishes of the greater deeps. The fishes of the
lesser deeps are also intelligent. As I get it, the Nevian cities were
originally built in very shallow water, or perhaps were upon islands.
The development of machinery and tools gave them a big edge on the fish;
and those living in the shallow seas, nearest the Islands, gradually
became tributary nations, if not actually slaves. Those fish not only
serve as food, but work in the mines, hatcheries, and plantations, and
do all kinds of work for the Nevians. Those so-called 'lesser deeps'
were conquered first, of course, and all their races of fish are docile
enough now. But the deep-sea breeds, who live in water so deep that the
Nevians can hardly stand the pressure down there, were more intelligent
to start with, and more stubborn besides. But the most valuable metals
here are deep down--this planet is very light for its size, you know--so
the Nevians kept at it until they conquered some of the deep-sea fish,
too, and put 'em to work. But those high-pressure boys were nobody's
fools. They realized that as time went on the amphibians would get
further and further ahead of them in development, so they let themselves
be conquered, learned how to use the Nevians' tools and everything else
they could get hold of, developed a lot of new stuff of their own, and
now they're out to wipe the amphibians off the map completely, before
they get too far ahead of them to handle."

"And the Nevians are afraid of them, and want to kill them all, as fast
as they possibly can," guessed Clio.

"That would be the logical thing, of course," commented Bradley. "Got
pretty nearly enough distance now, Costigan?"

"There isn't enough distance on the planet to suit me," Costigan
replied. "We'll need all we can get. A full diameter away from that crew
of amphibians is too close for comfort--their detectors are keen."

"Then they can detect us?" Clio asked. "Oh, I wish they hadn't hit
us--we'd have been away from here long ago."

"So do I," Costigan agreed, feelingly. "But they did--no use squawking.
We can rivet and weld those seams, and things could be a lot worse--we
are still breathing air!"

In silence the lifeboat flashed onward, and half of Nevia's mighty globe
was traversed before it was brought to a halt. Then in furious haste the
two officers set to work, again to make their small craft sound and
spaceworthy.




CHAPTER 12

WORM, SUBMARINE, AND FREEDOM


Since both Costigan and Bradley had often watched their captors at work
during the long voyage from the Solar System to Nevia, they were quite
familiar with the machine tools of the amphibians. Their stolen
lifeboat, being an emergency craft, of course carried full repair
equipment; and to such good purpose did the two officers labor that even
before their air-tanks were fully charged, all the damage had been
repaired.

The lifeboat lay motionless upon the mirror-smooth surface of the ocean.
Captain Bradley had opened the upper port and the three stood in the
opening, gazing in silence toward the incredibly distant horizon, while
powerful pumps were forcing the last possible ounces of air into the
storage cylinders. Mile upon strangely flat mile stretched that
waveless, unbroken expanse of water, merging finally into the violent
redness of the Nevian sky. The sun was setting; a vast ball of purple
flame dropping rapidly toward the horizon. Darkness came suddenly as
that seething ball disappeared, and the air became bitterly cold, in
sharp contrast to the pleasant warmth of a moment before. And as
suddenly clouds appeared in blackly banked masses and a cold, driving
rain began to beat down.

"Br-r-r, it's cold! Let's go in--Oh! _Shut the door!_" Clio shrieked,
and leaped wildly down into the compartment below, out of Costigan's
way, for he and Bradley had also seen slithering toward them the
frightful arm of the Thing.

Almost before the girl had spoken Costigan had leaped to the controls,
and not an instant too soon; for the tip of that horrible tentacle
flashed into the rapidly narrowing crack just before the door clanged
shut. As the powerful toggles forced the heavy wedges into engagement
and drove the massive disk home, that grisly tip fell severed to the
floor of the compartment and lay there, twitching and writhing with a
loathesome and unearthly vigor. Two feet long the piece was, and larger
than a strong man's leg. It was armed with spiked and jointed metallic
scales, and instead of sucking disks it was equipped with a series of
_mouths_--mouths filled with sharp metallic teeth which gnashed and
ground together furiously, even though sundered from the horrible
organism which they were designed to feed.

The little submarine shuddered in every plate and member as monstrous
coils encircled her and tightened inexorably in terrific, rippling
surges eloquent of mastodonic power; and a strident vibration smote
sickeningly upon Terrestrial ear-drums as the metal spikes of the
monstrosity crunched and ground upon the outer plating of their small
vessel. Costigan stood unmoved at the plate, watching intently; hands
ready upon the controls. Due to the artificial gravity of the lifeboat
it seemed perfectly stationary to its occupants. Only the weird
gyrations of the pictures upon the lookout screens showed that the craft
was being shaken and thrown about like a rat in the jaws of a terrier;
only the gauges revealed that they were almost a mile below the surface
of the ocean already, and were still going downward at an appalling
rate. Finally Clio could stand no more.
