screaming.

Jordde took two steps onto the plank, his mouth open, his eyes closed,
and fell over the side.

Urson heaved backwards, and toppled from the other side. For a moment
they hung with the whip between them over the board. The ship heaved,
rolled to. The plank swiveled, came loose; and with the board on top of
them, they crashed into the water.

Geo and Snake were at the rocks' edge. Iimmi and Argo were coming up
behind them.

Below them, limbs and board bobbed through the foam once. The line had
somehow looped around Urson's neck, and the plank had turned up almost
on end. Then they went under again.

With nothing between it and the rock wall of shore, the boat began to
roll in. With each swell, it came in six feet, and then leaned out
three. Then it came back another six. It took four swells, the time of
four very deep breaths, until the side of the boat was grating up
against the rocks. Geo could hear the plank splintering down in the
water. But the sound of the water blanketed anything else that was
breaking down there.

Geo took two steps backwards, clutched at his stubbed arm, and threw up.

Somebody, the captain, was calling, "Get her away from the rocks. Away
from the rocks, before she goes to pieces!"

Iimmi took Geo's arm. "Come on, boy," he said, and managed to haul him
onto the ship. Argo and Snake leapt on behind them, as the boat
floundered away from the shore.

Geo leaned against the rail. Below him the water turned on itself in the
rocks, thrashed along the river's side, and then, as he raised his eyes,
stretched out along the bright blade of the beach. The long sand that
rimmed the island dropped away from them, a stately and austere arc
gathering in its curve all the sun's glare, and throwing it back on
wave, and on wave. His back hurt, his stomach was shriveled and shaken
like an old man's palsied fist, his arm was gone, and Urson....

And then Argo said, "Look at the beach!"

Geo flung his eyes up and tried in one moment to envelop whatever he
saw, whatever it would be. Beneath the roar was a tide of quiet. The
sand along the naked crescent was dull at depressions, mirror bright at
rises. At the jungle's edge, leaves and fronds sped multi-textured
rippling along the foliage. Each single fragment in that green carpet
hung up in the sun was one leaf, he reflected, with two sides, and an
entire system of skeleton and veins, as his hand and arm had been. And
maybe one day would drop off, too. He looked from rock to rock now. Each
was different, shaped and lined distinctly, but losing detail as the
ship floated out, as the memory of his entire adventure was losing
detail. That one there was like a bull's head half submerged; those two
flat ones together on the sand looked like the stretched wings of
eagles. The waves, measured and magnificent, followed one another onto
the sand, like the varying, never duplicated rhythm of a good poem,
peaceful, ordered, and calm. He tried to pour the chaos of Urson
drowning from his mind onto the water. It flowed into each glass-green
wave's trough in which it rode, suddenly quiet, up to the beach. He
spread the pain in his own body over the web of foam and green
shimmering, and was surprised because it fit easily, hung there well,
quieted, very much quieted. Somewhere at the foot of his brain, an
understanding was beginning to effloresce with the sea's water, under
the sun.

Geo turned away from the rail, and with the wet deck slipping under his
bare feet, he walked toward the forecastle. He released his broken limb,
and his hand hung at his side.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Snake came down that evening, Geo was lying on his back in the
bunk, following the grain of the wood on the bottom of the bed above
his. He had his good arm behind his neck now. Snake touched his
shoulder.

"What is it?" Geo asked, turning on his side and sitting out from under
the bunk.

Snake held out the leather purse to Geo.

"Huh?" Geo asked. "Didn't you give them to Argo yet?"

Snake nodded.

"Well, why didn't she take them. Look, I don't want to see them again."

Snake pushed the purse toward him again, and added, _Look_ ...

Geo took the purse, opened the draw string, and turned the contents out
in his hand: there were three chains, on each of which was a gold coin
fastened by a hole near the edge. Geo frowned. "How come these are in
here?" he asked. "I thought--where are the jewels?"

_In ... ocean_, Snake said. _Urson ... switched ... them._

"What are you talking about?" demanded Geo. "What is it?"

_Don't ... want ... tell ... you ..._

"I don't care what you want, you little thief." Geo grabbed him by the
shoulder. "Tell me!"

_Know ... from ... back ... with ... blind ... priestesses_, Snake
explained rapidly. _He ... ask ... me ... how ... to ... use ...
jewels.. when ... you ... and ... Iimmi ... exploring ... and ...
after ... that ... no ... listen ... to ... thoughts ... bad ...
thoughts ... bad ..._

"But he--" Geo started. "He saved your life!"

_But ... what ... is ... reason_, Snake said. _At ... end ..._

"You saw his thoughts at the end?" asked Geo. "What did he think?"

_You ... sleep ... please_, Snake said. _Lot ... of ... hate ... lot ...
of ... bad ... hate ..._ There was a pause in the voice in his head ...
_and ... love ..._

Geo began to cry. A bubble of sound in the back of his throat burst, and
he turned onto the pillow and tried to bite through the sound with his
teeth, the tiredness, the fear, for Urson, for his arm, and the change
which hurt. His whole body ached, his back hurt in two sharp lines, and
he couldn't stop crying.

       *       *       *       *       *

Iimmi, who had now decided to take the bunk above Geo, came back a few
minutes after mess. Geo had just awakened.

Geo laughed. "I found out what it was we saw on the beach that made us
so dangerous."

"How?" asked Iimmi. "When? What was it?"

"Same time you did," Geo said. "I just looked. And then Snake explained
the details of it to me later."

"When?" Iimmi repeated.

"I just took a nap, and he went through the whole thing with me."

"Then what was it you saw, we saw?"

"Well, first of all; do you remember what Jordde was before he was
shipwrecked on Aptor?"

"Didn't Argo say he was studying to be a priest. Old Argo, I mean."

"Right," said Geo. "Now, do you remember what my theory was about what
we saw?"

"Did you have a theory?" Iimmi asked.

"About horror and pain making you receptive to whatever it was."

"Oh, that," Iimmi said. "I remember. Yes."

"I was also right about that. Now add to all this some theory from
Hama's lecture on the double impulse of life. It wasn't a thing we saw,
it was a situation, or rather an experience we had. Also, it didn't have
to be on the beach. It could have happened anywhere. Man, and his
constantly diametric motivations, is always trying to reconcile
opposites. In fact, you can say that an action _is_ a reconciliation of
the duality of his motivation. Now, take all that we've been through,
the confusion, the pain, the disorder; then reconcile that with the
great order obvious in something like the sea, with its rhythm, its
tides and waves, its overpowering calm, or the ordering of cells in a
leaf, or a constellation of stars. If you can do it, something happens
to you: you grow. You become a bigger person, able to understand, or
reconcile, more."

"All right," said Iimmi.

"And that's what we saw, or the experience we had when we looked at the
beach from the ship this morning; chaos caught in order, the order
defining chaos."

"All right again," Iimmi said. "And I'll even assume that Jordde knew
that the two impulses of this experience were one--something terrible
and confused, like seeing ten men hacked to pieces by vampires, or
seeing a film of a little boy getting his tongue pulled out, or coming
through what we came through since we landed on Aptor; and
two--something calm and ordered, like the beach and the sea. Now, why
would he want to kill someone simply because they might have gone
through what amounts, I guess, to the basic religious experience?"

"You picked just the right word," Geo smiled. "Now, Jordde was a novice
in the not too liberal religion of Argo. Jordde and Snake had been
through nearly as much on Aptor as we had. And they survived. And they
also emerged from that jungle of horror onto that great arcing rhythm of
waves and sand. And they went through just what you and I and Argo went
through. Little Argo, I mean. And it was just at that point when the
blind priestesses of Argo made contact with Jordde. They did so by means
of those vision screens we saw them with, which can receive sound and
pictures from just about any place, but can also project, at least
sound, to just about anywhere too. In other words, right in the middle
of this religious, or mystic, or whatever you want to call it,
experience, a voice materialized out of thin air that claimed to the
voice of The Goddess. Have you any idea what this did to his mind?"

"I imagine it took all the real significance out of the whole thing,"
Iimmi said. "It would for me."

"It did," said Geo. "Jordde wasn't what you'd call stable before that.
If anything, this made him more so. It also stopped his mental
functioning from working in the normal way. And Snake who was reading
his mind at the time, suddenly saw himself watching the terrifying
sealing up process of an active and competent, if not healthy, mind. He
saw it again in Urson. It's apparently a pretty stiff thing to watch.
That's why he stopped reading Urson's thoughts. The idea of stealing the
jewels for himself was slowly eating away Urson's balance, the
understanding, the ability to reconcile disparities, like the incident
with the blue lizard, things like that, all of which were signs we
didn't get. Snake contacted Hama by telepathy, almost accidentally. And
Hama was something to hold onto for the boy."

"Still, why did Jordde want to kill anybody who had experienced this,
voice of God and all?"

"Because Jordde had by now managed to do what a static mind always does.
The situation, the beach, the whole thing suddenly meant for him the
revelation of a concrete God. Now, he knew that Snake had contacted
something also, something which the blind priestesses told him was
thoroughly evil, an enemy, a devil. On the raft, on the boat, he
religiously tried to 'convert' Snake, till at last, in evangelical fury,
he cut the boy's tongue out with the electric generator and the hot wire
which the blind priestesses had given him before he left. Why did he
want to get rid of anybody who had seen his beach, a sacred place to him
by now? One, because the devils were too strong and he didn't want
anybody else possessed by them; Snake had been too much trouble
resisting conversion. And two, because he was jealous that someone else
might have that moment of exaltation and hear the voice of The Goddess
also."

"In other words," summarized Iimmi, "he thought what happened to him and
Snake was something supernatural, actually connected with the beach
itself, and didn't want it to happen to anybody else."

"That's right," said Geo, lying back in his bunk. "Which is sort of
understandable. They didn't come in contact with any of the technology
of Aptor, and so it might well have seemed that way."

Iimmi leaned back also. "Yeah," he said. "I can see how the same thing
almost--almost might have happened to me. If everything had been the
same."

Geo closed his eyes. Snake came down and took the top bunk; and when he
slept, Snake told him of Urson, of his last thoughts, and surprisingly,
things he mostly knew.

       *       *       *       *       *

Emerging from the forecastle the next morning, he felt bright sunlight
slice across his face. He had to squint, and when he did so, he saw her
sitting cross-legged on the stretched canvas topping of a suspended
lifeboat.

"Hi, up there," he called.

"Hello," she called down. "How are you feeling?"

Geo shrugged.

Argo slipped her feet over the gunwale and with paper bag in hand,
dropped to the deck. She bobbed up next to his shoulder, grinned, and
said, "Hey, come on back with me. I want to show you something."

"Sure." He followed her.

Suddenly she looked serious. "Your arm is worrying you. Why?"

Geo shrugged. "You don't feel like a whole person. I guess you're not
really a whole person."

"Don't be silly," said Argo. "Besides, maybe Snake will let you have one
of his. How are the medical facilities in Leptar?"

"I don't think they're up to anything like that."

"We did grafting of limbs back in Aptor," Argo said. "A most interesting
way we got around the antibody problem, too. You see--"

"But that was back in Aptor," Geo said. "This is the real world we're
going into now."

"Maybe I can get a doctor from the temple to come over," she shrugged.
"And then, maybe I won't be able to."

"It's a pleasant thought," Geo said.

When they reached the back of the ship, Argo took out a contraption from
the paper bag. "I salvaged this in my tunic. Hope I dried it off well
enough last night."

"It's your motor," Geo said.

"Um-hm," said Argo. She put it on a low set of lockers by the cabin's
back wall.

"How are you going to work it?" he asked. "It's got to have that stuff,
electricity."

"There is more than one way to shoe a centipede," Argo assured him. She
reached behind the locker and pulled up a strange gizmo of glass and
wire. "I got the lens from Sis," she explained. "She's awfully nice,
really. She says I can have my own laboratory all to myself. And I said
she could have all the politics, which I think was wise of me,
considering. Don't you?" She bent over the contraption. "Now, this lens
here focuses the sunlight--isn't it a beautiful day--on these
thermocouples. I got the extra metal from the ship's smith. He's sweet.
Hey, we're going to have to compare poems from now on. I mean I'm sure
you're going to write a whole handful about all of this. I certainly am.
Anyway, you connect it up here."

She fastened two wires to two other wires, adjusted the lens, and the
tips of the thermocouple glowed red. The armature tugged once around its
pivot, and then tugged around once more. Geo glanced up and saw Snake
and Iimmi standing above them, looking over the rail on the cabin's
roof. They grinned at each other, and then Geo looked back at the motor.
It whipped around steadily, gaining speed until it whirred into an
invisible copper haze. "Look at that thing go," breathed Argo. "Will you
just look at that thing go!"

       *       *       *       *       *

QUEST AMID FUTURITY'S RUINS


What was the strange impetus that drove a group of four widely different
humans to embark on a fear-filled journey across a forbidden sea to a
legendary land?

This was Earth still, but the Earth of a future terribly changed after a
planet-searing disaster, a planet of weird cults, mutated beasts, and
people who were not always entirely human. As for the four who made up
that questing party, they included a woman who was either a goddess, a
witch, or both, a four-armed boy whose humanity was open to question,
and two more men with equally "wild" talents.

The story of their voyage, of the power-wielding "jewels" they sought,
of the atomic and post-atomic terrors they encountered, is a remarkable
science-fiction Odyssey of the days to come.


Turn this book over for second complete novel





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jewels of Aptor, by Samuel R. Delany
