offered by the band or sheathing on the powder is to cause more complete
combustion of the charge before the shot moves, and therefore to raise
the velocity and the pressure. But I believe it escaped notice, till
observed in May, 1880, in the Royal Gun Factory, that this circumstance
affords a most steady and convenient mode of regulating the consumption
of the charge, so as to obtain the best results with the powder
employed.

Supposing the projectile to start, as in a muzzle loader, without
offering any resistance beyond that due to inertia, it is necessary to
employ a powder which shall burn quickly enough to give off most of
its gas before the shot has proceeded far down the bore; otherwise the
velocity at the muzzle will be low. To control this comparatively quick
burning powder, a large air space is given to the cartridge, which,
therefore, is placed in a chamber considerably too big for it.
Supposing, on the other hand, the projectile to be furnished with a
stout band, giving a high resistance to initial motion, a much slower
powder can be used, since the combustion proceeds as if in a closed
vessel, until sufficient pressure is developed to overcome the
resistance of the band. This enables us to put a larger quantity of
slower burning powder into the chamber, and in fact to use, instead of a
space filled with air, a space filled with powder giving off gas, which
comes into play as the projectile travels down the bore. Thus, while not
exceeding the intended pressure at the breech, the pressure toward the
muzzle is kept up, and the velocity very materially increased. Following
this principle to this conclusion, it will be found that the perfect
charge for a gun will be one which exactly fills the chamber, and which
is composed of a powder rather too slow to give the pressure for which
the gun is designed, supposing the shot to move off freely. The powder
should be so much too slow as to require for its full development the
holding power of a band which is just strong enough to give rotation to
the shot.

Having settled that the gun of the future is to be a breech-loader,
we have next to consider what system of closing the breech is to be
adopted.

The German guns are provided with a round backed wedge, which is pushed
in from the side of the breech, and forced firmly home by a screw
provided with handles; the face of the wedge is fitted with an easily
removable flat plate, which abuts against a Broad well ring, let into
a recess in the end of the bore. On firing, the gas presses the ring
firmly against the flat plate, and renders escape impossible as long as
the surfaces remain uninjured. When they become worn, the ring and
plate can be exchanged in a few minutes. Mr. Vavasseur, of Southwark,
constructs his guns on a very similar plan. In the French guns, and our
modern ones, the bore is continued to the rear extremity of the piece,
the breech end forming an intermittent screw, that is, a screw having
the threads intermittently left and slotted away. The breech block has
a similarly cut screw on it, so that when the slots in the block
correspond with the untouched threads in the gun, the block can be
pushed straight in, and the threads made to engage by part of a
revolution. In the French Marine the escape of gas is stopped very much
as in Krupp's system; a Broadwell ring is let into a recess in the end
of the bore, and a plate on the face of the breech-block abuts against
it.

In the French land service the escape is sealed in quite a different
manner. A stalk passes through the breech-block, its foot being secured
on the exterior. The stalk has a mushroom-shaped head projecting into
the bore. Round the neck of the stalk, just under the mushroom, is a
collar of asbestos, secured in a canvas cover; when the gun is fired,
the gas presses the mushroom against the asbestos collar, and squeezes
it against the walls of the bore. It is found that this cuts off all
escape.

We are at present using the Elswick method, which consists of a
flat-backed cup, abutting against the slightly rounded face of the
breech plug. The lips of the cup rest against a copper ring let in the
walls of the bore. On firing, the gas presses back the cup against the
rounded end of the breech-block, and thus forces the lips hard against
the copper ring.

It is difficult to compare the excellence of these various systems, so
much depends on the care of the gunners, and the nicety of manufacture.
The German and French marine methods permit the parts to be quickly
exchanged when worn, but it is necessary to cut deeply into the walls
of the gun, and to make the wedge, or breech-screw, considerably larger
than the opening into the chamber.

The Elswick plan is decidedly better in this last respect, but it
requires several hours to extract and renew the copper ring where worn.

The French land service (_De Bange_) arrangement requires no cutting
into the gun, and no enlargement of the breech screw beyond the size of
the chamber, while it is renewable in a few minutes, merely requiring a
fresh asbestos pad when worn. As regards durability, there is probably
no great difference. I have been informed that with a light gun as many
as 3,000 rounds have been fired with one asbestos pad. But usually
it may be considered that a renewal will be required of the wearing
surfaces of any breech-loader after a number of rounds, varying from six
or seven hundred, with a field gun, to a hundred or a hundred and fifty
with a very heavy gun. Full information is wanting on this point.

Having now decided on the material of which the gun is to be composed,
and the manner in which it is to be constructed, and having, moreover,
settled the knotty point of how it is to be loaded, we come to the
general principles on which a gun is designed. It must not be overlooked
that a gun is a machine which has to perform a certain quantity of work
of a certain definite kind, and, like all other machines, must be formed
specially for its purpose. The motive power is gunpowder, and the
article to be produced is perhaps a hole in an armor-plate, perhaps a
breach in a concealed escarp, or perhaps destructive effect on troops.
These articles are quite distinct, and though all guns are capable of
producing them all to some extent, no gun is capable of producing more
than one in the highest state of excellence.

Thus, for armor piercing, a long pointed bolt, nearly solid, is
required. It must strike with great velocity, and must therefore be
propelled by a very large charge of powder. Hence an armor-piercing gun
should have a large chamber and a comparatively small bore of great
length.

For breaching fortifications, on the other hand, curved fire is
necessary; the escarps of modern fortresses are usually covered from
view by screens of earth or masonry in front, so that the projectiles
must pass over the crest of the screen, and drop sufficiently to strike
the wall about half-way down, that is to say, at an angle of 15 deg. to 20 deg..
To destroy the wall, shell containing large bursting charges of powder
are found to be particularly well adapted. Now it is clear that, for a
shell to drop at an angle of 15 deg. or 20 deg. at the end of a moderate range,
the velocity at starting must be low. Hence, for pieces intended for
breaching no enlarged powder chamber is wanted; the effect on the wall
is due to the shell, which must be made of a shape to hold the most
powder for a given weight; and, therefore, rather short and thick. This
gives us a large bore, which need not be long, as little velocity is
required.

For producing destructive effect among troops, a third kind of
projectile is employed. It is called shrapnel, and it consists of a thin
shell, holding a little powder and a large quantity of bullets. The
powder is ignited by a fuse, which is set to act during flight, or on
graze, when the shell is nearing the object. The explosion bursts the
shell open, and liberates the bullets, which fly forward, actuated by
the velocity of the shell at the moment of bursting. Hence, to render
the bullets effective, a considerable remaining velocity is requisite.
The gun must therefore take a large powder charge, while, as the shell
has to hold as many bullets as possible, the bore must be large enough
to take a short projectile of the given weight. Thus, the proportions
of the shrapnel gun will be intermediate between those of the
armor-piercing gun and the shell gun.

There are certain axioms known from experience, which should be
mentioned here. First, the length of the powder chamber should not
be more than three and a half or four times its diameter, if it can
possibly be avoided, because, with longer charges, the inflamed powder
gas is apt to acquire rapid motion, and to set up violent local
pressures. Next, the strength of a heavy gun, as reckoned on the
principle of all the metal being sound and well in bearing, should not
be less than about four times the strain expected.

Again, though there are several opinions as to the best weight of shot
for armor piercing, in proportion to diameter, yet among the most
advanced gun-makers, there is a growing tendency toward increased
weight. The value of w/d cubed, that is, the weight in pounds divided by the
cube of the diameter in inches, as this question is termed, is in the
hands of the Ordnance Committee, and it is to be confidently hoped that
efforts will shortly be made to arrive at a solution. In the meantime,
from about 0.45 to 0.5 appears to be a fairly satisfactory value, and is
adopted for the present.

Lastly, it may be broadly stated, that with suitable powders, a charge
of one-third the weight of the shot demands for most profitable use a
length of bore equal to about twenty-six calibers; a charge equal to
half the weight of the shot should be accommodated with a bore of about
thirty calibers; while a charge of two-thirds the weight of the shot
will be best suited by a bore thirty-five calibers long. Of course, in
each case, greater length of bore will give increased velocity, but it
will be gained at the expense of additional weight, which can be better
utilized elsewhere in the gun.

The amount of work performed by gunpowder, when exploded in a gun, is a
subject which has engaged a vast quantity of attention, and some highly
ingenious methods of calculating it have been put forward. Owing,
however, to the impossibility of ascertaining how fast the combustion
of large grains and prisms proceeds, a very considerable amount of
experience is required to enable the gunmaker to apply the necessary
corrections to these calculations; but, on the whole, it may be said
that, with a given charge and weight of shot, the muzzle velocity may
now be predicted with some accuracy.

You now have the chief data on which the designer bases his proposals,
and lays down the dimensions of the gun to suit such conditions as it
may be required to fulfill. In actual practice, the conditions are
almost always complicated, either by necessities of mounting in
particular places, such as turrets and casemates; or by the advantages
attending the interchangeability of stores, or other circumstances;
and it requires great watchfulness to keep abreast of the ever-growing
improvements of the day.

I will now conclude with a few words on the power of heavy guns, when
employed in various ways. The first consideration is accuracy of fire.
No matter how deadly the projectile may be, it is useless if it does
but waste itself on air. Accuracy is of two kinds--true direction and
precision of range. All modern guns are capable of being made to shoot
straight; but their precision of range depends partly on the successful
designing of the gun and ammunition, so as to give uniform velocities,
and partly on the flatness of the trajectory. The greater the velocity,
the lower the trajectory, and the greater the chance of striking the
target. Supposing a heavy gun to be mounted as in the fortresses round
our coasts, and aimed with due care, the distance of the object being
approximately known, we may fairly expect to strike a target of the size
of an ordinary door about every other shot, at a range of a mile and a
half. Here we have carriages mounted on accurately leveled platforms; we
have men working electric position finders, and the gunners live on the
spot, and know the look of the sea and land round about.

Now, consider the case of guns mounted in ships. You at once perceive
the difficulties of the shooter. Even supposing the ship to be one of
our magnificent ironclads, solid, steady, yielding little to the motion
of the water, yet she is under steam, the aim of her guns is altered
every moment, some oscillation is unavoidable, and she can only estimate
the range of her adversary. Great skill is required, and not only
required, I am glad to say, but ready to hand, on the part of the seamen
gunners; and low trajectory guns must be provided to aid their skill.

If we go to unarmored ships of great tonnage and speed, we shall
find these difficulties intensified; and if we pass on to the little
gunboats, advocated in some quarters for attacking ironclads in a swarm,
we shall find that unsteadiness of platform in a sea-way renders them a
helpless and harmless mark for the comparatively accurate practice of
their solitary but stately foe.

The destructive power of guns is little known to the general public, and
many wild statements are sometimes put forward. Guns and plates have
fought their battle with varying success for many years. One day the
plate resists, another day the gun drives its bolt through. But it is
frequently overlooked that the victory of a plate is a complete victory.
If the shot does not get through, it does practically nothing. On the
other hand, the victory of the gun is but a partial triumph; it is
confined to a small arc. I mean that, when the plate is struck at an
angle exceeding 30 deg. or so, the shot glances harmlessly off; while, even
when perforation is obtained, it is at the expense of the more deadly
qualities of the projectile, which must be a nearly solid bolt, unable
to carry in with it heavy bursting charges of powder or destructive
masses of balls.

About six years ago, an experiment carried out at Shoeburyness taught a
lesson which seems to be in danger of being forgotten. We hear sometimes
that unarmored vessels are a match for ironclads and forts; and I will
conclude this paper with a short extract from the official account of
the results of firing shrapnel shell at an unprotected ship's side. I
shall say nothing of boilers and magazines, but shall state simply the
damage to guns and gunners.

A target was built representing the side of a certain class of unarmored
ships of war; behind this target, as on a deck, were placed some
unserviceable guns, mounted on old carriages, and surrounded by wooden
dummies, to represent the men working the guns. The attacking gun was a
twelve-ton nine-inch muzzle-loader, of the old despised type, and the
projectiles were shrapnel shell. The charges were reduced to represent
the striking force at a range of 500 yards. Two rounds did the following
damage inside, besides tearing and ripping the ship's side in all
directions.

1st Gun.--Seven men of detachment killed.

2d Gun.--Carriage destroyed. Six men blown to pieces, all the remainder
of the detachment severely hit.

3d Gun.--No damage to gun or carriage. Five men killed, one blown to
bits, and one wounded in leg.

4th Gun.--Gun dismounted. The whole of the gun detachment blown to
pieces.

That is the amount of destruction achieved in an unarmored ship by two
rounds of shrapnel shell.

       *       *       *       *       *




OSCILLATING CYLINDER LOCOMOTIVE.


This locomotive is the design of Mr. Henry F. Shaw, of Boston.

This engine has oscillating cylinders placed between the driving-wheels.
Fig. 2 represents a section of one of these cylinders, from which it
will be seen that each has two pistons and piston-rods, which are
connected directly to the crank-pins. His invention is described as
follows in his specification:

"Midway between each set of wheels, e and f, is located the oscillating
steam-cylinder, g, having its journals, g' and g", supported in the
stationary arm, h, which is secured in a suitable manner to the frame,
c. To each cylinder, g, is secured or cast in one piece therewith a
balanced vibratory beam or truss, i, as shown. Within the cylinder, g,
are two movable pistons, k and k', Fig. 2, provided with piston-rods, l
and l', and cross-heads, m and m', as shown.

"n n are slides for the cross-head, m, on the insides of one end of the
truss or beam, i, and n' n', are similar slides in the other end of
said truss or beam, for the cross-head, m'. To the driving-wheel, e,
is attached a crank-pin, passing through the cross-head, m, and to the
driver-wheel, f, is attached a similar crank-pin, F, that passes through
the cross-head, m'. o is the slide-valve within the steam-chest,
G, which slide-valve is operated forward and back by means of the
valve-rod, o1, the outer end of which is hinged to the upper end of
the slotted lever, o squared, Fig. 1, that is hung at o cubed, on the end of the
balanced and vibratory beam of truss, i, as shown. On the crank, F, is
secured an eccentric, that works within the slot of the slotted lever,
o squared, during the revolution of the crank, F, and in this manner imparts
the requisite motion to the slide valve, o, to admit the steam into the
cylinder, g, alternately between the pistons, k and k', and at the ends
of said cylinder, g, so as to alternately force the pistons, k and k',
from and toward each other, and thus, in combination with the vibratory
motion of the truss, i, impart a rotary motion to the driving-wheels, e
and f.

[Illustration: SHAWS OSCILLATING CYLINDER LOCOMOTIVE.]

"The steam is admitted to and from the cylinder, g, as follows: When
the pistons, k and k', are at the outer ends of their stroke the steam
enters through the channel, p, back of the piston, k, and at the same
time through the channel, p', back of the piston, k', and thus causes
both pistons to move toward each other, the steam between them being
at the same time exhausted through the channels, q and q', the former
communicating with the exhaust, r, by means of the space, s, in the
valve, o, and the latter communicating with the exhaust, r', through the
channel, s', in the said valve, o. The steam that passes to the back of
the piston, k, comes direct from the steam-chest, G, through the open
end of the channel, p, the valve, o, being at this time moved to one
side to leave the port, p, open. The steam is admitted to the back end
of the piston, k', from the steam-chest, G, through the channel, s", in
the valve, o, and from thence to the channel, p'. When the pistons, k
and k', have reached their inner positions the live steam is admitted
through the channels, q and q', direct from the steam-chest, G, to the
former, and through the recess, s cubed, and channel, s', in the valve, o, to
the latter, the exhaust steam back of the piston, K, passing out through
the channel, p, to the recess, s, in the valve, o, and thence to the
exhaust, r, the exhaust steam back of the piston, k, passing out through
channel, p', and through channel, s", in the valve, o, and thence to the
exhaust, r'.

"The valve-rod, o', is to be connected to a link and reversing lever as
usual, such being, however, omitted in the drawings."

The advantages claimed for it are that "it is composed of very few
parts, and it is very powerful on account of its having a separate steam
actuating piston for each of its driving-wheels. It has great strength
and resistance, owing to the fact that no pressure is exerted on the
journals on which the steam cylinders oscillate, and all the pressure
from the steam pistons is directly transferred to the crank-pins on the
driving-wheels. The engine is perfectly balanced in any position during
the stroke, and it may therefore be run at a much higher speed than the
common engines now in use."

       *       *       *       *       *




GAS MOTORS AND PRODUCERS.

By C.W. SIEMENS, London.


The cylinder of the engine--assuming that it has only a single-acting
one, placed with its axis vertical--consists of two parts; the upper hot
part being lined with plumbago, fire-clay, or other refractory material,
and the lower part kept cool by a water casing. The cylinder has a trunk
piston working in the lower part, and on its upper side a shield that
almost fills the hot part of the cylinder when the piston is at the
extreme of its upstroke. The trunk-rod of the piston passes through a
stuffing-box in the cylinder bottom, and is connected to a crank on the
engine-shaft; and this (unless multiple cylinders are employed) carries
a heavy fly-wheel. From the lower end of the cylinder there is a passage
which, by means of a rotating or reciprocating slide, is alternately
put in communication with inlets for gas and air (regulated by suitable
cocks or valves) and with a strong receptacle. As the piston, makes its
upstroke, air and gas are drawn into the annular space surrounding its
trunk, and the mixed air and gas are compressed by the downstroke of
the piston, and delivered into the receptacle, in which considerable
pressure is maintained. The receptacle is made of cylindrical form, with
a domed cover of thin sheet metal; so that in case of excessive internal
pressure it can operate as a safety-valve to save the body of the
receptacle from damage. From the upper end of the cylinder there is
a passage that, by means of a rotating or reciprocating slide, is
alternately put in communication with the receptacle and with a
discharge outlet. In this passage are fixed a number of wire gauze
screens or pieces of metal with interstices. These constitute a
regenerator of heat, and also prevent a communication of flame from the
cylinder to the receptacle. In the upper end of the cylinder or of the
piston shield are provided electrodes which give an electric spark, or
a platinum wire which is rendered incandescent by a current from an
inductor or other source of electricity to ignite the combustible charge
of the cylinder. After the engine has been for some time at work,
the heat at the upper part of the cylinder may suffice for effecting
ignition without provision of other means for this purpose.

In combining such an engine with means for generating the combustible
gas, a gas producer is employed. In this producer a current of heated
air is introduced into the heart of a body of kindled fuel, and
the gases produced--partly by distillation and partly by imperfect
combustion of the fuel--are conveyed to the gas inlet of the cylinder
or pump of the engine. As the gas in leaving the producer is hot, it is
caused to pass through regenerating apparatus, to which it delivers a
large portion of its heat before it reaches the engine, and the air
which supplies the producer is made to pass through this regenerating
apparatus so as to take up the heat abstracted from the gas.

In the accompanying engravings, Fig. 1 shows a front elevation (partly
in section) of a pair of engines constructed according to this
invention. The lower part, A, of each cylinder is cooled by water
circulating through its casing. The upper part, B, is lined with
refractory material, such as fire-clay. The trunk piston, C, is made
hollow, and formed with a shield covered by refractory material to
protect the packing of the piston and the surface of the lower part of
the cylinder from heat. The pistons of the two cylinders are connected
by rods, D, to opposite cranks on the shaft, E. This shaft, by means of
bevel gear, F, works a revolving cylindrical valve, G, situated in a
casing between the two cylinders. The lowest part of this casing is
supplied with combustible gas and with air, in proportions capable of
being regulated by stopcocks or valves. The highest part of the casing
communicates with a discharge-pipe; and the middle part of it with a
reservoir which can be cut off from communication by a stopcock, so that
the charge in the reservoir may be retained when the engine is stopped.
The middle space of the hollow valve, G, communicates, by a number of
holes, with the middle space of the slide casing. It also, by means of a
port at its lower part, communicates alternately with the annular spaces
of the two cylinders; this communication in each case being made when
the piston is performing the latter part of its downstroke. The interior
of the slide also, by means of a second port at its upper part,
communicates alternately with the tops of the two cylinders; this
communication being in each case made while the piston is performing the
first portion of its downstroke. During the upstroke of each piston the
slide, by means of another port, makes communication alternately to each
cylinder from the bottom of the slide casing, and by means of a fourth
port make communication alternately from each cylinder to the top of the
slide casing. In the passage connecting the top of the slide casing
to each cylinder is placed a regenerator, consisting of a number of
perforated metal plates or sheets of wire gauze.

[Illustration: SIEMENS' GAS PRODUCER AND GAS MOTOR. Fig 1.]

In order that gas of poor quality or gas diluted with a large proportion
of air may be utilized, an igniting arrangement is employed which
operates as follows: I is a vessel containing a supply of hydrocarbon
oil, preferably of volatile character. From this vessel pipes lead to
two cocks, one for each cylinder; these corks being caused to revolve in
time with the engine-shaft by a chain, M, communicating motion from a
wheel on the engine shaft to a chain-wheel of equal size on the spindle
of the two cocks. The plug of each cock has on its side a small hollow,
which during one part of its revolution presents itself under the
oil-pipe, and receives a charge of oil. During another part of its
revolution, which is timed to correspond with the flow of gaseous
mixture to the cylinder, the hollow of the plug presents itself to the
bend of a pipe leading from the top of the cylinder to a port opening
into the cylinder below the regenerator, in which port are situated
two wires of platinum. These wires are connected with the brushes of a
commutator, K, on the engine-shaft, which commutator is in electrical
connection with the poles of a battery, dynamo-electric machine, or
other source of electricity. Instead of two wires to produce a spark, a
single wire may be arranged to become incandescent at the proper time
for ignition.

The operation of the engine is as follows: Each piston as it ascends
draws into the annular space under it a supply of gas and air in
proportion regulated by the cocks or valves, and as it descends it
forces this charge into the interior of the revolving valve and its
casing, and into the reservoir which communicates therewith. When either
piston is at the top of its stroke, the revolving valve admits to the
upper part of the cylinder a supply of the gaseous mixture from the
reservoir and valve casing, and this passes through the generator. At
the same time a portion of the charge passes by the pipe, and becomes
