allied to nerve-tissue. One of the most remarkable facts is that long
immersion in the poison of the cobra-snake does not in the least check,
but rather stimulates, the spontaneous movements of the protoplasm in
the cells of the tentacles. Solutions of various salts and acids behave
very differently in delaying or in quite arresting the subsequent
action of a solution of phosphate of ammonia. Camphor dissolved in
water acts as a stimulant, as do small doses of certain essential oils,
for they cause rapid and strong inflection. Alcohol is not a stimulant.
The vapours of camphor, alcohol, chloroform, sulphuric and nitric
ether, are poisonous in moderately large doses, but in small doses
serve as narcotics or, anaesthetics, greatly delaying the subsequent
action of meat. But some of these vapours also act as stimulants,
exciting rapid, almost spasmodic movements in the tentacles. Carbonic
acid is likewise a narcotic, and retards the aggregation of the
protoplasm when carbonate of ammonia is subsequently given. The first
access of air to plants which have been immersed in this gas sometimes
acts as a stimulant and induces movement. But, as before remarked, a
special pharmacopoeia would be necessary to describe the diversified
effects of various substances on the leaves of Drosera.

In the tenth chapter it was shown that the sensitive- [page 275] ness
of the leaves appears to be wholly confined to the glands and to the
immediately underlying cells. It was further shown that the motor
impulse and other forces or influences, proceeding from the glands when
excited, pass through the cellular tissue, and not along the
fibro-vascular bundles. A gland sends its motor impulse with great
rapidity down the pedicel of the same tentacle to the basal part which
alone bends. The impulse, then passing onwards, spreads on all sides to
the surrounding tentacles, first affecting those which stand nearest
and then those farther off. But by being thus spread out, and from the
cells of the disc not being so much elongated as those of the
tentacles, it loses force, and here travels much more slowly than down
the pedicels. Owing also to the direction and form of the cells, it
passes with greater ease and celerity in a longitudinal than in a
transverse line across the disc. The impulse proceeding from the glands
of the extreme marginal tentacles does not seem to have force enough to
affect the adjoining tentacles; and this may be in part due to their
length. The impulse from the glands of the next few inner rows spreads
chiefly to the tentacles on each side and towards the centre of the
leaf; but that proceeding from the glands of the shorter tentacles on
the disc radiates almost equally on all sides.

When a gland is strongly excited by the quantity or quality of the
substance placed on it, the motor impulse travels farther than from one
slightly excited; and if several glands are simultaneously excited, the
impulses from all unite and spread still farther. As soon as a gland is
excited, it discharges an impulse which extends to a considerable
distance; but afterwards, whilst the gland is secreting and absorbing,
the impulse suffices only to keep the same tentacle [page 276]
inflected; though the inflection may last for many days.

If the bending place of a tentacle receives an impulse from its own
gland, the movement is always towards the centre of the leaf; and so it
is with all the tentacles, when their glands are excited by immersion
in a proper fluid. The short ones in the middle part of the disc must
be excepted, as these do not bend at all when thus excited. On the
other hand, when the motor impulse comes from one side of the disc, the
surrounding tentacles, including the short ones in the middle of the
disc, all bend with precision towards the point of excitement, wherever
this may be seated. This is in every way a remarkable phenomenon; for
the leaf falsely appears as if endowed with the senses of an animal. It
is all the more remarkable, as when the motor impulse strikes the base
of a tentacle obliquely with respect to its flattened surface, the
contraction of the cells must be confined to one, two, or a very few
rows at one end. And different sides of the surrounding tentacles must
be acted on, in order that all should bend with precision to the point
of excitement.

The motor impulse, as it spreads from one or more glands across the
disc, enters the bases of the surrounding tentacles, and immediately
acts on the bending place. It does not in the first place proceed up
the tentacles to the glands, exciting them to reflect back an impulse
to their bases. Nevertheless, some influence is sent up to the glands,
as their secretion is soon increased and rendered acid; and then the
glands, being thus excited, send back some other influence (not
dependent on increased secretion, nor on the inflection of the
tentacles), causing the protoplasm to aggregate in cell beneath cell.
This may [page 277] be called a reflex action, though probably very
different from that proceeding from the nerve-ganglion of an animal;
and it is the only known case of reflex action in the vegetable
kingdom.

About the mechanism of the movements and the nature of the motor
impulse we know very little. During the act of inflection fluid
certainly travels from one part to another of the tentacles. But the
hypothesis which agrees best with the observed facts is that the motor
impulse is allied in nature to the aggregating process; and that this
causes the molecules of the cell-walls to approach each other, in the
same manner as do the molecules of the protoplasm within the cells; so
that the cell-walls contract. But some strong objections may be urged
against this view. The re-expansion of the tentacles is largely due to
the elasticity of their outer cells, which comes into play as soon as
those on the inner side cease contracting with prepotent force; but we
have reason to suspect that fluid is continually and slowly attracted
into the outer cells during the act of re-expansion, thus increasing
their tension.

I have now given a brief recapitulation of the chief points observed by
me, with respect to the structure, movements, constitution, and habits
of Drosera rotundifolia; and we see how little has been made out in
comparison with what remains unexplained and unknown.  [page 278]



                          CHAPTER XII.

ON THE STRUCTURE AND MOVEMENTS OF SOME OTHER SPECIES OF DROSERA.

Drosera anglica--Drosera intermedia--Drosera capensis--Drosera
spathulata--Drosera filiformis--Drosera binata--Concluding remarks.

I EXAMINED six other species of Drosera, some of them inhabitants of
distant countries, chiefly for the sake of ascertaining whether they
caught insects. This seemed the more necessary as the leaves of some of
the species differ to an extraordinary degree in shape from the rounded
ones of Drosera rotundifolia. In functional powers, however, they
differ very little.

[Drosera anglica (Hudson).*--The leaves of this species, which was sent
to me from Ireland, are much elongated, and gradually widen from the
footstalk to the bluntly pointed apex. They stand almost erect, and
their blades sometimes exceed 1 inch in length, whilst their breadth is
only the 1/5 of an inch. The glands of all the tentacles have the same
structure, so that the extreme marginal ones do not differ from the
others, as in the case of Drosera rotundifolia.  When they are
irritated by being roughly touched, or by the pressure of minute
inorganic particles, or by contact with animal matter, or by the
absorption of carbonate of ammonia, the tentacles become inflected; the
basal portion being the chief seat of movement. Cutting or pricking the
blade of the leaf did not excite any movement. They frequently capture
insects, and the glands of the inflected tentacles pour forth much acid
secretion. Bits of roast meat were placed on some glands, and the
tentacles began to move in 1 m. or

* Mrs. Treat has given an excellent account in 'The American
Naturalist,' December 1873, p.  705, of Drosera longifolia (which is a
synonym in part of Drosera anglica), of Drosera rotundifolia and
filiformis.  [page 279]

1 m. 30 s.; and in 1 hr. 10 m. reached the centre. Two bits of boiled
cork, one of boiled thread, and two of coal-cinders taken from the
fire, were placed, by the aid of an instrument which had been immersed
in boiling water, on five glands; these superfluous precautions having
been taken on account of M. Ziegler's statements. One of the particles
of cinder caused some inflection in 8 hrs. 45 m., as did after 23 hrs.
the other particle of cinder, the bit of thread, and both bits of cork.
Three glands were touched half a dozen times with a needle; one of the
tentacles became well inflected in 17 m., and re-expanded after 24
hrs.; the two others never moved. The homogeneous fluid within the
cells of the tentacles undergoes aggregation after these have become
inflected; especially if given a solution of carbonate of ammonia; and
I observed the usual movements in the masses of protoplasm. In one
case, aggregation ensued in 1 hr. 10 m. after a tentacle had carried a
bit of meat to the centre. From these facts it is clear that the
tentacles of Drosera anglica behave like those of Drosera
rotundifolia.

If an insect is placed on the central glands, or has been naturally
caught there, the apex of the leaf curls inwards. For instance, dead
flies were placed on three leaves near their bases, and after 24 hrs.
the previously straight apices were curled completely over, so as to
embrace and conceal the flies; they had therefore moved through an
angle of 180o. After three days the apex of one leaf, together with the
tentacles, began to re-expand. But as far as I have seen-- and I made
many trials--the sides of the leaf are never inflected, and this is the
one functional difference between this species and Drosera
rotundifolia.

Drosera intermedia (Hayne).--This species is quite as common in some
parts of England as Drosera rotundifolia. It differs from Drosera
anglica, as far as the leaves are concerned, only in their smaller
size, and in their tips being generally a little reflexed. They capture
a large number of insects. The tentacles are excited into movement by
all the causes above specified; and aggregation ensues, with movement
of the protoplasmic masses. I have seen, through a lens, a tentacle
beginning to bend in less than a minute after a particle of raw meat
had been placed on the gland. The apex of the leaf curls over an
exciting object as in the case of Drosera anglica. Acid secretion is
copiously poured over captured insects. A leaf which had embraced a fly
with all its tentacles re-expanded after nearly three days.

Drosera capensis.--This species, a native of the Cape of Good Hope, was
sent to me by Dr.  Hooker. The leaves are elongated, slightly concave
along the middle and taper towards the apex, [page 280] which is
bluntly pointed and reflexed. They rise from an almost woody axis, and
their greatest peculiarity consists in their foliaceous green
footstalks, which are almost as broad and even longer than the
gland-bearing blade. This species, therefore, probably draws more
nourishment from the air, and less from captured insects, than the
other species of the genus.  Nevertheless, the tentacles are crowded
together on the disc, and are extremely numerous; those on the margins
being much longer than the central ones. All the glands have the same
form; their secretion is extremely viscid and acid.

The specimen which I examined had only just recovered from a weak state
of health. This may account for the tentacles moving very slowly when
particles of meat were placed on the glands, and perhaps for my never
succeeding in causing any movement by repeatedly touching them with a
needle. But with all the species of the genus this latter stimulus is
the least effective of any. Particles of glass, cork, and coal-cinders,
were placed on the glands of six tentacles; and one alone moved after
an interval of 2 hrs. 30 m. Nevertheless, two glands were extremely
sensitive to very small doses of the nitrate of ammonia, namely to
about 1/20 of a minim of a solution (one part to 5250 of water),
containing only 1/115200 of a grain (.000562 mg.) of the salt.
Fragments of flies were placed on two leaves near their tips, which
became incurved in 15 hrs. A fly was also placed in the middle of the
leaf; in a few hours the tentacles on each side embraced it, and in 8
hrs. the whole leaf directly beneath the fly was a little bent
transversely. By the next morning, after 23 hrs., the leaf was curled
so completely over that the apex rested on the upper end of the
footstalk. In no case did the sides of the leaves become inflected. A
crushed fly was placed on the foliaceous footstalk, but produced no
effect.

Drosera spathulata (sent to me by Dr. Hooker).--I made only a few
observations on this Australian species, which has long, narrow leaves,
gradually widening towards their tips. The glands of the extreme
marginal tentacles are elongated and differ from the others, as in the
case of Drosera rotundifolia. A fly was placed on a leaf, and in 18
hrs. it was embraced by the adjoining tentacles. Gum-water dropped on
several leaves produced no effect. A fragment of a leaf was immersed in
a few drops of a solution of one part of carbonate of ammonia to 146 of
water; all the glands were instantly blackened; the process of
aggregation could be seen travelling rapidly down the cells of the
tentacles; and the granules of protoplasm soon united into spheres and
variously shaped masses, which displayed the usual move- [page 281]
ments. Half a minim of a solution of one part of nitrate of ammonia to
146 of water was next placed on the centre of a leaf; after 6 hrs. some
marginal tentacles on both sides were inflected, and after 9 hrs. they
met in the centre. The lateral edges of the leaf also became incurved,
so that it formed a half-cylinder; but the apex of the leaf in none of
my few trials was inflected. The above dose of the nitrate (viz. 1/320
of a grain, or .202 mg.) was too powerful, for in the course of 23 hrs.
the leaf died.

Drosera filiformis.--This North American species grows in such
abundance in parts of New Jersey as almost to cover the ground. It
catches, according to Mrs. Treat,* an extraordinary number of small and
large insects, even great flies of the genus Asilus, moths, and
butterflies.  The specimen which I examined, sent me by Dr. Hooker, had
thread-like leaves, from 6 to 12 inches in length, with the upper
surface convex and the lower flat and slightly channelled.  The whole
convex surface, down to the roots--for there is no distinct
footstalk--is covered with short gland-bearing tentacles, those on the
margins being the longest and reflexed. Bits of meat placed on the
glands of some tentacles caused them to be slightly inflected in 20 m.;
but the plant was not in a vigorous state. After 6 hrs. they moved
through an angle of 90o, and in 24 hrs. reached the centre. The
surrounding tentacles by this time began to curve inwards.  Ultimately
a large drop of extremely viscid, slightly acid secretion was poured
over the meat from the united glands. Several other glands were touched
with a little saliva, and the tentacles became incurved in under 1 hr.,
and re-expanded after 18 hrs. Particles of glass, cork, cinders,
thread, and gold-leaf, were placed on numerous glands on two leaves; in
about 1 hr. four tentacles became curved, and four others after an
additional interval of 2 hrs. 30 m.  I never once succeeded in causing
any movement by repeatedly touching the glands with a needle; and Mrs.
Treat made similar trials for me with no success. Small flies were
placed on several leaves near their tips, but the thread-like blade
became only on one occasion very slightly bent, directly beneath the
insect. Perhaps this indicates that the blades of vigorous plants would
bend over captured insects, and Dr. Canby informs me that this is the
case; but the movement cannot be strongly pronounced, as it was not
observed by Mrs. Treat.

Drosera binata (or dichotoma).--I am much indebted to Lady

* 'American Naturalist,' December 1873, page 705.  [page 282]

Dorothy Nevill for a fine plant of this almost gigantic Australian
species, which differs in some interesting points from those previously
described. In this specimen the rush-like footstalks of the leaves were
20 inches in length. The blade bifurcates at its junction with the
footstalk, and twice or thrice afterwards, curling about in an
irregular manner. It is narrow, being only 3/20 of an inch in breadth.
One blade was 7 1/2 inches long, so that the entire leaf, including the
footstalk, was above 27 inches in length. Both surfaces are slightly
hollowed out. The upper surface is covered with tentacles arranged in
alternate rows; those in the middle being short and crowded together,
those towards the margins longer, even twice or thrice as long as the
blade is broad. The glands of the exterior tentacles are of a much
darker red than those of the central ones. The pedicels of all are
green. The apex of the blade is attenuated, and bears very long
tentacles. Mr. Copland informs me that the leaves of a plant which he
kept for some years were generally covered with captured insects before
they withered.

The leaves do not differ in essential points of structure or of
function from those of the previously described species. Bits of meat
or a little saliva placed on the glands of the exterior tentacles
caused well-marked movement in 3 m., and particles of glass acted in 4
m.  The tentacles with the latter particles re-expanded after 22 hrs. A
piece of leaf immersed in a few drops of a solution of one part of
carbonate of ammonia to 437 of water had all the glands blackened and
all the tentacles inflected in 5 m. A bit of raw meat, placed on
several glands in the medial furrow, was well clasped in 2 hrs. 10 m.
by the marginal tentacles on both sides. Bits of roast meat and small
flies did not act quite so quickly; and albumen and fibrin still less
quickly. One of the bits of meat excited so much secretion (which is
always acid) that it flowed some way down the medial furrow, causing
the inflection of the tentacles on both sides as far as it extended.
Particles of glass placed on the glands in the medial furrow did not
stimulate them sufficiently for any motor impulse to be sent to the
outer tentacles. In no case was the blade of the leaf, even the
attenuated apex, at all inflected.

On both the upper and lower surface of the blade there are numerous
minute, almost sessile glands, consisting of four, eight, or twelve
cells. On the lower surface they are pale purple, on the upper
greenish. Nearly similar organs occur on the foot-stalks, but they are
smaller and often in a shrivelled condition. The minute glands on the
blade can absorb rapidly: thus, a piece of leaf was immersed in a
solution of one part of carbonate [page 283] of ammonia to 218 of water
(1 gr. to 2 oz.), and in 5 m. they were all so much darkened as to be
almost black, with their contents aggregated. They do not, as far as I
could observe, secrete spontaneously; but in between 2 and 3 hrs. after
a leaf had been rubbed with a bit of raw meat moistened with saliva,
they seemed to be secreting freely; and this conclusion was afterwards
supported by other appearances. They are, therefore, homologous with
the sessile glands hereafter to be described on the leaves of Dionaea
and Drosophyllum. In this latter genus they are associated, as in the
present case, with glands which secrete spontaneously, that is, without
being excited.

Drosera binata presents another and more remarkable peculiarity,
namely, the presence of a few tentacles on the backs of the leaves,
near their margins. These are perfect in structure; spiral vessels run
up their pedicels; their glands are surrounded by drops of viscid
secretion, and they have the power of absorbing. This latter fact was
shown by the glands immediately becoming black, and the protoplasm
aggregated, when a leaf was placed in a little solution of one part of
carbonate of ammonia to 437 of water. These dorsal tentacles are short,
not being nearly so long as the marginal ones on the upper surface;
some of them are so short as almost to graduate into the minute sessile
glands. Their presence, number, and size, vary on different leaves, and
they are arranged rather irregularly. On the back of one leaf I counted
as many as twenty-one along one side.

These dorsal tentacles differ in one important respect from those on
the upper surface, namely, in not possessing any power of movement, in
whatever manner they may be stimulated. Thus, portions of four leaves
were placed at different times in solutions of carbonate of ammonia
(one part to 437 or 218 of water), and all the tentacles on the upper
surface soon became closely inflected; but the dorsal ones did not
move, though the leaves were left in the solution for many hours, and
though their glands from their blackened colour had obviously absorbed
some of the salt. Rather young leaves should be selected for such
trials, for the dorsal tentacles, as they grow old and begin to wither,
often spontaneously incline towards the middle of the leaf. If these
tentacles had possessed the power of movement, they would not have been
thus rendered more serviceable to the plant; for they are not long
enough to bend round the margin of the leaf so as to reach an insect
caught on the upper surface, Nor would it have been of any use if these
tentacles could have [page 284] moved towards the middle of the lower
surface, for there are no viscid glands there by which insects can be
caught. Although they have no power of movement, they are probably of
some use by absorbing animal matter from any minute insect which may be
caught by them, and by absorbing ammonia from the rain-water. But their
varying presence and size, and their irregular position, indicate that
they are not of much service, and that they are tending towards
abortion. In a future chapter we shall see that Drosophyllum, with its
elongated leaves, probably represents the condition of an early
progenitor of the genus Drosera; and none of the tentacles of
Drosophyllum, neither those on the upper nor lower surface of the
leaves, are capable of movement when excited, though they capture
numerous insects, which serve as nutriment. Therefore it seems that
Drosera binata has retained remnants of certain ancestral
characters--namely a few motionless tentacles on the backs of the
leaves, and fairly well developed sessile glands--which have been lost
by most or all of the other species of the genus.]

Concluding Remarks.--From what we have now seen, there can be little
doubt that most or probably all the species of Drosera are adapted for
catching insects by nearly the same means. Besides the two Australian
species above described, it is said* that two other species from this
country, namely Drosera pallida and Drosera sulphurea, "close their
leaves upon insects with "great rapidity: and the same phenomenon is
mani-"fested by an Indian species, D. lunata, and by several "of those
of the Cape of Good Hope, especially by "D. trinervis." Another
Australian species, Drosera heterophylla (made by Lindley into a
distinct genus, Sondera) is remarkable from its peculiarly shaped
leaves, but I know nothing of its power of catching insects, for I have
seen only dried specimens. The leaves form minute flattened cups, with
the footstalks attached not to one margin, but to the bottom. The

* 'Gardener's Chronicle,' 1874, p. 209.  [page 285]

inner surface and the edges of the cups are studded with tentacles,
which include fibro-vascular bundles, rather different from those seen
by me in any other species; for some of the vessels are barred and
punctured, instead of being spiral. The glands secrete copiously,
judging from the quantity of dried secretion adhering to them.  [page
286]



                         CHAPTER XIII.

                       DIONAEA MUSCIPULA.

Structure of the leaves--Sensitiveness of the filaments--Rapid movement
of the lobes caused by irritation of the filaments--Glands, their power
of secretion--Slow movement caused by the absorption of animal
matter--Evidence of absorption from the aggregated condition of the
glands--Digestive power of the secretion--Action of chloroform, ether,
and hydrocyanic acid- -The manner in which insects are captured--Use of
the marginal spikes--Kinds of insects captured--The transmission of the
motor impulse and mechanism of the movements-- Re-expansion of the
lobes.

THIS plant, commonly called Venus' fly-trap, from the rapidity and
force of its movements, is one of the most wonderful in the world.* It
is a member of the small family of the Droseraceae, and is found only
in the eastern part of North Carolina, growing in damp situations. The
roots are small; those of a moderately fine plant which I examined
consisted of two branches about 1 inch in length, springing from a
bulbous enlargement. They probably serve, as in the case of Drosera,
solely for the absorption of water; for a gardener, who has been very
successful in the cultivation of this plant, grows it, like an
epiphytic orchid, in well-drained damp moss without any soil.  The form
of the bilobed leaf, with its foliaceous footstalk, is shown in the
accompanying drawing (fig. 12).

* Dr. Hooker, in his address to the British Association at Belfast,
1874, has given so full an historical account of the observations which
have been published on the habits of this plant, that it would be
superfluous on my part to repeat them.

  'Gardener's Chronicle,' 1874, p. 464.  [page 287]

The two lobes stand at rather less than a right angle to each other.
Three minute pointed processes or filaments, placed triangularly,
project from the upper surfaces of both; but I have seen two leaves
with four filaments on each side, and another with only two. These
filaments are remarkable from their extreme sensitiveness to a touch,
as shown not by their own movement, but by that of the lobes. The
margins of the leaf are prolonged into sharp rigid projections which I
will call spikes, into each of which a bundle

FIG. 12.  (Dionaea muscipula.) Leaf viewed laterally in its expanded
state.

of spiral vessels enters. The spikes stand in such a position that,
when the lobes close, they inter-lock like the teeth of a rat-trap. The
midrib of the leaf, on the lower side, is strongly developed and
prominent.

The upper surface of the leaf is thickly covered, excepting towards the
margins, with minute glands of a reddish or purplish colour, the rest
of the leaf being green. There are no glands on the spikes, or on the
foliaceous footstalk, The glands are formed of from [page 288] twenty
to thirty polygonal cells, filled with purple fluid. Their upper
surface is convex. They stand on very short pedicels, into which spiral
vessels do not enter, in which respect they differ from the tentacles
of Drosera. They secrete, but only when excited by the absorption of
certain matters; and they have the power of absorption. Minute
projections, formed of eight divergent arms of a reddish-brown or
orange colour, and appearing under the microscope like elegant little
flowers, are scattered in considerable numbers over the foot-stalk, the
backs of the leaves, and the spikes, with a few on the upper surface of
the lobes. These octofid projections are no doubt homologous with the
papillae on the leaves of Drosera rotundifolia.  There are also a few
very minute, simple, pointed hairs, about 7/12000 (.0148 mm.) of an
inch in length on the backs of the leaves.

The sensitive filaments are formed of several rows of elongated cells,
filled with purplish fluid. They are a little above the 1/20 of an inch
in length; are thin and delicate, and taper to a point. I examined the
bases of several, making sections of them, but no trace of the entrance
of any vessel could be seen. The apex is sometimes bifid or even
trifid, owing to a slight separation between the terminal pointed
cells. Towards the base there is constriction, formed of broader cells,
beneath which there is an articulation, supported on an enlarged base,
consisting of differently shaped polygonal cells. As the filaments
project at right angles to the surface of the leaf, they would have
been liable to be broken whenever the lobes closed together, had it not
been for the articulation which allows them to bend flat down.

These filaments, from their tips to their bases, are exquisitely
sensitive to a momentary touch. It is scarcely [page 289] possible to
touch them ever so lightly or quickly with any hard object without
causing the lobes to close. A piece of very delicate human hair, 2 1/2
inches in length, held dangling over a filament, and swayed to and fro
so as to touch it, did not excite any movement. But when a rather thick
cotton thread of the same length was similarly swayed, the lobes
closed. Pinches of fine wheaten flour, dropped from a height, produced
no effect. The above-mentioned hair was then fixed into a handle, and
cut off so that 1 inch projected; this length being sufficiently rigid
to support itself in a nearly horizontal line. The extremity was then
brought by a slow movement laterally into contact with the tip of a
filament, and the leaf instantly closed. On another occasion two or
three touches of the same kind were necessary before any movement
ensued. When we consider how flexible a fine hair is, we may form some
idea how slight must be the touch given by the extremity of a piece, 1
inch in length, moved slowly.

Although these filaments are so sensitive to a momentary and delicate
touch, they are far less sensitive than the glands of Drosera to
prolonged pressure. Several times I succeeded in placing on the tip of
a filament, by the aid of a needle moved with extreme slowness, bits of
rather thick human hair, and these did not excite movement, although
they were more than ten times as long as those which caused the
tentacles of Drosera to bend; and although in this latter case they
were largely supported by the dense secretion. On the other hand, the
glands of Drosera may be struck with a needle or any hard object, once,
twice, or even thrice, with considerable force, and no movement ensues.
This singular difference in the nature of the sensitiveness of the
filaments of Dionaea and of [page 290] the glands of Drosera evidently
stands in relation to the habits of the two plants. If a minute insect
alights with its delicate feet on the glands of Drosera, it is caught
by the viscid secretion, and the slight, though prolonged pressure,
gives notice of the presence of prey, which is secured by the slow
bending of the tentacles. On the other hand, the sensitive filaments of
Dionaea are not viscid, and the capture of insects can be assured only
by their sensitiveness to a momentary touch, followed by the rapid
closure of the lobes.

As just stated, the filaments are not glandular, and do not secrete.
Nor have they the power of absorption, as may be inferred from drops of
a solution of carbonate of ammonia (one part to 146 of water), placed
on two filaments, not producing any effect on the contents of their
cells, nor causing the lobes to close, When, however, a small portion
of a leaf with an attached filament was cut off and immersed in the
same solution, the fluid within the basal cells became almost instantly
aggregated into purplish or colourless, irregularly shaped masses of
matter. The process of aggregation gradually travelled up the filaments
from cell to cell to their extremities, that is in a reverse course to
what occurs in the tentacles of Drosera when their glands have been
excited. Several other filaments were cut off close to their bases, and
left for 1 hr. 30 m. in a weaker solution of one part of the carbonate
to 218 of water, and this caused aggregation in all the cells,
commencing as before at the bases of the filaments.

Long immersion of the filaments in distilled water likewise causes
aggregation. Nor is it rare to find the contents of a few of the
terminal cells in a spontaneously aggregated condition.  The aggregated
[page 291] masses undergo incessant slow changes of form, uniting and
again separating; and some of them apparently revolve round their own
axes. A current of colourless granular protoplasm could also be seen
travelling round the walls of the cells. This current ceases to be
visible as soon as the contents are well aggregated; but it probably
still continues, though no longer visible, owing to all the granules in
