A GIGANTIC BRIDGE.--A suspension bridge is to be erected by M. Oudry,
engineer, over the Straits of Messina, Sicily, from Point Pezzo, on the
Calabrian Coast. It is to consist of four spans of 3,281 feet each,
elevated about 150 feet above high-water level, so that the largest
ships may pass under. The proposed Roebling bridge over the East River,
between New York and Brooklyn, is to have a single span of 1,600 feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The through mails to the West now go in iron-bound boxes instead of
leathern bags. Each box, tightly packed, contains about eight hundred
letters.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first steam vessel used in Great Britain was called the _Comet_, and
built by Henry Bell in 1812. It was thirty tuns burden.

       *       *       *       *       *




OFFICIAL REPORT OF PATENTS AND CLAIMS

Issued by the United States Patent Office,

FOR THE WEEK ENDING DECEMBER 10, 1867.

_Reported Officially for the Scientific American_


PATENTS ARE GRANTED FOR SEVENTEEN YEARS the following being a schedule
of fees:--

  On filing each Caveat                                         $10
  On filing each application for a Patent, except for a design  $15
  On issuing each original Patent                               $20
  On appeal to Commissioner of Patents                          $20
  On application for Reissue                                    $30
  On application for Extension of Patent                        $50
  On granting the Extension                                     $50
  On filing a Disclaimer                                        $10
  On filing application for Design (three and a half years)     $10
  On filing application for Design (seven years)                $15
  On filing application for Design (fourteen years)             $30

In addition to which there are some small revenue-stamp taxes. Residents
of Canada and Nova Scotia pay $500 on application.

_Pamphlets containing the Patent Laws and full particulars of the mode
of applying for Letters Patent, specifying size of model required,
and much other information useful to Inventors, may be had gratis by
addressing MUNN & CO., Publishers of the Scientific American, New York._

       *       *       *       *       *


71,836.--MACHINE FOR NOTCHING KNITTING NEEDLES.--W. Aiken, Franklin,
N.H.

I claim 1st, The improved machine, substantially as described, for
effecting the several operations of notching, slotting, boring, and
burring a knitting machine needle blank, in the order and manner as
explained.

2d, Also, the combination of one or more vibratory clamps, Y, the cam,
E, and the two burrs or cutters, q r, for forming the notches in the
needle blank such clamp or clamps, cam and cutters being provided with
mechanism for operating them, substantially as described.

3d, Also the combination of one or more vibratory clamps Y, the cam, E,
the two burrs or cutter wheels, q r, and the slotting burr or cutters,
s, provided with mechanism for operating them substantially as
explained,

4th, Also, the combination of one or more rotary clamps, Y, the cam,
E, the burrs or cutter wheels, q r s, and the drill, u, provided with
mechanism for operating them, substantially as set forth.

5th, Also, the combination of one or more vibrating clamps, the burring
cutter, t, the drill, u, and the slotting cutter, s, arranged and
provided with mechanism for operating, substantially as explained.


71,837.--TEA AND COFFEE POT.--Alfred Arnold, Tenafly, N.J.

I claim 1st, In a tea or coffee boiler, the base, D, so constructed and
adapted, relatively to the other parts, that an oscillating motion will
be imparted to the vessel by process of ebullition, substantially as
shown and described.

2d, In combination with the base or heating-surface, D, the chambers, b
b', and diaphragm, E, or their equivalents, substantially as arranged
and described, and for the purposes shown.


71,838.--TOOL FOR SIZING LAMP CHIMNEYS.--Lewis J. Atwood, (assignor to
himself and Holmes, Booth and Haydens), Waterbury, Conn.

I claim the adjustable sizing and shaping-jaws employed, substantially
as specified, in the manufacture of glass lamp chimneys and similar
articles.


71,839.--MODE OF PREVENTING THE UNTWISTING OF THE ENDS OF WIRE ROPE
BANDS.--Arthur Barbarin, New Orleans, La.

I claim a wire rope band, in which the ends of the several wires
composing the same are soldered together, substantially as herein
described and shown in the accompanying drawings, and for the purposes
set forth.


71,840.--SPRING-BED BOTTOM.--Alonzo B. Baty, Binghamton, N.Y.

I claim the construction and application of the bracket, B, in
combination with the bail or pendant, C, the springs, D D, transverse
pieces, F F, and slats, A A, all being constructed substantially as
herein described and represented, for the purpose set forth.


71,841.--HORSE-RAKE.--H.L. Beach, Montrose, Pa., assignor to Beach Wheel
Horse-Rake Manufacturing Company, N.Y.

I claim 1st, The teeth heads, N, constructed and operating substantially
as described.

2d, In combination with the teeth heads, N, the teeth, Q, substantially
as described.

3d, The arms, K, and teeth heads, N, combined and operating
substantially as set forth.

4th, The cleaners, M, teeth heads, N, and teeth, Q, when combined for
the purposes indicated.

5th, The blocks, f, pins, c, sliding bar, E, and lever, G, when combined
for the purposes set forth.

6th, The hooks, i i, and pins, j, secured in the axle for the purpose
shown.

7th, The washers, P, combined with the teeth and teeth heads,
substantially as and for the purpose described.


71,842.--APPARATUS FOR LIGHTING STREET GAS-LAMPS.--J. W. Beard, St.
Johns, New Brunswick.

I claim the combination of the hook, F, and the perforated cap, E, with
the lamp, D', to be affixed on a pole or staff, as set forth.

Also, the combination of the curved or hooked arms, c c, with the key,
k, of the cock of the burner, and their arrangement with respect, to the
opening in the bottom of the lantern, as explained.

Also, the combination of the socket tube, e, with the lamp, D', its
hook, F, and perforated cap, E.

Also the combination of the receiving tube, f, and bayonet connection,
g, with the socket tube, e, the lamp, D', its hook and perforated cap,
as described.


71,843.--CALIPER AND T-SQUARE.--Joseph Bennor, Philadelphia, Pa.

I claim the rule, a, stand, c, slide, m, legs, p and q, marker, u,
cutter, w, with their several described appendages, all combined in the
manner and for the purpose substantially as shown and described.


71,844.--REFRIGERATOR.--Ferdinand Borchard, Detroit, Mich.

I claim 1st, A refrigerator which is provided with movable racks, H,
within cooling chambers which are arranged beneath an ice chamber,
B, constructed with inclined walls, a a a, a drip pan, D, and an
ice-supporting rack, c, substantially as and for the purposes described.

2d, Providing the movable racks, with sliding brackets, I, which are so
applied as to serve as supports for the outer ends of the racks when
drawn partially out of their respective apartments, substantially as
described.


71,845.--CONSTRUCTION OF METAL SALVERS.--George Brabrook, (assignor to
Reed and Barton), Taunton, Mass.

I claim the arrangement and combination of the metallic ring and cap
molding together, and with the waiter or salver, in manner substantially
as and for the purpose specified.

Also, as a new or improved manufacture, a waiter or salver of britannia
metal, having a metallic strengthening-ring and cap molding combined and
arranged with its body in manner as specified.


71,846.--MANUFACTURE OF SHOES, ETC.--M.L. Brett, Warren, Ohio.

I claim the construction of a seamless shoe, etc., by felting, in the
manner set forth, as a new article of manufacture.


71,847.--CONSTRUCTION OF SCOOPS.--Theo. C. Bromley, Fort Howard, Wis.

I claim the cone-shaped back and the circular raised brace.


71,848.--WATER-RESERVOIR FOR EXTENSION-TOP STOVE.--Chas. H. Buck, St
Louis, Mo.

I claim 1st, the boiler, D, constructed with a depression in its rear
side, in combination with a stove made with the extended top, A, and
with a stovepipe, C, which is entirely independent of the boiler, but
still is partly enclosed by the boiler, in the manner and for the
purpose described.

2d, The boiler, D. with its depression in its rear side made wholly
independent of the pipe, C, but capable of enclosing a portion of said
pipe, and of being removed without disturbing the pipe, as herein
described and shown.


71,849.--JOURNAL-BOX.--T.F. Burgess, Lowell, Mass.

I claim the drips, e e, and conducting holes, d d, in combination with
the recesses, b b, when arranged to operate substantially as described
and for the purposes fully set forth.


71,850.--HAY ELEVATOR.--E.H. Carpenter, Dexter, Mich.

I claim 1st, In combination with a cable, A, frame, F, wheels, G,
sheave, E, and rope, C, the disengaging device, consisting of a collar,
M, stop, L, and vertical catch, K, enclosing the cable, A, and rope, C,
and operated substantially as described.

2d, The combination of the frame, F, rope, C, collar, M, stop, L, catch,
K, and valves, H, cams, I, and lever, l', said parts being constructed
and the whole arranged substantially as set forth.


71,831.--STEAM GENERATOR.--C.E. Case, Xenia, Ohio.

I claim the metal cup, G, constructed and arranged substantially upon
the principle and in the manner herein set forth.


71,852.--LOOM FOR WEAVING PALM-LEAF, ETC.--Geo. W. Chandler, (assignor
to himself and Lysander F. Thompson), Fitchburg, Mass.

I claim 1st, The hinged holder, G, substantially as and for the purposes
set forth.

2d, The combination of the hinged fingers, c c, with the ribs, b b b,
substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

3d, The combination of the adjustable weight, G', with the bottom of the
holder, for the purposes set forth.

4th, The combination with the hinged fingers, c c, of the hinged
holding-piece, G", substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

5th, The fingered stop or guard piece, h', with the holder, G
substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

6th, The combination, with the stand or plate, h, of the grooved hinged
flap, i, for supporting the guard or stop piece, h'.

7th, The combination with the ribbed holder, G, of the guide piece, s,
as and for the purposes set forth.

The combination of the feed arm, m, with the slide-piece, n, and lever,
26, substantially as and for the purpose set forth.

9th, the combination with lever, 26, of the adjustable ears, 27 27, for
the purposes stated.

10, The combination with slide piece, n, and table, L, of the connecting
piece, 21, substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

11th, The combination with the slotted slide piece, M", and connecting
piece, 21, of the double shouldered bolts, 18 18, substantially as and
for the purposes set forth.

12th, The combination with the curved lever, M, and the slide piece, M",
of the bent levers, M' M', substantially as and for the purposes set
forth.

13th, The combination with the arm, 70, and notched bar, w, of the
sping-pawl, t, substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

14th, Mechanism for separating the pieces of material to be fed,
constructed and combined for operation substantially as described, and
as shown in fig. 7, of the accompanying drawings.

15th, The combination with a loom for weaving palm-leaf and other cloth,
of a push-finger, 41, substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

16th, The combination with the stem of the push finger, 41, of
the catch-piece, 42, lever, 44, and operating springs, 43 and 46,
substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

17th, The combination with the slide, n, of the projection or dog, 47,
for releasing lever, 46, from the catch-piece, 42, as set forth.

18th, The combination with the hinged table, L, of the mechanism for
separating and feeding the material, substantially as set forth.

19th, The combination with the stationary bed, L", and stand, 72, of the
hinged table, L, and catch, o, substantially as set forth.

20th, The combination and relative arrangement with the table, L, bed,
L", and holder, G, of the evener knives, 12 and 14, as shown and set
forth.

21st, The combination with the bridge piece, 50, of the hinged dog, 52,
and bell-spring, 53, substantially as and for the purposes set forth.

22d, The combination and relative arrangement of mechanism,
substantially such as is shown and described for communicating the
