"That'll be fine."

"Okay. We're practically at Number One now," and James and Lola donned
their scanners, ready for the job.

        *           *           *

"Miss Flurnoy," Garlock said, "you might tell Mr. Entlore that
we're...."

"Oh, I already have, sir."

"You don't have to come along, of course, if you'd rather stay here."

"Stay here, sir? Why, he'd _kill_ me! I'm off the air for a minute,"
this last thought was a conspiratorial whisper. "Besides, do you think
I'd miss a chance to be the first person--and just a girl, too--of a
whole world to see other planets of other suns? Unless, of course, you
invite Mr. Entlore and Mr. Holson along. They're both simply dying to
go, I know, but of course won't admit it."

"You'd be just as well pleased if I didn't?"

"What do you think, sir?"

"We'll be working at top speed and they'd be very much in the way, so
they'll get theirs later--after you've licked the cream off the top of
the...."

"Ready to roll, Clee," James announced.

"Roll."

"Why, I lost contact!" Miss Flurnoy exclaimed.

"Naturally," Garlock said. "Did you expect to cover a distance it takes
light thousands of years to cross? You can record anything you see in
the plates. You can talk to Jim or Lola any time they'll let you. Don't
bother Miss Bellamy or me from now on."

Garlock and Belle went to work. All four Galaxians worked all day, with
half an hour off for lunch. They visited seventy planets and got back to
Margonia in time for a very late dinner. ComOff Flurnoy had less than a
quarter of one roll of recorder-tape left unused, and the Primes had
enough information to start the project they had in mind.

And shortly after dinner, all five retired.

"In one way, Clee, I'm relieved," Belle pondered, "but I can't figure
out why all the Primes--the grown-up ones, I mean--on all the worlds are
just about the same cantankerous, you-be-damned, out-and-out stinkers as
you and I are. How does _that_ fit into your theory?"

"It doesn't. Too fine a detail. My guess is--at least it seems to me to
make sense--it's because we haven't had any competition strong enough to
smack us down and make Christians out of us. I don't know what a
psychologist would say...."

"And I know _exactly_ what you'd think of whatever he did say, so you
don't need to tell me." Belle laughed and presented her lips to be
kissed. "Good night, Clee."

"Good night, ace."

        *           *           *

And the next morning, early, Garlock and Belle teleported themselves--by
arrangement and appointment, of course--across almost the full width of
a nation and into the private office in which Deggi Delcamp and Fao
Talaho awaited them.

For a time which would not have been considered polite in Tellurian
social circles the four Primes stood still, each couple facing the other
with blocks set tight, studying each other with their eyes. Delcamp was,
as Garlock had said, a big bruiser. He was shorter and heavier than the
Tellurian. Heavily muscled, splendidly proportioned, he was a man of
tremendous physical as well as mental strength. His hair, clipped close
all over his head, was blonde; his eyes were a clear, keen, cold dark
blue.

Fao Talaho was a couple of inches shorter than Belle; and a good fifteen
pounds heavier. She was in no sense fat, however, or even
plump--actually, she was almost lean. She was wider and thicker than was
the Earthwoman; with heavier bones forming a wider and deeper frame.
She, too, was beautifully--yes, spectacularly--built. Her hair, fully as
thick as Belle's own and worn in a free-falling bob three or four inches
longer than Belle's, was bleached almost white. Her eyes were not really
speckled, nor really mottled, but were regularly _patterned_ in lighter
and darker shades of hazel. She was, Garlock decided, a really
remarkable hunk of woman.

Both Nargodians wore sandals without either socks or stockings. Both
were dressed--insofar as they were dressed at all--in yellow. Fao's
single garment was of a thin, closely-knitted fabric, elastic and sleek.
Above the waist it was neckless, backless, and almost frontless; below,
it was a very short, very tight and clinging skirt. Delcamp wore a
sleeveless jersey and a pair of almost legless shorts.

Garlock lowered his shield enough to send and to receive a thin layer of
superficial thought; Delcamp did the same.

"So far, I like what I see," Garlock said then. "We are well ahead of
you, hence I can help you a lot if you want me to and if you want to be
friendly about it. If you don't, on either count, we leave now. Fair
enough?"

"Fair enough. I, too, like what I have seen so far. We need help, and I
appreciate your offer. Thanks, immensely. I can promise full cooperation
and friendship for myself and for most of our group; and I assure you
that I can and will handle any non-cooperation that may come up."

"Nicely put, Deggi." Garlock smiled broadly and let his guard down to a
comfortable lepping level. "I was going to bring that up--the faster
it's cleared the better. Belle and I are paired. Some day--unless we
kill each other first--we may marry. However, I'm no bargain and she's
one-third wildcat, one-third vixen, and one-third cobra. How do you two
stand?"

"You took the thought right out of my own mind. Your custom of pairing
is not what you call 'urbane' on this world. Nevertheless, Fao and I are
paired. We had to. No one else has ever interested either of us; no one
else ever will. We should not fight, but we do, furiously. But no matter
how vigorously we fly apart, we inevitably fly together again just as
fast. No one understands it, but you two are pretty much the same."

"Check. Just one more condition, then, and we can pull those women of
ours apart." Belle and Fao were still staring at each other, both still
sealed tight. "The first time Fao Talaho starts throwing her weight at
me, I'm not going to wait for you to take care of her--I'm going to give
her the surprise of her life."

"It'd tickle me silly if it could be done," Delcamp smiled and was
perfectly frank, "But the man doesn't live that can do it. How would you
go about trying it?"

"Set your block solid."

Delcamp did so, and through that block--the supposedly impenetrable
shield of a Prime Operator--Garlock insinuated a probe. He did not crack
the screen or break it down by force; he neutralized and counter-phased,
painlessly and almost imperceptibly, its every component and layer.

        *           *           *

"Like this," Garlock said, in the depths of the Margonian's mind.

"My God! You can do _that_?"

"If I tell her, this deep, to play ball or else, do you think she'd need
two treatments?"

"She certainly oughtn't to. This makes you Galactic Admiral, no
question. I'd thought, of course, of trying you out for Top Gunther, but
this settles that. We will support you, sir, wholeheartedly--and my
heartfelt thanks for coming here."

"I have your permission, then, to give Fao a little discipline when she
starts rocking the boat?"

"I wish you would, sir. I'm not too easy to get along with, I admit, but
I've tried to meet her a lot more than half-way. She's just too damned
cocky for _anybody's_ good."

"Check. I wish somebody would come along who could knock hell out of
Belle." Then, aloud, "Belle, Delcamp and I have the thing going. Do you
want in on it?"

Delcamp spoke to Fao, and the two women slowly, reluctantly, lowered
their shields to match those of the men.

"Your Galaxian shaking of the hands--handshake, I mean--is very good,"
Delcamp said, and he and Garlock shook vigorously.

Then the crossed pairs, and lastly the two girls--although neither put
much effort into the gesture.

"Snap out of it, Belle!" Garlock sent a tight-beamed thought. "She isn't
going to bite you!"

"She's been trying to, damn her, and I'm going to bite her right
back--see if I don't."

        *           *           *

Garlock called the meeting to order and all four sat down. The
Tellurians lighted cigarettes and the others--who, to the Earthlings'
surprise, also smoked--assembled and lit two peculiar-looking things
half-way between pipe and cigarette. And both pairs of smokers, after a
few tentative tests, agreed in not liking at all the other's taste in
tobacco.

"You know, of course, of the trip we took yesterday?" Garlock asked.

"Yes," Delcamp admitted. "We read ComOff Flurnoy. We know of the seventy
planets, but nothing of what you found."

"Okay. Of the seventy planets, all have Op fields and all have two or
more Operators; one planet has forty-four of them. Only sixty-one of the
planets, however, have Primes old enough for us to detect. Each of these
worlds has two, and only two, Primes--one male and one female--and on
each world the two Primes are of approximately the same age. On fifteen
of these worlds the Primes are not yet adult. On the forty-six remaining
worlds, the Primes are young adults, from pretty much like us four down
to considerably younger. None of these couples is married-for-family.
None of the girls has as yet had a child or is now pregnant.

"Now as to the information circulating all over this planet about us.
Part of it is false. Part of it is misleading--to impress the military
mind. Thus, the fact is that the _Pleiades_, as far as we know, is the
only starship in the whole galaxy. Also, the information is very
incomplete, especially as to the all-important fact that we were lost in
space for some time before we discovered that the only possible
controller of the Gunther Drive is the human mind...."

"_What!!!!_" and argument raged until Garlock stopped it by declaring
that he would prove it in the Margonians' own ship.

Then Garlock and Belle together went on to explain and to describe--not
even hinting, of course, that they had ever been outside the galaxy or
had even thought of trying to do so--their concept of what the Galaxian
Societies of the Galaxy would and should do; or what the Galaxian
Service could, should, and _would_ become--the Service to which they
both intended to devote their lives. It wasn't even in existence yet, of
course. Fao and Deggi were the only other Primes they had ever talked to
in their lives. That was why they were so eager to help the Margonians
get their ship built. The more starships there were at work, the faster
the Service would grow into a really tremendous....

"_Fao's getting ready to blow her top_," Delcamp flashed Garlock a
tight-beamed thought. "_If I were doing it I'd have to start right
now._"

        *           *           *

"_I'll let her work up a full head of steam, then smack her
bow-legged._"

"_Cheers, brother! I hope you can handle her!_"

... organization. Then, when enough ships were working and enough
Galaxian Societies were rolling, there would be the Regional
organizations and the Galactic Council....

"So, on a one-planet basis and right out of your own little fat head,"
Fao sneered, "you have set yourself up as Grand High Chief Mogul, and
all the rest of us are to crawl up to you on our bellies and kiss your
feet?"

"If that's the way you want to express it, yes. However, I don't know
how long I personally will be in the pilot's bucket. As I told you, I
will enforce the basic tenet that top Gunther is top boss--man, woman,
snake, fish, or monster."

"Top Gunther be damned!" Fao blazed. "I don't and won't take orders from
_any_ man--in hell or in heaven or on this Earth or on any planet of
any...."

"Fao!" Delcamp exclaimed, "Please keep still--_please_!"

"Let her rave," Garlock said, coldly. "This is just a three-year-old
baby's tantrum. If she keeps it up, I'll give her the damnedest jolt she
ever got in all her spoiled life."

Belle whistled sharply to call Fao's attention, then tight-beamed a
thought. "If you've got any part of a brain, slick chick, you'd better
start using it. The boy friend not only plays rough, but he doesn't
bluff."

"To hell with all that!" Fao rushed on. "We don't have anything to do
with your organization--go on back home or anywhere else you want to.
We'll finish our own ship and build our own organization and run it to
suit ourselves. We'll...."

"That's enough of that." Garlock penetrated her shield as easily as he
had the man's, and held her in lock. "You are _not_ going to wreck this
project. You will start behaving yourself right now or I'll spread your
mind wide open for Belle and Deggi to look at and see exactly what kind
of a half-baked jerk you are. If that doesn't work, I'll put you into a
Gunther-blocked cell aboard the _Pleiades_ and keep you there until the
ship is finished and we leave Margonia. How do you want it?"

Fao was shocked as she had never been shocked before. At first she tried
viciously to fight; but, finding that useless against the appalling
power of the mind holding hers, she stopped struggling and began really
to think.

"That's better. You've got what it takes to think with. Go ahead and do
it."

And Fao Talaho did have it. Plenty of it. She learned.

"I'll be good," she said, finally. "Honestly. I'm ashamed, really, but
after I got started I couldn't stop. But I can now, I'm sure."

"I'm sure you can, too. I know exactly how it is. All us Primes have to
get hell knocked out of us before we amount to a whoop in Hades. Deggi
got his one way, I got mine another, you got yours this way. No, neither
of the others knows anything about this conversation and they won't.
This is strictly between you and me."

"I'm awfully glad of that. And I think I ... yes, damn you, thanks!"

Garlock released her and, after a few sobs, a couple of gulps, and a
dabbing at her eyes with an inadequate handkerchief, she said: "I'm
sorry, Deggi, and you, too, Belle. I'll try not to act like such a fool
any more."

Delcamp and Belle both stared at Garlock; Belle licked her lips.

"No comment," he thought at the man; and, to Belle, "She just took a
beating. Will you sheathe your claws and take a lot of pains to be extra
nice to her the rest of the day?"
