
All these substances are highly valuable as manures, but it must be
borne in mind that they undergo decomposition very slowly in the soil,
and hence are chiefly applicable to slow growing crops, and to those
which require a strong soil. Woollen rags have been largely employed as
a manure for hops, and are believed to surpass every other substance for
that crop. As a manure applicable to the ordinary purposes of the farm
they have scarcely met with that attention which they deserve, probably
because their first action is slow and the farmer is more accustomed to
look to immediate than to future results; but they possess the important
qualification of adding permanently to the fertility of the soil.

_Blood_ is a most valuable manure, but it is not much employed in this
country, at least in the neighbourhood of large towns, as there is a
demand for it for other purposes, and it can rarely be obtained by the
farmer in large quantity, and at a sufficiently low price. In its
natural state it contains about 3 per cent of nitrogen, and after being
dried up, the residue contains about 15 per cent. It is best used in the
form of a compost with peat or mould, and this forms an excellent manure
for turnips, and is also advantageously applied as a top-dressing to
wheat.

_Flesh._--The flesh of all animals is useful as a manure, and is
especially distinguished by the rapidity with which it undergoes
decomposition, and yields up its valuable matters to the plant. It is
rarely employed in its natural state, but horse flesh was at one time
converted into a dry and portable manure, although, I understand, this
manufacture is not now prosecuted. The dead animal after being skinned
is cut up and boiled in large cauldrons until the flesh is separated
from the bones. The latter are removed, and the flesh dried upon a flat
stove. The flesh as sold has the following composition:--

Water                                12.17
Organic matter                       78.44
Phosphate of lime, etc.               3.82
Alkaline salts                        3.64
Sand                                  1.93
                                    ------
                                    100.00
Nitrogen                              9.22
Ammonia to which the nitrogen is }
equivalent                       }   11.20

The dried flesh and small bones of cattle, from the great slaughtering
establishments of South America, was at one time imported into this
country under the name of flesh manure. Its composition was--

Water                                9.05
Fat                                 11.13
Animal matter                       39.52
Phosphate of lime                   28.74
Carbonate of lime                    3.81
Alkaline salts                       0.57
Sand                                 7.18
                                   ------
                                   100.00
Nitrogen                             5.56
Ammonia to which the nitrogen is }
equivalent                       }   6.67

But owing to the large proportion of phosphates contained in it, it may
be most fairly compared with bones. It is not now imported, the results
obtained from its use being said not to have proved satisfactory,
although this statement appears very paradoxical.

_Fish_ have been employed in considerable quantity as a manure. That
most extensively employed in this country is the sprat, which is
occasionally caught in enormous quantities on the Norfolk coast, and
used as an application for turnips. They are sold at 8d. per bushel,
and their composition is--

Water             64.6
Organic matter    33.3
Ash                2.1
                 -----
                 100.0
Nitrogen          1.90
Phosphoric acid   0.91

The refuse of herring and other fish-curing establishments, whales'
blubber, and similar fish refuse, are all useful as manure, and are
employed whenever they can be obtained. They are not usually employed
alone, but are more advantageously made into composts with their own
weight of soil, and allowed to ferment thoroughly before being applied.

Many attempts have been made to convert the offal of the great
fish-curing establishments, and the inedible fish, of which large
quantities are often caught, into a dry manure, which has received the
name of "fish guano." The processes employed have consisted in boiling
with sulphuric acid and other agents, and then evaporating, or sometimes
by simply drying up the refuse by steam heat. A manure made in this way
proved to have the following composition:--

Water                                   8.00
Fatty matters                           7.20
Nitrogeneous organic matters           71.46
Phosphate of lime                       8.70
Alkaline salts                          3.80
Sand                                    0.84
                                      ------
                                      100.00

Nitrogen                                11.25
Equal to ammonia                        13.68
Phosphoric acid in the alkaline salts, } 0.65
   equal to 1.41 phosphate of lime     }

The expense of manufacturing manures of this description has hitherto
acted as a barrier to their introduction. In this country several
manufactories have been established, but either owing to this cause, or
to the difficulty of obtaining sufficiently large and uniform supplies
of the raw material, some of them have not proved successful, but a
manufactory is now in operation in Norway, which exports the manure to
Germany. It is probable that most of the processes used in this country
failed because they were too costly, and it is much to be desired that
the subject should be actively taken up. It is said that the refuse from
the Newfoundland fisheries is capable of yielding about 10,000 tons of
fish guano annually; and the quantity obtainable on our own coasts is
also very considerable.

_Bones._--Bones have been used as a manure for a long period, but they
first attracted the particular attention of agriculturists from the
remarkable effects produced by their application on the exhausted
pasture lands of Cheshire. During the present century they came into
general use on arable land, and especially as a manure for turnips; and
they are now imported in large quantities from the continent of Europe.
The bones used in agriculture are chiefly those of cattle, but sheep and
horse bones are also employed. They do not differ much in quality when
genuine. The subjoined analysis is that of a good sample.

Water                                   6.20
Organic matter                         39.13
Phosphate of lime                      48.95
Lime                                    2.57
Magnesia                                0.30
Sulphuric acid                          2.55
Silica                                  0.30
                                      ------
                                      100.00
Ammonia which the organic matter }
   is capable of yielding        }      4.80

In general, bones may be said to contain about half their weight of
phosphate of lime, and 10 or 12 per cent of water. But, in addition to
their natural state, they are met with in other forms in commerce, in
which their organic matter has been extracted either by boiling or
burning. The latter is especially common in the form of the spent animal
charcoal of the sugar refiners, which usually contains from 70 to 80 per
cent of phosphate of lime, but when deprived of their organic matter,
they may be more correctly considered under the head of mineral manures.

From the analysis given above, it is obvious that the manurial value of
bones is dependent partly on their phosphates and partly on the ammonia
they yield. It has been common to attribute their entire effects to the
former, but this is manifestly erroneous; and although there are no
doubt cases in which the former act most powerfully, the benefit derived
from the ammonia yielded by the organic matter is unequivocal. When the
phosphates only are of use, burnt bones or the spent animal charcoal of
the sugar refiners are to be preferred.

At their first introduction, bones were applied in large fragments, and
in quantities of from 20 to 30 cwt., or even more, per acre, but as
their use became more general they were gradually employed in smaller
pieces, until at last they were reduced to dust, and it was found that,
in a fine state of division, a few hundredweights produced as great an
effect as the larger quantity of the unground bones. Even the most
complete grinding which can be attained, however, leaves the bones in a
much less minute state of division than guano, and they necessarily act
more slowly than it does, the more especially as they contain no
ready-formed ammonia. They may be still further reduced by fermentation,
which acts by decomposing the organic matter, and causing the production
of ammonia; but not as is frequently, though erroneously supposed, by
converting the phosphates into a soluble condition, for this does not
occur to any extent, and their more rapid action is solely due to the
partial decomposition of the organic matter, by which it is brought into
a condition capable of undergoing a more rapid change in the soil. The
rapidity of action of bones is still more promoted by solution in
sulphuric acid, by which they are converted into the form of dissolved
bones or superphosphate. At the present moment, however, very little of
the superphosphates sold in the market are made exclusively from bones
in their natural state, by far the larger portion being manufactured
from mineral phosphates, or from bones after destruction of their
organic matter, sometimes with the addition of small quantities of
unburnt bones, but more frequently of sulphate of ammonia, to yield the
requisite quantity of ammonia. These substances may therefore be best
considered under the head of mineral manures.




CHAPTER XI.

COMPOSITION AND PROPERTIES OF MINERAL MANURES.


Mineral manure is a term which is now used with great laxity. In its
strict sense, it means manures which contain only, and owe their
exclusive value to the presence of, those substances which go to make up
the inorganic part or ash of plants. It has, however, been usually taken
to include all saline matters, and especially the compounds of ammonia
and nitric acid, which are indebted for their manurial effects to the
nitrogen they contain; and thus is so far incorrect. It would, however,
be manifestly impossible to arrange these compounds with any degree of
accuracy among either animal or vegetable manures, and hence the
necessity of including them amongst those which are strictly mineral.
The most important practical distinction between them and the substances
discussed in the two preceding chapters is, that the latter generally
contain the whole or the greater part of the constituents of plants.
Even bones yield a certain quantity of alkalies, magnesia, sulphuric
acid, and chlorine, and may in some sense be considered as a general
manure. But those to which the term mineral manure is applied for the
most part contain only one or two of the essential elements of plants,
and hence cannot be applied as substitutes for the substances already
discussed, although they are frequently most important additions to
them.

_Sulphate and Muriate of Ammonia._--These and other salts of ammonia
have been tried experimentally as manures, and it has been ascertained
that they may all be used with equal success; but as the sulphate is by
much cheaper, it is that which probably will always be employed to the
exclusion of every other. It contains, when pure, 25.7 per cent ammonia.

It is now manufactured of excellent quality for agricultural use, and
when good, contains from 95 to 97 per cent of actual sulphate, the
remainder consisting chiefly of moisture and a small quantity of fixed
residue; but specimens are occasionally met with containing as much as
10 per cent of impurities, which, as its price is high, makes a material
difference in its value. Inferior descriptions are also occasionally
sold, among which is a variety distinguished by containing a large
quantity of water and fixed salts, although it appears to the eye a good
article. Its composition is--

                                  I.              II.
Water                            9.05            5.77
Sulphate of ammonia             79.63           85.21
Fixed salts                     11.17            9.02
                               ------          ------
                               100.00          100.00
Ammonia                         20.55           21.94

An article called sulphomuriate of ammonia is also sold for agricultural
use. It is obtained as a refuse product in the manufacture of magnesia,
and is a mixture of sulphate and muriate of ammonia, with various
alkaline salts. It differs somewhat in quality, and is sold by analysis
at a price dependent on the ammonia it contains.

                          I.          II.
Water                    14.49       25.39
Sulphate of ammonia      62.55       47.79
Muriate of ammonia       15.3         ...
Sulphate of soda          ...         9.12
Sulphate of magnesia      ...        18.38
Chloride of potassium     4.75        2.94
Chloride of sodium       17.35        0.35
                        ------      ------
                        100.00      100.00
Ammonia                  16.50       11.28

The quality of sulphate of ammonia may generally be judged of from its
dry and uniformly crystalline appearance, and it may be tested by
heating a small quantity on a shovel over a clear fire, when it ought to
volatilize completely, or leave only a trifling residue. Some care,
however, is necessary in applying this test, as in the hands of
inexperienced persons it is sometimes fallacious. The salts of ammonia
may be applied in the same way as guano; but they are most
advantageously employed as a top-dressing, and principally to grass
lands. In this way very remarkable effects are produced, and within a
week after the application, the difference between the dressed and
undressed portions of a field is already conspicuous. Experience has
shewn that success is best insured when the salt is applied during or
immediately before rain, so that it may be at once incorporated with the
soil; as when used in dry weather little or no benefit is derived from
it. It seems also to exert a peculiarly beneficial effect upon clover;
and hence it ought to be employed only on clover-hay, as where ryegrass
or other grasses form the whole of the crop we have better manures.

_Ammoniacal Liquor of the Gas-Works, and of the Animal Charcoal
Manufacturers._--Both of these are excellent forms in which to apply
ammonia, when they can be obtained. The ammoniacal liquor of the
gas-works is very variable in quality, but contains generally from 4 to
8 ounces of dry ammonia per gallon, which corresponds in round numbers
to from 1 to 2 lb. of sulphate of ammonia. It is best applied with the
watering-cart, but must be diluted before use with three or four times
its bulk of water, as if concentrated it burns up the grass, and it is
also advisable to use it during wet weather. The ammoniacal liquor of
the ivory-black works contains about 12 per cent of ammonia, or about
four or five times as much as gas liquor. It has been used in some parts
of England, made into a compost, and applied to the turnip and other
crops, and, it is said, with good effect. _Bone oil_, which distils over
along with it, has also been used in the form of a compost; it contains
a large quantity of ammonia and of nitrogen in other forms of
combination; the total quantity of nitrogen it contains being 9.04 per
cent, which is equivalent to 10.98 of ammonia. Only part of this
nitrogen is actually in the state of ammonia; and some circumstances
connected with the chemical relations of the other nitrogenous compounds
in this substance render it probable that they may pass very slowly into
ammonia, and may therefore be of inferior value; but the substance
deserves a trial, as it is very cheap. It must be carefully composted
with peat, and turned over several times before being used.

_Nitrates of Potash and Soda._--Nitrate of potash has long been used as
a manure, but its high price has prevented its general application, and
its place has now been almost entirely taken by nitrate of soda, which
is much cheaper and contains weight for weight a larger quantity of
nitrogen. Both these salts are employed as sources of nitrogen; but
nitrate of potash owes also a certain proportion of its value to the
potash it contains. Nitrate of soda, on the other hand, must be
considered to owe its entire value to its nitric acid, as soda is of
little value to the plant; and, moreover, can be obtained in common salt
at a price so low, as to make it a matter of no moment in the valuation
of the nitrate. In its ordinary state, as imported from Peru, nitrate of
soda contains from 5 to 10 per cent of impurities, and it bears a price
proportionate to the quantity of the pure salt present in it. When of
good quality it contains about 15 per cent of nitrogen, equivalent to 18
of ammonia, and is, therefore, richer in that constituent of plants than
Peruvian guano. It is essentially a rapidly acting manure, and produces
a marked effect within a very few days after its application; but owing
to the fact that nitric acid cannot be absorbed and retained by the soil
in the same manner as ammonia, it is liable to be lost unless it can be
at once assimilated by the plant. For this reason it acts best when
applied in small quantity as a top-dressing to grass-land, and to young
corn. A large application has no advantages, and there can be no doubt
that the best effect would be produced by several very small quantities,
applied at intervals. In one experiment, Mr. Pusey found 42 lb. per acre
to increase the produce of barley by 7 bushels, and very favourable
results have been obtained by other experimenters. The beneficial
effects of nitrate of soda appear to be almost entirely confined to the
grasses and cereals. At least experience here has shewn that it produces
little or no effect on clover; and one farmer has stated, that having
recently adopted the practice of sowing clover with a very small
proportion of ryegrass only, he has been led to abandon the use of
nitrate of soda, which he formerly employed abundantly, when ryegrass
formed a principal part of his crop. The action of nitrate of soda is
very remarkable, not only in this respect, but also because a given
quantity of nitrogen in it _appears_ to produce a greater effect than
the same quantity in sulphate of ammonia or guano. At the same time this
statement must be taken as very general, definite experiments being
still too few to admit of its being stated as an absolute fact. The
probability is, that the same quantity of nitrogen, in the form either
of ammonia or nitrate of soda, will produce the same effect, although
the conditions necessary for its successful action may not be the same
with the two manures. It is alleged that nitrate of soda is
advantageously conjoined with common salt, which is said to check its
tendency to make the grain crops run to straw, and to prevent their
lodging, as they are apt to do, when it is employed alone. But
considerable difference of opinion exists in this point, many farmers
believing that salt produces no effect. When employed for hay,
especially when mixed with clover, it is advisable to use it along with
an equal quantity of sulphate of ammonia, which gives a better result
than either separately.

_Salts of Potash and Soda._--The substances just mentioned must be
considered to owe their chief manurial value to nitric acid; but other
salts have been used as manures in which the effect is undoubtedly due
to the alkalies themselves. With the exception of common salt, most of
the alkaline salts have only been used to a limited extent; and it is
remarkable that, so far as our present experience goes, there is no
class of substances from which more uncertain results are obtained.

_Muriate and Sulphate of Potash_ have both been used, and the former
has in some cases, and in particular seasons, produced a very remarkable
effect in the potato; but in other instances it has proved quite
useless. The cause of this difference has not been ascertained. Sulphate
of soda has also been used to some extent, but apparently without much
benefit; and there is no reason to expect that it should act better than
common salt, which can be obtained at a much lower price.

_Chloride of Sodium, or Common Salt_, has at different times been
employed as a manure, but its effects are so variable and uncertain,
that its use, in place of increasing, has of late years rather
diminished, it having frequently been found that on soils in all
respects similar, or even on the same soil, in different years, it
sometimes proves advantageous, at others positively injurious. Its use
as an addition to nitrate of soda has been already alluded to, and it is
said that it produces the same effect when mixed with guano and salts of
ammonia. The accuracy of this statement is doubted by many persons, and
the explanation which has been given of the cause of its action is more
than dubious. It is supposed to enable the plant to absorb more silica
from the soil; but this is a speculative explanation of its action, and
has not been supported by definite experiment. Although little effect
has been observed from salt, it deserves a more accurate investigation,
as not withstanding the extent to which it has been employed, we are
singularly deficient in definite experiments with it.

_Carbonates of Potash and Soda_ have only been tried experimentally, and
that to a small extent, nor is it likely that they will ever come into
use, owing to their high price. The remarks we have made in the section
on the ashes of plants regarding the subordinate value of soda, will
enable the reader to see that greater effects are to be anticipated
from the former than from the latter of these salts. They _may_,
