each planet, and depending on its mass and its radius. If the missile be
projected upwards with a velocity equal to or greater than this, then it
will ascend never to return. We all recollect Jules Verne's voyage to
the moon, in which he described the Columbiad, an imaginary cannon,
capable of shooting out a projectile with a velocity of six or seven
miles a second. This is the critical velocity for the earth. If we could
imagine the air removed, then a cannon of seven-mile power would project
a body upwards which would never fall down.

The great difficulty about Tschermak's view of the volcanic origin of
the meteorites lies in the tremendous initial velocity which is
required. The Columbiad is a myth, and we know no agent, natural or
artificial, at the present time on the earth, adequate to the production
of a velocity so appalling. The thunders of Krakatoa were heard
thousands of miles away, but in its mightiest throes it discharged no
missiles with a velocity of six miles a second. We are therefore led to
enquire whether any of the other celestial bodies are entitled to the
parentage of the meteorites. We cannot see volcanoes on any other body
except the moon; all the other bodies are too remote for an inspection
so minute. Does it seem likely that volcanoes on the moon can ever
launch forth missiles which fall upon the earth?

This belief was once sustained by eminent authority. The mass of the
moon is about one-eightieth of the mass of the earth. It would not be
true to assert that the critical velocity of projection varies directly
as the mass of the planet. The correct law is, that it varies directly
as the square root of the mass, and inversely as the square root of the
radius. It is hence shown that the velocity required to project a
missile away from the moon is only about one-sixth of that which would
be required to project a missile away from the earth. If the moon had on
its surface volcanoes of one-mile power, it is quite conceivable that
these might be the source of meteorites. We have seen how the whole
surface of the moon shows traces of intense volcanic activity. A missile
thus projected from the moon could undoubtedly fall on the earth, and it
is not impossible that some of the meteorites may really have come from
this source. There is, however, one great difficulty about the volcanoes
on the moon. Suppose an object were so projected, it would, under the
attraction of the earth, in accordance with Kepler's laws, move around
the earth as a focus. If we set aside the disturbances produced by all
other bodies, as well as the disturbance produced by the moon itself, we
see that the meteorite if it once misses the earth can never fall
thereon. It would be necessary that the shortest distance of the earth's
centre from the orbit of the projectile should be less than the radius
of the earth, so that if a lunar meteorite is to fall on the earth, it
must do so the first time it goes round. The journey of a meteorite from
the moon to the earth is only a matter of days, and therefore, as
meteorites are still falling, it would follow that they must still be
constantly ejected from the moon. The volcanoes on the moon are,
however, not now active; observers have long studied its surface, and
they find no reliable traces of volcanic activity at the present day.
It is utterly out of the question, whatever the moon may once have been
able to do, that at the present date she could still continue to launch
forth meteorites. It is just possible that a meteorite expelled from the
moon in remote antiquity, when its volcanoes were active, may, under the
influence of the disturbances of the other bodies of the system, have
its orbit so altered, that at length it comes within reach of the
atmosphere and falls to the earth, but in no circumstances could the
moon send us a meteorite at present. It is therefore reasonable to look
elsewhere in our search for volcanoes fulfilling the conditions of the
problem.

Let us now direct our attention to the planets, and examine the
circumstances in which volcanoes located thereon could eject a meteorite
which should ultimately tumble on the earth. We cannot see the planets
well enough to tell whether they have or ever had any volcanoes; but the
almost universal presence of heat in the large celestial masses seems to
leave us in little doubt that some form of volcanic action might be
found in the planets. We may at once dismiss the giant planets, such as
Jupiter or Saturn: their appearance is very unlike a volcanic surface;
while their great mass would render it necessary to suppose that the
meteorites were expelled with terrific velocity if they should succeed
in escaping from the gravitation of the planet. Applying the rule
already given, a volcano on Jupiter would have to be five or six times
as powerful as the volcano on the earth. To avoid this difficulty, we
naturally turn to the smaller planets of the system; take, for instance,
one of that innumerable host of minor planets, and let us enquire how
far this body is likely to have ejected a missile which should fall upon
the earth. Some of these globes are only a few miles in diameter. There
are bodies in the solar system so small that a very moderate velocity
would be sufficient to project a missile away from them altogether. We
have, indeed, already illustrated this point in discussing the minor
planets. It has been suggested that a volcano placed on one of the minor
planets might be quite powerful enough to start the meteorites on a
long ramble through space until the chapter of accidents brought them
into collision with the earth. There is but little difficulty in
granting that there might be such volcanoes, and that they might be
sufficiently powerful to drive bodies from the surface of the planet;
but we must remember that the missiles are to fall on the earth, and
dynamical considerations are involved which merit our close attention.
To concentrate our ideas, we shall consider one of the minor planets,
and for this purpose let us take Ceres. If a meteorite is to fall upon
the earth, it must pass through the narrow ring, some 8,000 miles wide,
which marks the earth's path; it will not suffice for the missile to
pass through the ecliptic on the inside or on the outside of the ring,
it must be actually through this narrow strip, and then if the earth
happens to be there at the same moment the meteorite will fall. The
first condition to be secured is, therefore, that the path of the
meteorite shall traverse this narrow ring. This is to be effected by
projection from some point in the orbit of Ceres. But it can be shown on
purely dynamical grounds that although the volcanic energy sufficient to
remove the projectile from Ceres may be of no great account, yet if that
projectile is to cross the earth's track, the dynamical requirements of
the case demand a volcano on Ceres at the very least of three-mile
power. We have thus gained but little by the suggestion of a minor
planet, for we have not found that a moderate volcanic power would be
adequate. But there is another difficulty in the case of Ceres, inasmuch
as the ring on the ecliptic is very narrow in comparison with the other
dimensions of the problem. Ceres is a long way off, and it would require
very great accuracy in volcanic practice on Ceres to project a missile
so that it should just traverse this ring and fall neither inside nor
outside, neither above nor below. There must be a great many misses for
every hit. We have attempted to make the calculation by the aid of the
theory of probabilities, and we find that the chances against this
occurrence are about 50,000 to 1, so that out of every 50,000
projectiles hurled from a point in the orbit of Ceres only a single one
can be expected to satisfy even the first of the conditions necessary if
it is ever to tumble on our globe. It is thus evident that there are two
objections to Ceres (and the same may be said of the other minor
planets) as a possible source of the meteorites. Firstly, that
notwithstanding the small mass of the planet a very powerful volcano
would still be required; and secondly, that we are obliged to assume
that for every one which ever reached the earth at least 50,000 must
have been ejected. It is thus plain that if the meteorites have really
been driven from some planet of the solar system, large or small, the
volcano must, from one cause or another, have been a very powerful one.
We are thus led to enquire which planet possesses on other grounds the
greatest probability in its favour.

We admit of course that at the present time the volcanoes on the earth
are utterly devoid of the necessary power; but were the terrestrial
volcanoes always so feeble as they are in these later days? Grounds are
not wanting for the belief that in the very early days of geological
time the volcanic energy on the earth was much greater than at present.
We admit fully the difficulties of the view that the meteorites have
really come from the earth; but they must have some origin, and it is
reasonable to indicate the source which seems to have most probability
in its favour. Grant for a moment that in the primaeval days of volcanic
activity there were some mighty throes which hurled forth missiles with
the adequate velocity: these missiles would ascend, they would pass from
the gravitation of the earth, they would be seized by the gravitation of
the sun, and they would be compelled to revolve around the sun for ever
after. No doubt the resistance of the air would be a very great
difficulty, but this resistance would be greatly lessened were the
crater at a very high elevation above the sea level, while, if a vast
volume of ejected gases or vapours accompanied the more solid material,
the effect of the resistance of the air would be still further reduced.
Some of these objects might perhaps revolve in hyperbolic orbits, and
retreat never to return; while others would be driven into elliptic
paths. Round the sun these objects would revolve for ages, but at each
revolution--and here is the important point--they would traverse the
point from which they were originally launched. In other words, every
object so projected from the earth would at each revolution cross the
track of the earth. We have in this fact an enormous probability in
favour of the earth as contrasted with Ceres. Only one Ceres-ejected
meteorite out of every 50,000 would probably cross the earth's track,
while every earth-projected meteorite would necessarily do so.

If this view be true, then there must be hosts of meteorites traversing
space in elliptic orbits around the sun. These orbits have one feature
in common: they all intersect the track of the earth. It will sometimes
happen that the earth is found at this point at the moment the meteorite
is crossing; when this is the case the long travels of the little body
are at an end, and it tumbles back on the earth from which it parted so
many ages ago.

It is well to emphasise the contrast between the lunar theory of
meteorites (which we think improbable) and the terrestrial theory (which
appears to be probable). For the lunar theory it would, as we have seen,
be necessary that some of the lunar volcanoes should be still active. In
the terrestrial theory it is only necessary to suppose that the
volcanoes on the earth once possessed sufficient explosive power. No one
supposes that the volcanoes at present on the earth eject now the
fragments which are to form future meteorites; but it seems possible
that the earth may be now slowly gathering back, in these quiet times,
the fragments she ejected in an early stage of her history. Assuming,
therefore, with Tschermak, that many meteorites have had a volcanic
origin on some considerable celestial body, we are led to agree with
those who think that most probably that body is the earth.

It is interesting to notice a few circumstances which seem to
corroborate the view that many meteorites are of ancient terrestrial
origin. The most characteristic constituent of these bodies is the alloy
of iron and nickel, which is almost universally present. Sometimes, as
in the Rowton siderite, the whole object consists of little else;
sometimes this alloy is in grains distributed through the mass. When
Nordenskjoeld discovered in Greenland a mass of native iron containing
nickel, this was at once regarded as a celestial visitor. It was called
the Ovifak meteorite, and large pieces of the iron were conveyed to our
museums. There is, for instance, in the national collection a most
interesting exhibit of the Ovifak substance. Close examination shows
that this so-called meteorite lies in a bed of basalt which has been
vomited from the interior of the earth. Those who believe in the
meteoric origin of the Ovifak iron are constrained to admit that shortly
after the eruption of the basalt, and while it was still soft, this
stupendous iron meteorite of gigantic mass and bulk happened to fall
into this particular soft bed. The view is, however, steadily gaining
ground that this great iron mass was no celestial visitor at all, but
that it simply came forth from the interior of the earth with the basalt
itself. The beautiful specimens in the British Museum show how the iron
graduates into the basalt in such a way as to make it highly probable
that the source of the iron is really to be sought in the earth and not
external thereto. Should further research establish this, as now seems
probable, a most important step will have been taken in proving the
terrestrial origin of meteorites. If the Ovifak iron be really
associated with the basalt, we have a proof that the iron-nickel alloy
is indeed a terrestrial substance, found deep in the interior of the
earth, and associated with volcanic phenomena. This being so, it will be
no longer difficult to account for the iron in undoubted meteorites.
When the vast volcanoes were in activity they ejected masses of this
iron-alloy, which, having circulated round the sun for ages, have at
last come back again. As if to confirm this view, Professor Andrews
discovered particles of native iron in the basalt of the Giant's
Causeway, while the probability that large masses of iron are there
associated with the basaltic formation was proved by the researches on
magnetism of the late Provost Lloyd.

Besides the more solid meteorites there can be no doubt that the
_debris_ of the ordinary shooting stars must rain down upon the earth in
gentle showers of celestial dust. The snow in the Arctic regions has
often been found stained with traces of dust which contains particles of
iron. Similar particles have been found on the towers of cathedrals and
in many other situations where it could only have been deposited from
the air. There can be hardly a doubt that some of the motes in the
sunbeam, and many of the particles which good housekeepers abhor as
dust, have indeed a cosmical origin. In the famous cruise of the
_Challenger_ the dredges brought up from the depths of the Atlantic no
"wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl," but among the mud which
they raised are to be found numerous magnetic particles which there is
every reason to believe fell from the sky, and thence subsided to the
depths of the ocean. Sand from the deserts of Africa, when examined
under the microscope, yield traces of minute iron particles which bear
the marks of having experienced a high temperature.

The earth draws in this cosmic dust continuously, but the earth now
never parts with a particle of its mass. The consequence is inevitable;
the mass of the earth must be growing, and though the change may be a
small one, yet to those who have studied Darwin's treatise on
"Earth-worms," or to those who are acquainted with the modern theory of
evolution, it will be manifest that stupendous results can be achieved
by slight causes which tend in one direction. It is quite probable that
an appreciable part of the solid substance of our globe may have been
derived from meteoric matter which descends in perennial showers upon
its surface.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE STARRY HEAVENS.


     The Constellations--The Great Bear and the Pointers--The Pole
     Star--Cassiopeia--Andromeda, Pegasus, and Perseus--The Pleiades:
     Auriga, Capella, Aldebaran--Taurus, Orion, Sirius; Castor and
     Pollux--The Lion--Booetes, Corona, and Hercules--Virgo and
     Spica--Vega and Lyra--The Swan.

The student of astronomy should make himself acquainted with the
principal constellations in the heavens. This is a pleasing acquirement,
and might well form a part of the education of every child in the
kingdom. We shall commence our discussion of the sidereal system with a
brief account of the principal constellations visible in the northern
hemisphere, and we accompany our description with such outline maps of
the stars as will enable the beginner to identify the chief features of
the starry heavens.

In an earlier chapter we directed the attention of the student to the
remarkable constellation of stars which is known to astronomers as Ursa
Major, or the Great Bear. It forms the most conspicuous group in the
northern skies, and in northern latitudes it never sets. At eleven p.m.
in the month of April the Great Bear is directly overhead (for an
observer in the United Kingdom); at the same hour in September it is low
down in the north; at the same hour July it is in the west; by Christmas
it is at the east. From the remotest antiquity this group of stars has
attracted attention. The stars in the Great Bear were comprised in a
great catalogue of stars, made two thousand years ago, which has been
handed down to us. From the positions of the stars given in this
catalogue it is possible to reconstruct the Great Bear as it appeared in
those early days. This has been done, and it appears that the seven
principal stars have not changed in this lapse of time to any large
extent, so that the configuration of the Great Bear remains practically
the same now as it was then. The beginner must first obtain an
acquaintance with this group of seven stars, and then his further
progress in this branch of astronomy will be greatly facilitated. The
Great Bear is, indeed, a splendid constellation, and its only rival is
to be found in Orion, which contains more brilliant stars, though it
does not occupy so large a region in the heavens.

[Illustration: Fig. 80.--The Great Bear and Pole Star.]

[Illustration: Fig. 81.--The Great Bear and Cassiopeia.]

In the first place, we observe how the Great Bear enables the Pole Star,
which is the most important object in the northern heavens, to be
readily found. The Pole Star is very conveniently indicated by the
direction of the two stars, b and a, of the Great Bear, which
are, accordingly, generally known as the "pointers." This use of the
Great Bear is shown on the diagram in Fig. 80, in which the line b
a, produced onwards and slightly curved, will conduct to the Pole
Star. There is no likelihood of making any mistake in this star, as it
is the only bright one in the neighbourhood. Once it has been seen it
will be readily identified on future occasions, and the observer will
not fail to notice how constant is the position which it preserves in
the heavens. The other stars either rise or set, or, like the Great
Bear, they dip down low in the north without actually setting, but the
Pole Star exhibits no considerable changes. In summer or winter, by
night or by day, the Pole Star is ever found in the same place--at
least, so far as ordinary observation is concerned. No doubt, when we
use the accurate instruments of the observatory the notion of the fixity
of the Pole Star is abandoned; we then see that it has a slow motion,
and that it describes a small circle every twenty-four hours around the
true pole of the heavens, which is not coincident with the Pole Star,
though closely adjacent thereto. The distance is at present a little
more than a degree, and it is gradually lessening, until, in the year
A.D. 2095, the distance will be under half a degree.

The Pole Star itself belongs to another inconsiderable group of stars
known as the Little Bear. The two principal members of this group, next
in brightness to the Pole Star, are sometimes called the "Guards." The
Great Bear and the Little Bear, with the Pole Star, form a group in the
northern sky not paralleled by any similarly situated constellation in
the southern heavens. At the South Pole there is no conspicuous star to
indicate its position approximately--a circumstance disadvantageous to
astronomers and navigators in the southern hemisphere.

It will now be easy to add a third constellation to the two already
acquired. On the opposite side of the Pole Star to the Great Bear, and
at about the same distance, lies a very pleasing group of five bright
stars, forming a W. These are the more conspicuous members of the
constellation Cassiopeia, which contains altogether about sixty stars
visible to the naked eye. When the Great Bear is low down in the north,
then Cassiopeia is high overhead. When the Great Bear is high overhead,
then Cassiopeia is to be looked for low down in the north. The
configuration of the leading stars is so striking that once the eye has
recognised them future identification will be very easy--the more so
when it is borne in mind that the Pole Star lies midway between
Cassiopeia and the Great Bear (Fig. 81). These important constellations
will serve as guides to the rest. We shall accordingly show how the
learner may distinguish the various other groups visible from the
British Islands or similar northern latitudes.

The next constellation to be recognised is the imposing group which
contains the Great Square of Pegasus. This is not, like Ursa Major, or
like Cassiopeia, said to be "circumpolar." The Great Square of Pegasus
sets and rises daily. It cannot be seen conveniently during the spring
and the summer, but in autumn and in winter the four stars which mark
the corners of the square can be easily recognised. There are certain
small stars within the region so limited; perhaps about thirty can be
counted by an unaided eye of ordinary power in these latitudes. In the
south of Europe, with its pure and bright skies, the number of visible
stars appears to be greatly increased. An acute observer at Athens has
counted 102 in the same region.

[Illustration: Fig. 82.--The Great Square of Pegasus.]

The Great Square of Pegasus can be reached by a line from the Pole Star
over the end of Cassiopeia. If it be produced about as far again it will
conduct the eye to the centre of the Great Square of Pegasus (Fig. 82).

The line through b and a in Pegasus continued 45 deg. to the
south points out the important star Fomalhaut in the mouth of the
Southern Fish. To the right of this line, nearly half-way down, is the
rather vague constellation of Aquarius, where a small equilateral
triangle with a star in the centre may be noticed.

The square of Pegasus is not a felicitous illustration of the way in
which the boundaries of the constellations should be defined. There can
be no more naturally associated group than the four stars of this
square, and they ought surely to be included in the same constellation.
Three of the stars--marked a, b, g--do belong to Pegasus; but that at
the fourth corner--also marked a--is placed in a different figure, known
as Andromeda, whereof it is, indeed, the brightest member. The remaining
bright stars of Andromeda are marked b and g, and they are readily
identified by producing one side of the Square of Pegasus in a curved
direction. We have thus a remarkable array of seven stars, which it is
both easy to identify and easy to remember, notwithstanding that they
are contributed to by three different constellations. They are
respectively a, b, and g of Pegasus; a, b, and g of Andromeda; and a of
Perseus. The three form a sort of handle, as it were, extending from one
side of the square, and are a group both striking in appearance, and
useful in the further identification of celestial objects. b Andromedae,
with two smaller stars, form the girdle of the unfortunate heroine.

a Persei lies between two other stars (g and d) of the
same constellation. If we draw a curve through these three and prolong
it in a bold sweep, we are conducted to one of the gems of the northern
heavens--the beautiful star Capella, in Auriga (Fig. 83). Close to
Capella are three small stars forming an isosceles triangle--these are
the Hoedi or Kids. Capella and Vega are, with the exception of
Arcturus, the two most brilliant stars in the northern heavens; and
though Vega is probably the more lustrous of the two, yet the opposite
opinion has been entertained. Different eyes will frequently form
various estimates of the relative brilliancy of stars which approach
each other in brightness. The difficulty of making a satisfactory
comparison between Vega and Capella is greatly increased by the wide
distance in the heavens at which they are separated, as well as by a
slight difference in colour, for Vega is distinctly whiter than Capella.
This contrast between the colour of stars is often a source of
uncertainty in the attempt to compare their relative brilliancy; so
that when actual measurements have to be effected by instrumental means,
it is necessary to compare the two stars alternately with some object of
intermediate hue.

[Illustration: Fig. 83.--Perseus and its Neighbouring Stars.]

On the opposite side of the pole to Capella, but not quite so far away,
will be found four small stars in a quadrilateral. They form the head of
the Dragon, the rest of whose form coils right round the pole.

If we continue the curve formed by the three stars g, a, and
d in Perseus, and if we bend round this curve gracefully into one
of an opposite flexion, in the manner shown in Fig. 83, we are first
conducted to two other principal stars in Perseus, marked e and
z. The region of Perseus is one of the richest in the heavens. We
have here a most splendid portion of the Milky Way, and the field of
the telescope is crowded with stars beyond number. Even a small
telescope or an opera-glass directed to this teeming constellation
cannot fail to delight the observer, and convey to him a profound
impression of the extent of the sidereal heavens. We shall give in a
subsequent paragraph a brief enumeration of some of the remarkable
telescopic objects in Perseus. Pursuing in the same figure the line
e and z, we are conducted to the remarkable little group
known as the Pleiades.

[Illustration: Fig. 84.--The Pleiades.]

The Pleiades form a group so universally known and so easily identified
that it hardly seems necessary to give any further specific instructions
for their discovery. It may, however, be observed that in these
latitudes they cannot be seen before midnight during the summer. Let us
suppose that the search is made at about 11 p.m. at night: on the 1st of
January the Pleiades will be found high up in the sky in the south-west;
on the 1st of March, at the same hour, they will be seen to be setting
in the west. On the 1st of May they are not visible; on the 1st of July
they are not visible; on the 1st of September they will be seen low down
in the east. On the 1st of November they will be high in the heavens in
the south-east. On the ensuing 1st of January the Pleiades will be in
the same position as they were on the same date in the previous year,
and so on from year to year. It need, perhaps, hardly be explained here
that these changes are not really due to movements of the
constellations; they are due, of course, to the apparent annual motion
of the sun among the stars.

[Illustration: Fig. 85.--Orion, Sirius, and the Neighbouring Stars.]

The Pleiades are shown in the figure (Fig. 84), where a group of ten
stars is represented, this being about the number visible with the
unaided eye to those who are gifted with very acute vision. The lowest
telescopic power will increase the number of stars to thirty or forty
(Galileo saw more than forty with his first telescope), while with
telescopes of greater power the number is largely increased; indeed, no
fewer than 625 have been counted with the aid of a powerful telescope.
The group is, however, rather too widely scattered to make an effective
telescopic object, except with a large field and low power. Viewed
through an opera-glass it forms a very pleasing spectacle.

[Illustration: Fig. 86.--Castor and Pollux.]

If we draw a ray from the Pole Star to Capella, and produce it
sufficiently far, as shown in Fig. 85, we come to the great
constellation of our winter sky, the splendid group of Orion. The
brilliancy of the stars in Orion, the conspicuous belt, and the
telescopic objects which it contains, alike render this group
remarkable, and place it perhaps at the head of the constellations. The
leading star in Orion is known either as a Orionis, or as
Betelgeuze, by which name it is here designated. It lies above the three
stars, d, e, z, which form the belt. Betelgeuze is a
star of the first magnitude, and so also is Rigel, on the opposite side
of the belt. Orion thus enjoys the distinction of containing two stars
of the first magnitude in its group, while the five other stars shown in
Fig. 85 are of the second magnitude.

The neighbourhood of Orion contains some important stars. If we carry on
the line of the belt upwards to the right, we are conducted to another
star of the first magnitude, Aldebaran, which strongly resembles
Betelgeuze in its ruddy colour. Aldebaran is the brightest star in the
constellation of Taurus. It is this constellation which contains the
Pleiades already referred to, and another more scattered group known as
the Hyades, which can be discovered near Aldebaran.

[Illustration: Fig. 87.--The Great Bear and the Lion.]

The line of the belt of Orion continued downwards to the left conducts
the eye to the gem of the sky, the splendid Sirius, which is the most
brilliant star in the heavens. It has, indeed, been necessary to create
a special order of magnitude for the reception of Sirius alone; all the
other first magnitude stars, such as Vega and Capella, Betelgeuze and
Aldebaran, coming a long way behind. Sirius, with a few other stars of
much less lustre, form the constellation of Canis Major.

It is useful for the learner to note the large configuration, of an
irregular lozenge shape, of which the four corners are the first
magnitude stars, Aldebaran, Betelgeuze, Sirius, and Rigel (Fig. 85).
The belt of Orion is placed symmetrically in the centre of the group,
and the whole figure is so striking that once perceived it is not likely
to be forgotten.

About half way from the Square of Pegasus to Aldebaran is the chief star
in the Ram--a bright orb of the second magnitude; with two others it
forms a curve, at the other end of which will be found g of the
same constellation, which was the first double star ever noticed.

We can again invoke the aid of the Great Bear to point out the stars in
the constellation of Gemini (Fig. 86). If the diagonal joining the stars
d and b of the body of the Bear be produced in the direction
opposite to the tail, it will lead to Castor and Pollux, two remarkable
stars of the second magnitude. This same line carried a little further
on passes near the star Procyon, of the first magnitude, which is the
only conspicuous object in the constellation of the Little Dog.

[Illustration: Fig. 88.--Booetes and the Crown.]

[Illustration: Fig. 89.--Virgo and the neighbouring Constellations.]

The pointers in the Great Bear marked a b will also serve to
indicate the constellation of the Lion. If we produce the line joining
them in the direction opposite from that used in finding the Pole, we
are brought into the body of the Lion. This group will be recognised by
the star of the first magnitude called Regulus. It is one of a series of
stars forming an object somewhat resembling a sickle: three of the group
are of the second magnitude. The Sickle has a special claim on our
notice because it contains the radiant point from which the periodic
shooting star shower known as the Leonids diverges. Regulus lies
alongside the sun's highway through the stars, at a point which he
passes on the 21st of August every year.

Between Gemini and Leo the inconspicuous constellation of the Crab may
be found; the most striking object it contains is the misty patch called
Praesepe or the Bee-Hive, which the smallest opera-glass will resolve
into its component stars.

[Illustration: Fig. 90.--The Constellation of Lyra.]

The tail of the Great Bear, when prolonged with a continuation of the
curve which it possesses, leads to a brilliant star of the first
magnitude known as Arcturus, the principal star in the constellation of
Booetes (Fig. 88). A few other stars, marked b, g, d,
and e in the same constellation, are also shown in the figure.
Among the stars visible in these latitudes Arcturus is to be placed next
to Sirius in point of brightness. Two stars in the southern hemisphere,
invisible in these latitudes, termed a Centauri and Canopus, are
nearly as bright as Vega and Capella, but not quite as bright as
Arcturus.

In the immediate neighbourhood of Booetes is a striking semicircular
group known as the Crown or Corona Borealis. It will be readily found
from its position as indicated in the figure, or it may be identified by
following the curved line indicated by b, d, e, and z in the Great Bear.

[Illustration: Fig. 91.--Vega, the Swan, and the Eagle.]

The constellation of Virgo is principally characterised by the first
magnitude star called Spica, or a Virginis. This may be found from
the Great Bear; for if the line joining the two stars a and
g in that constellation be prolonged with a slight curve, it will
conduct the eye to Spica. We may here notice another of those large
configurations which are of great assistance in the study of the stars.
There is a fine equilateral triangle, whereof Arcturus and Spica form
two of the corners, while the third is indicated by Denebola, the bright
star near the tail of the Lion (Fig. 89).

In the summer evenings when the Crown is overhead, a line from the Pole
Star through its fainter edge, continued nearly to the southern horizon,
encounters the brilliant red star Cor Scorpionis, or the Scorpion's
Heart (Antares), which was the first star mentioned as having been seen
with the telescope in the daytime.

The first magnitude star, Vega, in the constellation of the Lyre, can
be readily found at the corner of a bold triangle, of which the Pole
Star and Arcturus form the base (Fig. 90). The brilliant whiteness of
Vega will arrest the attention, while the small group of neighbouring
stars which form the Lyre produces one of the best defined
constellations.

Near Vega is another important constellation, known as the Swan or
Cygnus. The brightest star will be identified as the vertex of a
right-angled triangle, of which the line from Vega to the Pole Star is
the base, as shown in Fig. 91. There are in Cygnus five principal stars,
which form a constellation of rather remarkable form.

The last constellation which we shall here describe is that of Aquila or
the Eagle, which contains a star of the first magnitude, known as
Altair; this group can be readily found by a line from Vega over b
Cygni, which passes near the line of three stars, forming the
characteristic part of the Eagle.

We have taken the opportunity to indicate in these sketches of the
constellations the positions of some other remarkable telescopic
objects, the description of which we must postpone to the following
chapters.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE DISTANT SUNS.


     Sirius Contrasted with the Sun--Stars can be Weighed, but not in
     general Measured--The Companion of Sirius--Determination of the
     Weights of Sirius and his Companion--Dark Stars--Variable and
     Temporary Stars--Enormous Number of Stars.

The splendid pre-eminence of Sirius has caused it to be observed with
minute care from the earliest times in the history of astronomy. Each
generation of astronomers devoted time and labour to determine the exact
places of the brightest stars in the heavens. A vast mass of
observations as to the place of Sirius among the stars had thus been
accumulated, and it was found that, like many other stars, Sirius had
what astronomers call _proper motion_. Comparing the place of Sirius
with regard to the other stars now with the place which it occupied one
hundred years ago, there is a difference of two minutes (127") in its
situation. This is a small quantity: it is so small that the unaided eye
could not see it. Could we now see the sky as it appeared one century
ago, we should still see this star in its well-known place to the left
of Orion. Careful alignment by the eye would hardly detect that Sirius
was moving in two, or even in three or in four centuries. But the
accuracy of the meridian circle renders these minute quantities evident,
and gives to them their true significance. To the eye of the astronomer,
Sirius, instead of creeping along with a movement which centuries will
not show, is pursuing its majestic course with a velocity appropriate to
its dimensions.

Though the velocity of Sirius is _about_ 1,000 miles a minute, yet it
is sometimes a little more and sometimes a little less than its mean
value. To the astronomer this fact is pregnant with information. Were
Sirius an isolated star, attended only by planets of comparative
insignificance, there could be no irregularity in its motion. If it were
once started with a velocity of 1,000 miles a minute, then it must
preserve that velocity. Neither the lapse of centuries nor the mighty
length of the journey could alter it. The path of Sirius would be
inflexible in its direction; and it would be traversed with unalterable
velocity.

[Illustration: Fig. 92.--The Orbit of Sirius (Professor Burnham).]

The fact that Sirius had not been moving uniformly was of such interest
that it arrested the attention of Bessel when he discovered the
irregularities in 1844. Believing, as Bessel did, that there must be
some adequate cause for these disturbances, it was hardly possible to
doubt what the cause must be. When motion is disturbed there must be
force in action, and the only force that we recognise in such cases is
that known as gravitation. But gravity can only act from one body to
another body; so that when we seek for the derangement of Sirius by
gravitation, we are obliged to suppose that there must be some mighty
and massive body near Sirius. The question was taken up again by Peters
and by Auwers, who were able to discover, from the irregularities of
Sirius, the nature of the path of the disturbing body. They were able to
show that it must revolve around Sirius in a period of about fifty
years, and although they could not tell its distance from Sirius, yet
they were able to point out the direction in which it must lie. Fig. 92
shows the orbit of Sirius as given by Mr. Burnham, of Yerkes
Observatory.

The detection of the attendant of Sirius, and the measures which have
been made thereon, enable us to determine the weight of this famous
star. Let us attempt to illustrate this subject. It must, no doubt, be
admitted that the numerical estimates we employ have to be received with
a certain degree of caution. The companion of Sirius is a difficult
object to observe, and previous to 1896 it had only been followed
through an arc of 90 deg.. We are, therefore, hardly as yet in a position to
speak with absolute accuracy as to the periodic time in which the
companion completes its revolution. We may, however, take this time to
be fifty-two years. We also know the distance from Sirius to his
companion, and we may take it to be about twenty-one times the distance
from the earth to the sun. It is useful, in the first place, to compare
the revolution of the companion around Sirius with the revolution of the
planet Uranus around the sun. Taking the earth's distance as unity, the
radius of the orbit of Uranus is about nineteen, and Uranus takes
eighty-four years to accomplish a complete revolution. We have no planet
in the solar system at a distance of twenty-one; but from Kepler's third
law it may be shown that, if there were such a planet, its periodic time
would be about ninety-nine years. We have now the necessary materials
for making the comparison between the mass of Sirius and the mass of
the sun. A body revolving around Sirius at a certain distance completes
its journey in fifty-two years. To revolve around the sun at the same
distance a body should complete its journey in ninety-nine years. The
quicker the body is moving the greater must be the centrifugal force,
and the greater must be the attractive power of the central body. It can
be shown from the principles of dynamics that the attractive power is
inversely proportional to the square of the periodic time. Hence, then,
the attractive power of Sirius must bear to the attractive power of the
sun the proportion which the square of ninety-nine has to the square of
fifty-two. As the distances are in each case supposed to be equal, the
attractive powers will be proportional to the masses, and hence we
conclude that the mass of Sirius, together with that of his companion,
is to the mass of the sun, together with that of his planet, in the
ratio of three and a half to one. We had already learned that Sirius was
much brighter than the sun; now we have learned that it is also much
more massive.

Before we leave the consideration of Sirius, there is one additional
