She poured the wine, carefully filling the goblets only two-thirds full
so her trembling hands would not spill their contents.

The Tartar crossed the room and sat in the round-bottomed chair Tilia
had occupied a short while earlier. Rachel held out a goblet to him, and
her hand shook so badly she almost dropped it. He did not seem to
notice. Maybe he was used to being waited on by trembling women. He
smiled and nodded.

Tilia was watching all this, Rachel remembered. She drained her cup
quickly, the silver giving the wine a slightly metallic taste. She
poured a second cup for herself, and looked at him. He barely sipped
from his goblet before setting it on the table, holding his hand palm
down over it. Too bad, she thought. She had heard that men who drank too
much could not get stiff enough to go into women.

John started talking to her in his own tongue. He spoke for a long time
with many gestures, some toward himself, some toward her. She tried
desperately to guess what he was saying. She did not want to respond the
wrong way and anger him.

He seemed quite at ease, and he laughed occasionally, as if he were
telling her funny stories that amused him as well. She saw webs of fine
wrinkles in the brown skin around his eyes and thought, _He could be
older than Angelo_.

He began to make a strange sound, a long-drawn-out moan. Perhaps he was
in pain. Perhaps _he_ was going to be sick. Her heart leapt hopefully.
Then the moan changed pitch, and his mouth began to shape words. They
must be Tartar words. He was singing to her. It was unmistakably a song,
but it was strange and shrill to her ears. She almost burst out
laughing, but immediately felt terror at the thought of offending him.

It began to dawn on her, though, that John was not behaving like a
brute, as she had feared he would when she first saw him in the doorway.
If she looked behind the black slits that were his eyes, under the
tanned-leather skin, he seemed a pleasant old man. His language might be
gibberish to her, but it was clear that he was trying to entertain her,
even woo her.

But she hated the thought of what he was trying to woo her _for_.

He ended his song by clapping his hands rhythmically--she counted nine
handclaps. He followed that with more eager smiles and nods. He actually
wanted to know whether she liked his song. She relaxed a bit.

She smiled and nodded back. "Yes. Very good, John. Che bello!" Perhaps
she could get him to sing more, and put off the moment she dreaded.

But he stood up with a look on his face that froze her heart in her
chest. There was nothing ferocious or cruel in it or even lustful. There
was neither kindness nor pity in it, nor anything that recognized her as
a person. It was the satisfied smile of a man looking upon a possession.

He slipped off the wide-sleeved gown and unbuckled his belt. She began
to tremble uncontrollably.

       *       *       *       *       *

Daoud sat slumped with exhaustion on the carpeted floor of Ugolini's
cabinet. The long night just past had drained him of all his energy. He
wanted to sleep, but first he must see to it that Ugolini made good use
of the advantage they had gained at the contessa's reception.

A strong, rich, familiar smell filtered into his nostrils, and his head
lifted, as if a powerful hand had gripped it. The door opened, and a
servant carried in a tray laden with six small porcelain cups, one each
for Ugolini, Daoud, Sophia, and Lorenzo and two extra, as well as two
pitchers. Ugolini pushed aside a pile of parchment on his work table,
and the servant set the tray down.

As the door closed behind the servant, Daoud drew a deep breath to
identify the smell and felt a glow of surprised pleasure.

"Is it possible?" he said to Ugolini. "You have found kaviyeh?"

Ugolini, sitting in the big chair behind his work table, just his head
and shoulders showing, smiled benignly. "You may hate the Tartars for
invading the Islamic lands, my friend, but it means that we Christians
can now trade with that part of the world. The Venetians have been
importing the beans from the uplands of Persia in small--and very
expensive--quantities. I was saving this for a special occasion. This
morning, after your triumph over the Tartars and your narrow escape from
death, seemed appropriate."

Daoud found the strength to stand up and pour the steaming black liquid
from the pitcher into a cup. He held the cup to his face with both hands
and sniffed deeply. He felt happier than he had in a long time.

Sophia, sitting on a padded bench against the wall opposite Ugolini's
table, said, "What is that?" Daoud heard shrill alarm in her voice.

She must suspect it was some sort of drug, thought Daoud with
amusement.

The cardinal chuckled amiably. "Only a beverage, my dear. Long used in
the Orient by sages and poets. It produces a heightened state of
alertness and vigor."

Daoud sipped the hot liquid. The taste was wondrously bracing after
months of deprivation, but it was not quite strong enough.

"This is very good, and I am your grateful slave forever," he said. "But
you should tell your servants to boil it longer."

Having sensed that Sophia feared his pleasure, he wanted to share it
with her that she might see how harmless it was. He went to her and held
out his cup.

"Try this. Be careful, the cup is hot."

She took the cup from him, her fingers brushing his. He felt a tingle in
his arm. She raised the cup, sniffed suspiciously and grimaced, but took
a small sip.

He was disappointed to see her mouth pucker. She did not like it. Well,
he could not expect her to take to it at once. He had been drinking it
ever since he was a child. Even his crusader family had drunk kaviyeh.

"A very interesting taste," she said, handing back the cup. A Byzantine
comment, he thought. He heard Lorenzo chuckle.

A pang of jealousy shot through him. He could not expect her to like
kaviyeh any more than he could expect her to love him. Especially not
after she had been alone in the Monaldeschi atrium with that damned
French count.

His longing for Sophia made his heart ache. If only he could have her
for himself, and not be forced to throw her at Simon de Gobignon. But
she was no more his than that emerald Baibars had entrusted to him.

Resignedly he told himself he must find out what she had accomplished.

"How did you deal with the Frankish count?"

"As you wished me to."

He walked back to the cardinal's table and turned to face her. Her amber
eyes were fixed on him. She must have been watching him cross the room.

"Does he want to see you again?" David demanded.

She shrugged. "He did when I left him. But by now he and Cardinal de
Verceuil will have talked together and may well realize my part in what
we did to them."

"Well," said Ugolini, rubbing his hands together. "There will be no more
need for you to pursue Count Simon, my dear, or for Messer Lorenzo to
play backgammon with the French cardinal. And no need for our
illustrious David to risk further verbal jousting with the Tartars."

Daoud felt a stab of exasperation. Just as he had feared, Ugolini wanted
to believe that with last night's triumph over the Tartars, their work
was done. Would he be able to persuade the cardinal to realize this was
only the beginning of a long struggle--one in which he, Ugolini, must
play the chief part?

"De Verceuil is a clever but sloppy player," Lorenzo interjected. "He
kept leaving blots less than six points away from me. But I managed to
lose eighty florins to him. That kept him interested. Once he decided I
was not a skillful player, he kept doubling the stakes and pressing me
to do the same when the choice was mine." He went over to Ugolini's work
table and poured himself a cup of kaviyeh.

Ugolini laughed. "He must now think his winnings eighty costly florins
indeed." He filled a cup from another pitcher, sprang up, and carried
the cup across the room to Sophia.

"You will enjoy this spiced milk more than the Muslim kaviyeh. It is my
favorite morning drink."

"You think it is all over, then, Cardinal?" Daoud growled. "I can go
away and leave you in peace--and richer?"

From the suddenly outraged face Ugolini turned toward him, Daoud thought
the cardinal might well be wishing the Filippeschi had finished him off.

"Was last night not a victory?" the cardinal asked in a choked voice.

"Do you know the difference between winning a battle and winning a war?"

"What more can the French do?" said Ugolini.

"We must talk about that," said Daoud. "Even though, in spite of this
good kaviyeh, my body screams for rest." He drained the cup, put it
down, and stretched his arms. With difficulty he brought his anger under
control. He must win Ugolini, not turn him into an enemy.

Ugolini had sat down in the high-backed chair behind his work table. His
slender fingers restlessly polished the dome of the skull with the
diagram painted on its cranium that lay before him. He looked as gloomy
as if he were contemplating the day when he himself would be reduced to
bones. Lorenzo quietly got up and poured himself another cup of kaviyeh.

Daoud turned to Sophia. "How do you think de Gobignon feels toward
you?" He hated to ask the question. He watched her face closely. What he
really wanted to know was how _she_ felt about de Gobignon.

Her eyes were heavy-lidded. Even with Hashishiyya-trained senses, he
could not guess what was behind that damnably unrevealing mask.

"I think I persuaded him that the cardinal's niece neither knows nor
cares anything about alliances and crusades. I--believe he could come to
love me."

Rage throbbed in his temples. What, in his sheltered existence, could
the young count have learned of love?

"Love you? Unlikely," Daoud challenged her.

He saw with quick regret that he had hurt her feelings. She recoiled as
if struck.

"Do you not think me worthy of a nobleman's love?"

Daoud crossed the room in three quick steps and stood over her. "Such
pampered creatures as he are not capable of love."

The mask was back. She shrugged.

"Love or lust, he is drawn to me. Do you mean to make some use of it?"

"Send him a note by one of the cardinal's servants asking him to meet
with you in a few days' time." Daoud turned and walked to the celestial
globe beside Ugolini's table and spun it absently as he studied Sophia.
"Let him pick the place, so he feels secure."

Again he had a glimpse through the mask. Her eyes widened in fear. She
thought he meant to kill de Gobignon. That angered him. Did she care so
much for the Frenchman, then, that his possible death made her lose her
composure?

To Daoud's surprise, Ugolini jumped from his chair and advanced on him,
shaking his finger and crying, "All of France will be down on us like an
avalanche if you harm that boy."

Daoud checked an impulse to laugh. Ugolini was such a comical figure in
the flapping white robe he had donned on returning to his mansion.

To Daoud, who had lived most of his life among men for whom death was as
common as fear was rare, the little man's tendency to panic seemed
contemptible. But, anew, he reminded himself that he needed Ugolini and
must treat him with respect.

"Please, Your Eminence," he said. "If I meant to have de Gobignon
killed, I would not involve Sophia. I want her to tell him what we are
supposedly doing. I hope to create conflict among the supporters of the
alliance."

"But Sophia takes a great risk meeting with him," said Ugolini. "What if
de Gobignon attempts to force the truth out of her?"

The thought of de Gobignon laying violent hands on Sophia angered Daoud,
and he spoke impulsively.

"_Then_ I will kill him."

"God help us!" Ugolini went back to his work table and sat down behind
it, his hands over his face.

At once Daoud regretted what he had said. But was there no way to
instill courage into this man?

"There is much work for you to do, Cardinal," he said. "You must not
falter now."

"Then let there be no more talk of killing," said Ugolini fiercely,
taking his hands from his face.

Daoud poured himself another cup of kaviyeh and stood looking down at
Ugolini.

"With so much at stake, surely you know I would not do anything rash."

"You need not think of _doing anything_," Ugolini said, a plea in his
eyes. "As long as the pope delays his decision about the Tartars, your
people are safe."

True enough, Daoud thought. Delay was a large part of his mission. But,
despite what Ugolini might think, it was not enough. For the safety of
Islam, an alliance between Tartars and Christians must be made
impossible.

"Your Eminence, will it please you to visit the cardinals who heard the
Tartars condemn themselves last night?" He tried not to make it sound
like an order.

"I see no need for that," said Ugolini.

Of course, Daoud thought. The little cardinal's mind was so full of fear
that he could not see at all.

"But I am hoping that you can organize a delegation of cardinals to go
to the pope and urge him to give up the idea of an alliance with the
Tartars. After all, you are the cardinal camerlengo. Your word has
weight."

Ugolini made a bridge of his interlaced fingers and rested his forehead
against them, as if his head ached.

"I have attacked the Tartars at the pope's council." He spoke down at
his table, barely loud enough for Daoud to hear him. "I have introduced
you into the highest circles in Orvieto. I have let you recruit
criminals and instigate riots while you live in my mansion. I hear you
plotting murder." He looked up suddenly, wild-eyed. "Basta! Enough!"

Despair made Daoud feel weak. He knew this sick feeling came partly from
being awake all night, poisoning himself with al-koahl, and nearly
getting himself murdered. He told himself it did not matter how he felt.
He was Sufi-trained, and could control his feelings. He was a Mameluke,
and must remain on the attack.

But he chose not to meet Ugolini's refusal directly.

"I also hope that you will be able to persuade Fra Tomasso d'Aquino to
write an open letter, to the pope or to the King of France, denouncing
the Tartars. Copies of the letter can be circulated to men of influence
throughout Christendom."

Ugolini shook his head, whiskers fluttering. "Fra Tomasso is neutral and
wants to stay that way."

_But if I can, I intend to push Fra Tomasso away from his neutrality._

"Surely he could not have failed to be moved by what he heard last
night," said Daoud. "I could see that he was."

"It will take more than one incident to move Fra Tomasso," said Ugolini.

_Now I have him!_ Daoud glanced at Lorenzo, who nodded encouragingly.

Daoud leaned forward, pressing both hands on the table. "There! You
yourself have said the very thing I have been trying to tell you. Last
night was just one incident. It was not enough to move Fra Tomasso _or_
the cardinals _or_ the pope. We must do more. You can accomplish
everything we want by persuasion and cunning and subterfuge. If you do,
I will never have to put my hand to my dagger, and you will have nothing
to fear." He shook his open hand at Ugolini. "Take the lead yourself."

Ugolini sat staring at the skull while Daoud held his breath.

The little cardinal pulled at his whiskers and looked up at Daoud. "What
must I do?"

Daoud let his breath out. Strength surged back into his body, and
despair fled before it.

"Tell me," he said, "if Fra Tomasso were to turn against the Tartars,
what do you think the Franks would do about it?"

Ugolini frowned. "I think that then the only way to reach him would be
through the Dominicans. If his superiors commanded him to change his
opinion on the Tartars, or to be silent, he would have to obey."

"And who, of the alliance's chief supporters, would speak to the
Dominican order for the French?" Daoud pressed.

"Count Simon lacks the authority," Ugolini said. "Friar Mathieu is
eloquent and knows the Tartars well, but I cannot imagine that the chief
Dominicans would pay any attention to an ordinary Franciscan priest."

"What of de Verceuil?" Daoud asked.

Ugolini nodded. "As a cardinal, de Verceuil can speak as an equal to the
head of the Dominican order."

"Good," said Daoud. "That is what I hoped you would tell me." He turned
away from Ugolini. He had accomplished as much as he could for the
moment. Exhaustion struck him like a mace on the back of his head.

"Lorenzo, when you meet that bravo Sordello, tell him that I have
decided he and the three with him can join us. I am going to bed."

"I have a bad feeling about him," said Lorenzo.

Daoud paused to consider this. It was precisely for such advice that he
needed Lorenzo.

He put his hand on Lorenzo's shoulder. "If he is spying on us, we need
to know who sought to place him in our camp. Let him feel he is secure
with us. Then start keeping a close watch on him. See to whom he leads
us."

Daoud turned from Lorenzo to look at Sophia. She was looking at him
intently, but he could not tell what she was thinking or feeling. Tired
as he was, he wished she would come to bed with him. If only she were
willing. If only he could invite her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rachel lay with her face to the wall, crying silently. She wanted not to
weep because she was still afraid of offending the Tartar, even though
it was all over.

She realized that her gown was still above her waist, and she lifted her
hips to pull it down. But what was the point of modesty for her anymore?
Especially with this man, who had taken her virginity.

She heard the rustling of silk as he dressed behind her. He had not
taken all of his clothes off, just enough to bare his member. It had
been smaller than she imagined. Once, in a stable in Perugia, a boy had
shown himself to her and tried to rape her, but she had run away. That
stableboy's thing had been much bigger.

John said something to her, but she understood only his "Reicho." He was
probably telling her to stop crying.

Even though he had been kindly before getting into the bed with her, she
had expected that he would become like the wild, savage Tartars she had
heard about. His weight on top of her, even though he was a small man,
had frightened her, but he had entered her slowly, and stopped and
waited when she cried out. In the end it had been she, wanting in
desperation to get it over with, who finished the piercing by pressing
upward with her hips. His few quick thrusts and his shout of pleasure--a
drawn-out horseman's yell--followed in a moment. And that was all there
was to it.

She sobbed aloud suddenly and bit into the pillow. The thought that her
whole future had been decided by a moment that had not lasted even as
long as it takes to light a candle was too much to bear.

_Angelo would say I am not a good woman anymore._

The Tartar spoke again, and tapped her on the shoulder. His voice was
soft and kind. Quieting her sobs with one last, deep, shuddering sigh,
she rolled over to look at him. More smiles and nods from him. Yes, he
wanted to cheer her up. She sensed that he knew something about women,
and what he knew had come not just from rapes committed on the
battlefield. He must have a wife in the faraway land he came from, and
he must, long ago, have done to that wife what he had just done to
Rachel. More than one wife, she reminded herself, and more than one
deflowering, because according to Tilia, the Tartars took several wives,
as the Muslims did. He was probably a grandfather many times over back
in that land.

He stood beside the bed, fully dressed. He had even tucked back and
knotted his hair behind his head. His grin broadened when she looked at
him. Rachel had not seen a Jewish or a Christian man as old as John with
such good teeth.

He untied a small bag from his belt. He held it out to her. Should she
take it? Of course she should. Was not getting paid the whole point of
what she had just gone through? Was not money what her body was to be
traded for from now on?

"Thank you, Messer John," she said, and reached out her hand. But he
came closer and rubbed the soft leather of the bag against her cheeks,
to dry her tears. She understood what he was trying to tell her--that
this money should pay her for her pain. Being a pagan, he could not
understand the greater pain of her soul because she had sinned, because
she had shamed her family and dishonored herself forever.

_But I have no family--none living. That is why I am here._

John put the bag into her hand and closed her fingers over it, then
pushed her hand against her chest. The bag was very heavy for its small
size. He frowned, put his finger to his lips, and waved his hand. He was
trying to tell her, she thought, that this was a special present for
her, that she was not to tell Madama Tilia about it. He did not know
that Tilia had been watching everything they had done together.

He pressed the callused palm of his hand against her cheek and said
something, then turned and quickly walked out of the room.

And Rachel was alone with her desolation. She wanted to sleep. There
were no windows in this room, but it must have been morning by now. She
realized that she did not feel sleepy, although she was tired. She felt
a dull ache down inside herself, where he had broken the seal of her
virginity. The bag of money lay heavy in her lap. Perhaps if she drank
some wine it would help her sleep.

She heard men's voices, loud and rough, in other parts of the house. A
man laughed, and then a woman laughed. How many men had come with the
Tartar? She felt too tired even to crawl to the edge of the bed and pour
herself the wine. She picked up the money and pushed it under a pillow.
Perhaps Tilia had not seen him give it to her. She had done this for
money, and she ought to get as much as she could for it.

The door swung open and Tilia was standing there, her wide mouth
stretched in a broad smile, and her hands rose in benediction. "You were
just what he wanted. He seemed most pleased."

Rachel tried to smile. "It was not as bad as I thought it would be."

Tilia shrugged. "Men who are terrible in warfare are sometimes kinder in
bed. I thought his zipolo rather small, did you not? That was lucky for
you."

Rachel felt her face grow hot. "I have seen only one other--when it was
hard like that. And it _was_ bigger."

"Well," said Tilia, "small as this Tartar was, he was able to mount you
twice, and that is remarkable for a white-haired man who has been up
drinking all night." Then she laughed. "Ah, but you should have seen the
French cardinal who came here with this Tartar. He asked for three
women, and he swived each one of them mightily. Those French! I care not
for their high-horse airs, but they are a lusty lot."

Rachel felt herself smiling. Was it so easy to begin to think like a
whore and laugh at whores' jokes?

"Well," said Tilia, "we must get you washed out at once. You do not want
to be giving birth to a little Tartar in your first year as a woman, do
you?" She went to a cabinet and drew out a grayish-white bladder with a
tube coiled beside it.

"Peculiar-looking if you have never seen one before," said Tilia. "But
there is nothing to worry about. It does not hurt. We just fill the
pig's stomach with warm water and squeeze it, and the water goes through
the vellum tube and up inside you. The women of Rome used them centuries
ago when they did not want to get pregnant. I suppose that is why the
barbarians finally overran Italy."

Rachel looked at the thing Tilia laid on the bed beside her and felt
sick.

"Oh, by the way," said Tilia as she went back to the cabinet and got out
a basin and a pitcher, "I will let you keep the purse he gave you. He
looked so happy when he left here, I think you deserve it."

The Tartar could come and go as he pleased, thought Rachel, but she must
stay. Even now, with over five hundred florins, more money than she had
ever had in her life, she was alone. She knew how to travel; she had
traveled for two years with Angelo. But she also knew the terrors and
dangers of the road, dangers that ultimately had killed Angelo.

The best she could hope for was to endure this life for a year or two,
get what she could from it, let it make her rich. When she did leave,
she would have enough money to hire guards to accompany her. She would
make up an elaborate story about her past. She would go where no one
knew her, Sicily perhaps, and begin a new life as a wealthy woman,
venturing into banking or trading for herself.

The hope of a wealthy new life--that was the raft that would bear her up
when she felt she must drown in sorrow.




XXVII


Daoud's tired eyes burned. He shut them, as he entered his bedchamber,
against the bright light coming through the white window glass. But,
tired as he was, sleep did not come. Perhaps he was too tired.

He had missed the proper time for morning prayer, but he poured water
into a basin and washed his hands and face, then turned toward the risen
sun and humbly addressed God, first bowing, then kneeling, then striking
his forehead on the carpet.

_When I pray, I am at home no matter where I am._

After praying, he pushed open the iron casement with its diamond-shaped
glass panels to let in air and then pulled the green velvet curtains
across the window to shut out light.

He moved now in a cool dimness, as if underwater. He must rest, to be
strong for the next battle.

Crossing the room to his sleeping mattress, which lay on the floor
Egyptian-fashion, he stripped off his sweat-soaked tunic and threw it
down. He unbuckled his belt and laid it carefully on the mattress. Then
he kicked off his boots and dropped his hose and his loincloth. He
splashed water over his body and felt cleaner and cooler.

There was another way to be home. He had been waiting for the first time
he could feel he had triumphed. He knew all too well what that way could
do to a man in the aftermath of defeat--sharpen his misery till he could
ease the pain only by destroying himself.

But last night he had unmasked the Tartars before all the great ones of
Orvieto, and he had survived a street encounter with bravos who intended
to kill him. And so this morning he could allow himself this.

He had brought a cup of kaviyeh from Ugolini's room. He set it on the
black marble table beside his sleeping mattress. Then from his traveling
chest he took the dark brown leather pack that had accompanied him here
from Lucera. He felt for the small packet and drew it out. Unwrapping
the oily parchment, he looked at the small black cake, a square about
half the length of his finger on a side. He drew his dagger out of its
sheath--the dagger that would have been poor protection for him earlier
if he had had to fight those Filippeschi men. Carefully he shaved
peelings from the cake to the polished black marble. With the sharp edge
of the dagger he chopped at the peelings until he had a coarse powder.
He held the cup of cooling black liquid below the edge of the table and
scraped the powder into it. He stirred the kaviyeh with the dagger's
point.

Holding the cup up before him as if he were offering a toast, he spoke
the Hashishiyya invocation: "In the name of the Voice comes Brightness."

He put the cup to his lips and sipped it slowly. The lukewarm kaviyeh
masked the other taste, but he knew it would begin to work as soon as it
reached his stomach. He peered into the bottom of the cup to make sure
he had missed no precious grains, then set it down.

_The magic horse that flies to paradise_, so the Hashishiyya called it.

From Sheikh Saadi he had learned how to resist the power of drugs. From
Imam Fayum, the Old Man of the Mountain, he learned how to use them,
when he chose.

Naked, Daoud lay back on his mattress with a sigh that sounded like a
roar in his ears. If the Filippeschi came upon him to kill him now, he
would greet them with a smile and open arms. Lying on his back, his head
resting on a feather-filled cushion, he let his senses expand to fill
the world around him. His eyes traced the intricate red-on-red floral
pattern of a damask wall hanging. The humming of a large black fly that
had blundered in through the open casement and the closed curtains
resounded in his ears like a dervish chorus chanting themselves into an
ecstasy.

Odors swept in through the open window--clean mountain air with the
scent of pines in it, but from nearby the swampy foul reek of every kind
of filth produced by thousands of human beings living too close to one
another. It had rained last night, but not enough to clean the streets,
and the scavenging pigs--Daoud's heightened senses could hear and smell
them, too--could not keep up with the garbage and sewage produced by the
overcrowded people of Orvieto.

But he need not remain in Orvieto. He raised his head and lifted the
chain that held the silver locket about his neck. Turning the little
screw that fastened the lid of the locket, he let it fall open. It
covered most of the palm of his right hand. Holding the crystal disk
backed by silver close to his eyes, he saw his face reflected back at
him from the convex surface. His image was broken up by a pattern etched
into the transparency, a five-part webwork of interlocking angles and
boxes, spirals and concentric circles. The pattern formed a maze too
complex for the eye to grasp. He believed that the man who used a
stylus, doubtless diamond-pointed, to cut the design into the crystal
must have gone blind in the course of his work. No mosque bore a more
intricate--or more beautiful--pattern on its walls.

His eyes, as they always did when he looked into the locket, tried to
follow the pattern and became lost in it. As the drug extended its
empire within him, it seemed that he could actually see his eyes,
coalesced into a single eye, staring back at him from the net of lines
and whorls that entrapped it.

_The captive eye means that the locket now controls what I see._

He saw the face of Sophia Karaiannides. Her dark lips, luscious as red
grapes, were parted slightly, showing even, white teeth. Her
thick-lashed eyelids were half lowered over burning eyes. Her hair hung
unbound in brunette waves on either side of her face. She had splashed
water on her face, and the droplets gleamed on her cheeks and brow like
jewels.

Daoud had no doubt that he was seeing her exactly as she was at this
moment, somewhere else in the cardinal's mansion. The locket had that
property.

_But I do not want to see Sophia. I want Blossoming Reed._

Then Sophia spoke to him. "Oh, David, why will you not come to my bed?"

Her voice was rich as velvet. His muscles tensed with a sudden hunger, a
long-felt need that Francesca, the woman he bedded with now and then at
Tilia Caballo's, could never satisfy. Sophia, he realized, could give
him what he wanted, what he missed so terribly since leaving home.

_No! Let me see Blossoming Reed._

He shut his eyes, and Sophia was still looking at him. The locket and
the drug together could show a man things he did not want to see, make
him feel things he did not want to feel. Things that were inside him
that he did not want to know.

_The knowledge you run from is the most precious of all_, Saadi had
said.

_I know I want Sophia. I do not hide that from myself. But I cannot have
her. Let me therefore see my wife, Blossoming Reed, she who gave me this
locket._

Sophia's image faded now, and he saw again the crystal and its pattern
that caught his soul like a fish in its toils. Gradually the pattern
became the face of Blossoming Reed. Sparks flashed from her slanting
eyes, painted with black rings of kohl. Her wide mouth was a downturned
crescent of scorn. The nostrils of her hawklike nose flared proudly.
There was a message in her face. What did she know, and what was she
trying to tell him?

Blossoming Reed, daughter of Baibars and a Canaanite wife Baibars had
stolen from the crusader stronghold in Sidon. It was rumored that
Blossoming Reed's mother practiced a kind of sorcery that was ancient
even when the Hebrews were in bondage in Egypt. But would Baibars, the
mightiest defender of the faith since Saladin, allow devil-worship in
his own house? Daoud could not believe it.

And yet, what was this locket if not the work of some evil magician? He
would not have touched the thing, much less worn it, had it not come
from Blossoming Reed, whom he loved.

Blossoming Reed, betrothed to him at twelve, married to him at fourteen,
whose breasts were like oranges and whose nails flayed his back in their
lovemaking. Blossoming Reed, Baibars's gift of honor to him, seal and
symbol of eternal friendship between Baibars al-Bunduqdari and Daoud ibn
Abdallah.

Blossoming Reed, who now spoke to him in anger out of the magic of
hashish and the locket.

_Go back to the Well, Daoud!_

Back to the Well?

To the Well of Goliath?

He saw again the plain of tamarisk, thorn bush, and grass, and the long
black line of charging Tartars. Eagerly Daoud leaned forward in the
saddle. Tightly he gripped his bow.

_Now, devils, now you will pay for Baghdad!_

He had relived that day, the greatest battle of his life, hundreds of
times in thoughtful moments, in dreams, in hashish visions. What he saw
now were moments that seemed to leap at him out of the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Screaming a war cry and brandishing a scimitar, a Tartar galloped at
him. They were in open ground. Daoud circled away, sheathing his saif
and pulling his bow from its case. The Tartar chased him, guiding his
horse with his knees and firing arrow after arrow at Daoud. But he was
in too much of a hurry. He was not aiming carefully, and all the arrows
whistled over Daoud's head.

The muscles of the black Yemenite stallion bunched and stretched under
Daoud as its hooves thundered over the plain. He stood in the saddle. He
turned and took aim along the shaft of his arrow at the center of the
Tartar's chest. The arrow went low, to Daoud's annoyance, and struck the
Tartar in the side of the stomach. But he must have been wearing light
leather armor, for the arrow with its steel point went deep into him.
The Tartar gave a short cry and dropped his bow, then fell, like a
stone, from the saddle into the sand.

Daoud wheeled his Yemenite about, then jerked the horse to a stop and
jumped from the saddle with his saif out. The Tartar had somehow risen
to all fours, but was vomiting blood into the sand. Daoud kicked him
with his red-booted foot and rolled him over on his back.

Holding his saif high, he looked into the face of Nicetas, contorted
with pain and fear.

"Oh, God!" he whispered. "Oh, God, no!"

He stood paralyzed. Their eyes met.

Nicetas said, "You have to."

"God be merciful to me," Daoud said, and brought the saif down.




XXVIII


Lorenzo's eyes ached as he stared through a peephole in the doorway of a
storeroom into the common room of the inn called the Angel. Alternating
his left and right eye at intervals, he stared at a bench by the
opposite wall, where a hooded figure sat alone, holding a cup of wine in
his lap. As Lorenzo had instructed him, the tavern keeper had put a
lighted candle in a sconce near where Sordello was sitting, so that
Lorenzo could watch his quarry.

The candle beside Sordello was one of only four in the common room--just
light enough for the innkeeper to be certain he was paid in honest coin
while making it hard for his patrons to see the color of his wine. It
was early evening, and there were only about six men and women in the
room. All of them except Sordello sat on benches at the one long table
near the wine barrel. Sordello, leaning against the rough-hewn wooden
wall, had to set his cup beside him.

The mercenary's square hand lifted the painted pottery cup into the
shadow of his hood. Lorenzo knew Sordello was under the tightly drawn
hood only because he had followed him diligently through the tangle of
Orvieto's streets from the house where a dozen of the brigosi Lorenzo
had recruited were quartered.

Daoud's secret army was growing. The evening after the contessa's
reception Lorenzo had sealed a bargain with Marco di Filippeschi, who
