Monstrosity by the original owner, a newly-rich munitions manufacturer.

The structure itself loomed up before me in a few seconds, a rambling
affair with square-shouldered balconies and a great deal of wrought-iron
work, after the most flamboyant Spanish pattern. It was ablaze with
light. Apparently every bulb in the place was burning.

Just a few yards beyond the surf boomed hollowly on the smooth, shady
shore, littered now, I knew, by the pitiful spoils of the storm.

As I clamped on my brakes, a swift shadow passed two of the lower
windows. Before I could leap from the car, the broad front door, with
its rounded top and circular, grilled window, was flung wide, and Mercer
came running to meet me.

He was wearing a bathrobe, hastily flung on over a damp bathing suit,
his bare legs terminating in a pair of disreputable slippers.

"Fine, Taylor!" he greeted me. "I suppose you're wondering what it's all
about. I don't blame you. But come in, come in! Just wait till you see
her!"

"Her?" I asked, startled. "You're not in love, by any chance, and
bringing me down here like this merely to back up your own opinion of
them eyes and them lips, Mercer?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He laughed excitedly.

"You'll see, you'll see! No, I'm not in love. And I want you to help,
and not admire. There are only Carson and myself here, you know, and the
job's too big for the two of us." He hurried me across the broad
concrete porch and into the house. "Throw the cap anywhere and come
on!"

Too much amazed to comment further, I followed my friend. This was a
Warren Mercer I did not know. Usually his clean-cut, olive-tinted face
was a polite mask that seldom showed even the slightest trace of
emotion. His eyes, dark and large, smiled easily, and shone with
interest, but his almost beautiful mouth, beneath the long slim
mustache, always closely cropped, seldom smiled with his eyes.

But it was his present excited speech that amazed me most. Mercer,
during all the years I had known him, had never been moved before to
such tempestuous outbursts of enthusiasm. It was his habit to speak
slowly and thoughtfully, in his low, musical voice; even in the midst of
our hottest arguments, and we had had many of them, his voice had never
lost its calm, unhurried gentleness.

To my surprise, instead of leading the way to the really comfortable,
although rather gaudy living room, Mercer turned to the left, towards
what had been the billiard room, and was now his laboratory.

The laboratory, brilliantly illuminated, was littered, as usual, with
apparatus of every description. Along one wall were the retorts, scales,
racks, hoods and elaborate set-ups, like the articulated glass and
rubber bones of some weird prehistoric monster, that demonstrated
Mercer's taste for this branch of science. On the other side of the room
a corresponding workbench was littered with a tangle of coils,
transformers, meters, tools and instruments, and at the end of the
room, behind high black control panels, with gleaming bus-bars and
staring, gaping meters, a pair of generators hummed softly. The other
end of the room was nearly all glass, and opened onto the patio and the
swimming pool.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mercer paused a moment, with his hand on the knob of the door, a strange
light in his dark eyes.

"Now you'll see why I called you here," he said tensely. "You can judge
for yourself whether the trip was worth while. Here she is!"

With a gesture he flung open the door, and I stared, following his
glance, down at the great tiled swimming pool.

It is difficult for me to describe the scene. The patio was not large,
but it was beautifully done. Flowers and shrubs, even a few small palms,
grew in profusion in the enclosure, while above, through the movable
glass roof--made in sections to disappear in fine weather--was the empty
blackness of the sky.

None of the lights provided for the illumination of the covered patio
was turned on, but all the windows surrounding the patio were aglow, and
I could see the pool quite clearly.

The pool--and its occupant.

       *       *       *       *       *

We were standing at one side of the pool, near the center. Directly
opposite us, seated on the bottom of the pool, was a human figure, nude
save for a great mass of tawny hair that fell about her like a silken
mantle. The strangely graceful figure of a girl, one leg stretched out
straight before her, the other drawn up and clasped by the interlocked
fingers of her hands. Even in the soft light I could see her perfectly,
through the clear water, her pale body outlined sharply against the jade
green tiles.

I tore myself away from the staring, curious eyes of the figure.

"In God's name, Mercer, what is it? Porcelain?" I asked hoarsely. The
thing had an indescribably eery effect.

He laughed wildly.

"Porcelain? Watch ... _look_!"

My eyes followed his pointing finger. The figure was moving. Gracefully
it arose to its full height. The great cloud of corn-colored hair
floated down about it, falling below the knees. Slowly, with a grace of
movement comparable only with the slow soaring of a gull, she came
toward me, walking on the bottom of the pool through the clear water as
though she floated in air.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fascinated, I watched her. Her eyes, startlingly large and dark in the
strangely white face, were fixed on mine. There was nothing sinister in
the gaze, yet I felt my body shaking as though in the grip of a terrible
fear. I tried to look away, and found myself unable to move. I felt
Mercer's tense, sudden grip upon my arm, but I did not, could not, look
at him.

"She--she's smiling!" I heard him exclaim. He laughed, an excited,
high-pitched laugh that irritated me in some subtle way.

She was smiling, and looking up into my eyes. She was very close now,
within a few feet of us. She came still closer, until she was at my very
feet as I stood on the raised ledge that ran around the edge of the
pool, her head thrown back, staring straight up at me through the
water.

I could see her teeth, very white between her coral-pink lips, and her
bosom rising and falling beneath the veil of pale gold hair. She was
breathing _water_!

Mercer literally jerked me away from the edge of the pool.

"What do you think of her, Taylor?" he asked, his dark eyes dancing with
excitement.

"Tell me about it," I said, shaking my head dazedly. "She is not
human?"

"I don't know. I think so. As human as you or I. I'll tell you all I
know, and then you can judge for yourself. I think we'll know in a few
minutes, if my plans work out. But first slip on a bathing suit."

I didn't argue the matter. I let Mercer lead me away without a word. And
while I was changing, he told me all he knew of the strange creature in
the pool.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Late this afternoon I decided to go for a little walk along the beach,"
Mercer began. "I had been working like the devil since early in the
morning, running some tests on what you call my thought-telegraph. I
felt the need of some fresh sea air.

"I walked along briskly for perhaps five minutes, keeping just out of
reach of the rollers and the spray. The shore was littered with all
sorts of flotsam and jetsam washed up by the big storm, and I was just
thinking that I would have to have a man with a truck come and clean up
the shore in front of the place, when, in a little sandy pool, I
saw--_her_.

       *       *       *       *       *

"She was laying face down in the water, motionless, her head towards the
sea, one arm stretched out before her, and her long hair wrapped around
her like a half-transparent cloak.

"I ran up and lifted her from the water. Her body was cold, and deathly
white, although her lips were faintly pink, and her heart was beating,
faintly but steadily.

"Like most people in an emergency. I forgot all I ever knew about first
aid. All I could think of was to give her a drink, and of course I
didn't have a flask on my person. So I picked her up in my arms and
brought her to the house as quickly as I could. She seemed to be
reviving, for she was struggling and gasping when I got here with her.

"I placed her on the bed in the guest room and poured her a stiff drink
of Scotch--half a tumblerful, I believe. Lifting up her head, I placed
the glass to her lips. She looked up me, blinking, and took the liquor
in a single draught. She did not seem to drink it, but sucked it out of
the glass in a single amazing gulp--that's the only word for it. The
next instant she was off the bed, her face a perfect mask of hate and
agony.

"She came at me, hands clutching and clawing, making odd murmuring or
mewing sounds in her throat. It was then that I noticed for the first
time that her hands were webbed!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Webbed?" I asked, startled.

"Webbed," nodded Mercer solemnly. "As are her feet. But listen, Taylor.
I was amazed, and not a little rattled when she came for me. I ran
through the French windows out into the patio. For a moment she ran
after me, rather awkwardly and heavily, but swiftly, nevertheless. Then
she saw the pool.

"Apparently forgetting that I existed, she leaped into the water, and as
I approached a moment later I could see her breathing deeply and
gratefully, a smile of relief upon her features, as she lay upon the
bottom of the pool. Breathing, Taylor, on the bottom of the pool! Under
eight feet of water!"

"And then what, Mercer?" I reminded him, as he paused, apparently lost
in thought.

"I tried to find out more about her. I put on my bathing suit and dived
into the pool. Well, she came at me like a shark, quick as a flash, her
teeth showing, her hands tearing like claws through the water. I turned,
but not quickly enough to entirely escape. See?" Mercer threw back the
dressing robe, and I saw a ragged tear in his bathing suit on his left
side, near the waist. Through the rent three deep, jagged scratches were
clearly visible.

       *       *       *       *       *

"She managed to claw me, just once," Mercer resumed, wrapping the robe
about him again. "Then I got out and called on Carson for help. I put
him into a bathing suit, and we both endeavored to corner her. Carson
got two bad scratches, and one rather serious bite that I have bandaged.
I have a number of lacerations, but I didn't fare so badly as Carson
because I am faster in the water than he is.

"The harder we tried, the more determined I became. She would sit there,
calm and placid, until one of us entered the water. Then she became a
veritable fury. It was maddening.

"At last I thought of you. I phoned, and here we are!"

"But, Mercer, it's a nightmare!" I protested. We moved out of the room.
"Nothing human can live under water and breathe water, as she does!"

Mercer paused a moment, staring at me oddly.

"The human race," he said gravely, "came up out of sea. The human race
as we know it. Some may have gone back." He turned and walked away
again, and I hurried after him.

"What do you mean. Mercer? 'Some may have gone back?' I don't get it."

Mercer shook his head, but made no other reply until we stood again on
the edge of the pool.

The girl was standing where we had left her, and as she looked up into
my face, she smiled again, and made a quick gesture with one hand. It
seemed to me that she invited me to join her.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I believe she likes you, Taylor," said Mercer thoughtfully. "You're
light, light skin, light hair. Carson and I are both very dark, almost
swarthy. And in that white bathing suit--yes, I believe she's taken a
fancy to you!"

Mercer's eyes were dancing.

"If she has," he went on, "it'll make our work very easy."

"What work?" I asked suspiciously. Mercer, always an indefatigable
experimenter, was never above using his friends in the benefit of
science. And some of his experiments in the past had been rather trying,
not to say exciting.

"I think I have what you call my thought-telegraph perfected,
experimentally," he explained rapidly. "I fell asleep working on it at
three o'clock, or thereabouts, this morning, and some tests with Carson
seem to indicate that it is a success. I should have called you
to-morrow, for further test. Nearly five years of damned hard work to a
successful conclusion, Taylor, and then this mermaid comes along and
makes my experiment appear about as important as one of those breakers
rolling in out there!"

"And what do you plan to do now?" I asked eagerly, glancing down at the
beautiful pale face that glimmered up at me through the clear water of
the pool.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Why, try it on her!" exclaimed Mercer with mounting enthusiasm. "Don't
you see, Taylor? If it will work on her, and we can direct her thoughts,
we can find out her history, the history of her people! We'll add a page
to scientific history--a whole big chapter!--that will make us famous.
Man this is so big it's swept me off my feet! Look!" And he held out a
thin, aristocratic brown hand before my eyes, a hand that shook with
nervous excitement.

"I don't blame you," I said quickly. "I'm no savant, and still I see
what an amazing thing this is. Let's get busy. What can I do?"

Mercer reached around the door into the laboratory and pressed a
button.

"For Carson," he explained. "We'll need his help. In the meantime, we'll
look over the set-up. The apparatus is strewn all over the place."

He had not exaggerated. The set-up consisted of a whole bank of tubes,
each one in its own shielding copper box. On a much-drilled horizontal
panel, propped up on insulators, were half a score of delicate meters of
one kind and another, with thin black fingers that pulsed and trembled.
Behind the panel was a tall cylinder wound with shining copper wire, and
beside it another panel, upright, fairly bristling with knobs, contact
points, potentiometers, rheostats and switches. On the end of the table
nearest the door was still another panel, the smallest of the lot,
bearing only a series of jacks along one side, and in the center a
switch with four contact points. A heavy, snaky cable led from this
panel to the maze of apparatus further on.

       *       *       *       *       *

"This is the control panel," explained Mercer. "The whole affair, you
understand, is in laboratory form. Nothing assembled. Put the different
antennae plug into these jacks. Like this."

He picked up a weird, hastily built contrivance composed of two
semi-circular pieces of spring brass, crossed at right angles. On all
four ends were bright silvery electrodes, three of them circular in
shape, one of them elongated and slightly curved. With a quick, nervous
gesture, Mercer fitted the thing to his head, so that the elongated
electrode pressed against the back of his neck, extending a few inches
down his spine. The other three circular electrodes rested on his
forehead and either side of his head. From the center of the contrivance
ran a heavy insulated cord, some ten feet in length, ending in a simple
switchboard plug, which Mercer fitted into the uppermost of the three
jacks.

"Now," he directed, "you put on this one"--he adjusted a second
contrivance upon my head, smiling as I shrank from the contact of the
cold metal on my skin--"and think!"

He moved the switch from the position marked "Off" to the second contact
