self-fertilization, pollen is shed on visitors, which remove it
from a newly opened flower before the stigmas become receptive to
any; but in any case these are elevated in maturity above the
anthers, well out of harm's way.

Early in spring the large lower leaves are calculated to hold the
drip from the trees overhead, hence the plant's scientific and
popular names.


JIMSONWEED; JAMESTOWN WEED; THORN APPLE; STRAMONIUM; DEVIL'S
TRUMPET
  (Datura stramonium)  Potato family

Flowers - Showy, large, about 4 in. high, solitary, erect,
growing from the forks of branches. Calyx tubular, nearly half as
long as the corolla, 5-toothed, prismatic; corolla funnel-form,
deep-throated, the spreading limb 2 in. across or less, plaited,
5-pointed; stamens 5; 1 pistil. Stem: Stout, branching, smooth, 1
to 5 ft. high. Leaves: Alternate, large, rather thin, petioled,
egg-shaped in outline, the edges irregularly wavy-toothed or
angled, rank-scented. Fruit: A densely prickly, egg-shaped
capsule, the lower prickles smallest. The seeds and stems contain
a powerful narcotic poison.
Preferred Habitat - Light soil, fields, waste land near
dwellings, rubbish heaps.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to the Gulf of Mexico, westward beyond
the Mississippi.

When we consider that there are over five million Gypsies
wandering about the globe, and that the narcotic seeds of the
thorn apple, which apparently heal, as well as poison, have been
a favorite medicine of theirs for ages, we can understand at
least one means of the weed reaching these shores from tropical
Asia. (Hindoo, dhatura). Our Indians, who call it "white man's
plant," associate it with the Jamestown settlement - a plausible
connection, for Raleigh's colonists would have been likely to
carry with them to the New World the seeds of an herb yielding an
alkaloid more esteemed in the England of their day than the
alkaloid of opium known as morphine. Daturina, the narcotic, and
another product, known in medicine as stramonium, smoked by
asthmatics, are by no means despised by up-to-date practitioners.
Were it not for the rank odor of its leaves, the vigorous weed,
coarse as it is, would be welcome in men's gardens. Indeed, many
of its similar relatives adorn them. The fragrant petunia and
tobacco plants of the flower beds, the potato, tomato, and
egg-plant in the kitchen garden, call it cousin.

Late in the afternoon the plaited corolla of this long
trumpet-shaped flower expands to welcome the sphinx moths. So
deep a tube implies their tongues; not that these are the
benefactors to which the blossom originally adapted itself - they
were doubtless left behind in Asia - but apparently our moths
make excellent substitutes, for there is no abatement of the
weed's vigor here, as there surely would be did it habitually
fertilize itself. Any time after four o'clock in the afternoon,
according to the light, the sphinx moth, a creature of the
gloaming, begins its rounds, to be mistaken for a hummingbird
seven times out of ten. Hovering about its chosen white or yellow
flowers, that open for it at the approach of twilight, it remains
poised above one a second, as if motionless - although the faint
hum of its wings, while sucking, indicates that no magic suspends
it - then darts swift as thought to another deep tube to feast
again, of course transferring pollen as it goes. But what if the
Jamestown weed miscalculate the hour of her lover's call and open
too soon? Mischievous bees, quick to seize so golden an
opportunity, squeeze into the flower when it begins to unfold
(flies and beetles following them), to steal pollen, which will
sometimes be entirely removed before the moth's arrival.

The THORN-APPLE [now PURPLE THORN-APPLE, considered a variant of
JIMSONWEED]; PURPLE STRAMONIUM (D. tatula), a similar species,
usually with darker leaves, and pale lavender or violet flowers,
or with its long, slender tube white, has become at home in so
many fields and waste lands east of Minnesota and Texas that no
one thinks of it as belonging to tropical America.

Only sphinx moths can reach its deep well of nectar, from which
bees are literally barred out by an inward turn of the stamens
toward the center of the tube. Caterpillars of our commonest
member of the sphinx tribe conceal themselves on the tomato vine
by a mimicry of its color so faultless that a bright eye only may
detect their presence. In the South the caterpillar of another of
these moths (Sphinx Carolina) does fearful havoc under its
appropriate alias of "tobacco worm."


CULVER'S-ROOT; CULVER'S PHYSIC
(Leptandra Virginica; Veronica Virginica of Gray)  Figwort family

Flowers - Small, white or rarely bluish, crowded in dense
spike-like racemes 3 to 9 in. long, usually several spikes at top
of stem or from upper axils. Calyx 4-parted, very small; corolla
tubular, 4-lobed; 2 stamens protruding; pistil. Stem: Straight,
erect, usually unbranched, 2 to 7 ft. tall. Leaves: Whorled, from
3 to 9 in a cluster, lance-shaped or oblong, and long-tapering,
sharply saw-edged.
Preferred Habitat - Rich, moist woods, thickets, meadows.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Alabama, west to Nebraska.

Slender, erect white wands make conspicuous advertisements in
shady retreats at midsummer, when insect life is at its height
and floral competition for insect favors at its fiercest. Next of
kin to the tiny blue speedwell, these minute, pallid blossoms
could have little hope of winning wooers were they not living
examples of the adage, "In union there is strength.' Great
numbers crowded together on a single spike, and several spikes in
a cluster that towers above the woodland undergrowth, cannot well
be overlooked by the dullest insects, especially as nectar
rewards the search of those having midlength or long tongues.
Simply by crawling over the spikes, of which the terminal one
usually matures first, they fertilize the little flowers. The
pollen thrust far out of each tube in the early stage of bloom,
has usually all been brushed off on the underside of bees, wasps,
butterflies, flies, and beetles before the stigma matures;
nevertheless, when it becomes susceptible, the anthers spread
apart to keep out of its way lest any leftover pollen should
touch it.

"The leaves of the herbage at our feet," says Ruskin, "take all
kinds of strange shapes, as if to invite us to examine them.
Star-shaped. heart-shaped, spear-shaped, arrow-shaped, fretted,
fringed, cleft, furrowed, serrated, in whorls, in tufts, in
wreaths, in spires, endlessly expressive, deceptive, fantastic,
never the same from footstalks to blossom, they seem perpetually
to tempt our watchfulness, and take delight in outstripping our
wonder." Doubtless light is the factor with the greatest effect
in determining the position of the leaves on the stem, if not
their shape. After plenty of light has been secured, any aid they
may render the flowers in increasing their attractiveness is
gladly rendered. Who shall deny that the brilliant foliage of the
sumacs, the dogwood, and the pokeweed in autumn does not greatly
help them in attracting the attention of migrating birds to their
fruit, whose seeds they wish distributed? Or that the clustered
leaves of the dwarf cornel and Culver's-root, among others, do
not set off to great advantage their white flowers which, when
seen by an insect flying overhead, are made doubly conspicuous by
the leafy background formed by the whorl?


BUTTONBUSH; HONEY-BALLS; GLOBE-FLOWER; BUTTON-BALL SHRUB;
RIVER-BUSH
  (Cephalanthus occidentalis)  Madder family

Flowers - Fragrant, white, small, tubular, hairy within,
4-parted, the long, yellow-tipped style far protruding; the
florets clustered on a fleshy receptacle, in round heads (about 1
in. across), elevated on long peduncles from leaf-axils or ends
of branches. Stem: A shrub 3 to 12 ft. high. Leaves: Opposite or
in small whorls, petioled, oval, tapering at the tip, entire.
Preferred Habitat - Beside streams and ponds; swamps, low ground.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - New Brunswick to Florida and Cuba, westward to
Arizona and California.

Delicious fragrance, faintly suggesting jasmine, leads one over
marshy ground to where the buttonbush displays dense,
creamy-white globes of bloom, heads that Miss Lounsberry aptly
likens to "little cushions full of pins." Not far away the sweet
breath of the white-spiked clethra comes at the same season, and
one cannot but wonder why these two bushes, which are so
beautiful when most garden shrubbery is out of flower, should be
left to waste their sweetness, if not on desert air exactly, on
air that blows far from the homes of men. Partially shaded and
sheltered positions near a house, if possible, suit these water
lovers admirably. Cultivation only increases their charms. We
have not so many fragrant wild flowers that any can be neglected.
John Burroughs, who included the blossoms of several trees in his
list of fragrant ones, found only thirty-odd species in New
England and New York.

Examine a well-developed ball of bloom on the button-bush under a
magnifying glass to appreciate its perfection of detail. After
counting two hundred and fifty minute florets, tightly clustered,
one's tired eyes give out. A honey-ball, with a well of nectar in
each of these narrow tubes, invites hosts of insects to its
hospitable feast; but only visitors long and slender of tongue
can drain the last drop, therefore the vicinity of this bush is
an excellent place for a butterfly collector to carry his net.
Butterflies are by far the most abundant visitors; honey-bees
also abound, bumblebees, carpenter and mining bees, wasps, a
horde of flies, and some destructive beetles; but the short
tongues can reach little nectar. Why do the pistils of the
florets protrude so far? Even before each minute bud opened, all
its pollen had been shed on the tip of the style, to be in a
position to be removed by the first visitor alighting on the ball
of bloom. After the removal of the pollen from the still immature
stigma, it becomes sticky, to receive the importation from other
blossoms. Did not the floret pass through two distinct stages,
first male, then female, self-fertilization, not
cross-fertilization, would be the inevitable result. The dull red
and green seed-balls, which take on brown and bronze tints after
frost, make beautiful additions to an autumn bouquet. The bush is
next of kin to the coffee.


PARTRIDGE VINE; TWIN-BERRY; MITCHELLA-VINE; SQUAW-BERRY
  (Mitchella repens)  Madder family

Flowers - Waxy, white (pink in bud), fragrant, growing in pairs
at ends of the branches. Calyx usually 4-lobed; corolla
funnel-form, about 1/2 in. long, the 4 spreading lobes bearded
within; 4 stamens inserted on corolla throat; style with 4
stigmas; the ovaries of the twin flowers united. (The style is
long when the stamens are short, or vice versa). Stem: Slender,
trailing, rooting at joints, 6 to 12 in. long, with numerous
erect branches. Leaves: Opposite, entire, short petioled, oval or
rounded, evergreen, dark, sometimes white veined. Fruit: A small,
red, edible, double berry-like drupe.
Preferred Habitat - Woods; usually, but not always, dry ones.
Flowering Season - April-June. Sometimes again in autumn.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to the Gulf States, westward to
Minnesota and Texas.

A carpet of these dark, shining, little evergreen leaves, spread
at the foot of forest trees, whether sprinkled over in June with
pairs of waxy, cream-white, pink-tipped, velvety, lilac-scented
flowers that suggest attenuated arbutus blossoms, or with
coral-red "berries" in autumn and winter, is surely one of the
loveliest sights in the woods. Transplanted to the home garden in
closely packed, generous clumps, with plenty of leaf-mould, or,
better still, chopped sphagnum, about them, they soon spread into
thick mats in the rockery, the hardy fernery, or about the roots
of rhododendrons and the taller shrubs that permit some sunlight
to reach them. No woodland creeper rewards our care with greater
luxuriance of growth. Growing near our homes, the partridge vine
offers an excellent opportunity for study.

The two flowers at the tip of a branch may grow distinct down to
their united ovaries, or their tubes may be partly united, like
Siamese twins - a union which in either case accounts for the odd
shape of the so-called berry, that shows further traces of
consolidation in its "two eyes," the remnants of eight calyx
teeth. Experiment proves that when only one of the twin flowers
is pollenized by insects (excluded from the other one by a net),
fruit is rarely set; but when both are, a healthy seeded berry
follows. To secure cross-fertilization, the partridge flower,
like the bluets (q.v.), occurs in two different forms on distinct
plants, seed from either producing after its kind. In one form
the style is low within the tube, and the stamens protrude; in
the other form the stamens are concealed, and the style, with its
four spreading stigmas, is exserted. No single flower matures
both its reproductive organs. Short-tongued small bees and flies
cannot reach the nectar reserved for the blossom's benefactors
because of the hairs inside the tube, which nearly close it; but
larger bees and butterflies coming to suck a flower with tall
stamens receive pollen on the precise spot on their long tongues
that will come in contact with the sticky stigmas of the
long-styled form visited later, and there rub the pollen off. The
lobes' velvety surface keeps insect feet from slipping.

What endless confusion arises through giving the same popular
folk names to different species! The Bob White, which is called
quail in New England or wherever the ruffed grouse is known as
partridge, is called partridge in the Middle and Southern States,
where the ruffed grouse is known as pheasant. But as both these
distributing agents, like most winter rovers, whether bird or
beast, are inordinately fond of this tasteless partridge berry,
as well as of the spicy fruit of quite another species, the
aromatic wintergreen (q.v.), which shares with it a number of
common names, every one may associate whatever bird and berry
that best suit him. The delicious little twin-flower, beloved of
Linnaeus, also comes in for a share of lost identity through
confusion with the partridge vine.

CLEAVERS; GOOSE-GRASS; BEDSTRAW
  (Galium Aparine)  Madder family

Flowers - Small, white, 4-parted, inconspicuous, in clusters of 1
to 3 on peduncles from the axils of upper leaves. Stem: 2 to 5
ft. long, scrambling, weak, square; bristly on the angles.
Leaves: in whorls of 6 or 8, narrow, midrib and edges very rough.
Fruit: Rounded, twin seed-vessels, beset with many hooked
bristles.
Preferred Habitat - Shady ground.
Flowering Season - May-September.
Distribution - Eastern half of United States and Canada.

Among some seventy other English folk names by which cleavers are
known are the following, taken from Britton and Brown's
"Illustrated Flora": "CATCHWEED, BEGGAR-LICE, BURHEAD,
CLOVER-GRASS, CLING-RASCAL, SCRATCH-GRASS, WILD HEDGE-BURS,
HAIRIF or AIRIF, STICK-A-BACK or STICKLE-BACK, GOSLING-GRASS or
GOSLING-WEED, TURKEY-GRASS, PIGTAIL, GRIP or GRIP-GRASS, LOVEMAN,
SWEETHEARTS." From these it will be seen that the insignificant
little white flowers impress not the popular mind. But the twin
burs which steal a ride on every passing animal, whether man or
beast, in the hope of reaching new colonizing ground far from the
parent plant, rarely fail to make an impression on one who has to
pick trailing sprays beset with them off woollen clothing.

Several other similar bur-bearing relatives there are, common in
various parts of America as they are in Europe. The SWEET-SCENTED
BEDSTRAW (G. trifolium), always with three little greenish
flowers at the end of a footstalk, or branched into three
pedicels that are one to three flowered, and with narrowly oval,
one-nerved leaves arranged in whorls of six on its square stem,
ranges from ocean to ocean on this continent, over northern
Europe, and in Asia from Japan to the Himalayas. It will be
noticed that plants depending upon the by hook or by crook method
of travel are among the best of globe trotters. This species
becomes increasingly fragrant as it dries.


COMMON ELDER; BLACK-BERRIED, AMERICAN or SWEET ELDER; ELDERBERRY
  (Sambucus Canadensis)  Honeysuckle family

Flowers - Small, creamy, white, numerous, odorous, in large,
flat-topped, or convex cymes at ends of branches. Calyx tubular,
minute; corolla of 5 spreading lobes; 5 stamens; style short,
3-parted. Stem: A shrub 4 to 10 ft. high, smooth, pithy, with
little wood. Leaves: Opposite, pinnately compounded of 5 to 11
(usually 7) oval, pointed, and saw-edged leaflets, heavy-scented
when crushed. Fruit: Reddish-black, juicy "berries" (drupes).
Preferred Habitat - Rich, moist soil; open situation.
Flowering Season - June-July.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to the Gulf of Mexico, and westward
2,000 miles.

Flowers far less beautiful than these flat-spread, misty
clusters, that are borne in such profusion along the country lane
and meadow hedgerows in June, are brought from the ends of the
earth to adorn our over-conventional gardens. Certain European
relatives, with golden or otherwise variegated foliage that looks
sickly after the first resplendent outburst in spring, receive
places of honor with monotonous frequency in American shrubbery
borders.

Like the wild carrot among all the umbel-bearers, and the daisy
among the horde of composites, the elder flower has massed its
minute florets together, knowing that there was no hope of
attracting insect friends, except in such union. Where clumps of
elder grow - and society it ever prefers to solitude - few
shrubs, looked at from above, which, of course, is the winged
insect's point of view, offer a better advertisement. There are
people who object to the honey-like odor of the flowers.
Doubtless this is what most attracts the flies and beetles, while
the lesser bees, that frequent them also, are more strongly
appealed to through the eye. No nectar rewards visitors,
consequently butterflies rarely stop on the flat clusters; but
there is an abundant lunch of pollen for such as like it. Each
minute floret has its five anthers so widely spread away from the
stigmas that self-pollination is impossible; but with the help of
small, winged pollen carriers plenty of cross-fertilized fruit
forms. With the help of migrating birds, the minute nutlets
within the "berries" are distributed far and wide.

When clusters of dark, juicy fruit make the bush top-heavy, it
is, of course, no part of their plan to be gathered into pails,
crushed and boiled and fermented into the spicy elderberry wine
that is still as regularly made in some old-fashioned kitchens as
currant jelly and pickled peaches. Both flowers and fruit have
strong medicinal properties. Snuffling children are not loath to
swallow sugar pills moistened with the homeopathic tincture of
Sambucus. The common European species (S. nigra), a mystic plant,
was once employed to cure every ill that flesh is heir to; not
only that, but, when used as a switch, it was believed to check a
lad's growth. Very likely! Every whittling schoolboy knows how
easy it is to remove the white pith from an elder stem. An
ancient musical instrument, the sambuca, was doubtless made from
many such hollow reed-like sticks properly attuned.

A more woody species than the common elder, whose stems are so
green it is scarcely like a true shrub, is the very beautiful
RED-BERRIED or MOUNTAIN ELDER (S. pubens), found in rocky places,
especially in uplands and high altitudes, from the British
Possessions north of us to Georgia on the Atlantic Coast, and to
California on the Pacific. Coming into bloom in April or May, it
produces numerous flower clusters which are longer than broad,
pyramidal rather than flat-topped. They turn brown when drying.
In young twigs the pith is reddish-brown, not white as in the
common elder. Birds with increased families to feed in June are
naturally attracted by the bright red fruit; and while they may
not distribute the stones over so vast an area as autumn migrants
do those of the fall berries, they nevertheless have enabled the
shrub to travel across our continent.


HOBBLE-BUSH; AMERICAN WAYFARING TREE
  (Viburnum alnifolium; V. lantanoides of Gray)  Honeysuckle
family

Flowers - In loose, compound, flat, terminal clusters, 3 to 5 in.
across; the outer, showy, white flowers each about 1 in. across,
neutral; inner ones very much smaller, perfect. Calyx 5-parted;
corolla 5-lobed; 5 stamens; 3 stigmas. Stem: A widely and
irregularly branching shrub, sometimes 10 ft. high; the young
twigs rusty scurfy. Leaves: Opposite, rounded or broadly ovate,
pointed at the tip, finely saw-edged, unevenly divided by midrib,
scurfy on veins beneath. Fruit: Not edible, berry-like, at first
coral-red, afterward darker.
Preferred Habitat - Cool, low, moist woods.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - North Carolina and Michigan, far northward.

Widespread, irregular clusters of white bloom, that suggest heads
of hydrangea whose plan has somehow miscarried, form a very
decorative feature of the woods in May, when the shrubbery in
Nature's garden, as in men's, is in its glory. For what reason
are there two sizes and kinds of flowers in each cluster? Around
the outer margin are large showy shams: they lack the essential
organs, the stamens and pistil; therefore what use are they?
Undoubtedly they are mere advertisements to catch the eye of
passing insects - no small service, however. It is the
inconspicuous little flowers grouped within their circle that
attend to the serious business of life. The shrub found it good
economy to increase the size of the outer row of flowers, even at
the expense of their reproductive organs, simply to add to the
conspicuousness of the clusters, when so many blossoms enter into
fierce competition with them for insect trade. Many beetles,
attracted by the white color, come to feed on pollen, and often
destroy the anthers in their greed. But the lesser bees (Andrena
chiefly), and more flies, whose short tongues easily obtain the
accessible nectar, render constant service. These welcome guests
we have to thank for the clusters of coral-red berries that make
the shrub even more beautiful in September than in May.

Because it sometimes sends its straggling branches downward in
loops that touch the ground and trip up the unwary pedestrian,
who presumably hobbles off in pain, the bush received a name with
which the stumbler will be the last to find fault. From the bark
of the Wayfaring Tree of the Old World (V. lantana), the tips of
whose procumbent branches often take root as they lie on the
ground, is obtained bird-lime. No warm, sticky scales enclose the
buds of our hardy hobble-bush; the only protection for its tender
baby foliage is in the scurfy coat on its twigs; yet with this
thin covering, or without it, the young leaves safely withstand
the intense cold of northern winters.

The chief beauty of the HIGH BUSH-CRANBERRY, CRANBERRY TREE, or
WILD GUELDER-ROSE (V. Opulus) lies in its clusters of bright red,
oval, very acid "berries" (drupes), that are commonly used by
country people as a substitute for the fruit they so closely
resemble. This is a symmetrical, erect, tall, smooth shrub, found
in moist, low ground. Among the Berkshires it grows in
perfection. From New Jersey, Michigan, and Oregon far northward
is its range; also in Europe and Asia. The broadly ovate,
saw-edged, three-lobed leaves are more or less hairy along the
veins on the underside. Like the hobble-bush, this one produces
an outer circle of showy, neutral flowers, as advertisements, on
its peduncled, flat cluster; and small, perfect ones, to
reproduce the species, in June or July. As the flies and small
pollen-collecting bees move rapidly over a corymb to feast on the
layer of nectar freely exposed for their benefit, they usually
cross-fertilize the flowers; for, as Muller pointed out, the
anthers and stigmas of each come in contact with different parts
of the insect's feet or tongue. Beetles, which visit the clusters
in great numbers, often prove destructive visitors. Kerner claims
that nectar is secreted in the leaves of this species, whether in
the two glands that appear at the top of the petioles or not, he
does not say. Of what possible advantage to the plant could such
an arrangement be? Plants, as well as humans, are not in business
for philanthropy.

No garden is complete - was garden ever complete? - without the
beautiful SNOWBALL BUSH, a sterile variety of this shrub, with
whose abundant balls of white flowers everyone is familiar. When
various members of the viburnum and the hydrangea tribes are
cultivated, the corollas of both the small interior flowers and
those in the showy exterior circle become largely developed,
while the reproductive organs of the former gradually become
abortive. The snowball bush rather overdoes its advertising
business; for however attractive its round white masses of
sterile bloom, the effect is of no advantage to itself.

In light, dry, rocky woods, from North Carolina and Minnesota,
far northward, grows the common MAPLE-LEAVED ARROW-WOOD or
DOCKMACKIE (V. acerifolium), which one might easily mistake for a
maple sapling when it is not in flower or fruit. All the blossoms
in its slender peduncled, flat-topped, white clusters are
perfect; none are sterile for advertising purposes merely, as in
the cases of so many of its relatives. The five stamens protrude
from each five-lobed little flower for plain reasons. The
opposite leaves are broadly ovate, three-ribbed, three-lobed,
coarsely toothed, acute at the tip, and, except for their soft
hairiness underneath, are too like maple leaves to be mistaken.
In autumn, when they take on rich tints, and the clusters of
"berries" become first crimson, then nearly black, the shrub is a
delight to see.

To become familiar with one of the Viburnum bushes is to
recognize any member of the tribe when in blossom or fruit, for
all spread more or less flattened, compound cymes of white
flowers in late spring or early summer, followed by red or very
dark "berries" (drupes); but it is on the leaves that we depend
to name a species. The opposite, slender petioled, pale leaves of
the ARROW-WOOD or MEALY-TREE (V. dentalum), have no lobes; but
are ovate, coarsely toothed, pointed at the tip, prominently
pinnately veined. All the flowers in a cyme are perfect; and the
drupes, which are at first blue, become nearly black when fully
ripe. In moist, or even wet, ground, from the Georgia mountains,
western New York, and Minnesota far northward, this smooth,
slender, gray shrub is found. Its wood once furnished the Indians
with arrows.

A much lower growing, but similar, bush, the DOWNY-LEAVED
ARROW-WOOD (V. pubescens), formerly counted a mere variety of the
preceding, may be known by the velvety down on the under side of
its leaves. It grows in rocky, wooded places, often on some high
bank above a stream. Beetles and the less specialized bees visit
the flat-topped flower clusters abundantly in May. Short-tongued
visitors quickly lick up the abundant nectar secreted at the base
of each little style, cross-fertilizing their entertainers as
they journey across the cyme. So widely do the anthers diverge,
that pollen must often drop on the stigma of a neighboring
floret, and quite as often a flower is likely to be
self-fertilized through the curvature of the filaments.

The WITHE-ROD OR APPALACHIAN TEA (V. cassinoides; V. nudum of
Gray) is found in swamps and wet ground from North Carolina and
Minnesota northward, flowering in May or June. Its dense clusters
of perfect, small white flowers, on a rather short peduncle, are
followed by oval "berries" that, although pink at first, soon
turn a dark blue, with a bloom like the huckleberry's. The
opposite, oval to oblong, rather thick, smooth leaves and the
somewhat scurfy twigs help the novice to name this common shrub,
whose tough, pliable branches make excellent binders for farmer's
bundles, but whose leaves cannot be recommended as a substitute
for tea.

Beautiful enough for any gentleman's lawn is the SWEET VIBURNUM,
NANNY-BERRY, SHEEP-BERRY, or NANNY-BUSH, as it is variously
called (V. Lentago). Indeed, its name appears in many
nurserymen's catalogues. From Georgia, Indiana, and Missouri far
northward it grows in rich, moist soil, sometimes attaining the
height of a tree, more frequently that of a good-sized shrub. A
profusion of dense white, broad flower clusters, seated among the
rich green terminal leaves in May, indicate a feast for migrating
birds and hungry beasts, including the omnivorous small boy in
October, when the bluish-black, bloom-covered, sweet, edible
"berries" ripen. A peculiarity of the ovate, long-tapering, and
finely saw-edged leaves is that their long petioles often broaden
out and become wavy margined.

Another Viburnum, with smooth, bluish-black, sweet, and edible
fruit, that ripens a month earlier than the nanny-berry's, is the
similar BLACK HAW, STAG-BUSH or SLOE (V. prunifolium). As its
Latin name indicates, the leaves suggest those of a plum tree. It
is a very early bloomer; the flat-topped white clusters appearing
in April, and lasting through June, in various parts of its range
from the Gulf States to southern New England and Michigan. Unlike
the hobble-bush and the withe-rod, both the nanny-berry and the
black haw have conspicuous winter buds, the latter bush often
clothing its tender undeveloped foliage with warm-looking reddish
down, although few of its naked kin have so southerly a range.

ONE-SEEDED, BUR- or STAR CUCUMBER; NIMBLE KATE

  (Sicyos angulatus)  Gourd family

Flowers - Small, greenish-white, 5-parted, of 2 kinds: staminate
ones in a loose raceme on a very long peduncle; fertile ones
clustered in a little head on a short peduncle. Stem: A climbing
vine with branched tendrils; more or less sticky-hairy. Leaves:
Broad, 5-angled or 5-lobed, heart-shaped at base, rough,
sometimes enormous, on stout petioles. Fruit: From 3 to 10
bur-like, yellowish, prickly seed-vessels in a star-shaped
cluster, each containing one seed.
Preferred Habitat - Moist, shady waste ground; banks of streams.
Flowering Season - June-September.
Distribution - Quebec to the Gulf States, and westward beyond the
Mississippi.

In a damp, shady, waste corner, perhaps the first weed to take
possession is the star cucumber, a poor relation of the musk and
water melons, the squash, cucumber, pumpkin, and gourd of the
garden. Its sole use yet discovered is to screen ugly fences and
rubbish heaps by climbing and trailing luxuriantly over
everything within reach. That it thinks more highly of its own
importance in the world than men do of it, is shown by the
precaution it takes to insure a continuance of its species. By
separating the sexes of its flowers, like Quakers at meeting, it
prevents self-fertilization, and compels its small-winged
visitors to carry the smooth-banded, rough pollen from the
staminate to the tiny pistillate group. By roughening its angled
stem and leaves, it discourages pilfering ants and other crawlers
from reaching the sweets reserved for legitimate benefactors. So
extremely sensitive are the tips of the tendrils that by rubbing
them with the finger they will coil up perceptibly; then
straighten out again if they find they have been deceived, and
that there is no stick for them to twine around. Give them a
stick, however, and the coils remain fixed.


RATTLESNAKE-ROOT; WHITE LETTUCE or CANKER-WEED; LION'S-FOOT
  (Nabalus albus)  Chickory family

Flower-heads - Composite, numerous, greenish or cream white, or
tinged with lilac, fragrant, nodding; borne in loose, open,
narrow terminal, and axillary clusters. Each bell-like flowerhead
only about 1/4 in. across, composed of 8 to 15 ray flowers,
drooping from a cup-like involucre consisting of 8 principal,
colored bracts. Stem: 2 to 5 ft. high, smooth, green or dark
purplish red, leafy, from a tuberous, bitter root. Leaves:
Alternate, variable, sometimes very large, broad, hastate, ovate,
or heart-shaped, wavy-toothed, lobed, or palmately cleft; upper
leaves smaller, lance-shaped, entire.
Preferred Habitat - Woods; rich, moist borders; roadsides.
Flowering Season - August-September.
Distribution - Southern Canada to Georgia and Kentucky.

Nodding in graceful, open clusters from the top of a shining
colored stalk, the inconspicuous little bell-like flowers of this
common plant spread their rays to release the branching styles
for contact with pollen-laden visitors. These styles presently
become a bunch of cinnamon-colored hairs, a seed-tassel
resembling a sable paint brush - the principal feature that
distinguishes this species from the smaller-flowered TALL WHITE
LETTUCE (N. altissimus), whose pappus is a light straw color.
Both these plants are most easily recognized when their fluffy,
plumed seeds are waiting for a stiff breeze to waft them to fresh
colonizing ground.


BONESET; COMMON THOROUGHWORT; AGUE-WEED; INDIAN SAGE

  (Eupatorium perfoliatum)  Thistle family

Flower-heads - Composite, the numerous, small, dull, white heads
of tubular florets only, crowded in a scaly involucre and borne
in spreading, flat-topped terminal cymes. Stem: Stout, tall,
branching above, hairy, leafy. Leaves: Opposite, often united at
their bases, or clasping, lance-shaped, saw-edged, wrinkled.
Preferred Habitat - Wet ground, low meadows, roadsides.
Flowering Season - July-September.
Distribution - From the Gulf States north to Nebraska, Manitoba,
and New Brunswick.

Frequently, in just such situations as its sister the Joe-Pye
weed selects (q.v.), and with similar intent, the boneset spreads
its soft, leaden-white bloom; but it will be noticed that the
butterflies, which love color, especially deep pinks and magenta,
let this plant alone, whereas beetles, that do not find the
butterfly's favorite, fragrant Joe-Pye weed at all to their
liking, prefer these dull, odorous flowers. Many flies, wasps,
and bees also, get generous entertainment in these tiny florets,
where they feast with the minimum loss of time, each head in a
cluster containing, as it does, from ten to sixteen restaurants.
An ant crawling up the stem is usually discouraged by its hairs
long before reaching the sweets. Sometimes the stem appears to
run through the center of one large leaf that is kinky in the
middle and taper-pointed at both ends, rather than between a pair
of leaves.

An old-fashioned illness known as break-bone fever - doubtless
paralleled to-day by the grippe - once had its terrors for a
