Holding each by the hand, Sue's head barely above the water, he
started across. They had not gone more than twenty feet when they
heard Quade, left on the bank, give a hoarse yell of fear and dive
into the water. Their dread pursuer had caught up with them.

And it followed--on the water! Phil had hoped it would not be able to
cross, but once more the thing's astounding adaptability dashed his
hopes. Without hesitation, the whitish jelly sprawled out over the
water, rolling after them with ghastly, snake-like ripples, its pallid
body standing out gruesomely against the black, odorous tide.

Quade came up thrashing madly, some feet to the side of the other
three. He was swimming--and swimming with such strength that he
quickly left them behind. He would be across before they; and that
meant there was a good chance that the earth-borer would go up again
with only one passenger....

Phil fought against the water, pulling Sue and her father forward as
best he could. From behind came the rippling sound of their shapeless
pursuer. "Ten feet more--" Holmes began--then abruptly stopped.

There had been a swish, a ripple upstream. And as their heads turned
they saw the water part and a black head, long, evil, glistening,
pointing coldly down to where they were struggling towards the shore.
Phil Holmes felt his strength ooze out. He heard Professor Guinness
gasp:

"A water-snake!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Its head was reared above the surface, gliding down on them silently,
leaving a wedge of long, sluggish ripples behind. When thirty feet
away the glistening head dipped under, and a great half-circle of
leg-thick body arched out. It was like an oily stream of curved cable;
then it ended in a pointed tail--and the creature was entirely under
water....

With desperate strength Phil hauled the girl to the bank and, standing
in several feet of water, pushed her up. Then he whirled and yanked
old Guinness past him up into the hands of his daughter. With them
safe, and Sue reaching out her hand for him, he began to scramble up
himself.

But he was too late. There was a swish in the water behind him, and
toothless, hard-gummed jaws clamped tight over one leg and drew him
back and under. And with the touch of the creature's mouth a stiff
shock jolted him; his body went numb; his arms flopped limply down. He
was paralyzed.

Sue Guinness cried out. Her father stared helplessly at the spot where
his young partner had disappeared with so little commotion.

"It was an eel," he muttered dully. "Some kind of electric eel...."

Phil dimly realized the same thing. A moment later his face broke the
surface, but he could not cry out; he could not move his little
finger. Only his involuntary muscles kept working--his heart and his
lungs. He found he could control his breathing a little.... And then
he was wondering why he was remaining motionless on the surface.
Gradually he came to understand.

He had not felt it, but the eel had let go its hold on his leg, and
had disappeared. But only for a moment. Suddenly, from somewhere near,
its gleaming body writhed crazily, and a terrific twist of its tail
hit Phil a glancing blow on the chest. He was swept under, and the
water around him became a maelstrom. When next he bobbed to the
tumultuous surface, he managed to get a much-needed breath of
air--and in the swirling currents glimpsed the long, snake-like head
of the eel go shooting by, with thin trickles of stuff that looked
like white jelly clinging to it.

That explained what was happening. The eel had been challenged by the
ameboid monster, and they were fighting for possession of him--the
common prey.

       *       *       *       *       *

The water became an inferno of whipping and lashing movements, of
whitish fibers and spearing thrusts of a glistening black electric
body. Unquestionably the eel was using its numbing electric shock on
its foe. Time and time again Phil felt the amoeba grasp him,
searingly, only to be wrenched free by the force of the currents the
combat stirred up. Once he thudded into the bottom of the river, and
his lungs seemed about to burst before he was again shot to the top
and managed to get a breath. At last the water quieted somewhat, and
Phil, at the surface, saw the eel bury its head in a now apathetic
mound of flesh.

It tore a portion loose with savage jaws, a portion that still writhed
after it was separated from the parent mass; and then the victor
glided swiftly downstream, and disappeared under the surface....

Holmes floated helplessly on the inky water. He could see the amoeba
plainly; it was still partly paralyzed, for it was very still. But
then a faint tremor ran through it; a wave ran over its surface--and
it moved slowly towards him once again.

Desperately Phil tried to retreat. The will was there, but the body
would not work. Save for a feeble flutter of his hands and feet, he
could not move. He could not even turn around to bid Sue and David
Guinness good-by--with his eyes....

Then a fresh, loved voice sounded just behind him, and he felt
something tighten around his waist.

"It's all right, dear!" the voice called. "Hang on; we'll get you
out!"

Sue had come in after him! She had grasped the rope tied to his belt,
and she and her father were pulling him back to the bank!

He wanted to tell her to go back--the amoeba was only feet away--but
he could only manage a little croak. And then he was safe up on the
ledge at the other side of the river.

       *       *       *       *       *

A surge of strength filled his limbs, and he knew the shock was
rapidly wearing off. But it was also wearing off of the monster in the
water. Its speed increased; the ripplings of its amorphous
body-substance became quicker, more excited. It came on steadily.

While it came, the girl and her father worked desperately over Phil,
massaging his body and pulling him further up the bank. It had all but
reached the bank when Holmes gasped:

"I think I can walk now. Where--where did Quade go to?"

Guinness gestured over to the right, up a dim winding passage through
the rocks.

"Then we must follow--fast!" Phil said, staggering to his feet. "He
may get to the sphere first; he'll go up by himself even yet! I'm all
right!"

Despite his words, he could not run, and could only command an awkward
walk. Sue lifted one of his arms around her shoulder, and her father
took the other, and without a backward glance they labored ahead. But
Phil's strength quickly returned, and they raised the pace until they
had broken once more into a stumbling run.

How far ahead James Quade was, they did not know, but obviously they
could follow where he had gone. Once again the draft was strong on
their backs. They felt sure they were on the last stretch, headed for
the earth-borer. But, unless they could overtake Quade, he would be
there first. They had no illusions about what that would mean....


CHAPTER V

_A Death More Hideous_

Quade was there first.

When they burst out of a narrow crevice, not far from the
funnel-shaped opening they had originally entered, they saw him
standing beside the open door of the sphere as if waiting. The
searchlight inside was still on, and in its shaft of light they could
see that he was smiling thinly, once more his old, confident self. It
would only take him a second to jump in, slam the door and lock it. He
could afford a last gesture....

The three stopped short. They saw something he did not.

"So!" he observed in his familiar, mocking voice. He paused, seeing
that they did not come on. He had plenty of time.

He said something else, but the two men and the girl did not hear what
it was. As if by a magnet their eyes were held by what was hanging
above him, clinging to the lip of the hole the sphere had made in the
ceiling.

It was an amoeba, another of those single-celled, protoplasmic mounds
of flesh. It had evidently come down through the hole; and now it was
stretching, rubber-like, lower and lower, a living, reaching
stalactite of whitish hunger.

Quade was all unconscious of it. His final words reached Phil's
consciousness.

"... And this time, of course, I will keep the top disintegrators on.
No other monster will then be able to weigh me down!"

He shrugged his shoulders and turned to the door. And that movement
was the signal that brought his doom. Without a sound, the poised mass
above dropped.

James Quade never knew what hit him. The heap of whitish jelly fell
squarely. There was a brief moment of frantic lashing, of tortured
struggles--then only tiny ripples running through the monster as it
fed.

Sue Guinness turned her head. But the two men for some reason could
not take their eyes away....

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the girl's voice that jerked them back to reality. "The other!"
she gasped. "It's coming, behind!"

They had completely forgotten the mass in the tunnel. Turning, they
saw that it was only fifteen feet away and approaching fast, and
instinctively they ran out into the cavern, skirting the sphere
widely. When they came to Quade's wrecked borer Phil, who had snatched
a glance behind, dragged them down behind it. For he had seen their
pursuer abandon the chase and go to share in the meal of its fellow.

"We'd best not get too far away," he whispered. "When they leave the
front of the borer, maybe we can make a dash for it."

For minutes that went like hours the young man watched, waiting for
the creatures to be done, hoping that they would go away. Fortunately
the sphere lay between, and he was not forced to see too much. Only
one portion of one of the monsters was visible, lapping out from
behind the machine....

At last his body tensed, and he gripped Sue and her father's arm in
quick warning. The things were leaving the sphere. Or, rather, only
one was. For Phil saw that they had agglutenated--merged into
oneness--and now the monster that remained was the sum of the sizes of
the original two. And more....

They all watched. And they all saw the amoeba stop, hesitate for a
moment--and come straight for the wrecked borer behind which they were
hidden.

"Damn!" Phil whispered hoarsely. "It's still hungry--and it's after
us!"

David Guinness sighed wearily. "It's heavy and sluggish, now," he
said, "so maybe if we run again.... Though I don't know how I can last
any longer...."

Holmes did not answer. His eyes were narrowed; he was casting about
desperately for a plan. He hardly felt Sue's light touch on his arm as
she whispered:

"In case, Phil--in case.... This must be good-by...."

But the young man turned to her with gleaming eyes. "Good-by,
nothing!" he cried. "We've still got a card to play!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She stared at him, wondering if he had cracked from the strain of what
he had passed through. But his next words assured her he had not. "Go
back, Sue," he said levelly. "Go far back. We'll win through this
yet."

She hesitated, then obeyed. She crept back from the wrecked borer,
back into the dim rear, eyes on Phil and the sluggish mass that moved
inexorably towards him. When she had gone fifteen or twenty yards she
paused, and watched the two men anxiously.

Phil was talking swiftly to Professor Guinness. His voice was low and
level, and though she could not hear the words she could catch the
tone of assurance that ran through them. She saw her father nod his
head, and he seemed to make the gesture with vigor. "I will," she
heard him say; and he slapped Phil on the back, adding: "But for God's
sake, be careful!"

And with these words the old man wormed inside Quade's wrecked borer
and was gone from the girl's sight.

She wanted desperately to run forward and learn what Phil intended to
do, but she restrained herself and obeyed his order. She waited, and
watched; and saw the young man stand up, look at the slowly advancing
monster--and deliberately walk right into its path!

Sue could not move from her fright. In a daze she saw Phil advance
cautiously towards the amoeba and pause when within five feet of it.
The thing stopped; remained absolutely motionless. She saw him take
another short step forward. This time a pseudopod emerged, and reached
slowly out for him. Phil avoided it easily, but by so narrow a margin
that the girl's heart stopped beating. Then she saw him step back;
and, snail-like, the creature followed, pausing twice, as if wary and
suspicious. Slowly Phil Holmes drew it after him.

To Sue, who did not know what was his plan, it seemed a deliberate
invitation to death. She forgot about her father, lying inside the
mangled borer, waiting. She did not see that Phil was leading the
monster directly in front of it....

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a grotesque, silent pursuit. The creature appeared to be
unalert; its movements were sloth-like; yet the girl knew that if Phil
once ventured an inch too close, or slipped, or tried to dodge past it
to the sphere, its torpidness would vanish and it would have him. His
maneuvering had to be delicate, judged to a matter of inches. Tense
with the suspense, the strain of the slow-paced seconds, she
watched--and yet hardly dared to watch, fearful of the awful thing she
might see.

It was a fantastic game of tag her lover was playing, with death the
penalty for tardiness. The slow, enticing movements were repeated
again and again, Phil advancing very close, and stepping back in the
nick of time. Always he barely avoided the clutching white arms that
were extended, and little by little he decoyed the thing onward....

Then came the end. As Holmes was almost in front of the wrecked
machine, Sue saw him glance quickly aside--and, as if waiting for that
moment when he would be off guard, the monster whipped forward in a
great, reaching surge.

Sue's ragged nerves cracked: she shrieked. They had him! She started
forward, then halted abruptly. With a tremendous leap, Phil Holmes had
wrenched free and flung himself backwards. She heard his yell:

"Now!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a sputter from the bottom of the outstretched borer; then,
like the crack of a whip, came a bellow of awful sound.

A thick cloud of dust reared up, and the ear-numbing thunder rolled
through the cavern in great pulsing echoes. And then Sue Guinness
understood what the young man had been about.

The disintegrators of James Quade's borer had sent a broad beam of
annihilation into the monster. His own machine had destroyed his
destroyer--and given his intended victims their only chance to escape
from the dread fate he had schemed for them.

Sue could see no trace of the creature in its pyre of slow-swirling
dust. Caught squarely, its annihilation had been utter. And then,
through the thunder that still echoed in her ear-drums, she heard a
joyful voice.

"We got 'em!"

Through the dusty haze Phil appeared at her side. He flung his arms up
exultantly, swept her off the ground, hugged her close.

"We got 'em!" he cried again. "We're free--free to go up!"

Professor David Guinness crawled from the borer. His face, for the
first time since the descent, wore a broad smile. Phil ran over to
him, slapped him on the back; and the older man said:

"You did it beautifully, Phil." He turned to Sue. "He had to decoy
them right in front of the disintegrators. It was--well, it was
magnificent!"

"All credit to Sue: she was my inspiration!" Phil said, laughing. "But
now," he added, "let's see if we can fix those dead rocket-tubes. I
have a patient up above--and, anyway, I'm not over-fond of this
place!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The three had won through. They had blasted four miles down from the
surface of the earth. The brain of an elderly scientist, the
quick-witted courage of a young engineer, had achieved the seemingly
impossible--and against obstacles that could not have been predicted.
Death had attended that achievement, as death often does accompany
great forward steps; James Quade had gone to a death more hideous than
that he devised for the others. But, in spite of the justice of it, a
moment of silence fell on the three survivors as they came to the spot
