
"A Thought," by Dorothy Downs, is a pretty little thought indeed, and
prettily expressed, although the term "holiness divine" is strained when
applied to a rose, and "we will be surprised" is frankly ungrammatical
as a simple future in the first person. The =sine qua non= of all poetry
is absolutely correct grammar and freedom from redundancy.

The bit of verse heading the War Items written by F. G. Morris, is quite
adequate except for the lack of a rhyme in the last line, where the form
of the stanza leads the reader to expect a rhyme for "part."

Matthew Hilson's rhymed greeting to the United from across the water,
is on the whole, graceful and well done, and the United acknowledges its
receipt with thanks.

One other piece of work in this number deserves especial mention. Alfred
Galpin's "Mystery" introduces to the association a thinker more gifted
for his years than probably any other recruit within recent years. This
judgment is not based alone on the short article under consideration,
but even this little piece of thought, if carefully analysed, is enough
to stamp him as one who thinks with extreme facility in the deepest of
abstractions, and who for expression of that thought commands a
vocabulary of remarkable range. Mr. Galpin is going far in this world,
and we hope that he will sojourn long enough with us so that we can feel
that whatever glory he may attain will cast some of its rays upon the
Association.

The editorial remarks in this issue of the UNITED AMATEUR are worthy of
close perusal on account of their graceful literary quality. Seldom has
the critic seen the subject of the New Year so felicitously treated as
in this brief study by Miss McGeoch. The author's mastery of appropriate
words, phrases, and images, and her intuitive perception of the most
delicate elements of literary harmony, combine to make the reader wish
she were more frequently before the Association as a writer, as well as
in an editorial capacity.


REPORTS OF OFFICERS

PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE

Fellow-Amateurs:--

According to indications, the last few weeks of the United's
administrative year will exceed their predecessors in general activity
and work accomplished. The college recruiting campaign, delayed through
an unavoidable combination of circumstances, is now taking definite
form; and may be expected to show some actual results even before the
close of the present term, though its greatest fruits must necessarily
be reaped by the next administration. General recruiting is on the
increase, and a more satisfactory number of renewals and reinstatements
is noted.

One of the greatest obstacles to be combated during this unsettled era,
is the mistaken notion that amateur journalism is a non-essential and a
luxury, unworthy of attention or support amidst the national stress. The
prevalence of this opinion is difficult to account for, since its logic
is so feeble. It is universally recognised that in times like these,
some form of relaxation is absolutely indispensable if the poise and
sanity of the people are to be preserved. Amusements of a lighter sort
are patronised with increased frequency, and have risen to the dignity
of essentials in the maintenance of the national morale. If, then, the
flimsiest of pleasures be accorded the respect and favour of the public,
what may we not say for amateur journalism, whose function is not only
to entertain and relieve the mind, but to uplift and instruct as well?
Mr. Edward H. Cole has ably treated this matter in his recent =Bema=,
and no one who thoughtfully reviews the situation can dispute the force
and verity of his conclusions. As Mr. Cole points out in a later
communication, war-time amateur effort must of course be less elaborate
than in pre-war days; but amateurdom itself is now worthy of double
encouragement, rather than discouragement, since by its soothing and
steadying influence it becomes a source of calm and strength, and
therefore an active factor in the winning of the war. Let us on this
side of the Atlantic view the rejuvenescence of British amateurdom after
four years of warfare, as exhibited in the formation of the prosperous
Amateur Press Club by Messrs. Winskill and Parks. The moral is not hard
to deduce.

Of the new publications of the season it is hard to speak without using
superlatives, since Mr. Cook's epoch-making June =Vagrant= is among
their number. This veritable book of 148 pages and cover constitutes the
greatest achievement of contemporary amateurdom, and may legitimately be
considered as one of the outstanding features in the recent history of
the institution. It is the one product of our day which will bear actual
comparison with the publications of the departed "Halcyon" period. A
July =Vagrant=, of equal quality though lesser size, may be expected in
the near future. A newcomer to our list of journals is =The Silver
Clarion=, issued by Mr. John Milton Samples of Macon, Ga., a promising
poet, essayist, and editor, who has just entered the Association. =The
Clarion=, whose contents are distinguished for their wholesome tone and
pleasing literary quality, is a regularly issued monthly, and forms a
substantial addition to the literature of the United. Another welcome
paper is =The Roamer=, published by Mr. Louis H. Kerber, Jr., of
Chicago. This journal, devoted exclusively to travel articles, will
occupy a unique place in the United. Among the papers to be expected
before the close of the official year are a =Dabbler= from Mr. Lindquist
and a =Yerma= from Mr. J. H. D. Smith, now a soldier in the service of
his country at Camp Laurel, Md.

Responses to the proposal for a co-operative paper have been slow in
coming in. Let the members once more reflect upon the advantages of the
plan, and unite in an effort to increase the literary output of the
Association.

The annual convention, to be held on the 22nd, 23d and 24th of next July
at the Dells of the Wisconsin River, may well be expected to stimulate
interest to an unusually high pitch. A large attendance is urged, and
since Mr. Daas is in charge of arrangements, the gathering will
undoubtedly prove a bright spot in the year's programme.

                                           H. P. LOVECRAFT, President.
 May 6, 1918.




 THE UNITED AMATEUR    JUNE 1918


Astrophobos

Ward Phillips

    In the midnight heavens burning
      Through ethereal deeps afar,
    Once I watch'd with restless yearning
      An alluring, aureate star;
    Ev'ry eve aloft returning,
      Gleaming nigh the Arctic car.

    Mystic waves of beauty blended
      With the gorgeous golden rays;
    Phantasies of bliss descended
      In a myrrh'd Elysian haze;
    And in lyre-born chords extended
      Harmonies of Lydian lays.

    There (thought I) lie scenes of pleasure,
      Where the free and blessed dwell,
    And each moment bears a treasure,
      Freighted with the lotus-spell,
    And there floats a liquid measure
      From the lute of Israfel.

    There (I told myself) were shining
      Worlds of happiness unknown,
    Peace and Innocence entwining
      By the Crowned Virtue's throne;
    Men of light, their thoughts refining
      Purer, fairer, than our own.

    Thus I mus'd, when o'er the vision
      Crept a red delirious change;
    Hope dissolving to derision,
      Beauty to distortion strange;
    Hymnic chords in weird collision,
      Spectral sights in endless range.

    Crimson burn'd the star of sadness
      As behind the beams I peer'd;
    All was woe that seem'd but gladness
      Ere my gaze with truth was sear'd;
    Cacodaemons, mir'd with madness,
      Through the fever'd flick'ring leer'd.

    Now I know the fiendish fable
      That the golden glitter bore;
    Now I shun the spangled sable
      That I watch'd and lov'd before;
    But the horror, set and stable,
      Haunts my soul forevermore.




 THE UNITED AMATEUR    JULY 1918


At the Root

H. P. Lovecraft

(Editor Laureate)

To those who look beneath the surface, the present universal war drives
home more than one anthropological truth in striking fashion; and of
these verities none is more profound than that relating to the essential
immutability of mankind and its instincts.

Four years ago a large part of the civilised world laboured under
certain biological fallacies which may, in a sense, be held responsible
for the extent and duration of the present conflict. These fallacies,
which were the foundation of pacifism and other pernicious forms of
social and political radicalism, dealt with the capability of man to
evolve mentally beyond his former state of subservience to primitive
instinct and pugnacity, and to conduct his affairs and international or
inter-racial relations on a basis of reason and good-will. That belief
in such capability is unscientific and childishly naive, is beside the
question. The fact remains, that the most civilised part of the world,
including our own Anglo-Saxondom, did entertain enough of these notions
to relax military vigilance, lay stress on points of honour, place trust
in treaties, and permit a powerful and unscrupulous nation to indulge
unchecked and unsuspected in nearly fifty years of preparation for
world-wide robbery and slaughter. We are reaping the result of our
simplicity.

The past is over. Our former follies we can but regret, and expiate as
best we may by a crusade to the death against the Trans-Rhenane monster
which we allowed to grow and flourish beneath our very eyes. But the
future holds more of responsibility, and we must prepare to guard
against any renascence of the benevolent delusions that four years of
blood have barely been able to dispel. In a word, we must learn to
discard forever the sentimental standpoint, and to view our species
through the cold eyes of science alone. We must recognise the essential
underlying savagery in the animal called man, and return to older and
sounder principles of national life and defence. We must realise that
man's nature will remain the same so long as he remains man; that
civilisation is but a slight coverlet beneath which the dominant beast
sleeps lightly and ever ready to awake. To preserve civilisation, we
must deal scientifically with the brute element, using only genuine
biological principles. In considering ourselves, we think too much of
ethics and sociology--too little of plain natural history. We should
perceive that man's period of historical existence, a period so short
that his physical constitution has not been altered in the slightest
degree, is insufficient to allow of any considerable mental change. The
instincts that governed the Egyptians and the Assyrians of old, govern
us as well; and as the ancients thought, grasped, struggled, and
deceived, so shall we moderns continue to think, grasp, struggle, and
deceive in our inmost hearts. Change is only superficial and apparent.

Man's respect for the imponderables varies according to his mental
constitution and environment. Through certain modes of thought and
training it can be elevated tremendously, yet there is always a limit.
The man or nation of high culture may acknowledge to great lengths the
restraints imposed by conventions and honour, but beyond a certain point
primitive will or desire cannot be curbed. Denied anything ardently
desired, the individual or state will argue and parley just so
long--then, if the impelling motive be sufficiently great, will cast
aside every rule and break down every acquired inhibition, plunging
viciously after the object wished; all the more fantastically savage
because of previous repression. =The sole ultimate factor in human
decisions is physical force.= This we must learn, however repugnant the
idea may seem, if we are to protect ourselves and our institutions.
Reliance on anything else is fallacious and ruinous. Dangerous beyond
description are the voices sometimes heard today, decrying the
continuance of armament after the close of the present hostilities.

The specific application of the scientific truth regarding man's native
instincts will be found in the adoption of a post-bellum international
programme. Obviously, we must take into account the primordial
substructure and arrange for the upholding of culture by methods which
will stand the acid test of stress and conflicting ambitions. In
disillusioned diplomacy, ample armament, and universal military training
alone will be found the solution of the world's difficulties. It will
not be a perfect solution, because humanity is not perfect. It will not
abolish war, because war is the expression of a natural human tendency.
But it will at least produce an approximate stability of social and
political conditions, and prevent the menace of the entire world by the
greed of any one of its constituent parts.


REPORTS OF OFFICERS

PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE

Fellow-Amateurs:--

The conclusion of an administrative year is naturally a time for
retrospection rather than for announcement and planning, and seldom may
we derive more satisfaction from such a backward glance than at the
present period.

The United has just completed a twelvemonth which, though not notable
for numerousness of publications or expansion of the membership list,
will nevertheless be long remembered for the tone and quality of its
literature, and the uniformly smooth maintenance of its executive
programme. The virtual extirpation of petty politics, and the
elimination of all considerations save development of literary taste and
encouragement of literary talent, have raised our Association to a new
level of poise, harmony, dignity, and usefulness to the serious
aspirant.

Prime honours must be awarded to our Official Editor and Official
Publisher, who have given us an official organ unequalled and
unapproached in the history of amateur journalism. The somewhat altered
nature of contents, and radically elevated standard of editorship, mark
an era in the progress of the Association; since the UNITED AMATEUR is
really the nucleus of our activity and a reflection of the best in our
current thought and ideals. We have this year helped to shatter the
foolish fetichism which restricts the average official organ to a
boresome and needless display of facts and figures, relating to the
political mechanism of amateurdom. The organ has been a literary one, as
befits a literary association; and has been conducted with a sounder
sense of relative values than in times when amateurs seemed to place
elections and annual banquets above art, taste, and rhetoric.

The publications of the year have been distinguished for their merit,
general polish, and scholarly editorship. The percentage of crude matter
appearing in print has been reduced to a minimum through the careful and
conscientious critical service rendered both by the official bureau and
by private individuals. The artistic standard of the United has evolved
to a point where no aims short of excellence can win unqualified
approval. The classics have become our sole models, and whilst even the
most glaring faults of the sincere beginner receive liberal
consideration and sympathetically constructive attention, there is no
longer a seat of honour for complacent crudity. Genuine aspiration is
our criterion of worth. The spirit of this newer amateur journalism is
splendidly shown by such magazines of the year as =Eurus=, =Spindrift=,
=The Vagrant=, and the official organ.

Just before the close of the present term, several new publications have
appeared, amongst them a =Vagrant=, a =Conservative=, and Mr. Moloney's
splendid first venture, =The Voice From the Mountains=. Early in the
next fiscal year will appear =The United Co-Operative=, the fruit of
this year's planning, edited by Mrs. Jordan, Miss Lehr, Mr. J. Clinton
Pryor, and the undersigned. A revival of manuscript magazines,
inaugurated by the appearance of Sub-Lieut. McKeag's =Northumbrian=, is
in a measure solving the problems created by the high price of printing.
Next month the undersigned will put into circulation =Hesperia=, a
typewritten magazine designed to foster a closer relationship between
British and American amateurdom.

Judges of Award for the Laureateship contests have been appointed as
follows: Poetry, Mr. Nixon Waterman, a New-England bard who needs no
introduction to the lover of lofty and graceful expression. Verse, Dr.
Henry T. Schnittkind of the Stratford Publishing Co. Essay, Prof. Lewis
P. Shanks of the University of Pennsylvania. Study, Mr. J. Lee Robinson,
Editor of the =Cambridge Tribune=. Story, Mr. William R. Murphy of the
Philadelphia =Evening Ledger=, a former United man of the highest
attainments. Editorial, Hon. Oliver Wayne Stewart, Associate Editor of
=The National Enquirer=.

In doffing the official mantle after a year of executive endeavour, the
undersigned must express regret at his inability to serve in as vigorous
a manner as would the ideal President. He is acutely conscious of his
shortcomings in a position which demands constant care and exertion, and
which imposes a strain that only the robust are perfectly qualified to
bear. It would be impossible for him fully to express his gratitude to
his faithful and capable colleagues, to whose unremitting and
faultlessly co-ordinated efforts all the successes of the present year
must in justice be attributed. Valete!

                                           H. P. LOVECRAFT, President.
 June 26, 1918.




                           _THE
                      UNITED AMATEUR_

  OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE UNITED AMATEUR PRESS ASSOCIATION

 VOLUME XVIII    ATHOL, MASS., NOVEMBER, 1918    NUMBER 2


DEPARTMENT _of_ LITERATURE

The Literature of Rome

H. P. Lovecraft

    _The centre of our studies, the goal of our thoughts, the point to
    which all paths lead and the point from which all paths start again,
    is to be found in Rome and her abiding power._--Freeman.

Few students of mankind, if truly impartial, can fail to select as the
greatest of human institutions that mighty and enduring civilisation
which, first appearing on the banks of the Tiber, spread throughout the
known world and became the direct parent of our own. If to Greece is due
the existence of all modern thought, so to Rome is due its survival and
our possession of it; for it was the majesty of the Eternal City which,
reducing all Western Europe to a single government, made possible the
wide and uniform diffusion of the high culture borrowed from Greece, and
thereby laid the foundation of European enlightenment. To this day the
remnants of the Roman world exhibit a superiority over those parts which
never came beneath the sway of the Imperial Mother; a superiority
strikingly manifest when we contemplate the savage code and ideals of
the Germans, aliens to the priceless heritage of Latin justice,
humanity, and philosophy. The study of Roman literature, then, needs no
plea to recommend it. It is ours by intellectual descent; our bridge to
all antiquity and to those Grecian stores of art and thought which are
the fountain head of existing culture.

In considering Rome and her artistic history, we are conscious of a
subjectivity impossible in the case of Greece or any other ancient
