his face; the flat, heavy features showed his Asiatic origin.

Someone behind this leader impulsively shot an arrow across the glade.
It went over Migul's head and fell short of our cage. Migul turned,
and a rain of arrows thudded harmlessly against its metal body. I
heard the Robot's contemptuous laugh. It made no answering attack, but
stood motionless. And suddenly, thinking it a god whom now they must
placate, the savages fell prostrate before him.

Strange tableau! I saw a ball of white mist across the glade near
Migul. Something was materializing; an imponderable ghost of something
was taking form. In an instant it was the wraith of a cage; then,
where nothing had been, stood a cage. It was solid and substantial--a
metal cage-room, gleaming white in the sunlight.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tableau broke into sound and action. The savages howled. One
scrambled to his feet; then others. The Robot pretended to attack
them. An eery roar came from it as it turned toward the savages, and
in a panic of agonized terror they fled. In a moment they had
disappeared among the distant trees, with Migul's huge figure tramping
noisily after them.

From the doorway of the cage across the glade, a young man was
cautiously gazing. He had seen Migul make off; he saw, doubtless, Mary
and me at the window of this other cage five hundred feet away. He
came cautiously out from the doorway. He was a small, slim young man,
bareheaded, with a pallid face. His black garments were edged with
white, and he seemed unarmed. He hesitated, took a step or two
forward, stopped and stood cautiously peering. In the silence I could
have shouted a warning. But I did not dare. It would have meant Mary's
and my death.

She clung to me. "George, shall we?" she asked.

Harl came slowly forward. Then suddenly from the room behind us there
was a stab of light. It leaped knee-high past us, out through our door
across the glade--a tiny pencil-point of light so brilliantly
blue-white that it stabbed through the bright sunlight unfaded. It
went over Harl's head, but instantly bent down and struck upon him.
There it held the briefest of instants, then was gone.

Harl stood motionless for a second; then his legs bent and he fell.
The sunlight shone full on his crumpled body. And as I stared in
horror, I saw that he was not quite motionless. Writhing? I thought
so: a death agony. Then I realized it was not that.

"Mary, don't--don't look!" I said.

There was no need to tell her. She huddled beside me, shuddering, with
her face pressed against my shoulder.

The body of Harl lay in a crumpled heap. But the clothes were sagging
down. The flesh inside them was melting.... I saw the white face
suddenly leprous; putrescent.... All in this moment, within the
clothes, the body swiftly, decomposed.

In the sunlight of the glade lay a sagging heap of black and white
garments enveloping the skeleton of what a moment before had been a
man!

_(To be continued.)_




When the Moon Turned Green

_By Hal K. Wells_

[Illustration: _The monster whirled to confront Dixon._]

[Sidenote: Outside his laboratory Bruce Dixon finds a world of living
dead men--and above, in the sky, shines a weird green moon.]


It was nearly midnight when Bruce Dixon finished his labors and
wearily rose from before the work-bench of his lonely mountain
laboratory, located in an abandoned mine working in Southern Arizona.

He looked like some weirdly garbed monk of the Middle Ages as he
stretched his tall, lithe figure. His head was completely swathed in a
hood of lead-cloth, broken only by twin eyeholes of green glass. The
hood merged into a long-sleeved tunic of the same fabric, while
lead-cloth gauntlets covered his hands.

The lead-cloth costume was demanded by Dixon's work with radium
compounds. The result of that work lay before him on the bench--a
tiny lead capsule containing a pinhead lump of a substance which Dixon
believed would utterly dwarf earth's most powerful explosives in its
cataclysmic power.

So engrossed had Dixon been in the final stages of his work that for
the last seventy-two hours he had literally lived there in his
laboratory. It remained now only for him to step outside and test the
effect of the little contact grenade, and at the same time get a badly
needed taste of fresh air.

He set the safety catch on the little bomb and slipped it into his
pocket. As he started for the door he threw back his hood, revealing
the ruggedly good-looking face of a young man in the early thirties,
with lines of weariness now etched deeply into the clean-cut features.

       *       *       *       *       *

The moment that Dixon entered the short winding tunnel that led to the
outer air he was vaguely aware that something was wrong. There was a
strange and intangibly sinister quality in the moonlight that streamed
dimly into the winding passage. Even the cool night air itself seemed
charged with a subtle aura of brooding evil.

Dixon reached the entrance and stepped out into the full radiance of
the moonlight. He stopped abruptly and stared around him in utter
amazement.

High in the eastern sky there rode the disc of a full moon, but it was
a moon weirdly different from any that Dixon had ever seen before.
This moon was a deep and baleful green; was glowing with a stark
malignant fire like that which lurks in the blazing heart of a giant
emerald! Bathed in the glow of the intense green rays, the desolate
mountain landscape shone with a new and eery beauty.

Dixon took a dazed step forward. His foot thudded softly into a small
feathered body there in the sparse grass, and he stooped to pick it
up. It was a crested quail, with every muscle as stonily rigid as
though the bird had been dead for hours. Yet Dixon, to his surprise,
felt the slow faint beat of a pulse still in the tiny body.

Then a dim group of unfamiliar objects down in the shadows of a small
gully in front of him caught Dixon's eye. Tucking the body of the
quail inside his tunic for later examination, he hurried down into the
gully. A moment later he was standing by what had been the night camp
of a prospector.

The prospector was still there, his rigid figure wrapped in a blanket,
and his wide-open eyes staring sightlessly at the malignant green moon
in the sky above. Dixon knelt to examine the stricken man's body. It
showed the same mysterious condition as that of the quail, rigidly
stiff in every muscle, yet with the slow pulse and respiration of life
still faintly present.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dixon found the prospector's horse and burro sprawled on the ground
half a dozen yards away, both animals frozen in the same baffling
condition of living death. Dixon's brain reeled as he tried to fathom
the incredible calamity that had apparently overwhelmed the world
while he had been hidden away in his subterranean laboratory. Then a
new and terrible thought assailed him.

If the grim effect of the baleful green rays was universal in its
extent, what then of old Emil Crawford and his niece, Ruth Lawton?
Crawford, an inventor like Dixon, had his laboratory in a valley some
five miles away.

An abrupt chill went over Dixon's heart at the thought of Ruth
Lawton's vivid Titian-haired beauty being forever stilled in the grip
of that eery living death. He and Ruth had loved each other ever
since they had first met.

Dixon broke into a run as he headed for a nearby ridge that looked out
over the valley. His pulse hammered with unusual violence as he
scrambled up the steep incline, and his muscles seemed to be tiring
with strange rapidity. He had a vague feeling that the rays of that
malignant green moon were beating directly into his brain, clouding
his thoughts and draining his physical strength.

Gaining the crest of the ridge, he stopped aghast as he looked down
the valley toward Emil Crawford's place. Near the site of Crawford's
laboratory home was an unearthly pyrotechnic display such as Dixon had
never seen before. An area several hundred yards in diameter seemed
one vivid welter of pulsing colors, with flashing lances of every hue
crisscrossing in and through a great central cloud of ever-changing
opalescence like a fiery aurora borealis gone mad.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dixon fought back the ever-increasing lethargy that was benumbing his
brain, and groped dazedly for a key to this new riddle. Was it some
weird and colossal experiment of Emil Crawford's that was causing the
green rays of death from a transformed moon, an experiment the earthly
base of which was amid the seething play of blazing colors down there
in the valley?

The theory seemed hardly a plausible one. As far as Dixon knew,
Crawford's work had been confined almost entirely to a form of
radio-propelled projectile for use in war-time against marauding
planes.

Dixon shook his head forcibly in a vain effort to clear the stupor
that was sweeping over him. It was strange how the vivid rays of that
malevolent green moon seemed to sear insidiously into one's brain,
stifling thought as a swamp fog stifles the sunlight.

Then Dixon suddenly froze into stark immobility, staring with startled
eyes at the base of a rocky crag thirty yards away. Something was
lurking there in the green-black shadows--a great sprawling black
shape of abysmal horror, with a single flaming opalescent eye fixed
unwinkingly upon Dixon.

The next moment the vivid moon was suddenly obscured by drifting wisps
of cloud. As the green light blurred to an emerald haze, the creature
under the crag came slithering out toward Dixon.

He had a vague glimpse of a monster such as one should see only in
nightmares--a huge loathesome spider-form with a bloated body as long
as that of a man, and great sprawling legs that sent it half a dozen
yards nearer Dixon in one effortless leap.

       *       *       *       *       *

The onslaught proved too much for Dixon's morale, half-dazed as he was
by the green moon's paralyzing rays. With a low inarticulate cry of
terror, he turned and ran, straining every muscle in a futile effort
to distance the frightful thing that inexorably kept pace in the
shadowy emerald gloom behind him.

Dixon's strength faded rapidly after his first wild sprint. Fifty
yards more, and his faltering muscles failed him utterly. The dread
rays of that grim green moon sapped his last faint powers of
resistance. He staggered on for a few more painful steps then sprawled
helplessly to the ground. His brain hovered momentarily upon the verge
of complete unconsciousness.

Then he was suddenly aware of a fluttering struggle, inside his tunic
where he had placed the body of the quail. A moment later and the bird
wriggled free. It promptly spread its wings and flew away, apparently
as vibrantly alive as before the mysterious paralysis had stricken
it.

The incident brought a faint surge of hope to Dixon as he dimly
realized the answer to at least part of the green moon's riddle. The
bird had recovered after being shielded in the lead-cloth of his
tunic. That could only mean one thing--the menace of those green moon
rays must in some unknown way be radioactive. If Dixon could only get
the lead-cloth hood over his own head again he also might cheat the
green doom.

He fumbled at the garment with fingers that seemed as stiff as wooden
blocks. There was a long moment of agony when he feared that his
effort had come too late. Then the hood finally slipped over his head
just as utter oblivion claimed him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dixon came abruptly back to life with the dimly remembered echo of a
woman's scream still ringing in his ears. For a moment he thought that
he was awakening on his cot back in the laboratory after an unusually
vivid and weird nightmare. Then the garish green moonlight around him
brought swift realization that the incredible happenings of the night
were grim reality.

The clouds were gone from the moon, leaving his surroundings again
clearly outlined in the flood of green light. Dixon lifted his head
and cautiously searched the scene, but he could see no trace of the
great spider-form that had pursued him.

Wondering curiously why the creature had abandoned the chase at the
moment when victory was within its grasp, Dixon rose lithely to his
feet. The protecting hood had brought a quick and complete recovery
from the devastating effects of the green moon's rays. His muscles
were again supple, and his brain once more functioned with clearness.

Then abruptly Dixon's blood froze as the sound of a woman's scream
came again. The cry was that of a woman in the last extremity of
terror, and Dixon knew with a terrible certainty that that woman was
Ruth Lawton!

He raced toward the small ridge of rocks from behind which the sound
had apparently come. A moment later he reached the scene, and stopped
horror-stricken.

Three figures were there in a small rock-walled clearing. One was old
Emil Crawford, sprawled unconscious on his side, the soft glow of a
small white globe in a strange head-piece atop his gray hair shining
eerily in the green moonlight.

Near Crawford's body loomed the giant spider-creature, and clutched
firmly in the great claspers just under the monster's terrible fanged
mouth was the slender body of Ruth Lawton. Merciful unconsciousness
had apparently overwhelmed the girl now, for she lay supinely in the
dread embrace, with eyes closed and lips silent.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the monster dropped the girl's body to the ground and whirled to
confront Dixon, for the first time he had a clear view of the thing in
all its horror.

He shuddered in uncontrollable nausea. The incredible size of the
creature was repellent enough, but it was the grisly head of the
monstrosity that struck the final note of horror. That head was more
than half human!

The fangs and other mouth parts were those of a giant tarantula, but
these merged directly into the mutilated but unmistakable head of a
man--with an aquiline nose, staring eyes, and a touseled mop of dirty
brown hair. Resting on top of the head was a metallic head-piece
similar to the one worn by Emil Crawford, but the small globe in this
one blazed with a fiery opalescence.

The creature crouched lower, with its legs twitching in obvious
preparation for a spring. Dixon looked wildly about him for a possible
weapon, but saw nothing. Then he suddenly remembered the little lead
grenade in his pocket. The cataclysmic power of that little bomb
should be more than a match for even this monster.

His fingers closed over the grenade just as the great spider's
twitching legs straightened in a mighty effort that sent it hurtling
through the air straight toward him.

Dixon dodged to one side with a swiftness that caused the monster to
miss by a good yard. Dixon raced a dozen paces farther away, then
whirled to face the great spider. The creature's legs began scuttling
warily forward. It was to be no wild leap through the air this time,
but a swift rush over the ground that Dixon would be powerless to
evade.

Releasing the safety catch of the grenade, Dixon hurled the tiny
missile straight at the rock floor just under the feet of that vast
misshapen creature. There was a vivid flash of blinding blue flame,
then a terrific report. Dazed by the concussion, but unhurt, Dixon
cautiously went over to investigate the result of the explosion.

       *       *       *       *       *

One brief glance was enough. The hideous mass of shattered flesh
sprawling there on the rocks would never again be a menace. The only
thing that had escaped destruction in that shattering blast was the
strange head-piece the thing had worn. Either the small shining globe
was practically indestructible, or else it had been spared by some odd
freak of the explosive, for it still blazed in baleful opalescence
atop the shattered head.

Dixon hurried back to where Emil Crawford and Ruth Lawton lay. The
girl's body was so rigidly inert that Dixon threw back his
encumbering hood and knelt over her for a swift examination. His fears
were quickly realized. Ruth was already a victim of the green moon's
dread paralysis.

"Dixon! Bruce Dixon!"

Dixon turned at the call. Emil Crawford, his face drawn with pain, had
struggled up on one elbow. The old man was obviously fighting off
complete collapse by sheer will power.

"Dixon! Replace Ruth's shining head-piece at once!" Crawford gasped.
"That will make her immune from the Green Death, and then we can--"
The old man's voice swiftly faded away into silence as he again
fainted.

Dixon hurriedly searched the scene and found Ruth's head-piece on the
ground where it had apparently fallen in her first struggle with the
giant spider, but the tiny white globe in the device was shattered and
dark.
