
"Aren't you going to do something, Conway?" she cried.

"Not unless I have to," he replied, composedly. "I don't believe that
he can really hurt us, and if I use force of any kind I'm afraid that it
will kick up enough disturbance to bring Nerado down on us like a hawk
onto a chicken. However, if he takes us much deeper I'll have to go to
work on him. We're getting down pretty close to our limit, and the
bottom's a long ways down yet."

Deeper and deeper the lifeboat was dragged by its dreadful opponent,
whose spiked teeth still tore savagely at the tough outer plating of the
craft, until Costigan reluctantly threw in his power switches. Against
the full propellant thrust the monster could draw them no lower, but
neither could the lifeboat make any headway toward the surface. The
pilot then turned on his beams, but found that they were ineffective. So
closely was the creature wrapped around the submarine that his weapons
could not be brought to bear upon it.

"What can it possibly be, anyway, and what can we do about it?" Clio
asked.

"I thought at first it was something like a devilfish, or possibly an
overgrown starfish, but it isn't," Costigan made answer. "It must be a
kind of flat worm. That doesn't sound reasonable--the thing must be all
of a hundred meters long--but there it is. The only thing left to do
that I can think of is to try to boil him alive."

He closed other circuits, diffusing a terrific beam of pure heat, and
the water all about them burst into furious clouds of steam. The boat
leaped upward as the metallic fins of the gigantic worm fanned vapor
instead of water, but the creature neither released its hold nor ceased
its relentlessly grinding attack. Minute after minute went by, but
finally the worm dropped limply away--cooked through and through;
vanquished only by death.

"Now we've put our foot in it, clear to the neck!" Costigan exclaimed,
as he shot the lifeboat upward at its maximum power. "Look at that! I
knew that Nerado could trace us, but I didn't have any idea that _they_
could!"

Staring with Costigan into the plate, Bradley and the girl saw, not the
Nevian sky-rover they had expected, but a fast submarine cruiser, manned
by the frightful fishes of the greater deeps. It was coming directly
toward the lifeboat, and even as Costigan hurled the little vessel off
at an angle and then sped upward into the air, one of the deadly
offensive rods, tipped with its glowing ball of pure destruction,
flashed through the spot where they would have been had they held their
former course.

But powerful as were the propellant forces of the lifeboat and fiercely
though Costigan applied them, the denizens of the deep clamped a tractor
beam upon the flying vessel before it had gained a mile of altitude.
Costigan aligned his every driving projector as his vessel came to an
abrupt halt in the invisible grip of the beam, then experimented with
various dials.

"There ought to be some way of cutting that beam," he pondered audibly,
"but I don't know enough about their system to do it, and I'm afraid to
monkey around with things too much, because I might accidentally release
the screens we've already got out, and they're stopping altogether too
much stuff for us to do without them right now."

He frowned as he studied the flaring defensive screens, now radiating an
incandescent violet under the concentration of forces being hurled
against them by the warlike fishes, then stiffened suddenly.

"I thought so--they _can_ shoot 'em!" he exclaimed, throwing the
lifeboat into a furious corkscrew turn, and the very air blazed into
flaming splendor as a dazzlingly scintillating ball of energy sped past
them and high into the air beyond.

Then for minutes a spectacular battle raged. The twisting, turning,
leaping airship, small as she was and agile, kept on eluding the
explosive projectiles of the fishes, and her screens neutralized and
re-radiated the full power of the attacking beams. More--since Costigan
did not need to think of sparing his iron, the ocean around the great
submarine began furiously to boil under the full-driven offensive beams
of the tiny Nevian ship. But escape Costigan could not. He could not cut
that tractor beam and the utmost power of his drivers could not wrest
the lifeboat from its tenacious clutch. And slowly but inexorably the
ship of space was being drawn downward toward the ship of ocean's
depths. Downward, in spite of the utmost possible effort of every
projector and generator; and Clio and Bradley, sick at heart, looked
once at each other. Then they looked at Costigan, who, jaw hard set and
eyes unflinchingly upon his plate, was concentrating his attack upon one
turret of the green monster as they settled lower and lower.

"If this is ... if our number is going up, Conway," Clio began,
unsteadily.

"Not yet, it isn't!" he snapped. "Keep a stiff upper lip, girl. We're
still breathing air, and the battle's not over yet!"

Nor was it; but it was not Costigan's efforts, mighty though they were,
that ended the attack of the fishes of the greater deeps. The tractor
beams snapped without warning, and so prodigious were the forces being
exerted by the lifeboat that as it hurled itself away the three
passengers were thrown violently to the floor, in spite of the powerful
gravity controls. Scrambling up on hands and knees, bracing himself as
best he could against the terrific forces, Costigan managed finally to
force a hand up to his panel. He was barely in time; for even as he cut
the driving power to its normal value the outer shell of the lifeboat
was blazing at white heat from the friction of the atmosphere through
which it had been tearing with such an insane acceleration!

"Oh, I see--Nerado to the rescue," Costigan commented, after a glance
into the plate. "I hope that those fish blow him clear out of the
Galaxy!"

"Why?" demanded Clio. "I should think that you'd...."

"Think again," he advised her. "The worse Nerado gets licked the better
for us. I don't really expect that, but if they can keep him busy long
enough, we can get far enough away so that he won't bother about us any
more."

As the lifeboat tore upward through the air at the highest permissible
atmospheric velocity Bradley and Clio peered over Costigan's shoulders
into the plate, watching in fascinated interest the scene which was
being kept in focus upon it. The Nevian ship of space was plunging
downward in a long, slanting dive, her terrific beams of force screaming
out ahead of her. The beams of the little lifeboat had boiled the waters
of the ocean; those of the parent craft seemed literally to blast them
out of existence. All about the green submarine there had been volumes
of furiously-boiling water and dense clouds of vapor; now water and fog
alike disappeared, converted into transparent super-heated steam by the
blasts of Nevian energy. Through that tenuous gas the enormous mass of
the submarine fell like a plummet, her defensive screens flaming an
almost invisible violet, her every offensive weapon vomiting forth solid
and vibratory destruction toward the Nevian cruiser so high in the
angry, scarlet heavens.

For miles the submarine dropped, until the frightful pressure of the
depth drove water into Nerado's beam faster than his forces could
volatilize it. Then in that seething funnel there was waged a starkly
fantastic conflict. At its wildly turbulent bottom lay the submarine,
now apparently trying to escape, but held fast by the tractors of the
space-ship; at its top, smothered almost to the point of invisibility by
billowing masses of steam, hung poised the Nevian cruiser.

As the atmosphere had grown thinner and thinner with increasing
altitude Costigan had regulated his velocity accordingly, keeping the
outer shell of the vessel at the highest temperature consistent with
safety. Now beyond measurable atmospheric pressure, the shell cooled
rapidly and he applied full touring acceleration. At an appalling and
constantly increasing speed the miniature space-ship shot away from the
strange, red planet; and smaller and smaller upon the plate became its
picture. The great vessel of the void had long since plunged beneath the
surface of the sea, to come more closely to grips with the vessel of the
fishes; for a long time nothing of the battle had been visible save
immense clouds of steam, blanketing hundreds of square miles of the
ocean's surface. But just before the picture became too small to reveal
details a few tiny dark spots appeared above the banks of cloud, now
brilliantly illuminated by the rays of the rising sun--dots which might
have been fragments of either vessel, blown bodily from the depths of
the ocean and, riven asunder, hurled high into the air by the incredible
forces at the command of the other.

Nevia a tiny moon and the fierce blue sun rapidly growing smaller in the
distance, Costigan swung his visiray beam into the line of travel and
turned to his companions.

"Well, we're off," he said, scowling. "I hope it was Nerado that got
blown up back there, but I'm afraid it wasn't. He whipped two of those
submarines that we know of, and probably half their fleet besides.
There's no particular reason why that one should be able to take him, so
it's my idea that we should get ready for great gobs of trouble. They'll
chase us, of course; and I'm afraid that with their power, they'll catch
us."

"But what can we do, Conway?" asked Clio.

"Several things," he grinned. "I managed to get quite a lot of dope on
that paralyzing ray and some of their other stuff, and we can install
the necessary equipment in our suits easily enough."

They removed their armor, and Costigan explained in detail the changes
which must be made in the Triplanetary field generators. All three set
vigorously to work--the two officers deftly and surely; Clio uncertainly
and with many questions, but with undaunted spirit. Finally, having done
everything they could do to strengthen their position, they settled down
to the watchful routine of the flight, with every possible instrument
set to detect any sign of the pursuit they so feared.




CHAPTER 13

THE HILL


The heavy cruiser Chicago hung motionless in space, thousands of miles
distant from the warring fleets of space-ships so viciously attacking
and so stubbornly defending Roger's planetoid. In the captain's sanctum
Lyman Cleveland crouched tensely above his ultracameras, his sensitive
fingers touching lightly their micrometric dials. His body was rigid,
his face was set and drawn. Only his eyes moved; flashing back and forth
between his instruments and the smoothly-running strands of spring-steel
wire upon which were being recorded the frightful scenes of carnage and
destruction.

Silent and bitterly absorbed, though surrounded by staring officers
whose fervent, almost unconscious cursing was prayerful in its
intensity, the visiray expert kept his ultra-instruments upon that awful
struggle to its dire conclusion. Flawlessly those instruments noted
every detail of the destruction of Roger's fleet, of the transformation
of the armada of Triplanetary into an unknown fluid, and finally of the
dissolution of the gigantic planetoid itself. Then furiously Cleveland
drove his beam against the crimsonly opaque obscurity into which the
peculiar, viscous stream of substance was disappearing. Time after time
he applied his every watt of power, with no result. A vast volume of
space, roughly ellipsoidal in shape, was closed to him by forces
entirely beyond his experience or comprehension. But suddenly, while his
rays were still trying to pierce that impenetrable murk, it disappeared
instantly and without warning: the illimitable infinity of space once
more lay revealed upon his plates and his beams flashed unimpeded
through the void.

"Back to Tellus, sir?" The _Chicago's_ captain broke the strained
silence.

"I wouldn't say so, if I had the say." Cleveland, baffled and
frustrated, straightened up and shut off his cameras. "We should report
back as soon as possible, of course, but there seems to be a lot of
wreckage out there yet that we can't photograph in detail at this
distance. A close study of it might help us a lot in understanding what
they did and how they did it. I'd say that we should get close-ups of
whatever is left, and do it right away, before it gets scattered all
over space; but of course I can't give you orders."

"You can, though," the captain made surprising answer. "My orders are
that you are in command of this vessel."

"In that case we will proceed at full emergency acceleration to
investigate the wreckage," Cleveland replied, and the cruiser--sole
survivor of Triplanetary's supposedly invincible force--shot away with
every projector delivering its maximum blast.

As the scene of the disaster was approached there was revealed upon the
plates a confused mass of debris; a mass whose individual units were
apparently moving at random, yet which was as a whole still following
the orbit of Roger's planetoid. Space was full of machine parts,
structural members, furniture, flotsam of all kinds; and everywhere were
the bodies of men. Some were encased in space-suits, and it was to these
that the rescuers turned first--space-hardened veterans though the men
of the _Chicago_ were, they did not care even to look at the others.
Strangely enough, however, not one of the floating figures spoke or
moved, and space-line men were hurriedly sent out to investigate.

"All dead." Quickly the dread report came back. "Been dead a long time.
The armor is all stripped off the suits, and all the generators and
other apparatus are all shot. Something funny about it, too--none of
them seem to have been touched, but the machinery of the suits seems to
be about half missing."

"I've got it all on the reels, sir." Cleveland, his close-up survey of
the wreckage finished, turned to the captain. "What they've just
reported checks up with what I have photographed everywhere. I've got an
idea of what might have happened, but it's so new that I'll have to have
some evidence before I'll believe it myself. You might have them bring
in a few of the armored bodies, a couple of those switchboards and
panels floating around out there, and half a dozen miscellaneous pieces
of junk--the nearest things they get hold of, whatever they happen to
be."

"Then back to Tellus at maximum?"

"Right--back to Tellus, as fast as we can possibly get there."

While the _Chicago_ hurtled through space at full power, Cleveland and
the ranking officers of the vessel grouped themselves about the salvaged
wreckage. Familiar with space-wrecks as were they all, none of them had
ever seen anything like the material before them. For every part and
instrument was weirdly and meaninglessly disintegrated. There were no
breaks, no marks of violence, and yet nothing was intact. Bolt-holes
stared empty, cores, shielding cases and needles had disappeared, the
vital parts of every instrument hung awry, disorganization reigned
rampant and supreme.

"I never imagined such a mess," the captain said, after a long and
silent study of the objects. "If you have a theory to cover _that_,
Cleveland, I would like to hear it!"

"I want you to notice something first," the expert replied. "But don't
look for what's there--look for what _isn't_ there."

"Well, the armor is gone. So are the shielding cases, shafts, spindles,
the housings and stems ..." the captain's voice died away as his eyes
raced over the collection. "Why everything that was made of wood,
bakelite, copper, aluminum, silver, bronze, or anything but steel hasn't
been touched, and every bit of that is gone. But that doesn't make
sense--what does it mean?"

"I don't know--yet," Cleveland replied, slowly. "But I'm afraid that
there's more, and worse." He opened a space-suit reverently, revealing
the face; a face calm and peaceful, but utterly, sickeningly white.
Still reverently, he made a deep incision in the brawny neck, severing
the jugular vein, then went on, soberly:

"You never imagined such a thing as _white_ blood, either, but it all
checks up. Someway, somehow, every atom of free or combined iron in this
whole volume of space was made off with."

"Huh? How come? And above all, _why_?" from the amazed and staring
officers.

"You know as much as I do," grimly, ponderingly. "If it were not for the
fact that there are solid asteroids of iron out beyond Mars, I would say
that somebody wanted iron badly enough to wipe out the fleet and the
planetoid to get it. But anyway, whoever they were, they carried enough
power so that our armament didn't bother them at all. They simply took
the metal they wanted and went away with it--so fast that I couldn't
trace them with an ultra-beam. There's only one thing plain; but that's
so plain that it scares me stiff. This whole affair spells intelligence,
with a capital 'I', and that intelligence is anything but friendly. I
want to put Fred Rodebush at work on this just as fast as I can get
him."

He stepped over to his ultra-projector and put in a call for Virgil
Samms, whose face soon appeared upon his screen.

"We got it all, Virgil," he reported. "It's something
extraordinary--bigger, wider, and deeper than any of us dreamed. It may
be urgent, too, so I think I had better shoot the stuff in on an
ultra-beam and save some time. Fred has a telemagneto recorder there
that he can synchronize with this outfit easily enough. Right?"

"Right. Good work, Lyman--thanks," came back terse approval and
appreciation, and soon the steel wires were again flashing from reel to
reel. This time, however, their varying magnetic charges were so
modulating ultra-waves that every detail of that calamitous battle of
the void was being screened and recorded in the innermost private
laboratory of the Triplanetary Service.

Eager though he naturally was to join his fellow-scientists, Cleveland
was not impatient during the long, but uneventful journey back to Earth.
There was much to study, many improvements to be made in his
comparatively crude first ultra-camera. Then, too, there were long
conferences with Samms, and particularly with Rodebush, the nuclear
physicist, who would have to do much of the work involved in solving the
riddles of the energies and weapons of the Nevians. Thus it did not seem
long before green Terra grew large beneath the flying sphere of the
_Chicago_.

"Going to have to circle it once, aren't you?" Cleveland asked the chief
pilot. He had been watching that officer closely for minutes, admiring
the delicacy and precision with which the great vessel was being
maneuvered preliminary to entering the Earth's atmosphere.

"Yes," the pilot replied. "We had to come in in the shortest possible
time, and that meant a velocity here that we can't check without a
spiral. However, even at that we saved a lot of time. You can save quite
a bit more, though, by having a rocket-plane come out to meet us
somewhere around fifteen or twenty thousand kilometers, depending upon
where you want to land. With their drives they can match our velocity
and still make the drop direct."

"Guess I'll do that--thanks," and the operative called his chief, only
to learn that his suggestion had already been acted upon.

