at any one place can keep an effective watch upon only those meteors
which come into the earth's atmosphere within some moderate distance of
their station, say 50 or 100 miles, and to watch every part of that
atmosphere would require a large number of stations, estimated at
something more than 10,000, scattered systematically over the whole face
of the earth. If we piece together the several numbers above considered,
taking 14 as a fair average of the hourly number of meteors to be seen
by a single observer at all hours of the night, we shall find for
the total number of meteors encountered by the earth in 24 hours,
14 × 5 × 10,000 × 24 = 16,800,000. Without laying too much stress upon
this particular number, we may fairly say that the meteors picked up by
the earth every day are to be reckoned by millions, and since they come
at all seasons of the year, we shall have to admit that the region
through which the earth moves, instead of being empty space, is really a
dust cloud, each individual particle of dust being a prospective meteor.

On the average these individual particles are very small and very far
apart; a cloud of silver dimes each about 250 miles from its nearest
neighbor is perhaps a fair representation of their average mass and
distance from each other, but, of course, great variations are to be
expected both in the size and in the frequency of the particles. There
must be great numbers of them that are too small to make shooting stars
visible to the naked eye, and such are occasionally seen darting by
chance across the field of view of a telescope.

168. THE ZODIACAL LIGHT is an effect probably due to the reflection of
sunlight from the myriads of these tiny meteors which occupy the space
inside the earth's orbit. It is a faint and diffuse stream of light,
something like the Milky Way, which may be seen in the early evening or
morning stretching up from the sunrise or sunset point of the horizon
along the ecliptic and following its course for many degrees, possibly
around the entire circumference of the sky. It may be seen at any season
of the year, although it shows to the best advantage in spring evenings
and autumn mornings. Look for it.

169. GREAT METEORS.--But there are other meteors, veritable fireballs in
appearance, far more conspicuous and imposing than the ordinary shooting
star. Such a one exploded over the city of Madrid, Spain, on the morning
of February 10, 1896, giving in broad sunlight "a brilliant flash which
was followed ninety seconds later by a succession of terrific noises
like the discharge of a battery of artillery." Fig. 111 shows a large
meteor which was seen in California in the early evening of July 27,
1894, and which left behind it a luminous trail or cloud visible for
more than half an hour.

Not infrequently large meteors are found traveling together, two or
three or more in company, making their appearance simultaneously as did
the California meteor of October 22, 1896, which is described as triple,
the trio following one another like a train of cars, and Arago cites an
instance, from the year 1830, where within a short space of time some
forty brilliant meteors crossed the sky, all moving in the same
direction with a whistling noise and displaying in their flight all the
colors of the rainbow.

The mass of great meteors such as these must be measured in hundreds if
not thousands of pounds, and stories are current, although not very well
authenticated, of even larger ones, many tons in weight, having been
found partially buried in the ground. Of meteors which have been
actually seen to fall from the sky, the largest single fragment
recovered weighs about 500 pounds, but it is only a fragment of the
original meteor, which must have been much more massive before it was
broken up by collision with the atmosphere.

[Illustration: FIG. 111.--The California meteor of July 27, 1894.]

170. THE VELOCITY OF METEORS.--Every meteor, big or little, is subject
to the law of gravitation, and before it encounters the earth must be
moving in some kind of orbit having the sun at its focus, the particular
species of orbit--ellipse, parabola, hyperbola--depending upon the
velocity and direction of its motion. Now, the direction in which a
meteor is moving can be determined without serious difficulty from
observations of its apparent path across the sky made by two or more
observers, but the velocity can not be so readily found, since the
meteors go too fast for any ordinary process of timing. But by
photographing one of them two or three times on the same plate, with an
interval of only a tenth of a second between exposures, Dr. Elkin has
succeeded in showing, in a few cases, that their velocities varied from
20 to 25 miles per second, and must have been considerably greater than
this before the meteors encountered the earth's atmosphere. This is a
greater velocity than that of the earth in its orbit, 19 miles per
second, as might have been anticipated, since the mere fact that meteors
can be seen at all in the evening hours shows that some of them at least
must travel considerably faster than the earth, for, counting in the
direction of the earth's motion, the region of sunset and evening is
always on the rear side of the earth, and meteors in order to strike
this region must overtake it by their swifter motion. We have here, in
fact, the reason why meteors are especially abundant in the morning
hours; at this time the observer is on the front side of the earth which
catches swift and slow meteors alike, while the rear is pelted only by
the swifter ones which follow it.

A comparison of the relative number of morning and evening meteors makes
it probable that the average meteor moves, relative to the sun, with a
velocity of about 26 miles per second, which is very approximately the
average velocity of comets when they are at the earth's distance from
the sun. Astronomers, therefore, consider meteors as well as comets to
have the parabola and the elongated ellipse as their characteristic
orbits.

171. METEOR SHOWERS--THE RADIANT.--There is evident among meteors a
distinct tendency for individuals, to the number of hundreds or even
hundreds of millions, to travel together in flocks or swarms, all going
the same way in orbits almost exactly alike. This gregarious tendency is
made manifest not only by the fact that from time to time there are
unusually abundant meteoric displays, but also by a striking peculiarity
of their behavior at such times. The meteors all seem to come from a
particular part of the heavens, as if here were a hole in the sky
through which they were introduced, and from which they flow away in
every direction, even those which do not visibly start from this place
having paths among the stars which, if prolonged backward, would pass
through it. The cause of this appearance may be understood from Fig.
112, which represents a group of meteors moving together along parallel
paths toward an observer at _D_. Traveling unseen above the earth until
they encounter the upper strata of its atmosphere, they here become
incandescent and speed on in parallel paths, _1_, _2_, _3_, _4_, _5_,
_6_, which, as seen by the observer, are projected back against the sky
into luminous streaks that, as is shown by the arrowheads, _b_, _c_,
_d_, all seem to radiate from the point _a_--i. e., from the point in
the sky whose direction from the observer is parallel to the paths of
the meteors.

[Illustration: FIG. 112.--Explanation of the radiant of a meteoric
shower.--DENNING.]

Such a display is called a meteor shower, and the point _a_ is called
its radiant. Note how those meteors which appear near the radiant all
have short paths, while those remote from it in the sky have longer
ones. Query: As the night wears on and the stars shift toward the west,
will the radiant share in their motion or will it be left behind? Would
the luminous part of the path of any of these meteors pass across the
radiant from one side to the other? Is such a crossing of the radiant
possible under any circumstances? Fig. 113 shows how the meteor paths
are grouped around the radiant of a strongly marked shower. Select from
it the meteors which do not belong to this shower.

[Illustration: FIG. 113.--The radiant of a meteoric shower, showing
also the paths of three meteors which do not belong to this
shower.--DENNING.]

Many hundreds of these radiants have been observed in the sky, each of
which represents an orbit along which a group of meteors moves, and the
relation of one of these orbits to that of the earth is shown in Fig.
114. The orbit of the meteors is an ellipse extending out beyond the
orbit of Uranus, but so eccentric that a part of it comes inside the
orbit of the earth, and the figure shows only that part of it which lies
nearest the sun. The Roman numerals which are placed along the earth's
orbit show the position of the earth at the beginning of the tenth
month, eleventh month, etc. The meteors flow along their orbit in a long
procession, whose direction of motion is indicated by the arrow heads,
and the earth, coming in the opposite direction, plunges into this
stream and receives the meteor shower when it reaches the intersection
of the two orbits. The long arrow at the left of the figure represents
the direction of motion of another meteor shower which encounters the
earth at this point.

[Illustration: FIG. 114.--The orbits of the earth and the November
meteors.]

Can you determine from the figure answers to the following questions? On
what day of the year will the earth meet each of these showers? Will the
radiant points of the showers lie above or below the plane of the
earth's orbit? Will these meteors strike the front or the rear of the
earth? Can they be seen in the evening hours?

From many of the radiants year after year, upon the same day or week in
each year, there comes a swarm of shooting stars, showing that there
must be a continuous procession of meteors moving along this orbit, so
that some are always ready to strike the earth whenever it reaches the
intersection of its orbit with theirs. Such is the explanation of the
shower which appears each year in the first half of August, and whose
meteors are sometimes called Perseids, because their radiant lies in the
constellation Perseus, and a similar explanation holds for all the star
showers which are repeated year after year.

172. THE LEONIDS.--There is, however, a kind of star shower, of which
the Leonids (radiant in Leo) is the most conspicuous type, in which the
shower, although repeated from year to year, is much more striking in
some years than in others. Thus, to quote from the historian: "In 1833
the shower was well observed along the whole eastern coast of North
America from the Gulf of Mexico to Halifax. The meteors were most
numerous at about 5 A. M. on November 13th, and the rising sun could not
blot out all traces of the phenomena, for large meteors were seen now
and then in full daylight. Within the scope that the eye could contain,
more than twenty could be seen at a time shooting in every direction.
Not a cloud obscured the broad expanse, and millions of meteors sped
their way across in every point of the compass. Their coruscations were
bright, gleaming, and incessant, and they fell thick as the flakes in
the early snows of December." But, so far as is known, none of them
reached the ground. An illiterate man on the following day remarked:
"The stars continued to fall until none were left. I am anxious to see
how the heavens will appear this evening, for I believe we shall see no
more stars."

An eyewitness in the Southern States thus describes the effect of this
shower upon the plantation negroes: "Upward of a hundred lay prostrate
upon the ground, some speechless and some with the bitterest cries, but
with their hands upraised, imploring God to save the world and them. The
scene was truly awful, for never did rain fall much thicker than the
meteors fell toward the earth--east, west, north, and south it was the
same." In the preceding year a similar but feebler shower from the same
radiant created much alarm in France, and through the old historic
records its repetitions may be traced back at intervals of 33 or 34
years, although with many interruptions, to October 12, 902, O. S., when
"an immense number of falling stars were seen to spread themselves over
the face of the sky like rain."

Such a star shower differs from the one repeated every year chiefly in
the fact that its meteors, instead of being drawn out into a long
procession, are mainly clustered in a single flock which may be long
enough to require two or three or four years to pass a given point of
its orbit, but which is far from extending entirely around it, so that
meteors from this source are abundant only in those years in which the
flock is at or near the intersection of its orbit with that of the
earth. The fact that the Leonid shower is repeated at intervals of 33 or
34 years (it appeared in 1799, 1832-'33, 1866-'67) shows that this is
the "periodic time" in its orbit, which latter must of course be an
ellipse, and presumably a long and narrow one. It is this orbit which is
shown in Fig. 114, and the student should note in this figure that if
the meteor stream at the point where it cuts through the plane of the
earth's orbit were either nearer to or farther from the sun than is the
earth there could be no shower; the earth and the meteors would pass by
without a collision. Now, the meteors in their motion are subject to
perturbations, particularly by the large planets Jupiter, Saturn, and
Uranus, which slightly change the meteor orbit, and it seems certain
that the changes thus produced will sometimes thrust the swarm inside or
outside the orbit of the earth, and thus cause a failure of the shower
at times when it is expected. The meteors were due at the crossing of
the orbits in November, 1899 and 1900, and, although a few were then
seen, the shower was far from being a brilliant one, and its failure was
doubtless caused by the outer planets, which switched the meteors aside
from the path in which they had been moving for a century. Whether they
will be again switched back so as to produce future showers is at the
present time uncertain.

173. CAPTURE OF THE LEONIDS.--But a far more striking effect of
perturbations is to be found in Fig. 115, which shows the relation of
the Leonid orbit to those of the principal planets, and illustrates a
curious chapter in the history of the meteor swarm that has been worked
out by mathematical analysis, and is probably a pretty good account of
what actually befell them. Early in the second century of the Christian
era this flock of meteors came down toward the sun from outer space,
moving along a parabolic orbit which would have carried it just inside
the orbit of Jupiter, and then have sent it off to return no more. But
such was not to be its fate. As it approached the orbit of Uranus, in
the year 126 A. D., that planet chanced to be very near at hand and
perturbed the motion of the meteors to such an extent that the character
of their orbit was completely changed into the ellipse shown in the
figure, and in this new orbit they have moved from that time to this,
permanent instead of transient members of the solar system. The
perturbations, however, did not end with the year in which the meteors
were captured and annexed to the solar system, but ever since that time
Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus have been pulling together upon the orbit,
and have gradually turned it around into its present position as shown
in the figure, and it is chiefly this shifting of the orbit's position
in the thousand years that have elapsed since 902 A. D. that makes the
meteor shower now come in November instead of in October as it did
then.

[Illustration: FIG. 115.--Supposed capture of the November meteors by
Uranus.]

174. BREAKING UP A METEOR SWARM.--How closely packed together these
meteors were at the time of their annexation to the solar system is
unknown, but it is certain that ever since that time the sun has been
exerting upon them a tidal influence tending to break up the swarm and
distribute its particles around the orbit, as the Perseids are
distributed, and, given sufficient time, it will accomplish this, but up
to the present the work is only partly done. A certain number of the
meteors have gained so much over the slower moving ones as to have made
an extra circuit of the orbit and overtaken the rear of the procession,
so that there is a thin stream of them extending entirely around the
orbit and furnishing in every November a Leonid shower; but by far the
larger part of the meteors still cling together, although drawn out into
a stream or ribbon, which, though very thin, is so long that it takes
some three years to pass through the perihelion of its orbit. It is only
when the earth plunges through this ribbon, as it should in 1899, 1900,
1901, that brilliant Leonid showers can be expected.

175. RELATION OF COMETS AND METEORS.--It appears from the foregoing that
meteors and comets move in similar orbits, and we have now to push the
analogy a little further and note that in some instances at least they
move in identically the same orbit, or at least in orbits so like that
an appreciable difference between them is hardly to be found. Thus a
comet which was discovered and observed early in the year 1866, moves in
the same orbit with the Leonid meteors, passing its perihelion about ten
months ahead of the main body of the meteors. If it were set back in its
orbit by ten months' motion, _it would be a part of the meteor swarm_.
Similarly, the Perseid meteors have a comet moving in their orbit
actually immersed in the stream of meteor particles, and several other
of the more conspicuous star showers have comets attending them.

Perhaps the most remarkable case of this character is that of a shower
which comes in the latter part of November from the constellation
Andromeda, and which from its association with the comet called Biela
(after the name of its discoverer) is frequently referred to as the
Bielid shower. This comet, an inconspicuous one moving in an unusually
small elliptical orbit, had been observed at various times from 1772
down to 1846 without presenting anything remarkable in its appearance;
but about the beginning of the latter year, with very little warning, it
broke in two, and for three months the pieces were watched by
astronomers moving off, side by side, something more than half as far
apart as are the earth and moon. It disappeared, made the circuit of its
orbit, and six years later came back, with the fragments nearly ten
times as far apart as before, and after a short stay near the earth once
more disappeared in the distance, never to be seen again, although the
fragments should have returned to perihelion at least half a dozen times
since then. In one respect the orbit of the comet was remarkable: it
passed through the place in which the earth stands on November 27th of
each year, so that if the comet were at that particular part of its
orbit on any November 27th, a collision between it and the earth would
be inevitable. So far as is known, no such collision with the comet has
ever occurred, but the Bielid meteors which are strung along its orbit
do encounter the earth on that date, in greater or less abundance in
different years, and are watched with much interest by the astronomers
who look upon them as the final appearance of the _débris_ of a worn-out
comet.

176. PERIODIC COMETS.--The Biela comet is a specimen of the type which
astronomers call periodic comets--i. e., those which move in small
ellipses and have correspondingly short periodic times, so that they
return frequently and regularly to perihelion. The comets which
accompany the other meteor swarms--Leonids, Perseids, etc.--also belong
to this class as do some 30 or 40 others which have periodic times less
than a century. As has been already indicated, these deviations from the
normal parabolic orbit call for some special explanation, and the
substance of that explanation is contained in the account of the Leonid
meteors and their capture by Uranus. Any comet may be thus captured by
the attraction of a planet near which it passes. It is only necessary
that the perturbing action of the planet should result in a diminution
of the comet's velocity, for we have already learned that it is this
velocity which determines the character of the orbit, and anything less
than the velocity appropriate to a parabola must produce an
ellipse--i. e., a closed orbit around which the body will revolve time
after time in endless succession. We note in Fig. 115 that when the
Leonid swarm encountered Uranus it passed _in front of_ the planet and
had its velocity diminished and its orbit changed into an ellipse
thereby. It might have passed behind Uranus, it would have passed behind
had it come a little later, and the effect would then have been just the
opposite. Its velocity would have been increased, its orbit changed to a
hyperbola, and it would have left the solar system more rapidly than it
came into it, thrust out instead of held in by the disturbing planet. Of
such cases we can expect no record to remain, but the captured comet is
its own witness to what has happened, and bears imprinted upon its orbit
the brand of the planet which slowed down its motion. Thus in Fig. 115
the changed orbit of the meteors has its _aphelion_ (part remotest from
the sun) quite close to the orbit of Uranus, and one of its nodes,
[mho], the point in which it cuts through the plane of the ecliptic from
north to south side, is also very near to the same orbit. It is these
two marks, aphelion and node, which by their position identify Uranus as
the planet instrumental in capturing the meteor swarm, and the date of
the capture is found by working back with their respective periodic
times to an epoch at which planet and comet were simultaneously near
this node.

Jupiter, by reason of his great mass, is an especially efficient
capturer of comets, and Fig. 116 shows his group of captives, his
family of comets as they are sometimes called. The several orbits are
marked with the names commonly given to the comets. Frequently this is
the name of their discoverer, but often a different system is
followed--e. g., the name 1886, IV, means the fourth comet to pass
through perihelion in the year 1886. The other great planets--Saturn,
Uranus, Neptune--have also their families of captured comets, and
according to Schulhof, who does not entirely agree with the common
opinion about captured comets, the earth has caught no less than nine of
these bodies.

[Illustration: FIG. 116.--Jupiter's family of comets.]

177. COMET GROUPS.--But there is another kind of comet family, or comet
group as it is called, which deserves some notice, and which is best
exemplified by the Great Comet of 1882 and its relatives. No less than
four other comets are known to be traveling in substantially the same
orbit with this one, the group consisting of comets 1668, I; 1843, I;
1880, I; 1882, II; 1887, I. The orbit itself is not quite a parabola,
but a very elongated ellipse, whose major axis and corresponding
periodic time can not be very accurately determined from the available
data, but it certainly extends far beyond the orbit of Neptune, and
requires not less than 500 years for the comet to complete a revolution
in it. It was for a time supposed that some one of the recent comets of
this group of five might be a return of the comet of 1668 brought back
ahead of time by unknown perturbations. There is still a possibility of
this, but it is quite out of the question to suppose that the last four
members of the group are anything other than separate and distinct
comets moving in practically the same orbit. This common orbit suggests
a common origin for the comets, but leaves us to conjecture how they
became separated.

The observed orbits of these five comets present some slight
discordances among themselves, but if we suppose each comet to move in
the average of the observed paths it is a simple matter to fix their
several positions at the present time. They have all receded from the
sun nearly on line toward the bright star Sirius, and were all of them,
at the beginning of the year 1900, standing nearly motionless inside of
a space not bigger than the sun and distant from the sun about 150 radii
of the earth's orbit. The great rapidity with which they swept through
that part of their orbit near the sun (see § 162) is being compensated
by the present extreme slowness of their motions, so that the comets of
