they have stated some of these questions in their writings, to
prove that this science contains difficulties, to silence those
who pretend they find nothing in it above their ability, to warn
mathematicians against undertaking to answer every question that
may be proposed, and to excite men of genius to attempt their
solution. Of these I have selected seven.

1. To divide 10 into two parts, such, that when each part is
added to its square-root and the sums multiplied together, the
product is equal to the supposed number.

2. What square is that, which being increased or diminished by
10, the sum and remainder are both square numbers?

3. A person said he owed to Zaid 10 all but the square-root of
what he owed to Amir, and that he owed Amir 5 all but the
square-root of what he owed Zaid.

4. To divide a cube number into two cube numbers.

5. To divide 10 into two parts such, that if each is divided by
the other, and the two quotients are added together, the sum is
equal to one of the parts.

6. There are three square numbers in continued geometric
proportion, such, that the sum of the three is a square number.

7. There is a square, such, that when it is increased and
diminished by its root and 2, the sum and the difference are
squares.--KHULASAT-AL-HISAB.

                         _Algebra; quoted in Hutton: A
                         Philosophical and Mathematical
                         Dictionary (London, 1815), Vol. 1, p.
                         70._


=1739.= The solution of such questions as these [referring to the
solution of cubic equations] depends on correct judgment, aided
by the assistance of God.--BIJA GANITA.

                         _Quoted in Hutton: A Philosophical and
                         Mathematical Dictionary (London, 1815),
                         Vol. 1, p. 65._


=1740.= For what is the theory of determinants? It is an algebra
upon algebra; a calculus which enables us to combine and foretell
the results of algebraical operations, in the same way as algebra
itself enables us to dispense with the performance of the special
operations of arithmetic. All analysis must ultimately clothe
itself under this form.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Philosophical Magazine, Vol. 1, (1851),
                         p. 300; Collected Mathematical Papers,
                         Vol. 1, p. 247._


=1741.=

    Fuchs. Fast moecht' ich nun _moderne Algebra_ studieren.

    Meph.  Ich wuenschte nicht euch irre zu fuehren.
           Was diese Wissenschaft betrifft,
           Es ist so schwer, die leere Form zu meiden,
           Und wenn ihr es nicht recht begrifft,
           Vermoegt die Indices ihr kaum zu unterscheiden.
           Am Besten ist's, wenn ihr nur _Einem_ traut
           Und auf des Meister's Formeln baut.
           Im Ganzen--haltet euch an die _Symbole_.
           Dann geht ihr zu der Forschung Wohle
           Ins sichre Reich der Formeln ein.

    Fuchs. Ein Resultat muss beim Symbole sein?

    Meph.  Schon gut! Nur muss man sich nicht alzu aengstlich
             quaelen.
           Denn eben, wo die Resultate fehlen,
           Stellt ein Symbol zur rechten Zeit sich ein.
           Symbolisch laesst sich alles schreiben,
           Muesst nur im Allgemeinen bleiben.
           Wenn man der Gleichung Loesung nicht erkannte,
           Schreibt man sie als Determinante.
           Schreib' was du willst, nur rechne _nie_ was aus.
           Symbole lassen trefflich sich traktieren,
           Mit einem Strich ist alles auszufuehren,
           Und mit Symbolen kommt man immer aus.
                                                --LASSWITZ, KURD.

                         _Der Faust-Tragoedie (-n)ter Teil;
                         Zeitschrift fuer mathematischen und
                         naturwissenschaftlichen Unterricht, Bd.
                         14, p. 317._

    Fuchs. To study _modern algebra_ I'm most persuaded.

    Meph.  'Twas not my wish to lead thee astray.
           But as concerns this science, truly
           'Tis difficult to avoid the empty form,
           And should'st thou lack clear comprehension,
           Scarcely the indices thou'll know apart.
           'Tis safest far to trust but _one_
           And built upon your master's formulas.
           On the whole--cling closely to your _symbols_.
           Then, for the weal of research you may gain
           An entrance to the formula's sure domain.

    Fuchs. The symbol, it must lead to some result?

    Meph.  Granted. But never worry about results,
           For, mind you, just where the results are wanting
           A symbol at the nick of time appears.
           To symbolic treatment all things yield,
           Provided we stay in the general field.
           Should a solution prove elusive,
           Write the equation in determinant form.
           Write what you please, but _never_ calculate.
           Symbols are patient and long suffering,
           A single stroke completes the whole affair.
           Symbols for every purpose do suffice.


=1742.= As all roads are said to lead to Rome, so I find, in my
own case at least, that all algebraic inquiries sooner or later
end at the Capitol of Modern Algebra over whose shining portal
is inscribed "Theory of Invariants."--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _On Newton's Rule for the Discovery of
                         Imaginary Roots; Collected Mathematical
                         Papers, Vol. 2, p. 380._


=1743.= If we consider the beauty of the theorem [Sylvester's
Theorem on Newton's Rule for the Discovery of Imaginary Roots]
which has now been expounded, the interest which belongs to the
rule associated with the great name of Newton, and the long lapse
of years during which the reason and extent of that rule remained
undiscovered by mathematicians, among whom Maclaurin, Waring and
Euler are explicitly included, we must regard Professor
Sylvester's investigations made to the Theory of Equations in
modern times, justly to be ranked with those of Fourier, Sturm
and Cauchy.--TODHUNTER, I.

                         _Theory of Equations (London, 1904), p.
                         250._


=1744.= Considering the remarkable elegance, generality, and
simplicity of the method [Homer's Method of finding the numerical
values of the roots of an equation], it is not a little
surprising that it has not taken a more prominent place in
current mathematical textbooks.... As a matter of fact, its
spirit is purely arithmetical; and its beauty, which can only be
appreciated after one has used it in particular cases, is of that
indescribably simple kind, which distinguishes the use of
position in the decimal notation and the arrangement of the
simple rules of arithmetic. It is, in short, one of those things
whose invention was the creation of a commonplace.

                                              --CHRYSTAL, GEORGE.

                         _Algebra (London and Edinburgh, 1893),
                         Vol. 1, chap. 15, sect. 25._


=1745.= _To a missing member of a family group of terms in an
algebraical formula._

          Lone and discarded one! divorced by fate,
        Far from thy wished-for fellows--whither art
            flown?
        Where lingerest thou in thy bereaved estate,
        Like some lost star, or buried meteor stone?
        Thou mindst me much of that presumptuous one
        Who loth, aught less than greatest, to be
            great,
        From Heaven's immensity fell headlong down
        To live forlorn, self-centred, desolate:
        Or who, like Heraclid, hard exile bore,
        Now buoyed by hope, now stretched on rack of
            fear,
        Till throned Astaea, wafting to his ear
        Words of dim portent through the Atlantic roar,
        Bade him "the sanctuary of the Muse revere
        And strew with flame the dust of Isis'
            shore."
                                          --SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Inaugural Lecture, Oxford, 1885;
                         Nature, Vol. 33, p. 228._


=1746.= In every subject of inquiry there are certain entities,
the mutual relations of which, under various conditions, it is
desirable to ascertain. A certain combination of these entities
are submitted to certain processes or are made the subjects of
certain operations. The theory of invariants in its widest
scientific meaning determines these combinations, elucidates
their properties, and expresses results when possible in terms of
them. Many of the general principles of political science and
economics can be represented by means of invariantive relations
connecting the factors which enter as entities into the special
problems. The great principle of chemical science which asserts
that when elementary or compound bodies combine with one another
the total weight of the materials is unchanged, is another case
in point. Again, in physics, a given mass of gas under the
operation of varying pressure and temperature has the well-known
invariant, pressure multiplied by volume and divided by absolute
temperature.... In mathematics the entities under examination may
be arithmetical, algebraical, or geometrical; the processes to
which they are subjected may be any of those which are met with
in mathematical work.... It is the _principle_ which is so
valuable. It is the _idea_ of invariance that pervades today all
branches of mathematics.--MACMAHON, P. A.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science (1901); Nature, Vol. 64, p.
                         481._


=1747.= [The theory of invariants] has invaded the domain of
geometry, and has almost re-created the analytical theory; but it
has done more than this for the investigations of Cayley have
required a full reconsideration of the very foundations of
geometry. It has exercised a profound influence upon the theory
of algebraic equations; it has made its way into the theory of
differential equations; and the generalisation of its ideas is
opening out new regions of most advanced and profound functional
analysis. And so far from its course being completed, its
questions fully answered, or its interest extinct, there is no
reason to suppose that a term can be assigned to its growth and
its influence.--FORSYTH, A. R.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science (1897); Nature, Vol. 56, p.
                         378._


=1748.= ... the doctrine of Invariants, a theory filling the heavens
like a light-bearing ether, penetrating all the branches of
geometry and analysis, revealing everywhere abiding configurations
in the midst of change, everywhere disclosing the eternal reign of
the law of form.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 28._


=1749.= It is in the mathematical doctrine of Invariance, the
realm wherein are sought and found configurations and types of
being that, amidst the swirl and stress of countless hosts of
transformations remain immutable, and the spirit dwells in
contemplation of the serene and eternal reign of the subtile laws
of Form, it is there that Theology may find, if she will, the
clearest conceptions, the noblest symbols, the most inspiring
intimations, the most illuminating illustrations, and the surest
guarantees of the object of her teaching and her quest, an
Eternal Being, unchanging in the midst of the universal flux.

                                                  --KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 42._


=1750.= I think that young chemists desirous of raising their
science to its proper rank would act wisely in making themselves
master betimes of the theory of algebraic forms. What mechanics
is to physics, that I think is algebraic morphology, founded at
option on the theory of partitions or ideal elements, or both, is
destined to be to the chemistry of the future ... invariants and
isomerism are sister theories.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _American Journal of Mathematics, Vol. 1
                         (1878), p. 126._


=1751.= The great notion of Group, ... though it had barely merged
into consciousness a hundred years ago, has meanwhile become a
concept of fundamental importance and prodigious fertility, not
only affording the basis of an imposing doctrine--the Theory of
Groups--but therewith serving also as a bond of union, a kind of
connective tissue, or rather as an immense cerebro-spinal system,
uniting together a large number of widely dissimilar doctrines as
organs of a single body.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 12._


=1752.= In recent times the view becomes more and more prevalent
that many branches of mathematics are nothing but the theory of
invariants of special groups.--LIE, SOPHUS.

                         _Continuierliche Gruppen--Scheffers
                         (Leipzig, 1893), p. 665._


=1753.= Universal Algebra has been looked on with some suspicion
by many mathematicians, as being without intrinsic mathematical
interest and as being comparatively useless as an engine of
investigation.... But it may be shown that Universal Algebra has
the same claim to be a serious subject of mathematical study as
any other branch of mathematics.--WHITEHEAD, A. N.

                         _Universal Algebra (Cambridge, 1898),
                         Preface, p. vi._


=1754.= [Function] theory was, in effect, founded by Cauchy; but,
outside his own investigations, it at first made slow and
hesitating progress. At the present day, its fundamental ideas
may be said almost to govern most departments of the analysis of
continuous quantity. On many of them, it has shed a completely
new light; it has educed relations between them before unknown.
It may be doubted whether any subject is at the present day so
richly endowed with variety of method and fertility of resource;
its activity is prodigious, and no less remarkable than its
activity is its freshness.--FORSYTH, A. R.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science (1897); Nature, Vol. 56, p.
                         378._


=1755.= Let me mention one other contribution which this theory
[Theory of functions of a complex variable] has made to knowledge
lying somewhat outside our track. During the rigorous revision to
which the foundations of the theory have been subjected in its
re-establishment by Weierstrass, new ideas as regards number and
continuity have been introduced. With him and with others
influenced by him, there has thence sprung a new theory of higher
arithmetic; and with its growth, much has concurrently been
effected in the elucidation of the general notions of number and
quantity.... It thus appears to be the fact that, as with Plato,
or Descartes, or Leibnitz, or Kant, the activity of pure
mathematics is again lending some assistance to the better
comprehension of those notions of time, space, number, quantity,
which underlie a philosophical conception of the universe.

                                                 --FORSYTH, A. R.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science (1897); Nature, Vol. 56, p.
                         378._




  CHAPTER XVIII

  GEOMETRY


=1801.= The science of figures is most glorious and beautiful.
But how inaptly it has received the name geometry!--FRISCHLINUS, N.

                         _Dialog 1._


=1802.= Plato said that God geometrizes continually.--PLUTARCH.

                         _Convivialium disputationum, liber 8,
                         2._


=1803.= [Greek: medeis ageometretos eisito mou ten stegen]. [Let
no one ignorant of geometry enter my door.]--PLATO.

                         _Tzetzes, Chiliad, 8, 972._


=1804.= All the authorities agree that he [Plato] made a study of
geometry or some exact science an indispensable preliminary to
that of philosophy. The inscription over the entrance to his
school ran "Let none ignorant of geometry enter my door," and on
one occasion an applicant who knew no geometry is said to have
been refused admission as a student.--BALL, W. W. R.

                         _History of Mathematics (London, 1901),
                         p. 45._


=1805.= Form and size constitute the foundation of all search for
truth.--PARKER, F. W.

                         _Talks on Pedagogics (New York, 1894),
                         p. 72._


=1806.= At present the science [of geometry] is in flat
contradiction to the language which geometricians use, as will
hardly be denied by those who have any acquaintance with the
study: for they speak of finding the side of a square, and
applying and adding, and so on, as if they were engaged in some
business, and as if all their propositions had a practical end in
view: whereas in reality the science is pursued wholly for the
sake of knowledge.

Certainly, he said.

Then must not a further admission be made?

What admission?

The admission that this knowledge at which geometry aims is of
the eternal, and not of the perishing and transient.

That may be easily allowed. Geometry, no doubt, is the knowledge
of what eternally exists.

Then, my noble friend, geometry will draw the soul towards truth,
and create the mind of philosophy, and raise up that which is now
unhappily allowed to fall down.--PLATO.

                         _Republic [Jowett-Davies], Bk. 7, p.
                         527._


=1807.= Among them [the Greeks] geometry was held in highest
honor: nothing was more glorious than mathematics. But we have
limited the usefulness of this art to measuring and calculating.

                                                        --CICERO.

                         _Tusculanae Disputationes, 1, 2, 5._


=1808.=

                              Geometria,
        Through which a man hath the sleight
        Of length, and brede, of depth, of height.
                                              --GOWER, JOHN.

                         _Confessio Amantis, Bk. 7._


=1809.= Geometrical truths are in a way asymptotes to physical truths,
that is to say, the latter approach the former indefinitely near
without ever reaching them exactly.--D'ALEMBERT.

                         _Quoted in Rebiere: Mathematiques et
                         Mathematiciens (Paris, 1898), p. 10._


=1810.= Geometry exhibits the most perfect example of logical
stratagem.--BUCKLE, H. T.

                         _History of Civilization in England (New
                         York, 1891), Vol. 2, p. 342._


=1811.= It is the glory of geometry that from so few principles,
fetched from without, it is able to accomplish so much.--NEWTON.

                         _Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
                         Mathematica, Praefat._


=1812.= Geometry is the application of strict logic to those
properties of space and figure which are self-evident, and which
therefore cannot be disputed. But the rigor of this science is
carried one step further; for no property, however evident it may
be, is allowed to pass without demonstration, if that can be
given. The question is therefore to demonstrate all geometrical
truths with the smallest possible number of assumptions.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _On the Study and Difficulties of
                         Mathematics (Chicago, 1902), p. 231._


=1813.= Geometry is a true natural science:--only more simple,
and therefore more perfect than any other. We must not suppose
that, because it admits the application of mathematical analysis,
it is therefore a purely logical science, independent of
observation. Every body studied by geometers presents some
primitive phenomena which, not being discoverable by reasoning,
must be due to observation alone.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau], Bk. 1,
                         chap. 3._


=1814.= Geometry in every proposition speaks a language which
experience never dares to utter; and indeed of which she but half
comprehends the meaning. Experience sees that the assertions are
true, but she sees not how profound and absolute is their truth.
She unhesitatingly assents to the laws which geometry delivers,
but she does not pretend to see the origin of their obligation.
She is always ready to acknowledge the sway of pure scientific
principles as a matter of fact, but she does not dream of
offering her opinion on their authority as a matter of right;
still less can she justly claim to herself the source of that
authority.--WHEWELL, WILLIAM.

                         _The Philosophy of the Inductive
                         Sciences, Part 1, Bk. 1, chap. 6, sect.
                         1 (London, 1858)._


=1815.= Geometry is the science created to give understanding
and mastery of the external relations of things; to make easy
the explanation and description of such relations and the
transmission of this mastery.--HALSTED, G. B.

                         _Proceedings of the American Association
                         for the Advancement of Science (1904),
                         p. 359._


=1816.= A mathematical point is the most indivisible and unique
thing which art can present.--DONNE, JOHN.

                         _Letters, 21._


=1817.= It is certain that from its completeness, uniformity and
faultlessness, from its arrangement and progressive character,
and from the universal adoption of the completest and best line
of argument, Euclid's "Elements" stand pre-eminently at the head
of all human productions. In no science, in no department of
knowledge, has anything appeared like this work: for upward of
2000 years it has commanded the admiration of mankind, and that
period has suggested little toward its improvement.--KELLAND, P.

                         _Lectures on the Principles of
                         Demonstrative Mathematics (London,
                         1843), p. 17._


=1818.= In comparing the performance in Euclid with that in
Arithmetic and Algebra there could be no doubt that Euclid had
made the deepest and most beneficial impression: in fact it might
be asserted that this constituted by far the most valuable part
of the whole training to which such persons [students, the
majority of which were not distinguished for mathematical taste
and power] were subjected.--TODHUNTER, I.

                         _Essay on Elementary Geometry; Conflict
                         of Studies and other Essays (London,
                         1873), p. 167._


=1819.= In England the geometry studied is that of Euclid, and I
hope it never will be any other; for this reason, that so much
has been written on Euclid, and all the difficulties of geometry
have so uniformly been considered with reference to the form in
which they appear in Euclid, that the study of that author is a
better key to a great quantity of useful reading than any other.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Elements of Algebra (London, 1837),
                         Introduction._


=1820.= This book [Euclid] has been for nearly twenty-two
centuries the encouragement and guide of that scientific thought
which is one thing with the progress of man from a worse to a
better state. The encouragement; for it contained a body of
knowledge that was really known and could be relied on, and that
moreover was growing in extent and application. For even at the
time this book was written--shortly after the foundation of the
Alexandrian Museum--Mathematics was no longer the merely ideal
science of the Platonic school, but had started on her career of
conquest over the whole world of Phenomena. The guide; for the
aim of every scientific student of every subject was to bring his
knowledge of that subject into a form as perfect as that which
geometry had attained. Far up on the great mountain of Truth,
which all the sciences hope to scale, the foremost of that sacred
sisterhood was seen, beckoning for the rest to follow her. And
hence she was called, in the dialect of the Phythagoreans, "the
purifier of the reasonable soul."--CLIFFORD, W. K.

                         _Lectures and Essays (London, 1901),
                         Vol. 1, p. 354._


=1821.= [Euclid] at once the inspiration and aspiration of
scientific thought.--CLIFFORD, W. K.

                         _Lectures and Essays (London, 1901), Vol
                         1, p. 355._


=1822.= The "elements" of the Great Alexandrian remain for all
time the first, and one may venture to assert, the _only_ perfect
model of logical exactness of principles, and of rigorous
development of theorems. If one would see how a science can be
constructed and developed to its minutest details from a very
small number of intuitively perceived axioms, postulates, and
plain definitions, by means of rigorous, one would almost say
chaste, syllogism, which nowhere makes use of surreptitious or
foreign aids, if one would see how a science may thus be
constructed one must turn to the elements of Euclid.--HANKEL, H.

                         _Die Entwickelung der Mathematik in den
                         letzten Jahrhunderten (Tuebingen, 1884),
                         p. 7._


=1823.= If we consider him [Euclid] as meaning to be what
his commentators have taken him to be, a model of the most
unscrupulous formal rigour, we can deny that he has altogether
succeeded, though we admit that he made the nearest approach.

                                                  --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman
                         Biography and Mythology (London, 1902);
                         Article "Eucleides."_


=1824.= The Elements of Euclid is as small a part of mathematics
as the Iliad is of literature; or as the sculpture of Phidias is
of the world's total art.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 8._


=1825.= I should rejoice to see ... Euclid honourably shelved
or buried "deeper than did ever plummet sound" out of the
schoolboys' reach; morphology introduced into the elements of
algebra; projection, correlation, and motion accepted as aids to
geometry; the mind of the student quickened and elevated and his
faith awakened by early initiation into the ruling ideas of
polarity, continuity, infinity, and familiarization with the
doctrines of the imaginary and inconceivable.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _A Plea for the Mathematician; Nature,
                         Vol. 1, p. 261._


=1826.= The early study of Euclid made me a hater of geometry,
... and yet, in spite of this repugnance, which had become a
second nature in me, whenever I went far enough into any
mathematical question, I found I touched, at last, a geometrical
bottom.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _A Plea for the Mathematician; Nature,
                         Vol. 1, p. 262._


=1827.= Newton had so remarkable a talent for mathematics that
Euclid's Geometry seemed to him "a trifling book," and he wondered
that any man should have taken the trouble to demonstrate
propositions, the truth of which was so obvious to him at the
first glance. But, on attempting to read the more abstruse
geometry of Descartes, without having mastered the elements of the
science, he was baffled, and was glad to come back again to his
Euclid.--PARTON, JAMES.

                         _Sir Isaac Newton._


=1828.= As to the need of improvement there can be no question
whilst the reign of Euclid continues. My own idea of a useful
course is to begin with arithmetic, and then not Euclid but
algebra. Next, not Euclid, but practical geometry, solid as well
as plane; not demonstration, but to make acquaintance. Then not
Euclid, but elementary vectors, conjoined with algebra, and
applied to geometry. Addition first; then the scalar product.
Elementary calculus should go on simultaneously, and come into
the vector algebraic geometry after a bit. Euclid might be an
extra course for learned men, like Homer. But Euclid for children
is barbarous.--HEAVISIDE, OLIVER.

                         _Electro-Magnetic Theory (London, 1893),
                         Vol. 1, p. 148._


=1829.= Geometry is nothing if it be not rigorous, and the whole
educational value of the study is lost, if strictness of
demonstration be trifled with. The methods of Euclid are, by
almost universal consent, unexceptionable in point of rigour.

                                                --SMITH, H. J. S.

                         _Nature, Vol. 8, p. 450._


=1830.= To seek for proof of geometrical propositions by an
appeal to observation proves nothing in reality, except that the
person who has recourse to such grounds has no due apprehension
of the nature of geometrical demonstration. We have heard of
persons who convince themselves by measurement that the
geometrical rule respecting the squares on the sides of a
right-angles triangle was true: but these were persons whose
minds had been engrossed by practical habits, and in whom
speculative development of the idea of space had been stifled by
other employments.--WHEWELL, WILLIAM.

                         _The Philosophy of the Inductive
                         Sciences, (London, 1858), Part 1, Bk. 2,
                         chap. 1, sect. 4._


=1831.= No one has ever given so easy and natural a chain of
geometrical consequences [as Euclid]. There is a never-erring
truth in the results.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman
                         Biography and Mythology (London, 1902);
                         Article "Eucleides."_


=1832.= Beyond question, Egyptian geometry, such as it was, was
eagerly studied by the early Greek philosophers, and was the germ
