
Yes; a copse of dead trees, without leaves, without sap, trees
petrified by the action of the water and here and there overtopped by
gigantic pines.  It was like a coal-pit still standing, holding by the
roots to the broken soil, and whose branches, like fine black paper
cuttings, showed distinctly on the watery ceiling.  Picture to yourself
a forest in the Hartz hanging on to the sides of the mountain, but a
forest swallowed up.  The paths were encumbered with seaweed and fucus,
between which grovelled a whole world of crustacea.  I went along,
climbing the rocks, striding over extended trunks, breaking the sea
bind-weed which hung from one tree to the other; and frightening the
fishes, which flew from branch to branch.  Pressing onward, I felt no
fatigue.  I followed my guide, who was never tired.  What a spectacle!
How can I express it? how paint the aspect of those woods and rocks in
this medium--their under parts dark and wild, the upper coloured with
red tints, by that light which the reflecting powers of the waters
doubled?  We climbed rocks which fell directly after with gigantic
bounds and the low growling of an avalanche.  To right and left ran
long, dark galleries, where sight was lost.  Here opened vast glades
which the hand of man seemed to have worked; and I sometimes asked
myself if some inhabitant of these submarine regions would not suddenly
appear to me.

But Captain Nemo was still mounting.  I could not stay behind.  I
followed boldly.  My stick gave me good help.  A false step would have
been dangerous on the narrow passes sloping down to the sides of the
gulfs; but I walked with firm step, without feeling any giddiness.  Now
I jumped a crevice, the depth of which would have made me hesitate had
it been among the glaciers on the land; now I ventured on the unsteady
trunk of a tree thrown across from one abyss to the other, without
looking under my feet, having only eyes to admire the wild sites of
this region.

There, monumental rocks, leaning on their regularly-cut bases, seemed
to defy all laws of equilibrium.  From between their stony knees trees
sprang, like a jet under heavy pressure, and upheld others which upheld
them.  Natural towers, large scarps, cut perpendicularly, like a
"curtain," inclined at an angle which the laws of gravitation could
never have tolerated in terrestrial regions.

Two hours after quitting the Nautilus we had crossed the line of trees,
and a hundred feet above our heads rose the top of the mountain, which
cast a shadow on the brilliant irradiation of the opposite slope.  Some
petrified shrubs ran fantastically here and there.  Fishes got up under
our feet like birds in the long grass.  The massive rocks were rent
with impenetrable fractures, deep grottos, and unfathomable holes, at
the bottom of which formidable creatures might be heard moving.  My
blood curdled when I saw enormous antennae blocking my road, or some
frightful claw closing with a noise in the shadow of some cavity.
Millions of luminous spots shone brightly in the midst of the darkness.
They were the eyes of giant crustacea crouched in their holes; giant
lobsters setting themselves up like halberdiers, and moving their claws
with the clicking sound of pincers; titanic crabs, pointed like a gun
on its carriage; and frightful-looking poulps, interweaving their
tentacles like a living nest of serpents.

We had now arrived on the first platform, where other surprises awaited
me.  Before us lay some picturesque ruins, which betrayed the hand of
man and not that of the Creator.  There were vast heaps of stone,
amongst which might be traced the vague and shadowy forms of castles
and temples, clothed with a world of blossoming zoophytes, and over
which, instead of ivy, sea-weed and fucus threw a thick vegetable
mantle.  But what was this portion of the globe which had been
swallowed by cataclysms?  Who had placed those rocks and stones like
cromlechs of prehistoric times?  Where was I?  Whither had Captain
Nemo's fancy hurried me?

I would fain have asked him; not being able to, I stopped him--I seized
his arm.  But, shaking his head, and pointing to the highest point of
the mountain, he seemed to say:

"Come, come along; come higher!"

I followed, and in a few minutes I had climbed to the top, which for a
circle of ten yards commanded the whole mass of rock.

I looked down the side we had just climbed.  The mountain did not rise
more than seven or eight hundred feet above the level of the plain; but
on the opposite side it commanded from twice that height the depths of
this part of the Atlantic.  My eyes ranged far over a large space lit
by a violent fulguration.  In fact, the mountain was a volcano.

At fifty feet above the peak, in the midst of a rain of stones and
scoriae, a large crater was vomiting forth torrents of lava which fell
in a cascade of fire into the bosom of the liquid mass.  Thus situated,
this volcano lit the lower plain like an immense torch, even to the
extreme limits of the horizon.  I said that the submarine crater threw
up lava, but no flames.  Flames require the oxygen of the air to feed
upon and cannot be developed under water; but streams of lava, having
in themselves the principles of their incandescence, can attain a white
heat, fight vigorously against the liquid element, and turn it to
vapour by contact.

Rapid currents bearing all these gases in diffusion and torrents of
lava slid to the bottom of the mountain like an eruption of Vesuvius on
another Terra del Greco.

There indeed under my eyes, ruined, destroyed, lay a town--its roofs
open to the sky, its temples fallen, its arches dislocated, its columns
lying on the ground, from which one would still recognise the massive
character of Tuscan architecture.  Further on, some remains of a
gigantic aqueduct; here the high base of an Acropolis, with the
floating outline of a Parthenon; there traces of a quay, as if an
ancient port had formerly abutted on the borders of the ocean, and
disappeared with its merchant vessels and its war-galleys. Farther on
again, long lines of sunken walls and broad, deserted streets--a
perfect Pompeii escaped beneath the waters.  Such was the sight that
Captain Nemo brought before my eyes!

Where was I?  Where was I?  I must know at any cost.  I tried to speak,
but Captain Nemo stopped me by a gesture, and, picking up a piece of
chalk-stone, advanced to a rock of black basalt, and traced the one
word:


ATLANTIS


What a light shot through my mind!  Atlantis! the Atlantis of Plato,
that continent denied by Origen and Humbolt, who placed its
disappearance amongst the legendary tales.  I had it there now before
my eyes, bearing upon it the unexceptionable testimony of its
catastrophe.  The region thus engulfed was beyond Europe, Asia, and
Lybia, beyond the columns of Hercules, where those powerful people, the
Atlantides, lived, against whom the first wars of ancient Greeks were
waged.

Thus, led by the strangest destiny, I was treading under foot the
mountains of this continent, touching with my hand those ruins a
thousand generations old and contemporary with the geological epochs.
I was walking on the very spot where the contemporaries of the first
man had walked.

Whilst I was trying to fix in my mind every detail of this grand
landscape, Captain Nemo remained motionless, as if petrified in mute
ecstasy, leaning on a mossy stone.  Was he dreaming of those
generations long since disappeared?  Was he asking them the secret of
human destiny?  Was it here this strange man came to steep himself in
historical recollections, and live again this ancient life--he who
wanted no modern one?  What would I not have given to know his
thoughts, to share them, to understand them!  We remained for an hour
at this place, contemplating the vast plains under the brightness of
the lava, which was some times wonderfully intense.  Rapid tremblings
ran along the mountain caused by internal bubblings, deep noise,
distinctly transmitted through the liquid medium were echoed with
majestic grandeur.  At this moment the moon appeared through the mass
of waters and threw her pale rays on the buried continent.  It was but
a gleam, but what an indescribable effect!  The Captain rose, cast one
last look on the immense plain, and then bade me follow him.

We descended the mountain rapidly, and, the mineral forest once passed,
I saw the lantern of the Nautilus shining like a star.  The Captain
walked straight to it, and we got on board as the first rays of light
whitened the surface of the ocean.



CHAPTER X

THE SUBMARINE COAL-MINES

The next day, the 20th of February, I awoke very late:  the fatigues of
the previous night had prolonged my sleep until eleven o'clock. I
dressed quickly, and hastened to find the course the Nautilus was
taking.  The instruments showed it to be still toward the south, with a
speed of twenty miles an hour and a depth of fifty fathoms.

The species of fishes here did not differ much from those already
noticed.  There were rays of giant size, five yards long, and endowed
with great muscular strength, which enabled them to shoot above the
waves; sharks of many kinds; amongst others, one fifteen feet long,
with triangular sharp teeth, and whose transparency rendered it almost
invisible in the water.

Amongst bony fish Conseil noticed some about three yards long, armed at
the upper jaw with a piercing sword; other bright-coloured creatures,
known in the time of Aristotle by the name of the sea-dragon, which are
dangerous to capture on account of the spikes on their back.

About four o'clock, the soil, generally composed of a thick mud mixed
with petrified wood, changed by degrees, and it became more stony, and
seemed strewn with conglomerate and pieces of basalt, with a sprinkling
of lava.  I thought that a mountainous region was succeeding the long
plains; and accordingly, after a few evolutions of the Nautilus, I saw
the southerly horizon blocked by a high wall which seemed to close all
exit.  Its summit evidently passed the level of the ocean.  It must be
a continent, or at least an island--one of the Canaries, or of the Cape
Verde Islands.  The bearings not being yet taken, perhaps designedly, I
was ignorant of our exact position.  In any case, such a wall seemed to
me to mark the limits of that Atlantis, of which we had in reality
passed over only the smallest part.

Much longer should I have remained at the window admiring the beauties
of sea and sky, but the panels closed.  At this moment the Nautilus
arrived at the side of this high, perpendicular wall.  What it would
do, I could not guess.  I returned to my room; it no longer moved.  I
laid myself down with the full intention of waking after a few hours'
sleep; but it was eight o'clock the next day when I entered the saloon.
I looked at the manometer.  It told me that the Nautilus was floating
on the surface of the ocean.  Besides, I heard steps on the platform.
I went to the panel.  It was open; but, instead of broad daylight, as I
expected, I was surrounded by profound darkness.  Where were we?  Was I
mistaken?  Was it still night?  No; not a star was shining and night
has not that utter darkness.

I knew not what to think, when a voice near me said:

"Is that you, Professor?"

"Ah!  Captain," I answered, "where are we?"

"Underground, sir."

"Underground!"  I exclaimed.  "And the Nautilus floating still?"

"It always floats."

"But I do not understand."

"Wait a few minutes, our lantern will be lit, and, if you like light
places, you will be satisfied."

I stood on the platform and waited.  The darkness was so complete that
I could not even see Captain Nemo; but, looking to the zenith, exactly
above my head, I seemed to catch an undecided gleam, a kind of twilight
filling a circular hole.  At this instant the lantern was lit, and its
vividness dispelled the faint light.  I closed my dazzled eyes for an
instant, and then looked again.  The Nautilus was stationary, floating
near a mountain which formed a sort of quay.  The lake, then,
supporting it was a lake imprisoned by a circle of walls, measuring two
miles in diameter and six in circumference.  Its level (the manometer
showed) could only be the same as the outside level, for there must
necessarily be a communication between the lake and the sea.  The high
partitions, leaning forward on their base, grew into a vaulted roof
bearing the shape of an immense funnel turned upside down, the height
being about five or six hundred yards.  At the summit was a circular
orifice, by which I had caught the slight gleam of light, evidently
daylight.

"Where are we?"  I asked.

"In the very heart of an extinct volcano, the interior of which has
been invaded by the sea, after some great convulsion of the earth.
Whilst you were sleeping, Professor, the Nautilus penetrated to this
lagoon by a natural canal, which opens about ten yards beneath the
surface of the ocean.  This is its harbour of refuge, a sure,
commodious, and mysterious one, sheltered from all gales.  Show me, if
you can, on the coasts of any of your continents or islands, a road
which can give such perfect refuge from all storms."

"Certainly," I replied, "you are in safety here, Captain Nemo.  Who
could reach you in the heart of a volcano?  But did I not see an
opening at its summit?"

"Yes; its crater, formerly filled with lava, vapour, and flames, and
which now gives entrance to the life-giving air we breathe."

"But what is this volcanic mountain?"

"It belongs to one of the numerous islands with which this sea is
strewn--to vessels a simple sandbank--to us an immense cavern.  Chance
led me to discover it, and chance served me well."

"But of what use is this refuge, Captain?  The Nautilus wants no port."

"No, sir; but it wants electricity to make it move, and the wherewithal
to make the electricity--sodium to feed the elements, coal from which
to get the sodium, and a coal-mine to supply the coal.  And exactly on
this spot the sea covers entire forests embedded during the geological
periods, now mineralised and transformed into coal; for me they are an
inexhaustible mine."

"Your men follow the trade of miners here, then, Captain?"

"Exactly so.  These mines extend under the waves like the mines of
Newcastle.  Here, in their diving-dresses, pick axe and shovel in hand,
my men extract the coal, which I do not even ask from the mines of the
earth.  When I burn this combustible for the manufacture of sodium, the
smoke, escaping from the crater of the mountain, gives it the
appearance of a still-active volcano."

"And we shall see your companions at work?"

"No; not this time at least; for I am in a hurry to continue our
submarine tour of the earth.  So I shall content myself with drawing
from the reserve of sodium I already possess.  The time for loading is
one day only, and we continue our voyage.  So, if you wish to go over
the cavern and make the round of the lagoon, you must take advantage of
to-day, M. Aronnax."

I thanked the Captain and went to look for my companions, who had not
yet left their cabin.  I invited them to follow me without saying where
we were.  They mounted the platform.  Conseil, who was astonished at
nothing, seemed to look upon it as quite natural that he should wake
under a mountain, after having fallen asleep under the waves.  But Ned
Land thought of nothing but finding whether the cavern had any exit.
After breakfast, about ten o'clock, we went down on to the mountain.

"Here we are, once more on land," said Conseil.

"I do not call this land," said the Canadian.  "And besides, we are not
on it, but beneath it."

Between the walls of the mountains and the waters of the lake lay a
sandy shore which, at its greatest breadth, measured five hundred feet.
On this soil one might easily make the tour of the lake.  But the base
of the high partitions was stony ground, with volcanic locks and
enormous pumice-stones lying in picturesque heaps.  All these detached
masses, covered with enamel, polished by the action of the
subterraneous fires, shone resplendent by the light of our electric
lantern.  The mica dust from the shore, rising under our feet, flew
like a cloud of sparks.  The bottom now rose sensibly, and we soon
arrived at long circuitous slopes, or inclined planes, which took us
higher by degrees; but we were obliged to walk carefully among these
conglomerates, bound by no cement, the feet slipping on the glassy
crystal, felspar, and quartz.

The volcanic nature of this enormous excavation was confirmed on all
sides, and I pointed it out to my companions.

"Picture to yourselves," said I, "what this crater must have been when
filled with boiling lava, and when the level of the incandescent liquid
rose to the orifice of the mountain, as though melted on the top of a
hot plate."

"I can picture it perfectly," said Conseil.  "But, sir, will you tell
me why the Great Architect has suspended operations, and how it is that
the furnace is replaced by the quiet waters of the lake?"

"Most probably, Conseil, because some convulsion beneath the ocean
produced that very opening which has served as a passage for the
Nautilus.  Then the waters of the Atlantic rushed into the interior of
the mountain.  There must have been a terrible struggle between the two
elements, a struggle which ended in the victory of Neptune.  But many
ages have run out since then, and the submerged volcano is now a
peaceable grotto."

"Very well," replied Ned Land; "I accept the explanation, sir; but, in
our own interests, I regret that the opening of which you speak was not
made above the level of the sea."

"But, friend Ned," said Conseil, "if the passage had not been under the
sea, the Nautilus could not have gone through it."

We continued ascending.  The steps became more and more perpendicular
and narrow.  Deep excavations, which we were obliged to cross, cut them
here and there; sloping masses had to be turned.  We slid upon our
knees and crawled along.  But Conseil's dexterity and the Canadian's
strength surmounted all obstacles.  At a height of about 31 feet the
nature of the ground changed without becoming more practicable.  To the
conglomerate and trachyte succeeded black basalt, the first dispread in
layers full of bubbles, the latter forming regular prisms, placed like
a colonnade supporting the spring of the immense vault, an admirable
specimen of natural architecture.  Between the blocks of basalt wound
long streams of lava, long since grown cold, encrusted with bituminous
rays; and in some places there were spread large carpets of sulphur.  A
more powerful light shone through the upper crater, shedding a vague
glimmer over these volcanic depressions for ever buried in the bosom of
this extinguished mountain.  But our upward march was soon stopped at a
height of about two hundred and fifty feet by impassable obstacles.
There was a complete vaulted arch overhanging us, and our ascent was
changed to a circular walk.  At the last change vegetable life began to
struggle with the mineral.  Some shrubs, and even some trees, grew from
the fractures of the walls.  I recognised some euphorbias, with the
caustic sugar coming from them; heliotropes, quite incapable of
justifying their name, sadly drooped their clusters of flowers, both
their colour and perfume half gone.  Here and there some chrysanthemums
grew timidly at the foot of an aloe with long, sickly-looking leaves.
But between the streams of lava, I saw some little violets still
slightly perfumed, and I admit that I smelt them with delight.  Perfume
is the soul of the flower, and sea-flowers have no soul.

We had arrived at the foot of some sturdy dragon-trees, which had
pushed aside the rocks with their strong roots, when Ned Land exclaimed:

"Ah! sir, a hive! a hive!"

"A hive!"  I replied, with a gesture of incredulity.

"Yes, a hive," repeated the Canadian, "and bees humming round it."

I approached, and was bound to believe my own eyes.  There at a hole
bored in one of the dragon-trees were some thousands of these ingenious
insects, so common in all the Canaries, and whose produce is so much
esteemed.  Naturally enough, the Canadian wished to gather the honey,
and I could not well oppose his wish.  A quantity of dry leaves, mixed
with sulphur, he lit with a spark from his flint, and he began to smoke
out the bees.  The humming ceased by degrees, and the hive eventually
yielded several pounds of the sweetest honey, with which Ned Land
filled his haversack.

"When I have mixed this honey with the paste of the bread-fruit," said
he, "I shall be able to offer you a succulent cake."

[Transcriber's Note: 'bread-fruit' has been substituted for
'artocarpus' in this ed.]

"'Pon my word," said Conseil, "it will be gingerbread."

"Never mind the gingerbread," said I; "let us continue our interesting
walk."

At every turn of the path we were following, the lake appeared in all
its length and breadth.  The lantern lit up the whole of its peaceable
surface, which knew neither ripple nor wave.  The Nautilus remained
perfectly immovable.  On the platform, and on the mountain, the ship's
crew were working like black shadows clearly carved against the
luminous atmosphere.  We were now going round the highest crest of the
first layers of rock which upheld the roof.  I then saw that bees were
not the only representatives of the animal kingdom in the interior of
this volcano.  Birds of prey hovered here and there in the shadows, or
fled from their nests on the top of the rocks.  There were sparrow
hawks, with white breasts, and kestrels, and down the slopes scampered,
with their long legs, several fine fat bustards.  I leave anyone to
imagine the covetousness of the Canadian at the sight of this savoury
game, and whether he did not regret having no gun.  But he did his best
to replace the lead by stones, and, after several fruitless attempts,
he succeeded in wounding a magnificent bird.  To say that he risked his
