heat, pressure, and odors are enabled by them to stimulate neurons, the
importance of these organs becomes apparent. As would naturally be
inferred, the construction of any sense organ has particular reference to
the nature of the stimulus which it is to receive. This is most apparent
in the sense organs of sight and hearing.

*Simple Forms of Sense Organs.*--The simplest form of a sense organ (if
such it may be called) is one found among the various tissues. It consists
of the terminal branches of nerve fibers which spread over a small area of
cells, as a network or plexus. Such endings are numerous in the skin and
muscles.

Next in order of complexity are the so-called _end-bulbs_. These consist
of rounded, or elongated, connective tissue capsules, within which the
nerve fibers terminate. On the inside the fibers lose their sheaths and
divide into branches, which wind through the capsule. End-bulbs are
abundant in the lining membrane of the eye, and are found also in the skin
of the lips and in the tissues around the joints.

Slightly more complex than the end-bulbs are the _touch corpuscles_. These
are elongated bulb-like bodies, having a length of about one
three-hundredth of an inch, and occupying the papillae of the skin (Fig.
144). They are composed mainly of connective tissue. Each corpuscle
receives the termination of one or more nerve fibers. These, on entering,
lose the medullary sheath and separate into a number of branches that
penetrate the corpuscle in different directions.

                                [Fig. 144]


        Fig. 144--*A touch corpuscle* highly magnified. (See text.)


The largest of the simple forms of sense organs are bodies visible to the
naked eye and called, from their discoverer Pacini, the _Pacinian
corpuscles_. They lie along the course of nerves in many parts of the
body, and have the general form of grains of wheat. (See Practical Work.)
The Pacinian corpuscles are composed of connective tissue arranged in
separate layers around a narrow central cavity called the core (Fig. 145).
Within the core is the termination of a large nerve fiber. These
corpuscles are found in the connective tissue beneath the skin, along
tendons, around joints, and among the organs of the abdominal cavity.

                                [Fig. 145]


  Fig. 145--*Pacinian corpuscle*, magnified. _A._ Medullated nerve fiber.
   _B._ Axis cylinder terminating in small bulb at _C._ _D._ Concentric
              layers of connective tissue. _E._ Inner bulb.


The simple forms of sense organs have a more or less general distribution
over the body, and are concerned in the production of at least three
special sensations. These are _touch, temperature_, and the _muscular
sensation_.

*Touch*, or feeling, is perhaps the simplest of the sensations. The sense
organs employed are the touch corpuscles, and the external stimulus is
some form of pressure or impact. Pressure applied to the skin, by acting
on the fiber terminations in the corpuscles, starts the impulses that give
rise to the sensation. The touch corpuscles render the fiber terminations
so sensitive that the slightest pressure is able to arouse sensations of
touch. It is found that _a change of pressure_, rather than pressure that
is constant, is the active stimulus. That all parts of the skin are not
equally sensitive to pressure, and that the mind does not interpret
equally well the sensations from different parts, are facts easily
demonstrated by experiment. (See Practical Work.)

*The Temperature Sensation.*--Temperature sensations, like those of touch,
are limited almost entirely to the skin. They are of two kinds, and are
designated as _heat_ sensations and as _cold_ sensations. Whether the
sense organs for temperature are different from those of touch is not
known. It is known, however, that the same corpuscles do not respond alike
to heat, cold, and pressure.

_A Change of Temperature_, rather than any specific degree of heat or
cold, is the active temperature stimulus. The sensation of warmth is
obtained when the temperature of the skin is being raised, and of cold
when it is being lowered. This explains why in going into a hallway from a
heated room one receives a sensation of cold, while in coming into the
same hallway from the outside air he receives a sensation of warmth. It is
for the same reason that we are able to distinguish only the relative, not
the actual, temperature of bodies.

*Muscular Sensations.*--These are sensations produced by impulses arising
at the muscles. Such impulses originate at the fiber terminations which
are found in both the muscles and their tendons. By muscular sensations
one is conscious of the location of a contracting muscle and of the degree
of its tension. They also make it possible to judge of the weight of
objects.

                                [Fig. 146]


  Fig. 146--*Sense organs of taste.* _A._ Map of upper surface of tongue,
 showing on the left the different kinds of papillae, and on the right the
   areas of taste (after Hall). Area sensitive to bitter (----); to acid
    (....); to salt (--.--.--.--); to sweet (--------). _B._ Section through a
     papilla. _n._ Small nerve connecting with taste buds at _d. e._
  Epithelium. _C._ Single taste bud magnified. _n._ Nerve, the fibers of
which terminate between the spindle-shaped cells _a. e._ Epithelial cells.


*The Sensation of Taste.*--The sense organs of taste are found chiefly in
the mucous membrane covering the upper surface of the tongue. Scattered
over this surface are a number of rounded elevations, or large papillae (A,
Fig. 146). Toward the back of the tongue two rows of these, larger than
the others, converge to meet at an angle, where is located a papilla of
exceptional size. Surrounding each papilla is a narrow depression, within
which are found the sense organs of taste (B, Fig. 146). These are called,
from their shape, _taste buds_, and each bud contains a central cavity
which communicates with the surface by a small opening--_the gustatory
pore_. Within this cavity are many slender, spindle-shaped cells which
terminate in hair-like projections at the end nearest the pore, but in
short fibers at the other end. Nerve fibers enter at the inner ends of the
buds and spread out between the cells (_C_, Fig. 146). These fibers pass
to the brain as parts of two pairs of nerves--those from the front of the
tongue joining the trigeminal nerve, and those from the back of the
tongue, the glossopharyngeal nerve.

The gustatary, or _taste stimulus_, is some chemical or physical condition
of substances which is manifested only when they are in a liquid state.
For this reason _only liquid substances can be tasted_. Solids to be
tasted must first be dissolved.

The different taste sensations are described as bitter, sweet, sour, and
saline, and in the order named are recognized as the tastes of quinine,
sugar, vinegar, and salt. As to how these different tastes are produced,
little is known. Flavors such as vanilla and lemon, and the flavors of
meats and fruits, are really smelled and not tasted. Taste serves two main
purposes: it is an aid in the selection of food and it is a means of
stimulating the digestive glands (page 161).

                                [Fig. 147]


Fig. 147--*Sense organ of smell.* _A._ Distribution of nerves in outer wall
 of nasal cavity. 1. Turbinated bones. 2. Branch of fifth pair of nerves.
 3. Branches of olfactory nerve. 4. Olfactory bulb. _B._ Diagram showing
                connection of neurons concerned in smell.


*The Sensation of Smell.*--The sense organs of smell are found in the
mucous membrane lining the upper divisions of the nasal cavities. Here are
found two kinds of cells in great abundance--column-shaped epithelial cells
and the cells which are recognized as the sense organs of smell. These
olfactory cells are spindle-shaped, having at one end a slender,
thread-like projection which reaches the surface, and at the other end a
fiber which joins an olfactory nerve (B, Fig. 147). In fact, the olfactory
cells resemble closely the cell-bodies of neurons, and are thought to be
such. The divisions of the olfactory nerve pass through many small
openings in the ethmoid bone to connect with the olfactory bulbs, which in
turn connect with the cerebrum (A, Fig. 147).

*The Olfactory Stimulus.*--Only substances in the gaseous state can be
smelled. From this it is inferred that the stimulus is supplied by gas
particles. Solids and liquids are smelled because of the gas particles
which separate from them. The substance which is smelled must be kept
moving through the nostrils and made to come in direct contact with the
olfactory cells. There is practically no limit to the number of distinct
odors that may be recognized.

*Value of Smell.*--Although the sense of smell is not so acute in man as in
some of the lower animals, it is, nevertheless, a most important and
useful gift. It is the only sense that responds to matter in the gaseous
state, and is, for this reason, the only natural means of detecting
harmful constituents of the atmosphere. In this connection it has been
likened to a sentinel standing guard over the air passages. Many gases
are, however, without odor, and for this reason cannot be detected by the
nostrils. It is of especial importance that gases which are likely to
become mixed with the air supply to the body have odor, even though the
odor be disagreeable. The bad odors of illuminating gas and of various
compounds of the chemical laboratory, since they serve as danger signals
to put one exposed to them on his guard, are of great protective value.

*Sight and Hearing.*--The sense organs of sight and hearing are highly
complicated structures, and will be considered in the chapters following.

*Summary.*--Sensations are certain activities of the mind that result from
excitations within the body or at its surface. These cause the neurons to
discharge impulses which on reaching the cerebrum cause the sensations.
Sensations are necessary for intelligent and purposeful action and for
acquiring all kinds of knowledge. To enable the stimuli to act to the best
advantage in starting the impulses, special devices, called sense organs,
are employed. These receive the terminations of the neurons, and by their
special structure enable the most delicate stimuli to start impulses. The
simpler forms of sense organs are those of touch, temperature, taste, and
smell.

*Exercises.*--1. Compare sensations and reflex actions with reference to
their nature and cause. Give steps in the production of each.

2. Give examples of sensation stimuli. State the purpose of sense organs.

3. How do general sensations differ from special sensations?

4. Of what value is pain in the protection of the body?

5. Show that sensations lead to the higher forms of mental activity, such
as emotion and imagination.

6. Of what value to the body is the "localizing of the sensation"?

7. What kinds of sense organs are found in the skin? State the purpose of
each.

8. Through what sense avenues is one made aware of solids, of liquids, and
of gases?

9. Of what special protective value is the sense of smell?



PRACTICAL WORK


*To demonstrate the Pacinian Corpuscles.*--Spread out the mesentery from
the intestine of a cat and hold it between the eye and the light: Pacinian
corpuscles will appear as small translucent bodies having the general form
of grains of wheat. Secure a portion of the mesentery over a circular
opening in a thin piece of cork and examine it with a microscope of low
power. Follow the course of the nerve fiber to the nerve from which it
branches.

*To show Relative Sensitiveness of Different Parts of the Skin.*--Holding a
bristle between the fingers, bring the end in contact with the skin,
noting the amount of pressure necessary to cause a sensation of touch.
Test the lips, tongue, tips of fingers, and palm and back of hand, trying
different sizes of bristles. Has the degree of sensitiveness any relation
to the thickness of the cuticle?

*To show Perceptive Differences of Different Portions of the Skin.*--Place
the points of a pair of dividers on the back of the hand of one who looks
in the opposite direction. Is one point felt or two? Repeat several times,
changing the distance between the points until it is fully determined how
near the two points must be placed in order to be felt as one. In like
manner test other parts of the body, as the tips of the fingers and the
back of the neck. Compare results obtained at different places.

*To locate Warm and Cold Sensation Spots.*--Slowly and evenly draw a
blunt-pointed piece of metal over the back of the neck. If it be of the
same temperature as the skin, only touch sensations will be experienced.
If it be a little colder (the temperature of the room) sensations of cold
will be felt at certain spots. If slightly warmer than the body, heat
sensation spots will be found on other parts of the skin. If the heat and
cold sensation spots be marked and tested from day to day they will be
found to remain constant as to position. Inference.




CHAPTER XXI - THE LARYNX AND THE EAR


Man is a social being. His inclinations are not to live alone, but to be a
part of that great human organization known as society. For men to work
together, to be mutually helpful one to another, requires the ability to
exchange ideas and this in turn requires some means of communication.(115)
One means of communication is found in certain movements of the
atmosphere, known as _sound waves_. In the exchange of ideas by this means
there are employed two of the most interesting divisions of the body--the
larynx and the ear. The first is an instrument for the production of sound
waves; the second is the sense organ which enables the sound waves to act
as stimuli to the nervous system.

*Nature of Sound Waves.*--If some sonorous body, as a bell, be struck, it
is given a quivering, or vibratory, motion. This is not confined to the
bell, but is imparted to the air and other substances with which the bell
comes in contact. These take up the movements and pass them to objects
more remote, and they in turn give them to others, until a very
considerable distance is reached. Such progressive vibrations are known as
waves, and, since they act as stimuli to the organs of hearing, they are
called _sound waves_. Sound waves _always originate in vibrating
bodies_.(116) They are transmitted chiefly _by the air_, which, because of
its lightness, elasticity, and abundance, readily takes up the vibrations
and spreads them in all directions (Fig. 148).

While these vibratory movements of the atmosphere are correctly classified
as waves, they bear little resemblance to the waves on water. Instead of
being made of crests and troughs, as are the water waves, the sound waves
consist of alternating successions of slightly condensed and rarefied
layers of air. Then, while the general movement of the water waves is that
of ever widening circles _over a surface_, the sound waves spread as
enlarging spherical shells _through_ the air. In sound waves, as in all
other waves, however, it is only the form of the wave that moves forward.
The individual particles of air that make up the wave simply vibrate back
and forth.

                                [Fig. 148]


 Fig. 148--Diagram illustrating the spreading of sound waves through air.


*How Sound Waves act as Stimuli.*--Any sound wave represents a small but
definite amount of energy, this being a part of the original force that
acted on the vibrating body to set it in motion. The hammer, for instance,
in striking a bell imparts to it a measurable quantity of energy, which
the bell in turn imparts to the air. This energy is in the sound waves and
is communicated to the bodies against which they strike.(117) Though the
force exerted by most sound waves is, indeed, very slight, it is
sufficient to enable them to act as stimuli to the nervous system.

*How Sounds Differ.*--Three distinct effects are produced by sound waves
upon the nerves of hearing, and through them upon the mind. These are
known as _pitch, intensity_, and _quality_, and they are dependent upon
the vibrations of the sound-producing bodies.

_Pitch_, which has reference to the height, or degree of sharpness, of
tones, is determined by the rapidity of the vibrations of the vibrating
body. The more rapid the vibrations, the higher the pitch, the number of
vibrations doubling for each musical interval known as the octave.

_Intensity_ is the energy, or force, of the sound waves. This is
recognized by the strength of the sensation and is expressed by the term
_loudness_. Intensity is governed mainly by the width of the vibrations of
the vibrating body, and the width depends upon the force applied to the
body to make it vibrate.

_Quality_ is that peculiarity of sound that enables tones from different
instruments to sound differently, although they may have the same pitch
and intensity. Quality depends upon the fact that most tones are complex
in nature and result from the blending together of simple tones of
different pitch.

*Reenforcement of Sound Waves.*--The sound vibrations from small bodies are
not infrequently reenforced by surrounding conditions so that their
outgoing waves reach farther and are more effective than waves from larger
bodies. This is true of the sound waves produced by most musical
instruments and also those produced by the human larynx. Such
reenforcement is effected in two general ways--by sounding boards and by
inclosed columns of air. Stringed instruments--violin, guitar, piano,
etc.--employ sounding boards, while wind instruments, as the flute, pipe
organ, and the various kinds of horns, employ air columns for reenforcing
their vibrations. In the use of the sounding board, the vibrations are
communicated to a larger surface, and in the use of the air column the
vibrations are communicated to the inclosed air. (See Practical Work.)

*Value of Sound Waves to the Body.*--From a physiological standpoint, the
value of sound waves is not easily overestimated. In addition to the use
made of them in the communication of ideas, they serve the purpose of
protecting the body, and in the sphere of music provide one of the most
elevating forms of entertainment. Sounds from different animals, as well
as from inanimate objects, may also be the means of supplying needed
information. The existence of two kinds of sound instruments in the
body--the one for the production, the other for the detection, of sound--is
certainly suggestive of the ability of the body to adjust itself to, and
to make use of, its physical environment. Both the larynx and the ear are
constructed with special reference to the nature and properties of sound
waves.



THE LARYNX


*The Sound-producing Mechanism of the Body* consists of the following
parts:

1. Delicately arranged bodies that are easily set in vibration.

2. An arrangement for supplying the necessary force for making these
bodies vibrate.

3. Contrivances for modifying the vibrating parts so as to produce changes
in pitch and intensity.

4. Parts that reenforce the vibrations.

5. Organs by means of which the sounds are converted into the forms of
speech.

The central organ in this complex mechanism is

*The Larynx.*--The larynx forms a part of the air passages, being a short
tube at the upper end of the trachea. Mucous membrane lines the inside of
it and muscles cover most of the outer surface. The framework is made of
cartilage. At the top it is partly encircled by a small bone (the hyoid),
and its opening into the pharynx is guarded by a flexible lid, called the
_epiglottis_. The cartilage in its walls is in eight separate pieces, but
the greater portion of the structure is formed of two pieces only. These
are known as the _thyroid cartilage_ and the _cricoid cartilage_ (Fig.
149). Both can be felt in the throat--the thyroid as the projection known
as "Adam's apple," and the cricoid as a broad ring just below.

                                [Fig. 149]


  Fig. 149--The larynx.--_A._ Outside view. _B._ Vertical section through
  larynx, showing inside. 1. Thyroid cartilage. 2. Cricoid cartilage. 3.
Trachea. 4. Hyoid bone. 5. Epiglottis. 6. Vocal cord. 7. False vocal cord.
                      8. Lining of mucous membrane.


The _thyroid cartilage_ consists of two V-shaped pieces, one on either
side of the larynx, meeting at their points in front, and each terminating
at the back in an upward and a downward projection. Between the back
portions of the thyroid is a space equal to about one third of the
circumference of the larynx. This is occupied by the greater portion of
the _cricoid cartilage_. This cartilage has the general shape of a signet
ring and is so placed that the part corresponding to the signet fits into
the thyroid space, while the ring portion encircles the larynx just below
the thyroid. Muscles and connective tissue pass from the thyroid to the
cricoid cartilage at all places, save one on each side, where the downward
projections of the thyroid form hinge joints with the cricoid. These
joints permit of motion of either cartilage upon the other.

At the summit of the cricoid cartilage, on each side, is a small piece of
triangular shape, called the _arytenoid cartilage_. Each arytenoid is
movable on the cricoid and is connected with one end of a vocal cord.

                                [Fig. 150]


 Fig. 150--*Vocal cords* as seen from above. _A._ In producing sound, _B._
                         During quiet breathing.


*The Vocal Cords* are formed by two narrow strips of tissue which,
connecting with the thyroid cartilage in front and the arytenoid
cartilages behind, lie in folds of the mucous membrane. They have the
general appearance of ridge-like projections from the sides of the larynx,
but at their edges they are sharp and smooth. The open space between the
cords is called the _glottis_. When sound is not being produced, the
glottis is open and has a triangular form, due to the spreading apart of
the arytenoid cartilages and the attached cords. But when sound is being
produced, the glottis is almost completely closed by the cords. Above the
vocal cords, and resembling them in appearance, are two other folds of
membrane, called the _false vocal cords_ (B, Fig. 149). The false cords do
not produce sound, but they aid in the closing of the glottis.

*How the Voice is Produced.*--The voice is produced through the vibrations
of the vocal cords. A special set of muscles draws the arytenoid
cartilages toward each other, thereby bringing their edges very near and
parallel to each other in the passage. At the same time other muscles act
on the thyroid and cricoid cartilages to separate them at the top and give
the cords the necessary tension. With the glottis now almost closed,
blasts of air from the lungs strike the sharp edges of the cords and set
them in vibration (Fig. 150). The vocal cords do not vibrate as strings,
like the strings of a violin, but somewhat as reeds, similar to the reeds
of a French harp or reed organ.

The location of the vocal cords in the air passages enables the lungs and
the muscles of respiration to aid in the production of the voice. It is
their function to supply the necessary force for setting the cords in
vibration. The upper air passages (mouth, nostrils, and pharynx) supply
resonance chambers for reenforcing the vibrations from the vocal cords,
thereby greatly increasing their intensity. In ordinary breathing the
vocal cords are in a relaxed condition against the sides of the larynx and
are not acted upon by the air as it enters or leaves the lungs.

*Pitch and Intensity of the Voice.*--Changes in the pitch of the voice are
caused mainly by variations in the tension of the cords, due to the
movements of the thyroid and cricoid cartilages upon each other.(118) In
the production of tones of very high pitch, the vibrating portions of the
cords are thought to be actually shortened by their margins being drawn
into contact at the back. This raises the pitch in the same manner as does
the shortening of the vibrating portion of a violin string.

The _intensity_, or loudness, of the voice is governed by the force with
which the air is expelled from the lungs. The vibrations of the cords,
however, are greatly reenforced by the peculiar structure of the upper air
passages, as stated above.

*Production of Speech.*--The sounds that form our speech or language are
produced by modifying the vibrations from the vocal cords. This is
accomplished by "mouthing" the sounds from the larynx. The distinct
sounds, or words, are usually complex in nature, being made up of two or
more elementary sounds. These are classed either as _vowels_ or
_consonants_ and are represented by the different letters of the alphabet.
The vowel sounds are made with the mouth open and are more nearly the pure
vibrations of the vocal cords. The consonants are modifications of the
vocal cord vibrations produced by the tongue, teeth, lips, and throat.

*Words and their Significance.*--In the development of language certain
ideas have become associated with certain sounds so that the hearing of
these sounds suggests the ideas. Our words, therefore, consist of so many
sound signals, each capable of arousing a definite idea in the mind. To
talk is to express ideas through these signals, and to listen is to assume
an attitude of mind such that the signals may be interpreted. In learning
a language, both the sounds of the words and their associated ideas are
mastered, this being necessary to their practical use in exchanging ideas.
From spoken language man has advanced to written language, so that the
sight of the written or printed word also arouses in the mind the
associated idea.



THE EAR


*The Ear* is the sense organ which enables sound waves to so act upon
afferent neurons as to excite impulses in them. The effect upon the mind
which these impulses produce is known as the _sensation of hearing_. In
the performance of its function the ear receives and transmits sound waves
and also concentrates them upon a suitable exposure of nerve cells. It
includes three parts--the _external ear_, the _middle ear_, and the
_internal ear_.

*External Ear.*--The external ear consists of the part on the outside of
the head called the _pinna_, or auricle, and the tube leading into the
middle ear, called the _auditory canal_ (Fig. 151). The pinna by its
peculiar shape aids to some extent the entrance of sound waves into the
auditory canal.(119) It consists chiefly of cartilage. The auditory canal
is a little more than an inch in length and one fourth of an inch in
diameter, and is closed at its inner end by a thin, but important
membrane, called

*The Membrana Tympani.*--This membrane consists of three thin layers. The
outer layer is continuous with the lining of the auditory canal; the inner
is a part of the lining of the middle ear; and the middle is a fine layer
of connective tissue. Being thin and delicately poised, the membrana
tympani is easily made to vibrate by the sound waves that enter the
auditory canal. In this way it serves as a receiver of sound waves from
the air. It also protects

                                [Fig. 151]


 Fig. 151--*Diagram of section through the ear*, showing relations of its
                        various parts. (See text.)


*The Middle Ear.*--The middle ear, or tympanum,(120) consists of an
irregular cavity in the temporal bone which is lined with mucous membrane
and filled with air. It is connected with the pharynx by a slender canal
called the _Eustachian tube_. Extending across the middle ear and
connecting with the membrana tympani on one side, and with a membrane
closing a small passage to the internal ear on the other, is a tiny bridge
formed of three small bones. These bones, named in their order from the
membrana tympani, are the _malleus_, the _incus_, and the _stapes_ (Fig.
151). Where the malleus joins the membrane is a small muscle whose
contraction has the effect of tightening the membrane. The Eustachian tube
admits air freely to the middle ear, providing in this way for an equality
of atmospheric pressure on the two sides of the drum membrane. The bridge
of bones and the air in the middle ear receive vibrations from the
membrana tympani and communicate them to the membrane of the internal ear.

*Purposes of the Middle Ear. *--The middle ear serves two important
purposes. In the first place, it makes it possible for sound waves to set
the membrana tympani in vibration. This membrane could not be made to
vibrate by the more delicate of the sound waves if it were stretched over
a bone, or over some of the softer tissues, or over a liquid. Its
