progress grew slower and slower.

"'Smatter? Something gone screwy?" demanded Seaton.

"Not at all, everything is working perfectly. The substance is now so
dense that it is becoming opaque to rays of the fourth order, so that we
are now partially displacing the medium instead of moving through it
without friction. At the point where we can barely see to work; that is,
when the fourth-order rays will be so retarded that they can no longer
carry the heterodyned light waves without complete distortion, we shall
stop automatically, as the material at that depth will have the required
density to refract the fifth-order rays to the correct degree."

"How can our foundations stand it?" asked Seaton. "This stuff must be a
hundred times as dense as platinum already, and we must he pushing a
horrible load in going through it."

"We are exerting no force whatever upon our foundations nor upon
Norlamin. The force is transmitted without loss from the power-plant in
our laboratory to this secondary projector here inside the star, where
it is liberated in the correct band to pull us through the mass, using
all the mass ahead of us as anchorage. When we wish to return, we shall
simply change the pull into a push. Ah! we are now at a standstill--now
comes the most important moment of the entire project!"

All apparent motion had ceased, and Seaton could see only dimly the
outlines of the faidon, now directly before his eyes. The structure of
force slowly warped around until its front portion held the faidon as in
a vise. Rovol pressed a lever and behind them, in the laboratory, four
enormous plunger switches drove home. A plane of pure energy, flaming
radiantly even in the indescribable incandescence of the core of that
seething star, bisected the faidon neatly, and ten gigantic beams, five
upon each half of the jewel, rapidly molded two sections of a
geometrically-perfect hollow lens. The two sections were then brought
together by the closing of the jaws of the mighty vise, their edges in
exact alignment. Instantly the plane and the beams of energy became
transformed into two terrific opposing tubes of force--vibrant, glowing
tubes, whose edges in contact coincided with the almost invisible seam
between the two halves of the lens.

Like a welding arc raised to the _nth_ power these two immeasurable and
irresistible forces met exactly in opposition--a meeting of such
incredible violence that seismic disturbances occurred throughout the
entire mass of that dense, violet-white star. Sunspots of unprecedented
size appeared, prominences erupted to hundreds of times their normal
distances, and although the two scientists deep in the core of the
tormented star were unaware of what was happening upon its surface,
convulsion after Titanic convulsion wracked the mighty globe, and
enormous masses of molten and gaseous material were riven from it and
hurled far out into space--masses which would in time become planets of
that youthful and turbulent luminary.

Seaton felt his air-supply grow hot. Suddenly it became icy cold, and
knowing that Rovol had energized the refrigerator system, Seaton turned
away from the fascinating welding operation for a quick look around the
laboratory. As he did so, he realized Rovol's vast knowledge and
understood the reason for the new system of relief-points and
ground-rods, as well as the necessity for the all-embracing scheme of
refrigeration.

Even through the practically opaque goggles he could see that the
laboratory was one mass of genuine lightning. Not only from the
relief-points, but from every metallic corner and protuberance the
pent-up losses from the disintegrating bar were hurling themselves upon
the flaring, blue-white, rapidly-volatilizing ground-rods; and the very
air of the room, renewed second by second though it was by the powerful
blowers, was beginning to take on the pearly luster of the
highly-ionized corona. The bar was plainly visible, a scintillating
demon of pure violet radiance, and a momentary spasm of fear seized him
as he saw how rapidly that great mass of copper was shrinking--fear that
their power would be exhausted with their task still uncompleted.

But the calculations of the aged physicist had been accurate. The lens
was completed with some hundreds of pounds of copper to spare, and that
geometrical form, with its precious content of semi-neutronium, was
following the secondary projector back toward the green system. Rovol
left his seat, discarded his armor, and signaled Seaton to do the same.

"I've got to hand it to you, ace--you sure are a blinding flash and a
deafening report!" Seaton exclaimed, writhing out of his insulating
suit. "I feel as though I'd been pulled half-way through a knot-hole and
riveted over on both ends! How big a lens did you make, anyway? Looked
as though it would hold a couple of liters; maybe three."

"Its contents are almost exactly three liters."

"Hm--m--m. Seven and a half million kilograms--say eight thousand tons.
_Some_ mass, I'd say, to put into a gallon jug. Of course, being inside
the faidon, it won't have any weight, but it'll have all its full quota
of inertia. That's why you're taking so long to bring it in, of course."

"Yes. The projector will now bring it here into the laboratory without
any further attention from us. The period of labor is about to end, and
tomorrow we shall find the lens awaiting us when we arrive to begin
work."

"How about cooling it off? It had a temperature of something like forty
million degree centigrade before you started working on it; and when you
got done with it, it was hot."

"You're forgetting again, son. Remember that the hot, dense material is
entirely enclosed in an envelope impervious to all vibrations longer
than those of the fifth order. You could put your hand upon it now,
without receiving any sensation either of heat, or of cold."

"Yeah, that's right, too. I noticed that I could take a faidon right out
of an electric arc and it wouldn't even be warm. I couldn't explain why
it was, but I see now. So that stuff inside that lens will always stay
as hot as it is right now! Zowie! Here's hoping she never explodes!
Well, there's the bell--for once in my life, I'm all ready to quit when
the whistle blows," and arm in arm the young Terrestrial chemist and the
aged Norlaminian physicist strolled out to their waiting airboat.




CHAPTER XII

Flying Visits--Via Projection


"Well, what to do?" asked Seaton as he and Rovol entered the laboratory,
"Tear down this fourth-order projector and tackle the big job? I see the
lens is here, on schedule, so we can hop right into it."

"We shall have further use for this mechanism. We shall need at least
one more lens of this dense material, and other scientists also may have
need of one or two. Then, too, the new projector must be so large that
it cannot be erected in this room."

As he spoke, Rovol seated himself at his control-desk and ran his
fingers lightly over the keys. The entire wall of the laboratory
disappeared, hundreds of beams of force darted here and there, seizing
and working raw materials, and in the portal there grew up, to Seaton's
amazement, a keyboard and panel installation such as the Earth-man, in
his wildest moments, had never imagined. Bank upon bank of
typewriter-like keys; row upon row of keys, pedals, and stops resembling
somewhat those of the console of a gigantic pipe-organ; panel upon panel
of meters, switches, and dials--all arranged about two deeply-cushioned
chairs and within reach of their occupants.

"Whew! That looks like the combined mince-pie nightmares of a whole
flock of linotype operators, pipe-organists, and hard-boiled radio
hams!" exclaimed Seaton when the installation was complete. "Now that
you've got it, what are you going to do with it?"

"There is not a control system in Norlamin adequate for the task we
face, since the problem of the projection of rays of the fifth order has
heretofore been of only academic interest. Therefore it becomes
necessary to construct such a control. This mechanism will, I am
confident, have a sufficiently wide range of application to perform any
operation we shall require of it."

"It sure looks as though it could do almost anything, provided the man
behind it knows how to play a tune on it--but if that rumble seat is for
me, you'd better count me out right now. I followed you for about
fifteen seconds, then lost you completely; and now I'm sunk without a
trace," said Seaton.

"That is, of course, true, and is a point I was careless enough to
overlook." Rovol thought for a moment, then got up, crossed the room to
his control desk, and continued, "We shall dismantle the machine and
rebuild it at once."

"Oh no--too much work!" protested Seaton, "You've got it about done,
haven't you?"

"It is hardly started. Two hundred thousand bands of force must be
linked to it, each in its proper place, and it is necessary that you
should understand thoroughly every detail of this entire projector,"
Rovol answered.

"Why? I'm not ashamed to admit that I haven't got brains enough to
understand a thing like that."

"You have sufficient brain capacity; it is merely undeveloped. There are
two reasons why you must be as familiar with the operation of this
mechanism as you are with the operation of one of your Earthly
automobiles. The first is that a similar control is to be installed in
your new space-vessel, since by its use you can attain a perfection of
handling impossible by any other system. The second, and more important
reason, is that neither I nor any other man of Norlamin could compel
himself, by any force of will, to direct a ray that would take away the
life of any fellow-man."

While Rovol was speaking, he reversed his rays, and soon the component
parts of the new control had been disassembled and piled in orderly
array about the room.

"Hm--m--m. Never thought of that. It's right too," mused Seaton. "How're
you going to get it into my thick skull--with an educator?"

"Exactly," and Rovol sent a beam of force after his highly developed
educational mechanism. Dials and electrodes were adjusted, connections
were established, and the beams and pencils of force began to
reconstruct the great central controlling device. But this time, instead
of being merely a bewildered spectator, Seaton was an active participant
in the work. As each key and meter was wrought and mounted, there were
indelibly impressed upon his brain the exact reason for and function of
the part, and later, when the control itself was finished and the
seemingly interminable task of connecting it up to the output
force-bands of the transformers had begun, he had a complete
understanding of everything with which he was working, and understood
all the means by which the ends he had so long desired were to be
attained. For to the ancient scientist the tasks he was then performing
were the merest routine, to be performed in reflex fashion, and he
devoted most of his attention to transferring from his own brain to that
of his young assistant as much of his stupendous knowledge as the
smaller brain of the Terrestrial was capable of absorbing. More and more
rapidly as the work progressed the mighty flood of knowledge poured into
Seaton's mind. After an hour or so, when enough connections had been
made so that automatic forces could be so directed as to finish the job,
Rovol and Seaton left the laboratory and went into the living room. As
they walked, the educator accompanied them, borne upon its beam of
force.

"Your brain is behaving very nicely indeed," said Rovol, "much better
than I would have thought possible from its size. In fact, it may be
possible for me to transfer to you all the knowledge I have which might
be of use to you. That is why I took you away from the laboratory. What
do you think of the idea?"

"Our psychologists have always maintained that none of us ever uses more
than a minute fraction of the actual capacity of his brain," Seaton
replied after a moment's thought. "If you think you can give me even a
percentage of your knowledge without killing me, go to it--I'm for it,
strong!"

"Knowing that you would be, I have already requested Drasnik, the First
of Psychology, to come here, and he has just arrived," answered Rovol.
And as he spoke, that personage entered the room.

When the facts had been set before him, the psychologist nodded his head

"That is quite possible," he said with enthusiasm, "and I will be only
too glad to assist in such an operation."

"But listen!" protested Seaton, "You'll probably change my whole
personality! Rovol's brain is three times the size of mine."

"Tut-tut--nothing of the kind," Drasnik reproved him. "As you have said,
you are using only a minute portion of the active mass of your brain.
The same thing is true with us--many millions of cycles would have to
pass before we would be able to fill the brains we now have."

"Then why are your brains so large?"

"Merely a provision of Nature that no possible accession of knowledge
shall find her storehouse too small," replied Drasnik, positively.
"Ready?"

All three donned the headsets and a wave of mental force swept into
Seaton's mind, a wave of such power that the Terrestrial's every sense
wilted under the impact. He did not faint, he did not lose
consciousness--he simply lost all control of every nerve and fiber as
his entire brain passed into the control of the immense mentality of the
First of Psychology and became a purely receptive, plastic medium upon
which to impress the knowledge of the aged physicist.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hour after hour the transfer continued, Seaton lying limp as though
lifeless, the two Norlaminians tense and rigid, every faculty
concentrated upon the ignorant, virgin brain exposed to their gaze.
Finally the operation was complete and Seaton, released from the weird,
hypnotic grip of that stupendous mind, gasped, shook himself, and
writhed to his feet.

"Great Cat!" he exclaimed, his eyes wide with astonishment. "I wouldn't
have believed there was as much to know in the entire Universe as I know
right now, and I know it as well as I ever knew elementary algebra.
Thanks, fellows, a million times--but say, did you leave any open spaces
for more? In one way, I seem to know less than I did before, there's so
much more to find out. Can I learn anything more, or did you fill me up
to capacity?"

The psychologist, who had been listening to the exuberant youth with
undisguised pleasure, spoke calmly.

"The mere fact that you appreciate your comparative ignorance shows that
you are still capable of learning. Your capacity to learn is greater
than it ever was before, even though the waste space has been reduced.
Much to our surprise, Rovol and I gave you all of his knowledge that
would be of any use to you, and some of my own, and still theoretically
you can add to it more than nine times the total of your present
knowledge."

The psychologist departed, and Rovol and Seaton returned to the
laboratory, where the forces were still merrily at work. There was
nothing that could be done to hasten the connecting, and it was late in
the following period of labor before they could begin the actual
construction of the projector. Once started, however, it progressed with
amazing rapidity. Now understanding the system, it did not seem strange
to Seaton that he should merely actuate a certain combination of forces
when he desired a certain operation performed; nor did it seem unusual
or worthy of comment that one flick of his finger over that switchboard
would send a force a distance of hundreds of miles to a factory where
other forces were busily at work, to seize a hundred angle-bars of
transparent purple metal that were to form the backbone of the
fifth-order projector. Nor did it seem peculiar that the same force,
with no further instruction, should bring these hundred bars back to
him, in a high loop through the atmosphere; should deposit them gently
in a convenient space near the site of operations; and then should
disappear as though it had never existed! With such tools as that, it
was a matter of only a few hours before the projector was done--a task
that would have required years of planning and building upon Earth.

Two hundred and fifty feet it towered above their heads, a tubular
network of braced and latticed bars of purple metal, fifty feet in
diameter at the base and tapering smoothly to a diameter of about ten
feet at the top. Built of a metal thousands of times as strong and hard
as steel, it was not cumbersome in appearance, and yet was strong enough
to be absolutely rigid. Ten enormous supporting forces held the lens of
neutronium immovable in the exact center of the upper end; at intervals
down the shaft similar forces held variously-shaped lenses and prisms
formed from zones of force; in the center of the bottom or floor of the
towering structure was the double controlling system, with a universal
visiplate facing each operator.

"Well, Rovol, that's that," remarked Seaton as the last connection was
made. "What say we hop in and give the baby a ride over to the Area of
Experiment? Caslor must have the mounting done, and we've got time
enough left in this period to try her out."

"In a moment. I am setting the fourth-order projector to go out to the
dwarf star after an additional supply of neutronium."

Seaton, knowing from the data of their first journey, that the controls
could be so set as to duplicate their feat in every particular without
supervision, stepped into his seat in the new controller, pressed a key,
