It took several successive tastes of the different drugs before this
result was accomplished, but in perhaps half an hour they were ready to
leave the house. To the Very Young Man this change of size was no longer
even startling. Aura, this time, with him beside her, seemed quite
unafraid.

"Now we're ready," said the Very Young Man, in a matter-of-fact tone
that was far from indicating his true feeling. "Take the way where we
are least likely to be noticed--towards Orlog. When we get in the open
country we can get bigger."

He led the girl across Reoh's study. She kept her face averted as they
passed the body lying on the floor, and in a moment they were outside
the house. They walked rapidly, keeping close to the walls of the
houses. The streets were nearly deserted and no one seemed to notice
them.

The Very Young Man was calculating the time. "Probably they are just
getting to Orlog with Loto," he said. "Once we get out of Arite we'll
travel fast; we'll have him back in two or three hours."

Aura said nothing, but walked beside him. Once or twice she looked back
over her shoulder.

They were in the outskirts of the city, when suddenly the girl gripped
her companion by the arm.

"Some one--behind us," she whispered. The Very Young Man resisted an
impulse to look around. They had come to a cross street; the Very Young
Man abruptly turned the corner, and clutching Aura by the hand ran
swiftly forward a short distance. When they had slowed down to a walk
again the Very Young Man looked cautiously back over his shoulder. As he
did so he caught a glimpse of three men who had just reached the corner,
and who darted hastily back out of sight as he turned his head.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE ATTACK ON THE PALACE


Oteo led the two men swiftly through the city towards Reoh's house.
There were few pedestrians about and no one seemed particularly to
notice them. Yet somehow, the Big Business Man thought, there hung about
the city an ominous air of unrest. Perhaps it was the abnormal
quiet--that solemn sinister look of deserted streets; or perhaps it was
an occasional face peering at them from a window, or a figure lurking in
a doorway disappearing at their approach. The Big Business Man found his
heart beating fast. He suddenly felt very much alone. The realization
came to him that he was in a strange world, surrounded by beings of
another race, most of whom, he knew now, hated and feared him and those
who had come with him.

Then his thoughts took another turn. He looked up at the brilliant
galaxy of stars overhead. New, unexplored worlds! Thousands, millions of
them! In one tiny, little atom of a woman's wedding-ring! Then he
thought of his friend the Banker. Perhaps the ring had not been moved
from its place in the clubroom. Then--he looked at the sky again--then
Broadway--only thirty feet away from him this moment! He smiled a little
at this conception, and drew a long breath--awed by his thoughts.

Oteo was plucking at his sleeve and pointing. Across the street stood
Reoh's house. The Doctor knocked upon its partially open front door,
and, receiving no answer, they entered silently, with the dread sense of
impending evil hanging over them. The Doctor led the way into the old
man's study. At the threshold he stopped, shocked into immobility. Upon
the floor, with the knife still in it, lay Reoh's body. The Doctor made
a hasty examination, although the presence of the knife obviously made
it unnecessary.

A hurried search of the house convinced them that Aura and the Very
Young Man were not there. The two men, confused by this double disaster,
were at a loss to know what to do.

"They've got him," said the Big Business Man with conviction. "And the
girl too, probably. He must have come back just as they were killing
Reoh."

"There wasn't much time," the Doctor said. "He was back here in ten
minutes. But they've got him--you're right--or he would have been back
with us before this."

"They'll take him and the girl to Orlog. They won't hurt them because
they----" The Big Business Man stopped abruptly; his face went white.
"Good God, Frank, do you realize? They've got the drugs now!"

Targo had the drugs! The Big Business Man shuddered with fear at the
thought. Their situation would be desperate, indeed, if that were so.

The Doctor reasoned it out more calmly. "I hadn't thought of that," he
said slowly. "And it makes me think perhaps they have not captured Jack.
If they had the drugs they would lose no time in using them. They
haven't used them yet--that's evident."

The Big Business Man was about to reply when there came a shouting from
the street outside, and the sound of many feet rushing past the house.
They hurried to the door. A mob swept by--a mob of nearly a thousand
persons. Most of them were men. Some were armed with swords; others
brandished huge stones or lengths of beaten gold implements, perhaps
with which they had been working, and which now they held as weapons.

The mob ran swiftly, with vainglorious shouts from its leaders. It
turned a corner nearby and disappeared.

From every house now people appeared, and soon the streets were full of
scurrying pedestrians. Most of them followed the direction taken by the
mob. The listeners in the doorway could hear now, from far away, the
sound of shouts and cheering. And from all around them came the buzz and
hum of busy streets. The city was thoroughly awake--alert and expectant.

The Big Business Man flung the door wide. "I'm going to follow that
crowd. See what's going on. We can't stay here in the midst of this."

The Doctor and Oteo followed him out into the street, and they mingled
with the hastening crowd. In their excitement they walked freely among
the people. No one appeared to notice them, for the crowd was as excited
as they, hurrying along, heedless of its immediate surroundings. As they
advanced, the street became more congested.

Down another street they saw fighting going on--a weaponless crowd
swaying and struggling aimlessly. A number of armed men charged this
crowd--men who by their breastplates and swords the Big Business Man
recognized as the police. The crowd ceased struggling and dispersed,
only to gather again in another place.

The city was in a turmoil of excitement without apparent reason, or
definite object. Yet there was a steady tide in the direction the first
armed mob had gone, and with that tide went the Big Business Man and his
two companions.

After a time they came to an open park, beyond which, on a prominence,
with the lake behind, stood a large building that the Chemist had
already pointed out to them as the king's palace.

Oteo led them swiftly into a side street to avoid the dense crowd around
the park. Making a slight detour they came back to it again--much nearer
the palace now--and approached from behind a house that fronted the open
space near the palace.

"Friend of the Master--his house!" Oteo explained as he knocked
peremptorily at a side door.

They waited a moment, but no one came. Oteo pushed the door and led them
within. The house was deserted, and following Oteo, they went to the
roof. Here they could see perfectly what was going on around the palace,
and in the park below them.

This park was nearly triangular in shape--a thousand feet possibly on
each side. At the base of the triangle, on a bluff with the lake behind
it, stood the palace. Its main entrance, two huge golden doors, stood at
the top of a broad flight of stone steps. On these steps a fight was in
progress. A mob surged up them, repulsed at the top by a score or more
of men armed with swords, who were defending the doorway.

The square was thronged with people watching the palace steps and
shouting almost continuously. The fight before the palace evidently had
been in progress for some time. Many dead were lying in the doorway and
on the steps below it. The few defenders had so far resisted
successfully against tremendous odds, for the invaders, pressed upward
by those behind, could not retreat, and were being killed at the top
from lack of space in which to fight.

"Look there," cried the Big Business Man suddenly. Coming down a cross
street, marching in orderly array with its commander in front, was a
company of soldier police. It came to a halt almost directly beneath the
watchers on the roof-tops, and its leader brandishing his sword after a
moment of hesitation, ordered his men to charge the crowd. They did not
move at the order, but stood sullenly in their places. Again he ordered
them forward, and, as they refused to obey, made a threatening move
towards them.

In sudden frenzy, those nearest leaped upon him, and in an instant he
lay dead upon the ground, with half a dozen swords run through his body.
Then the men stood, in formation still, apathetically watching the
events that were going on around them.

Meanwhile the fight on the palace steps raged more furiously than ever.
The defenders were reduced now to a mere handful.

"A moment more--they'll be in," said the Doctor breathlessly. Hardly had
he spoken when, with a sudden, irresistible rush, the last of the guards
were swept away, and the invaders surged through the doorway into the
palace.

A great cry went up from the crowd in the park as the palace was
taken--a cry of applause mingled with awe, for they were a little
frightened at what they were seeing.

Perhaps a hundred people crowded through the doorway into the palace;
the others stood outside--on the steps and on the terrace
below--waiting. Hardly more than five minutes went by when a man
appeared on the palace roof. He advanced to the parapet with several
others standing respectfully behind him.

"Targo!" murmured Oteo.

It was Targo--Targo triumphantly standing with uplifted arms before the
people he was to rule. When the din that was raised at his appearance
had subsided a little he spoke; one short sentence, and then he paused.
There was a moment of indecision in the crowd before it broke into
tumultuous cheers.

"The king--he killed," Oteo said softly, looking at his master's friends
with big, frightened eyes.

The Big Business Man stared out over the waving, cheering throng, with
the huge, dominant, triumphant figure of Targo above and muttered to
himself, "The king is dead; long live the king."

When he could make himself heard, Targo spoke again. The Doctor and the
Big Business Man were leaning over the parapet watching the scene, when
suddenly a stone flew up from the crowd beneath, and struck the railing
within a few feet of where they were standing. They glanced down in
surprise, and realized, from the faces that were upturned, that they
were recognized. A murmur ran over the crowd directly below, and then
someone raised a shout. Four words it seemed to be, repeated over and
over. Gradually the shout spread--"Death to the Giants," the Big
Business Man knew it was--"Death to the Giants," until the whole mass of
people were calling it rhythmically--drowning out Targo's voice
completely. A thousand faces now stared up at the men on the roof-top
and a rain of stones began falling around them.

The Doctor clutched his friend by the arm and pulled him back from the
parapet. "They know us--good God, don't you see?" he said tensely. "Come
on. We must get out of this. There'll be trouble." He started across the
roof towards the opening that led down into the house.

The Big Business Man jerked himself free from the grasp that held him.

"I do see," he cried a little wildly. "I do see we've been damn fools.
There'll be trouble. You're right--there will be trouble; but it won't
be ours. I'm through--through with this miserable little atom and its
swarm of insects." He gripped the Doctor by both shoulders. "My God,
Frank, can't you understand? We're men, you and I--men! These
creatures"--he waved his arm back towards the city--"nothing but
insects--infinitesimal--smaller than the smallest thing we ever dreamed
of. And we take them seriously. Don't you understand? Seriously! God,
man, that's funny, not tragic."

He fumbled at the neck of his robe, and tearing it away, brought out a
vial of the drugs.

"Here," he exclaimed, and offered one of the pellets.

"Not too much," warned the Doctor vehemently, "only touch it to your
tongue."

Oteo, with pleading eyes, watched them taking the drug, and the Doctor
handed him a pellet, showing him how to take it.

As they stood together upon the roof-top, clinging to one another, the
city dwindled away rapidly beneath them. By the time the drug had ceased
to act there was hardly room for them to stand on the roof, and the
house, had it not been built solidly of stone, would have been crushed
under their weight. At first they felt a little dizzy, as though they
were hanging in mid-air, or were in a balloon, looking down at the city.
Then gradually, they seemed to be of normal size again, balancing
themselves awkwardly upon a little toy-house whose top was hardly bigger
than their feet.

The park, only a step now beneath the house-top, swarmed with tiny
figures less than two inches in height. Targo still stood upon the
palace roof; they could have reached down and picked him up between
thumb and forefinger. The whole city lay within a radius of a few
hundred feet around them.

When they had stopped increasing in size, they leaped in turn over the
palace, landing upon the broad beach of the lake. Then they began
walking along it. There was only room for one on the sand, and the other
two, for they walked abreast, waded ankle-deep in the water. From the
little city below them they could hear the hum of a myriad of tiny
voices--thin, shrill and faint. Suddenly the Big Business Man laughed.
There was no hysteria in his voice now--just amusement and relief.

"And we took that seriously," he said. "Funny, isn't it?"




CHAPTER XXIX

ON THE LAKE


"You're right--we are being followed," the Very Young Man said soberly.
He had pulled the girl over close against the wall of a house. "Did you
see that?"

"Three, they are," Aura answered. "I saw them before--in the street
below--Targo's men."

Evidently the three men had been watching the house from which they had
come and had followed them from there. If they were Targo's men, as
seemed very probable, the Very Young Man could not understand why they
had not already attacked him. Perhaps they intended to as soon as he and
Aura had reached a more secluded part of the city. They must know he had
the drugs, and to gain possession of those certainly was what they were
striving for. The Very Young Man realized he must take no chances; to
lose the drugs would be fatal to them all.

"Are we near the edge of the city?" he asked.

"Yes, very near."

"Then we shall get large here. If we make a run for it we will be in the
country before we are big enough to attract too much attention.
Understand, Aura?"

"I understand."

"We mustn't stir up the city if we can help it; with giants running
around, the people would get worked up to a frenzy. You could see that
with Lylda this afternoon. Not that you can blame them altogether, but
we want to get Loto back before we start anything here in Arite." He
took the pellets out as he spoke, and they each touched one of them to
the tip of their tongues.

"Now, then, come on--not too fast, we want to keep going," said the Very
Young Man, taking the girl by the hand again.

As they started off, running slowly down the street, the Very Young Man
looked back. The three men were running after them--not fast, seeming
content merely to keep their distance. The Very Young Man laughed. "Wait
till they see us get big. Fine chance they've got."

Aura, her lithe, young body in perfect condition, ran lightly and easily
as a fawn. She made a pretty picture as she ran, with her long, black
hair streaming out behind her, and the short silk tunic flapping about
her lean, round thighs. She still held the Very Young Man by the hand,
running just in advance of him, guiding him through the streets, which
in this part of the city were more broken up and irregular.

They had not gone more than a hundred yards when the pavement began to
move unsteadily under them, as the deck of a plunging ship feels to one
who runs its length, and the houses they were swiftly passing began
visibly to decrease in size. The Very Young Man felt the girl falter in
her stride. He dropped her hand and slipped his arm about her waist,
holding her other hand against it. She smiled up into his eyes, and thus
they ran on, side by side.

A few moments more and they were in the open country, running on a road
that wound through the hills, between cultivated fields dotted here and
there with houses. The landscape dwindled beneath them steadily, until
they seemed to be running along a narrow, curving path, bordered by
little patches of different-colored ground, like a checkerboard. The
houses they passed now hardly reached as high as their knees. Sometimes
peasants stood in the doorways of these houses watching them in terror.
Occasionally they passed a farmer ploughing his field, who stopped his
work, stricken dumb, and stared at them as they went swiftly by.

When they were well out into the country, perhaps a quarter of the way
to Orlog--for to beings so huge as they the distance was not great--the
Very Young Man slowed down to a walk.

"How far have we gone?" he asked.

Aura stopped abruptly and looked around her. They seemed now to be at
the bottom of a huge, circular, shallow bowl. In every direction from
where they stood the land curved upward towards the rim of the bowl that
was the horizon--a line, not sharp and well defined, but dim and hazy,
melting away into the blackness of the star-studded sky. Behind them,
hardly more than a mile away, according to their present stature--they
had stopped growing entirely now--lay the city of Arite. They could see
completely across it and out into the country beyond.

The lake, with whose shore they had been running parallel, was much
closer to them. Ahead, up near the rim of the horizon, lay a black
smudge. Aura pointed. "Orlog is there," she said. "You see it?"

To the Very Young Man suddenly came the realization that already he was
facing the problem of how to get into Orlog unheralded. If they remained
in their present size they could easily walk there in an hour or less.
But long before that they would be seen and recognized.

The Very Young Man feared for Loto's safety if he allowed that to
happen. He seemed to be able to make out the city of Orlog now. It was
smaller than Arite, and lay partially behind a hill, with most of its
houses strung along the lake shore. If only they were not so tall they
could not be seen so readily. But if they became smaller it would take
them much longer to get there. And eventually they would have to become
normal Oroid size, or even smaller, in order to get into the city
unnoticed. The Very Young Man thought of the lake. Perhaps that would be
the best way.

"Can you swim?" he asked. And Aura, with her ready smile, answered that
she could. "If we are in the water," she added, seeming to have followed
his thoughts, "they would not see us. I can swim very far--can you?"

The Very Young Man nodded.

"If we could get near to Orlog in the water," he said, "we might get a
boat. And then when we were small, we could sail up. They wouldn't see
us then."

"There are many boats," answered the girl in agreement. "Look!"

There were, indeed, on the lake, within sight of them now, several
boats. "We must get the one nearest Orlog," the Very Young Man said. "Or
else it will beat us in and carry the news."
