"Your secretary got my name wrong. She thinks I'm Mr. Melon--Kenneth
J. Melon."

"But you're not," Willcoe said.

Malone resisted an impulse to announce that he was really Lamont
Cranston. "I'm Kenneth J. Malone," he said.

"Ah," Willcoe said. "Quite amusing. Imagine my mistaking you for a Mr.
Melon, when you're really Mr. Malone." He paused, and his face got
even more wrinkled. "But I don't know you under either name," he said.
"What do you want?"

"I want to talk to Mr. Manelli," Malone said.

"But Mr. Aoud--"

"Mr. Aoud," Malone said, wondering if it sounded as silly to Willcoe
as it did to him, "isn't in. So I thought you might be able to arrange
an appointment for this afternoon."

Willcoe bit his lip. "Mr. Manelli isn't in just now," he said.

"Yes," Malone said. "I didn't think he would be. That's why I want to
arrange an appointment for later, when he _will_ be in."

"Does Mr. Manelli know you?" Willcoe said suspiciously, the wrinkles
deepening again.

"He knows my boss," Malone said carefully. "You just tell him that
this is something that ought to be worth time and money to him. His
time, and his money."

"Hmm," Willcoe said. "I see. Would you wait a moment, Mr. Mel--Mr.
Malone?"

The screen blanked out immediately. The wait this time was slightly
longer.

And the next face that appeared on the screen was that of Cesare "Big
Cheese" Antonio Manelli, the nearly invisible cog.

For a cog, the face was not a bad one. It was strong and well-muscled,
and it had dark, wavy hair running along the top. At the sides of the
face, the hair was greying slightly, and behind the grey two large
ears stuck out. Manelli's nose was a long, faintly aquiline affair and
his eyes were very pleasant and candid. They were light grey.

"Aha," Manelli said. "You are Mr. Malone, right?" His voice was
guttural, but it was obvious that he was trying for control. "I regret
announcing that I was out, Mr. Malone," he said. "But a man in my
position--I like privacy, Mr. Malone, and I try to keep privacy for
myself. Let me request you to answer a question, Mr. Malone: do I know
you, Mr. Malone?"

"Not personally," Malone said. "I--"

"But I'm supposed to know your boss," Manelli said. "I don't know him,
either, so far."

Malone shrugged. "I'm sure you do," he said, and dropped the name
almost casually: "Andrew J. Burris."

Manelli raised his eyebrows. "So that's who you are," he said. "I
ought to have known, Mr. Malone. And you want to talk to me a little
bit, right?"

"That's right," Malone said.

"But this is no way to act, Mr. Malone," Manelli said reproachfully.
"After all, we understand each other, you and me. What you should do,
you should come in through channels, in the correct way, so everything
it would be open and above the board."

"Through channels?" Malone said.

Manelli regarded him with a pitying glance. "You must be new on your
job, Mr. Malone," he said. "Because there is an entire system built
up, and you don't know about it. The way things work, we sit around
and we don't see people. And then somebody comes and presents his
credentials, you might say--search warrants, for instance, or
subpoenas. And then we know where we are."

Malone shook his head. "This isn't that kind of call," he said. "It's
more a friendly type of call."

"Mr. Malone," Manelli said. The reproach was stronger in his voice.
"You must be very new at your job."

"Nevertheless," Malone said.

Manelli hesitated only a second. "Because I like you," he said, "and
to teach you how things operate around here, I could do you a favor."

"Good," Malone said patiently.

"In an hour," Manelli said. "My place. Here."

The screen blanked out before Malone could even say goodbye.

Malone got up, went out to the corridor, and decided that, since he
had time to kill, he might as well walk on down to Manelli's office.
That, he told himself, would give him time to decide what he wanted to
say.

He toyed at first with the idea of a nice bourbon and soda in a
Madison Avenue bar, but he discarded that idea in a hurry. It was
always possible for him to get into a tight spot and have to teleport
his way out, and he didn't want to be fuzzy around the edges in case
that happened. _Trotkin's_ had showed him that, under enough stress,
he could manage the job with quite a lot of vodka in him. But there
was absolutely no sense, he told himself sadly, in taking chances.

He started off downtown along Fifth. Soon he was standing in front of
the blue-and-crystal tower of the Ravell Building.

That made up his mind for him. He checked his watch, mentally flipped
a coin and then cheated a little to make the answer come out right. He
went inside and stepped into an elevator.

"Six," he said with decision.

Lou was sitting at the Psychical Research Society desk, talking to the
tweedy Sir Lewis Carter. Malone waved at Carter, decided that
conversation with Lou was out, and started to walk away. Then he
realized that he couldn't have Carter thinking he was crazy. He had to
figure out something to tell the man--and in a hurry, too.

Carter smiled and gestured to him. "Ah, Mr. Malone," he said. "I'm
glad you brought our Lou home safely. I've heard a little about your--
ah--escapade. Astounding, really."

"Not for the FBI," Malone said modestly. "We've been through too
much."

"But--"

"No, really," Malone said. "We never call anything astounding any
more."

"I can well imagine," Carter said. "Is there anything I can do for
you?"

Malone thought fast. He had to have something, and he didn't have much
time. "Why--uh--" he said, and then it came to him. "Yes, as a matter
of fact you can," he said.

"Glad to be of service," Carter said. "I'm sure we can do anything you
request."

"Have you got any more data on telepathic projection?" Malone said.

Sir Lewis Carter frowned. "Telepathic projection?" he said.

"The stuff--the phenomenon Cartier Taylor mentioned," Malone said, "in
_Minds and Morons_. I think it was page eighty-four."

"Oh," Carter said. "Oh, yes. Of course. Well, Mr. Malone, we'll see
what we can do for you."

Malone sighed. "Thanks," he said mournfully. "I guess--I guess that's
all, then." He smiled at Lou, and turned the smile into a terrifying
scowl when his eye caught Carter's. "Oh," Malone said. "So long. So
long, everybody."

"Ken--"

This was not, he told himself sadly, either the time or the place.
"Goodbye, Sir Lewis," he said. "Goodbye, Lou."

The elevator opened its doors and received him.

* * * * *

Exactly fifty-nine minutes after Cesare Manelli had hung up on him,
Malone showed up in the stately and sumptuous suite that belonged, for
a stiff fee every month, to the firm of Rodger, Willcoe, O'Vurr and
Aoud. The girl at the desk was his old Spearmint friend.

"Mr. Manelli," Malone said. "I've got an appointment. My name is
Malone and his is Manelli. He works here." That, he told himself, was
an understatement; but at least he had a chance of getting his point
across.

"Oh," the girl said. Her gum popped. "Certainly. Right away, Mr.
Maloney."

Malone opened his mouth, then shut it again. It just wasn't worth the
trouble, he thought.

The girl did things with a switchboard, then turned to him again. "Mr.
Manelli's office is right down there in back," she said, pointing
vaguely. "Think you can find it, Mr. Maloney?"

"I'll try," Malone promised. He went down the long corridor and
stopped at an unmarked door. It was at least an even chance, he told
himself, and opened the door.

The room inside appeared to be mostly desk. The gigantic slab of wood
sat against the far wall of the room, in the right-hand corner and
spreading over toward the center. It appeared, in the soft half-light
of the room, to be waiting for somebody to walk into its lair. Malone
was sure, at first sight, that this desk ate people; it was just the
type: big and dark and glowering and massive.

There wasn't anybody seated behind it, which reinforced his belief.
The desk had eaten its master. Now it was out of control and they
would have to have it shot. Malone took a deep breath and tried not to
veer.

Then he heard a voice.

"Sit down, Mr. Malone," the voice said. "How about you having a drink
while we talk? If this is going to be so friendly."

The voice didn't belong to the desk. It belonged, unmistakably, to Big
Cheese himself. Malone turned and saw him, sitting in the left-hand
corner of the room behind a low table. There was another empty chair
facing Manelli, and Malone went over and sat in it.

"A drink?" he said. "Okay. Sure."

"Bourbon and soda, isn't it?" Manelli said. He stood up.

"Your research department gets fast answers," Malone said. "Bourbon
and soda it is."

"After all," Manelli said, shrugging slightly, "a person in my
position, he has to make sure he knows what is what, and all the time.
It's routine, what you call S. O. P. Standard Operating Procedure,
they call it."

"I'm sure they do," Malone murmured politely.

"And besides," Manelli said, "you are a well-known type. I thought I
knew the name when old Fred mentioned it, or I would never talk to
you. You know how it is."

Malone nodded. "Well," he said, as Manelli went over to a small
portable bar at the back of the room and got busy, "we're being frank,
anyway."

"And why shouldn't we be frank, Mr. Malone?" Manelli said. "It's a
nice, friendly conversation, and what have we got on our minds?"

For the first time, as he turned, Malone got a glimpse of something
behind the structured and muscular face. There was panic there, just a
tiny seed under iron control, but it showed in the eyes and in the
muscles of the cheek.

"Just a nice, friendly conversation," Malone said. Manelli brought the
drinks over and set them on the table.

"Take your pick," he said. "That's not what a good host should do, ask
the guest to pick one, like a game; but I got into the habit. People
get nervous about arsenic in the drinks. Which is silly."

"Sure it is," Malone agreed. He picked up the left-hand glass and
regarded it carefully. "If you wanted to kill me, you'd need a motive
and an opportunity, and you don't have either at the moment. Besides,
you'd make sure to be far away when it happened." He hoped he sounded
confident. He took a sip of the drink, but it tasted like bourbon and
soda.

"Mr. Malone," Manelli said, "you say these things about me, and it
hurts. It hurts me, right here." He pressed a hand over the checkbook
side of his jacket. "I'm a legitimate businessman, and no different
from any other legitimate businessman. You can't prove anything else."

"I know I can't," Malone said. "But I want to talk to you about your
real business."

"This is my real business," Manelli said. "The advertising agency. I
work here. Advertising is in my blood. And I don't understand the
least little bit why you have to do things to me all the time."

"Do things?" Malone said. "What did I do?"

"Now, Mr. Malone," Manelli said. He took a swallow of his drink. "You
said let's be frank, so I'm frank. Why not you?"

"I don't know what you're talking about," Malone said, telling part of
the truth.

Manelli took another swallow of his drink, fished in a jacket pocket
and brought out two cigars. "Smoke, Mr. Malone?" he said. "The very
best, from Havana, Cuba. Cost me a dollar and a half each."

Malone looked with longing at the cigar. But it was okay for Manelli
to smoke cigars, he thought bitterly. Manelli was a gangster, and who
cared how he looked? Malone was an FBI man, and FBI men didn't smoke
cigars. Particularly Havana cigars. That, he told himself with
regretful firmness, was that.

"No, thanks," he said. "I never smoke on duty."

Manelli shrugged and put one cigar away. He lit the other one and
dense clouds of smoke began to rise in the room. Malone breathed
deeply.

"I understand you've been having troubles," he said.

Manelli nodded. "Now, you see, Mr. Malone?" he said. "You tell me you
don't know what's happening, but you know I got troubles. How come,
Mr. Malone? How come?"

"Because you have got troubles," Malone said. "But I have nothing to
do with them." He hesitated, thought of adding: "Yet," and decided
against it.

"Now, Mr. Malone," Manelli said. "You know better than that."

"I do?" Malone said.

Manelli sighed, took another swallow of his drink and dragged deeply
on the cigar. "Let's take a for-instance," he said. "Now, you
understand my business is advertising, Mr. Malone?"

"It's in your blood," Malone said, involuntarily.

"Right," Manelli said. "But I think about things. I like to figure
things out. In a sort of a theoretical way, like a for-instance.
Understand?"

"What sort of theoretical story are you going to tell me?" Malone
said.

Manelli leaned back in his chair. "Let's take, for instance, some
numbers runners who had some trouble the other day, got beat up and
money taken from them. Maybe you read about it in the papers."

"I haven't been following the papers much," Malone said.

"That's all right," Manelli said grandly. "Maybe it wasn't _in_ the
papers. But anyhow, I figured out maybe that happened. I had nothing
to do with this, Mr. Malone; you understand that? But I figured out
how maybe it happened."

"How?" Malone said.

Manelli took another puff on his cigar. "Maybe there was an error at a
racetrack--we could say Jamaica, for instance, just for laughs. And
maybe two different totals were published for the pari-mutuel numbers,
and both got given out. So the numbers runners got all fouled up, so
they got beat up and money taken from them."

"It could have happened that way," Malone said.

"I figure maybe the FBI had something to do with this," Manelli said.

"We didn't," Malone said. "Frankly."

