thrust aside as though their existence were an irrelevance. Along the
lower reaches of the St Lawrence the refugees came like locusts to
devour the substance of the _habitants_. Into empty Ungava and almost
equally empty Labrador the hardier ones pushed, armed like their
forebears with only ax and shotgun. Northward and eastward, beyond the
Arctic Circle and onto the polar ice they trickled, seeking some place
which promised security from the Grass. Passenger rates to Europe or
South America, formerly at a premium, now shot to unparalleled heights.

I wound up my own affairs, disappointed at the failure to find a use for
the Grass, but still keeping it in view as a future objective, and
arranged for the removal of the Florida factory to Brazzaville. Heeding
the cabled importunities of Stuart Thario I risked my life to travel
once more into the interior to see Joe and persuade him to come back
with me. I found them in a small Pennsylvania town in the Alleghenies,
once a company owned miningvillage. The Grass, advancing rapidly, was
just beyond the nearest mountainridge, replacing the jagged Appalachian
horizon with a softer and more ominous one.

They appeared serene and content, Joe's haggard look of the winter
erased. "I'm in the middle of the third movement, A W," he told me, like
a man who had no time to waste on preliminaries or indirections. "Here."
He thrust an enormous manila envelope at me. "Here are the first two
movements. There are no copies and I cannot trust the mails or any other
messenger to get them out. If possible I'll send the Old Man the third
movement as soon as it's finished--and the fourth, if I have time. But
take the first two anyway; at least I'll know theyre preserved."

"Joe, Florence!" I exclaimed. "This is ridiculous. Insane. Come back
with me."

Silence.

"You can compose just as well in Europe, if it is so important to you.
In France, say, or England, away from this danger and discomfort. There
is no doubt the country is finished; come to safety while you can."

Florence was busy with a stack of musicpaper and offered no comment. Joe
put his hand for a second on my shoulder and then turned away, talking
with his eyes fixed out the window in the direction of the Grass.

"General Herkimer had both legs shot off at the battle of Oriskany. He
made his men put his back to a treestump and with a flintlock rifle
fired at the enemy until he bled to death. Commodore Lawrence, mortally
wounded, had only one order. Schoolbooks hold the words of John Paul,
selfnamed Jones, and of Hiram Ulysses Grant. Even yesterday, the old
tradition was alive: 'Enemy landing; issue in doubt.' If I finish my
symphony--"

"When you finish your symphony--" I encouraged.

"If you finish your symphony--" said Florence quietly.

"If I finish my symphony, it must be in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont."
His speech took on a hushed, abstracted tone. "Massachusetts, Rhode
Island or Connecticut. New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania--" his voice
rose higher-- "Maryland, Virginia or West Virginia--" his shoulders
shook and he seemed to be crying-- "North Carolina, South Carolina,
Georgia, Florida ..."

I left them, convinced the madness of the country had found still
another victim. That night I thankfully boarded the European Clipper for
the last time. The next day I sank back into civilization as into a
comfortable bed.


_63._ "The United States, July 4 (N.A.N.A.)--'A decent respect for the
opinion of mankind' dictates the content of this summary. Less than two
centuries past, a small group of smugglers, merchants and planters
united in an insurrection which in its course gathered to itself such an
accreta of riffraff--debtors, convicts, adventurers, careerists,
foreigners, theoreticians, idealists, revolutionaries, soldiers of
fortune and restless men, that at the height of their numbers they
composed, with their sympathizers, perhaps a third of the people in the
country. After seven years of inept war in which they had all the
breaks, including that of a halfhearted enemy, they established 'upon
this continent a new nation.' Some of the phrases thrown off in the heat
of propaganda were taken seriously and despite shocked opposition
written into basic law.

"The cryptogram is readable backward or forward, straightaway or upside
down. Unparalleled resources, the fortuitous historical moment, the tide
of immigration drawing on the best of the world, the implicit good in
conception necessarily resultant in the explicit best of being; high
purpose, inventive genius, exploratory urge, competitive spirit,
fraternal enthusiasm, what does the ascription matter if the end product
was clear for all to see?

"Is it not fitting that a nation calling itself lightly 'God's Country,'
meaning a land abundantly favored by nature, should find its dispatch
through an act of the benefactor become understandably irritable? This
is not to pose the editorial question of justice, but to remember in
passing the girdled forests, abused prairies, gullied lands, the
stupidly harnessed plains, wasted coal, gas, petroleum; the millions of
tons of rich mud denied hungry soil by Mississippi levees and forced
profitlessly into the salt sea.

"A small part, a heartbreakingly small part of the United States remains
at this moment. In a matter of weeks even this little must be overrun,
stilled and covered green as all graves are. Scattered through the world
there will be Americans, participants in a bitter diaspora. For
them--and for their children to be instructed zealously in the
formalities of an antique civilization--there can be no Fourth of July,
no Thanksgiving; only one holiday will remain, and that continue through
all the year. Its name, of course, is Memorial Day. W.R.L."


_64._ This was the last dispatch from the once great editor. It was
assumed generally that he had perished with so many others. It was only
some time later I heard a curious story, for whose authenticity I cannot
vouch.

True to the flippant prediction of Jacson Gootes, Le ffacase returned to
the Church into which he had been born. He went further and became a lay
brother, taking upon himself the obligation of silence. Though an old
man, he stayed close to the advancing Grass, giving what assistance and
comfort he could to the refugees. The anecdotes of his sudden appearance
in typhusridden camps, mute and gaunt, hastening with water for the
feverish, quieting the terrified with a light touch, praying silently
beside the dying, sound improbable to me, but I mention them for what
they are worth.


_65._ When winter came again, the Canadian government petitioned the
Parliament at Westminster for crowncolony status and the assent of the
Queen's Privy Council was given to the ending of the premier Dominion.
All that was left of the largest landmass within the British
Commonwealth was eastern and northern Quebec, the Maritime Provinces and
part of the Northwest Territories.

The United States and more than half of Mexico had been wiped from the
map. From the Pacific to the Atlantic, from Nome to Veracruz stretched a
new Sargasso Sea of _Cynodon dactylon_. A hundred and eighty million
men, women, and children had been thrust from their homes by a despised
weed.

I cannot say life on the other continents--and I could call any of them,
except possibly Africa, my home--was undisturbed by the disappearance of
the United States. American competition gone, the tempo of businesslife
seemed to run slower and slower. Production dwindled, prices rose;
luxury articles were made in abundance, but manufacturers hesitated to
adopt American methods of massproduction for necessities.

Russia, after her new revolution, was a quiet backwater economically,
although politically she caused turmoil by giving a home to the Fourth
International. Germany became the leading iron and steel country, but it
was not an aggressive leadership, rather it was a lackadaisical
acceptance of a fortuitous role; while Britain, often on deathbed but
never a corpse, without question took the lead in international affairs.

Consolidated Pemmican and Allied Industries was now, if not the largest,
certainly one of the largest companies in the world. We purchased sheep
in Australia, beef and wheat and corn in South America, rice and millet
and eggs in Asia, fruit and sugar and milo in Africa, and what the
farmers of Europe could spare, to process and ship back in palatable,
concentrated form to a world which now constituted our market. Besides
all this we had of course our auxiliary concerns, many of which
dominated their respective fields. Ministers of finance consulted me
before proposing new budgets and there was not a statesman--outside the
Socialist Union--who didnt listen respectfully to my suggestions.

Tony Preblesham had proved an invaluable find. Never the type to whom
authority in the largest matters could be delegated, nevertheless he was
extremely handy as troubleshooter, exploiter of new territory or
negotiator with competitors or troublesome laborleaders. The pioneers
who had fled to the north had little to offer in payment for the vast
quantities of food concentrates they required, but the land was rich in
furs, timber, and other resources. With permission of the Danish
authorities I sent Preblesham to Julianthaab. There he established our
headquarters for Greenland, Iceland, and all that was left of North
America. From Julianthaab immediately radiated a network of posts where
our products were traded for whatever the refugees could bring in.

But the Americans who had gone into the icy wastes were not seeking
subsistence. They were striving mightily to reach some place of
sanctuary where they could no longer be menaced by the Grass. Beyond the
Arctic Circle? Here they might learn to imitate the Innuit, living on
fish and seals and an occasional obligingly beached whale. But could
they be sure, on territory contiguous or very nearly contiguous to that
supporting the weed, that they could count on immunity? They did not
believe so. They filled up Newfoundland in the hope that the narrow Gulf
of St Lawrence and the narrower Straits of Belle Isle might offer
protective barriers. They crossed on sleds to Baffin Island and in
homemade boats to Greenland. Before the Grass had wiped out their
families, and their less hardy compatriots left behind in Nova Scotia
and Prince Edward Island, these pioneers abandoned the continent of
their origin; the only effect of their passage having been to
exterminate the last of the Innuit by the propagation of the manifold
diseases they had brought with them.

In the south the tempo was slower, the striving for escape less
hysterical and more philosophic. When the Mexican peon heard the Grass
was in the next village he packed his few belongings and moved farther
away. From Tampico to Chiapas the nation journeyed easily south, not
regretting too loudly the lands left behind, not crowding or jostling
rudely on the highways, not failing to pause for siestas when the sun
was hot, but traveling steadily in a quiet resignation that seemed
beyond resignation--the extension of a gracious will.


_66._ But the rest of the world, even in the lethargy which had come
upon it in viewing the loss of most of North America, could not afford
to leave the Grass to its own devices, content to receive the refugees
it drove out or watch them die. A World Congress to Combat the Grass was
hastily called in London. It was a distinguished body of representatives
from all the nations and resembled at its best the now functionless
Federal Disruptions Committee.

At the opening sitting a delegation with credentials from the President
of the United States attempted to join in the proceedings. One of the
French members rose to inquire of the chairman, Where was the United
States? He, the delegate, had read of such a country, had heard it
spoken of--and none too favorably--but did it exist, _de facto_?

The delegate from Haiti asked for the floor and wished to assure his
distinguished colleague from the motherland of culture--especially did
he wish to assure this learned gentleman, bound as they were by the same
beautiful and meticulous language--that his country had good reason to
know the United States actually existed--or had done so at one time. His
glorious land bore scars inflicted by the barbarians. His own
grandfather, a great patriot, had been hunted down by the United States
Marines as a bandit. He implored a congress with humanitarian designs to
refuse admission to the delegates of the socalled United States.

One of the German delegates, after wiping the perspiration from the
three folds on the back of his neck, said he spoke with great diffidence
for fear of being misunderstood. The formerly existent country had twice
defeated, or apparently defeated, his own in a war and his distinguished
colleagues might misinterpret the spirit which moved him. Nevertheless,
he could not refrain from remarking that it appeared to him that a Just
Providence had wiped out the United States and therefore it would be
illogical if not blasphemous for this august body to admit a delegation
from a nonexistent country.

The American delegation attempted to point out feebly that Hawaii still
remained and Puerto Rico and Guam. The members from the various sections
of the British Commonwealth, arguing the precedents of the
governmentsinexile, urged the acceptance of their credentials. The
representative of Switzerland called for a vote and the credentials were
rejected.

This controversy being settled, the body, in high good humor, selected a
governing committee to take whatever measures it deemed necessary to
protect the rest of the world from the menace. After lengthy debate and
much conflicting testimony from experts a bold plan was endorsed. It was
decided to complete the digging of the Nicaragua Canal and blow up that
part of Central America lying between it and the Isthmus of Panama. It
was a colossal feat of engineering which would cost billions of pounds
and untold manpower, but the nations of the world, not without some
grumbling, finally agreed to the expenditure.

While technicians from all over the world directed laborgangs and
steamshovels, ammunitionships loaded with tons of explosives sailed from
every port for Panama and Colon. Though at first reluctant with their
contributions, the countries had reconsidered and poured forth their
shares without stint. All obsolete warmaterials were shipped to the
scene of action. Prisons were emptied to supply the needed manpower and
when this measure fell short all without visible means of support were
added to the roll.

Shortsightedly Costa Rica protested vigorously the proposed destruction
of its entire territory and there were even momentary uprisings of
patriots who proposed to defend their nation with the last drop of
blood, but commonsense and international amity prevailed, especially
when Costa Ricans were promised a territory twice as big as their native
country in the hinterland between Colombia and Venezuela, a valueless
tract both nations had been trying in vain to settle for decades.

Night and day the detonations of highexplosives killed fish on both the
Atlantic and Pacific sides of Central America and brought stunned birds
plummeting down from the skies to their death. The coastal plains fell
into the sea, great mountains were reduced to powder and little by
little the gap between North and South America widened.

But the progress of the work was infinitesimal compared with the advance
of the Grass. It swept over the ancient Aztec empire down to the Isthmus
of Tehuantepec. The ruins of Mayan civilization, excavated once, were
buried anew. The demolition engineers measured their daily progress in
feet, the Grass in miles. When the waters of the Atlantic and Pacific
met in Lake Nicaragua, the Grass was in Yucatan. When the first green
runners invaded Guatemala, a bare twenty miles of northern Panama had
been demolished and hardly a start had been made in the destruction of
Costa Rica.

Fleets of airplanes bombed the connecting strip in the area left by
engineers to the last, but as their flights went on the Grass crept into
British Honduras. The workers sent another twenty miles of Panama into
nothingness and the Grass completed the conquest of Guatemala. They blew
up another ten miles and the Grass took over El Salvador. Dynamite
widened the Nicaragua Canal to a ridiculously thin barrier as the Grass
overran Honduras.

They stood now almost facetoface, the width of one pitiful little Banana
Republic between them. On one hand the Grass, funneled and constricted
to a strip of land absurdly inadequate to support its gargantuan might,
on the other the combined resources of man, desperately determined to
destroy the bridge before the invader. In tropic heat the work was kept
up at superhuman pace. Gangs of native laborers fainting under their
loads were blown skyhigh by impatient technicians unwilling to waste the
time necessary to revive them. In selfdefense the South American states
doubled their contributions. At the edge of the weed all the offensive
weapons of the world were massed to stay it as long as possible, for
even a day's--even an hour's delay might be invaluable.

But the Grass overbore the heavy artillery, the flamethrowers, the
bombs, the radium, and all the devices in its path. The inventions of
war whose constant improvement was the pride of the human race offered
no more obstacle to the Grass than a few anthills might to a herd of
stampeding elephants. It swept down to the edge of the ditch and paused
at the fiftymile stretch of saltwater between it and the shapeless
island still offering the temptation of a foothold in front of the now
vastly enlarged Panama Canal.

If those engaged in the task, from coordinator-in-chief down to the
sweating waterboys, had worked like madmen before, they worked like
triple madmen now, for the wind might blow a single seed onto what had
been Costa Rica and undo all they had so far accomplished. The
explosions were continuous, rocking the diminishing territory with
ceaseless earthquakes. After an hour on the job men reeled away,
deafened, blinded and shocked.

On the South American side, as had been planned, great supercyclone fans
were set up to blow back any errant seed. Fed by vast hydroelectric
plants in the Colombian highlands, the noise of their revolving blades
drowned out the sounds of the explosions for all those nearby. The
oceans became interested participants and enormously high tides possibly
caused by the difference in level between the Atlantic and Pacific,
clawed away great hunks of land. The great island became a small island,
the small island an islet. At last nothing but ruffling blue water lay
between the Grass and South America. Over this stretch of sea the great
fans blew their steady breath, protecting the continent behind from the
fate of its northern twin.

The passage between was forbidden to all ships for fear they might
inadvertently act as carriers of the seed. The lost continent was not
only isolated, it was sealed off. From the sharp apex of the inverted
triangle to its broad base in the arctic ice the Grass flourished in one
undisputed prairie, the sole legatee of all the hopes, trials,
afflictions, dreams and victories of the men and women who had lived
there since the first alien foot was set upon its soil.




FIVE

_The South Pacific Sailing Directory_


_67._ I cannot say the world greeted the end of the North American
continent with either rejoicing or regret. Relief, yes. When the news of
the last demolition was given and it was clear the Grass was unable to
bridge the gap, the imaginative could almost hear mankind emit a vast
sigh. The world was saved, they could go about their business now,
having written off a sixth of themselves.

I was reminded of Miss Francis' remark that if you cut off a man's leg
you bestow upon him a crippled mentality. For approximately two
centuries the United States had been a leg of the global body, a limb so
constantly inflicted with growingpains it caused the other parts to
writhe in sympathy. Now the member was cut off and everyone thought that
with the troublesome appendage gone life would be pleasanter and
simpler. Debtor nations expanded their chests when they remembered Uncle
Shylock was no more. Industrial countries looked eagerly to enlarge
their markets in those places where Americans formerly sold goods. Small
states whose inhabitants were occasionally addicted to carrying off
tourists and holding them for ransom now felt they could dispense with
those foreign undersecretaries whose sole business it had been to write
diplomatic notes of apology.

But it was a crippled world and the lost leg still twitched spectrally.
I don't think I speak now as a native of the United States, for with my
international interests I believe I have become completely a
cosmopolitan, but for everyone, Englishman, Italian, Afrikander or
citizen of Liberia. The disappearance of America created a revolution in
their lives, a change perhaps not immediately apparent, but eventually
to be recognized by all.

It was the trivial things we Americans had taken for granted as part of
our daily lives and taught the rest of the world to appreciate which
were most quickly missed. The substitution of English, Turkish, Egyptian
or Russian cigarettes for good old Camels or Luckies; the impossibility
of buying a bottle of cocacola at any price; the disappearance of the
solacing wad of chewinggum; the pulsing downbeat of a hot band--these
were the first things whose loss was noticed.

For a long time I had been too busy to attend movingpictures, except
rarely, but a man--especially a man with much on his mind--needs
relaxation and I would not choose the foreign movies with their morbid
emphasis on problems and crime and sex in preference to the cleancut
American product which always satisfied the nobler feelings by showing
the reward of the honest, the downfall of evildoers and the purity of
love and motherhood. Art is all very well, but need it be sordid?

As I told George Thario, I am no philistine; I think the Parthenon and
the Taj Mahal are lovely buildings, but I would not care to have an
office in either of them--give me Radio City. I don't mind the highbrow
programs the British Broadcasting Corporation put on; I myself am quite
capable of understanding and enjoying them, but I imagine there are
thousands of housewives who would prefer a good serial to bring romance
into their lives. I don't object to a commercial world in which
competitors go through the formality of pretending to be scrupulously
fair in talking about each others' products, but I must admit I missed
the good old American slapdash advertising which yelled, Buy my
deodorant or youll stink; wash your mouth with my antiseptic or youll
lose your job; brush your teeth with my dentifrice or no one will kiss
you; powder your face with my leadarsenate or youll keep your
maidenhead. I would give a lot of money to hear a singing commercial
once more or watch the neon lights north of Times Square urge me to buy
something for which I have no possible use. Living within your income is
fine, but the world lacks the goods youd have bought on the
installmentplan; getting what you need is sound policy, but how many
lives were lightened by the young men working their way through college,
or the fullerbrushman?

I think there was a subconscious realization of this which came
gradually to the top. In the beginning the almost universal opinion was
that the loss of the aching limb was for the better. I have heard
socalled cultured foreigners discuss the matter in my presence,
doubtless unaware I was an American. No more tourists, they gloated, to
stand with their backs to the Temple of Heaven in Pekin and explain the
superior construction of the Masonic Hall at Cedar Rapids; no more
visitors to the champagne caves at Rheims to inquire where they could
get a shot of real bourbon; no more music lovers at Salzburg or
Glyndebourne to regret audibly the lack of a peppy swingtune; no more
gourmets in Vienna demanding thick steaks, rare and smothered in onions.

But this period of smug selfcongratulation was soon succeeded by a
strange nostalgia which took the form of romanticizing the lost land.
American books were reprinted in vast quantities in the Englishspeaking
nations and translated anew in other countries. American movies were
revived and imitated. Fashionable speech was powdered with what were
conceived to be Yankee expressions and a southern drawl was assiduously
cultivated.

Bestselling historical novels were laid in the United States and popular
operas were written about Daniel Boone, Davy Crockett, and Kit Carson.
Men told their growing sons to work hard, for now there was left no land
of opportunity to which they could emigrate, no country where they could
become rich overnight with little effort. Instead of fairytales children
demanded stories of fortyniners and the Wedding of the Rails; and on the
streets of Bombay and Cairo urchins, probably quite unaware of the
memorial gesture, could be heard whistling _Casey Jones_.

But handinhand with this newfound romantic love went a completely
practical attitude toward those Americans still existing in the flesh.
The earliest expatriates, being generally men of substance, were well
received. The thousands who had crossed by small boats from Canada to
Greenland and from Greenland to Iceland to Europe were by definition in
a different category and found the quota system their fathers and
grandfathers had devised used to deny their own entrance.

They were as bewildered and hurt as children that any nation could be at
once so shortsighted and so heartless as to bar homeless wanderers. We
bring you knowledge and skills and our own need, they said in effect, we
will be an asset to your country if you admit us. The Americans could
not understand; they themselves had been fair to all and only kept out
undesirable immigrants.

Gradually the world geared itself to a slower tempo. The gogetter
followed the brontosaurus to extinction, and we Americans with the
foresight to carry on our businesses from new bases profited by the
unAmerican backwardness of our competitors. At this time I daresay I was
