point of very great interest which it is necessary to consider. There is
a remarkable contrast between the brilliancy of Sirius and his
companion. Sirius is a star far transcending all other stars of the
first magnitude, while his companion is extremely faint. Even if it were
completely withdrawn from the dazzling proximity of Sirius, the
companion would be only a small star of the eighth or ninth magnitude,
far below the limits of visibility to the unaided eye. To put the matter
in numerical language, Sirius is 5,000 times as bright as its companion,
but only about twice as heavy! Here is a very great contrast; and this
point will appear even more forcible if we contrast the companion of
Sirius with our sun. The companion is slightly heavier than our sun; but
in spite of its slightly inferior bulk, our sun is much more powerful as
a light-giver. One hundred of the companions of Sirius would not give as
much light as our sun! This is a result of very considerable
significance. It teaches us that besides the great bodies in the
universe which attract attention by their brilliancy, there are also
other bodies of stupendous mass which have but little
brilliancy--probably some of them possess none at all. This suggests a
greatly enhanced conception of the majestic scale of the universe. It
also invites us to the belief that the universe which we behold bears
but a small ratio to the far larger part which is invisible in the
sombre shades of night. In the wide extent of the material universe we
have here or there a star or a mass of gaseous matter sufficiently
heated to be luminous, and thus to become visible from the earth; but
our observation of these luminous points can tell us little of the
remaining contents of the universe.

The most celebrated of all the variable stars is that known as Algol,
whose position in the constellation of Perseus is shown in Fig. 83. This
star is conveniently placed for observation, being visible every night
in our latitude, and its interesting changes can be observed without any
telescopic aid. Everyone who desires to become acquainted with the great
truths of astronomy should be able to recognise this star, and should
have also followed it during one of its periods of change. Algol is
usually a star of the second magnitude; but in a period between two and
three days, or, more accurately, in an interval of 2 days 20 hours 48
minutes and 55 seconds, its brilliancy goes through a most remarkable
cycle of variations. The series commences with a gradual decline of the
star's brightness, which in the course of four and a half hours falls
from the second magnitude down to the fourth. At this lowest stage of
brightness Algol remains for about twenty minutes, and then begins to
increase, until in three and a half hours it regains the second
magnitude, at which it continues for about 2 days 12 hours, when the
same series commences anew. It seems that the period required by Algol
to go through its changes is itself subject to a slow but certain
variation. We shall see in a following chapter how it has been proved
that the variability of Algol is due to the occasional interposition of
a dark companion which cuts off a part of the lustre of the star. All
the circumstances can thus be accounted for, and even the weight and the
size of Algol and its dark companion be determined.

There are, however, other classes of variable stars, the fluctuation of
whose light can hardly be due to occasional obscuration by dark bodies.
This is particularly the case with those variables which are generally
faint, but now and then flare up for a short time, after which temporary
exaltation they again sink down to their original condition. The periods
of such changes are usually from six months to two years. The best known
example of a star of this class was discovered more than three hundred
years ago. It is situated in the constellation Cetus, a little south of
the equator. This object was the earliest known case of a variable star,
except the so-called temporary stars, to which we shall presently refer.
The variable in Cetus received the name of Mira, or the wonderful. The
period of the fluctuations of Mira Ceti is about eleven months, during
the greater part of which time the star is of the ninth magnitude, and
consequently invisible to the naked eye. When the proper time has
arrived, its brightness begins to increase rather suddenly. It soon
becomes a conspicuous object of the second or third magnitude. In this
condition it remains for eight or ten days, and then declines more
slowly than it rose until it is reduced to its original faintness, about
three hundred days after the rise commenced.

More striking to the general observer than the ordinary variable stars
are the _temporary stars_ which on rare occasions suddenly make their
appearance in the heavens. The most famous object of this kind was that
which blazed out in the beginning of November, 1572, and which when
first seen was as bright as Venus at its maximum brightness. It could,
indeed, be seen in full daylight by sharp-sighted people. As far as
history can tell us, no other temporary star has ever been as bright as
this one. It is specially associated with the name of Tycho Brahe, for
although he was not the discoverer, he made the best observations of the
object, and he proved that it was at a distance comparable with that of
the ordinary fixed stars. Tycho described carefully the gradual decline
of the wonderful star until it disappeared from his view about the end
of March, 1574, for the telescope, by which it could doubtless have been
followed further, had not yet been invented. During the decline the
colour of the object gradually changed; at first it was white, and by
degrees became yellow, and in the spring of 1573 reddish, like
Aldebaran. About May, 1573, we are told somewhat enigmatically that it
"became like lead, or somewhat like Saturn," and so it remained as long
as it was visible. What a fund of information our modern spectroscopes
and other instruments would supply us with if so magnificent a star were
to burst out in these modern days!

But though we have not in our own times been favoured with a view of a
temporary star as splendid as the one seen by Tycho Brahe and his
contemporaries, it has been our privilege to witness several minor
outbursts of this kind. It seems likely that we should possess more
records of temporary stars from former times if a better watch had been
kept for them. That is at any rate the impression we get when we see how
several of the modern stars of this kind have nearly escaped us
altogether, notwithstanding the great number of telescopes which are now
pointed to the sky on every clear night.

In 1866 a star of the second magnitude suddenly appeared in the
constellation of the crown (Corona Borealis). It was first seen on the
12th May, and a few days afterwards it began to fade away. Argelander's
maps of the northern heavens had been published some years previously,
and when the position of the new star had been accurately determined, it
was found that it was identical with an insignificant looking star
marked on one of the maps as of the 9-1/2 magnitude. The star exists in
the same spot to this day, and it is of the same magnitude as it was
prior to its spasmodic outburst in 1866. This was the first new star
which was spectroscopically examined. We shall give in Chapter XXIII. a
short account of the features of its spectrum.

The next of these temporary bright stars, Nova Cygni, was first seen by
Julius Schmidt at Athens on the 24th November, 1876, when it was between
the third and fourth magnitudes, and he maintains that it cannot have
been conspicuous four days earlier, when he was looking at the same
constellation. By some inadvertence the news of the discovery was not
properly circulated, and the star was not observed elsewhere for about
ten days, when it had already become considerably fainter. The decrease
of brightness went on very slowly; in October, 1877, the star was only
of the tenth magnitude, and it continued getting fainter until it
reached the fifteenth magnitude; in other words, it became a minute
telescopic star, and it is so still in the very same spot. As this star
did not reach the first or second magnitude it would probably have
escaped notice altogether if Schmidt had not happened to look at the
Swan on that particular evening.

We are not so likely to miss seeing a new star since astronomers have
pressed the photographic camera into their service. This became evident
in 1892, when the last conspicuous temporary star appeared in Auriga. On
the 24th January, Dr. Anderson, an astronomer in Edinburgh, noticed a
yellowish star of the fifth magnitude in the constellation Auriga, and a
week later, when he had compared a star-map with the heavens and made
sure that the object was really a new star, he made his discovery
public. In the case of this star we are able to fix fairly closely the
moment when it first blazed out. In the course of the regular
photographic survey of the heavens undertaken at the Harvard College
Observatory (Cambridge, Massachusetts) the region of the sky where the
new star appeared had been photographed on thirteen nights from October
21st to December 1st, 1891, and on twelve nights from December 10th to
January 20th, 1892. On the first series of plates there was no trace of
the Nova, while it was visible on the very first plate of the second
series as a star of the fifth magnitude. Fortunately it turned out that
Professor Max Wolf of Heidelberg, a most successful celestial
photographer, had photographed the same region on the 8th December, and
this photograph does not show the star, so that it cannot on that night
have been as bright as the ninth magnitude. Nova Auriga must therefore
have flared up suddenly between the 8th and the 10th of December.
According to the Harvard photographs, the first maximum of brightness
occurred about the 20th of December, when the magnitude was 4-1/2. The
decrease of the brightness was very irregular; the star fluctuated for
the five weeks following the first of February between the fourth and
the sixth magnitude, but after the beginning of March, 1892, the
brightness declined very rapidly, and at the end of April the star was
seen as an exceedingly faint one (sixteenth magnitude) with the great
Lick Refractor. When this mighty instrument was again pointed to the
Nova in the following August, it had risen nearly to the tenth
magnitude, after which it gradually became extremely faint again, and is
so still.

The temporary and the variable stars form but a very small section of
the vast number of stars with which the vault of the heavens is studded.
That the sun is no more than a star, and the stars are no less than
suns, is a cardinal doctrine of astronomy. The imposing magnificence of
this truth is only realised when we attempt to estimate the countless
myriads of stars. This is a problem on which our calculations are
necessarily vain. Let us, therefore, invoke the aid of the poet to
attempt to express the innumerable, and conclude this chapter with the
following lines of Mr. Allingham:--

  "But number every grain of sand,
  Wherever salt wave touches land;
  Number in single drops the sea;
  Number the leaves on every tree,
  Number earth's living creatures, all
  That run, that fly, that swim, that crawl;
  Of sands, drops, leaves, and lives, the count
  Add up into one vast amount,
  And then for every separate one
  Of all those, let a flaming SUN
  Whirl in the boundless skies, with each
  Its massy planets, to outreach
  All sight, all thought: for all we see
  Encircled with infinity,
  Is but an island."




CHAPTER XX.

DOUBLE STARS.


     Interesting Stellar Objects--Stars Optically Double--The Great
     Discovery of the Binary Stars made by Herschel--The Binary Stars
     describe Elliptic Paths--Why is this so important?--The Law of
     Gravitation--Special Double Stars--Castor--Mizar--The Coloured
     Double Stars--b Cygni.

The sidereal heavens contain few more interesting objects for the
telescope than can be found in the numerous class of double stars. They
are to be counted in thousands; indeed, _many_ thousands can be found in
the catalogues devoted to this special branch of astronomy. Many of
these objects are, no doubt, small and comparatively uninteresting, but
some of them are among the most conspicuous stars in the heavens, such
as Sirius, whose system we have already described. We shall in this
brief account select for special discussion and illustration a few of
the more remarkable double stars. We shall particularly notice some of
those that can be readily observed with a small telescope, and we have
indicated on the sketches of the constellations in a previous chapter
how the positions of these objects in the heavens can be ascertained.

It had been shown by Cassini in 1678 that certain stars, which appeared
to the unaided eye as single points of light, really consisted of two or
more stars, so close together that the telescope was required for their
separation.[36] The number of these objects was gradually increased by
fresh discoveries, until in 1781 (the same year in which Herschel
discovered Uranus) a list containing eighty double stars was published
by the astronomer Bode. These interesting objects claimed the attention
of Herschel during his memorable researches. The list of known doubles
rapidly swelled. Herschel's discoveries are to be enumerated by
hundreds, while he also commenced systematic measurements of the
distance by which the stars were separated, and the direction in which
the line joining them pointed. It was these measurements which
ultimately led to one of the most important and instructive of all
Herschel's discoveries. When, in the course of years, his observations
were repeated, Herschel found that in some cases the relative position
of the stars had changed. He was thus led to the discovery that in many
of the double stars the components are so related that they revolve
around each other. Mark the importance of this result. We must remember
that the stars are suns, comparable, it may be, with our sun in
magnitude; so that here we have the astonishing spectacle of pairs of
suns in mutual revolution. There is nothing very surprising in the fact
that movements should be observed, for in all probability every body in
the universe is in motion. It is the particular character of the
movement which is specially interesting and instructive.

It had been imagined that the proximity of the two stars forming a
double must be only accidental. It was thought that amid the vast host
of stars in the heavens it not unfrequently happened that one star was
so nearly behind another (as seen from the earth) that when the two were
viewed in the telescope they produced the effect of a double star. No
doubt many of the so-called double stars are produced in this way.
Herschel's discovery shows that this explanation will not always answer,
but that in many cases we really have two stars close together, and in
motion round their common centre of gravity.

When the measurements of the distances and the positions of double stars
had been accumulated during many years, they were taken over by the
mathematicians to be treated by their methods. There is one peculiarity
about double star observations: they have not--they cannot have--the
accuracy which the computer of an orbit demands. If the distance between
the pair of stars forming a binary be four seconds, the orbit we have to
scrutinise is only as large as the apparent size of a penny-piece at the
distance of one mile. It would require very careful measurement to make
out the form of a penny a mile off, even with good telescopes. If the
penny were tilted a little, it would appear, not circular, but oval; and
it would be possible, by measuring this oval, to determine how much the
penny was tilted. All this requires skilful work: the errors, viewed
intrinsically, may not be great, but viewed with reference to the whole
size of the quantities under consideration, they are very appreciable.
We therefore find the errors of observation far more prominent in
observations of this class than is generally the case when the
mathematician assumes the task of discussing the labours of the
observer.

The interpretation of Herschel's discovery was not accomplished by
himself; the light of mathematics was turned on his observations of the
binary stars by Savary, and afterwards by other mathematicians. Under
their searching enquiries the errors of the measurements were disclosed,
and the observations were purified from the grosser part of their
inaccuracy. Mathematicians could then apply to their corrected materials
the methods of enquiry with which they were familiar; they could deduce
with fair precision the actual shape of the orbit of the binary stars,
and the position of the plane in which that orbit is contained. The
result is not a little remarkable. It has been proved that the motion of
each of the stars is performed in an ellipse which contains the centre
of gravity of the two stars in its focus. This has been actually shown
to be true in many binary stars; it is believed to be true in all. But
why is this so important? Is not motion in an ellipse common enough?
Does not the earth revolve in an ellipse round the sun? And do not the
planets also revolve in ellipses?

It is this very fact that elliptic motion is so common in the planets of
the solar system which renders its discovery in binary stars of such
importance. From what does the elliptic motion in the solar system
arise? Is it not due to the law of attraction, discovered by Newton,
which states that every mass attracts every other mass with a force
which varies inversely as the square of the distance? That law of
attraction had been found to pervade the whole solar system, and it
explained the movements of the bodies of our system with marvellous
fidelity. But the solar system, consisting of the sun, and the planets,
with their satellites, the comets, and a host of smaller bodies, formed
merely a little island group in the universe. In the economy of this
tiny cosmical island the law of gravitation reigns supreme; before
Herschel's discovery we never could have known whether that law was not
merely a piece of local legislation, specially contrived for the
exigencies of our particular system. This discovery gave us the
knowledge which we could have gained from no other source. From the
binary stars came a whisper across the vast abyss of space. That whisper
told us that the law of gravitation was not peculiar to the solar
system. It told us the law extended to the distant shores of the abyss
in which our island is situated. It gives us grounds for believing that
the law of gravitation is obeyed throughout the length, breadth, and
depth of the entire visible universe.

One of the finest binary stars is that known as Castor, the brighter of
the two principal stars in the constellation of Gemini. The position of
Castor on the heavens is indicated in Fig. 86, page 418. Viewed by the
unaided eye, Castor resembles a single star; but with a moderately good
telescope it is found that what seems to be one star is really two
separate stars, one of which is of the third magnitude, while the other
is somewhat less. The angular distance of these two stars in the heavens
is not so great as the angle subtended by a line an inch long viewed at
a distance of half a mile. Castor is one of the double stars in which
the components have been observed to possess a motion of revolution. The
movement is, however, extremely slow, and the lapse of centuries will be
required before a revolution is completely effected.

A beautiful double star can be readily identified in the constellation
of Ursa Major (_see_ Fig. 80, page 410). It is known as Mizar, and is
the middle star (z) of the three which form the tail. In the close
neighbourhood of Mizar is the small star Alcor, which can be readily
seen with the unaided eye; but when we speak of Mizar as a double star,
it is not to be understood that Alcor is one of the components of the
double. Under the magnifying power of the telescope Alcor is seen to be
transferred a long way from Mizar, while Mizar itself is split up into
two suns close together. These components are of the second and the
fourth magnitudes respectively, and as the apparent distance is nearly
three times as great as in Castor, they are observed with facility even
in a small telescope. This is, indeed, the best double star in the
heavens for the beginner to commence his observations upon. We cannot,
however, assert that Mizar is a binary, inasmuch as observations have
not yet established the existence of a motion of revolution. Still less
are we able to say whether Alcor is also a member of the same group, or
whether it may not merely be a star which happens to fall nearly in the
line of vision. Recent spectroscopic observations have shown that the
larger component of Mizar is itself a double, consisting of a pair of
suns so close together that there is not the slightest possibility of
their ever being seen separately by the most powerful telescope in the
world.

A pleasing class of double stars is that in which we have the remarkable
phenomenon of colours, differing in a striking degree from the colours
of ordinary stars. Among the latter we find, in the great majority of
cases, no very characteristic hue; some are, however, more or less
tinged with red, some are decidedly ruddy, and some are intensely red.
Stars of a bluish or greenish colour are much more rare,[37] and when a
star of this character does occur, it is almost invariably as one of a
pair which form a double. The other star of the double is sometimes of
the same hue, but more usually it is yellow or ruddy.

One of the loveliest of these objects, which lies within reach of
telescopes of very moderate pretensions, is that found in the
constellation of the Swan, and known as b Cygni (Fig. 91). This
exquisite object is composed of two stars. The larger, about the third
magnitude, is of a golden-yellow, or topaz, colour; the smaller, of the
sixth magnitude, is of a light blue. These colours are nearly
complementary, but still there can be no doubt that the effect is not
merely one of contrast. That these two stars are both tinged with the
hues we have stated can be shown by hiding each in succession behind a
bar placed in the field of view. It has also been confirmed in a very
striking manner by spectroscopic investigation; for we see that the blue
star has experienced a special absorption of the red rays, while the
more ruddy light of the other star has arisen from the absorption of the
blue rays. The contrast of the colours in this object can often be very
effectively seen by putting the eye-piece out of focus. The discs thus
produced show the contrast of colours better than when the telescope
exhibits merely two stellar points.

Such are a few of these double and multiple stars. Their numbers are
being annually augmented; indeed, one observer--Mr. Burnham, formerly on
the staff of the Lick Observatory, and now an observer in the Yerkes
Observatory--has added by his own researches more than 1,000 new doubles
to the list of those previously known.

The interest in this class of objects must necessarily be increased when
we reflect that, small as the stars appear to be in our telescopes, they
are in reality suns of great size and splendour, in many cases rivalling
our own sun, or, perhaps, even surpassing him. Whether these suns have
planets attending upon them we cannot tell; the light reflected from the
planet would be utterly inadequate to the penetration of the vast extent
of space which separates us from the stars. If there be planets
surrounding these objects, then, instead of a single sun, such planets
will be illuminated by two, or, perhaps, even more suns. What wondrous
effects of light and shade must be the result! Sometimes both suns will
be above the horizon together, sometimes only one sun, and sometimes
both will be absent. Especially remarkable would be the condition of a
planet whose suns were of the coloured type. To-day we have a red sun
illuminating the heavens, to-morrow it would be a blue sun, and,
perhaps, the day after both the red sun and the blue sun will be in the
firmament together. What endless variety of scenery such a thought
suggests! There are, however, grave dynamical reasons for doubting
whether the conditions under which such a planet would exist could be
made compatible with life in any degree resembling the life with which
we are familiar. The problem of the movement of a planet under the
influence of two suns is one of the most difficult that has ever been
proposed to mathematicians, and it is, indeed, impossible in the present
state of analysis to solve with accuracy all the questions which it
implies. It seems not at all unlikely that the disturbances of the
planet's orbit would be so great that it would be exposed to
vicissitudes of light and of temperature far transcending those
experienced by a planet moving, like the earth, under the supreme
control of a single sun.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE DISTANCES OF THE STARS.


     Sounding-line for Space--The Labours of Bessel--Meaning of Annual
     Parallax--Minuteness of the Parallactic Ellipse Illustrated--The
     Case of 61 Cygni--Different Comparison Stars used--The Proper
     Motion of the Star--Struve's Investigations--Can they be
     Reconciled?--Researches at Dunsink--Conclusion obtained--Accuracy
     which such Observations admit Examined--The Proper Motion of 61
     Cygni--The Permanence of the Sidereal Heavens--The New Star in
     Cygnus--Its History--No Appreciable Parallax--A Mighty Outburst of
     Light--The Movement of the Solar System through Space--Herschel's
     Discovery--Journey towards Lyra--Probabilities.

We have long known the dimensions of the solar system with more or less
accuracy. Our knowledge includes the distances of the planets and the
comets from the sun, as well as their movements. We have also
considerable knowledge of the diameters and the masses of many of the
different bodies which belong to the solar system. We have long known,
in fact, many details of the isolated group nestled together under the
protection of the sun. The problem for consideration in the present
chapter involves a still grander survey than is required for measures of
our solar system. We propose to carry the sounding-line across the vast
abyss which separates the group of bodies closely associated about our
sun from the other stars which are scattered through the realms of
space. For centuries the great problem of star distance has engaged the
attention of those who have studied the heavens. It would be impossible
to attempt here even an outline of the various researches which have
been made on the subject. In the limited survey which we can make, we
must glance first at the remarkable speculative efforts which have been
directed to the problem, and then we shall refer to those labours which
have introduced the problem into the region of accurate astronomy.

No attempt to solve the problem of the absolute distances of the stars
was successful until many years after Herschel's labours were closed.
Fresh generations of astronomers, armed with fresh appliances, have for
many years pursued the subject with unremitting diligence, but for a
long time the effort seemed hopeless. The distances of the stars were so
great that they could not be ascertained until the utmost refinements of
mechanical skill and the most elaborate methods of mathematical
calculation were brought to converge on the difficulty. At last it was
found that the problem was beginning to yield. A few stars have been
induced to disclose the secret of their distance. We are able to give
some answer to the question--How far are the stars? though it must be
confessed that our reply up to the present moment is both hesitating and
imperfect. Even the little knowledge which has been gained possesses
interest and importance. As often happens in similar cases, the
discovery of the distance of a star was made independently about the
same time by two or three astronomers. The name of Bessel stands out
conspicuously in this memorable chapter of astronomy. Bessel proved
(1840) that the distance of the star known as 61 Cygni was a measurable
quantity. His demonstration possessed such unanswerable logic that
universal assent could not be withheld. Almost simultaneously with the
classical labours of Bessel we have Struve's measurement of the distance
of Vega, and Henderson's determination of the distance of the southern
star a Centauri. Great interest was excited in the astronomical
world by these discoveries, and the Royal Astronomical Society awarded
its gold medal to Bessel. It appropriately devolved on Sir John Herschel
to deliver the address on the occasion of the presentation of the medal:
that address is a most eloquent tribute to the labours of the three
astronomers. We cannot resist quoting the few lines in which Sir John
said:--

     "Gentlemen of the Royal Astronomical Society,--I congratulate you
     and myself that we have lived to see the great and hitherto
     impassable barrier to our excursion into the sidereal universe,
     that barrier against which we have chafed so long and so
     vainly--_aestuantes angusto limite mundi_--almost simultaneously
     overleaped at three different points. It is the greatest and most
     glorious triumph which practical astronomy has ever witnessed.
     Perhaps I ought not to speak so strongly; perhaps I should hold
     some reserve in favour of the bare possibility that it may be all
     an illusion, and that future researches, as they have repeatedly
     before, so may now fail to substantiate this noble result. But I
     confess myself unequal to such prudence under such excitement. Let
     us rather accept the joyful omens of the time, and trust that, as
     the barrier has begun to yield, it will speedily be effectually
     prostrated."

Before proceeding further, it will be convenient to explain briefly how
the distance of a star can be measured. The problem is one of a wholly
different character from that of the sun's distance, which we have
already discussed in these pages. The observations for the determination
of stellar parallax are founded on the familiar truth that the earth
revolves around the sun. We may for our present purpose assume that the
earth revolves in a circular path. The centre of that path is at the
centre of the sun, and the radius of the path is 92,900,000 miles. Owing
to our position on the earth, we observe the stars from a point of view
which is constantly changing. In summer the earth is 185,800,000 miles
distant from the position which it occupied in winter. It follows that
the apparent positions of the stars, as projected on the background of
the sky, must present corresponding changes. We do not now mean that the
actual positions of the stars are really displaced. The changes are only
apparent, and while oblivious of our own motion, which produces the
displacements, we attribute the changes to the stars.

On the diagram in Fig. 93 is an ellipse with certain months--viz.,
January, April, July, October--marked upon its circumference. This
ellipse may be regarded as a miniature picture of the earth's orbit
around the sun. In January the earth is at the spot so marked; in April
it has moved a quarter of the whole journey; and so on round the whole
circle, returning to its original position in the course of one year.
When we look from the position of the earth in January, we see the star
A projected against the point of the sky marked 1. Three months later
the observer with his telescope is carried round to April; but he now
sees the star projected to the position marked 2. Thus, as the observer
moves around the whole orbit in the annual revolution of the earth, so
the star appears to move round in an ellipse on the background of the
sky. In the technical language of astronomers, we speak of this as the
parallactic ellipse, and it is by measuring the major axis of this
ellipse that we determine the distance of the star from the sun. Half of
this major axis, or, what comes to the same thing, the angle which the
radius of the earth's orbit subtends as seen from the star, is called
the star's "annual parallax."

[Illustration: Fig. 93.--The Parallactic Ellipse.]

The figure shows another star, B, more distant from the earth and the
solar system generally than the star previously considered. This star
also describes an elliptic path. We cannot, however, fail to notice that
the parallactic ellipse belonging to B is much smaller than that of A.
The difference in the sizes of the ellipses arises from the different
distances of the stars from the earth. The nearer the star is to the
earth the greater is the ellipse, so that the nearest star in the
heavens will describe the largest ellipse, while the most distant star
will describe the smallest ellipse. We thus see that the distance of the
star is inversely proportional to the size of the ellipse, and if we
measure the angular value of the major axis of the ellipse, then, by an
exceedingly simple mathematical manipulation, the distance of the star
can be expressed as a multiple of a radius of the earth's orbit.
Assuming that radius to be 92,900,000 miles, the distance of the star is
obtained by simple arithmetic. The difficulty in the process arises from
the fact that these ellipses are so small that our micrometers often
fail to detect them.

How shall we adequately describe the extreme minuteness of the
parallactic ellipses in the case of even the nearest stars? In the
technical language of astronomers, we may state that the longest
diameter of the ellipse never subtends an angle of more than one and a
half seconds. In a somewhat more popular manner, we would say that one
thousand times the major axis of the very largest parallactic ellipse
would not be as great as the diameter of the full moon. For a still more
simple illustration, let us endeavour to think of a penny-piece placed
at a distance of two miles. If looked at edgeways it will be linear, if
tilted a little it would be elliptic; but the ellipse would, even at
that distance, be greater than the greatest parallactic ellipse of any
star in the sky. Suppose a sphere described around an observer, with a
radius of two miles. If a penny-piece were placed on this sphere, in
front of each of the stars, every parallactic ellipse would be totally
concealed.

The star in the Swan known as 61 Cygni is not remarkable either for its
size or for its brightness. It is barely visible to the unaided eye, and
there are some thousands of stars which are apparently larger and
brighter. It is, however, a very interesting example of that remarkable
class of objects known as double stars. It consists of two nearly equal
stars close together, and evidently connected by a bond of mutual
attraction. The attention of astronomers is also specially directed
towards the star by its large proper motion. In virtue of that proper
motion, the two components are carried together over the sky at the rate
of five seconds annually. A proper motion of this magnitude is extremely
rare, yet we do not say it is unparalleled, for there are some few stars
which have a proper motion even more rapid; but the remarkable duplex
character of 61 Cygni, combined with the large proper motion, render it
an unique object, at all events, in the northern hemisphere.

When Bessel proposed to undertake the great research with which his name
will be for ever connected, he determined to devote one, or two, or
three years to the continuous observations of one star, with the view of
measuring carefully its parallactic ellipse. How was he to select the
object on which so much labour was to be expended? It was all-important
to choose a star which should prove sufficiently near to reward his
efforts by exhibiting a measurable parallax. Yet he could have but
little more than surmise and analogy as a guide. It occurred to him that
the exceptional features of 61 Cygni afforded the necessary presumption,
and he determined to apply the process of observation to this star. He
devoted the greater part of three years to the work, and succeeded in
discovering its distance from the earth.

Since the date of Sir John Herschel's address, 61 Cygni has received the
devoted and scarcely remitted attention of astronomers. In fact, we
might say that each succeeding generation undertakes a new discussion of
the distance of this star, with the view of confirming or of criticising
the original discovery of Bessel. The diagram here given (Fig. 94) is
intended to illustrate the recent history of 61 Cygni.

When Bessel engaged in his labours, the pair of stars forming the double
were at the point indicated on the diagram by the date 1838. The next
epoch occurred fifteen years later, when Otto Struve undertook his
researches, and the pair of stars had by that time moved to the
position marked 1853. Finally, when the same object was more recently
observed at Dunsink Observatory, the pair had made still another
advance, to the position indicated by the date 1878. Thus, in forty
years this double star had moved over an arc of the heavens upwards of
three minutes in length. The actual path is, indeed, more complicated
than a simple rectilinear movement. The two stars which form the double
have a certain relative velocity, in consequence of their mutual
attraction. It will not, however, be necessary to take this into
account, as the displacement thus arising in the lapse of a single year
is far too minute to produce any inconvenient effect on the parallactic
ellipse.

[Illustration: Fig. 94.--61 Cygni and the Comparison Stars.]

The case of 61 Cygni is, however, exceptional. It is one of our nearest
neighbours in the heavens. We can never find its distance accurately to
one or two billions of miles; but still we have a consciousness that an
uncertainty amounting to twenty billions is too large a percentage of
the whole. We shall presently show that we believe Struve was right,
yet it does not necessarily follow that Bessel was wrong. The apparent
paradox can be easily explained. It would not be easily explained if
Struve had used the _same comparison star_ as Bessel had done; but
Struve's comparison star was different from either of Bessel's, and this
is probably the cause of the discrepancy. It will be recollected that
the essence of the process consists of the comparison of the small
ellipse made by the distant star with the larger ellipse made by the
nearer star. If the two stars were at the same distance, the process
would be wholly inapplicable. In such a case, no matter how near the
stars were to the earth, no parallax could be detected. For the method
to be completely successful, the comparison star should be at least
eight times as far as the principal star. Bearing this in mind, it is
quite possible to reconcile the measures of Bessel with those of Struve.
We need only assume that Bessel's comparison stars are about three times
as far as 61 Cygni, while Struve's comparison star is at least eight or
ten times as far. We may add that, as the comparison stars used by
Bessel are brighter than that of Struve, there really is a presumption
that the latter is the most distant of the three.

We have here a characteristic feature of this method of determining
parallax. Even if all the observations and the reductions of a parallax
series were mathematically correct, we could not with strict propriety
describe the final result as the parallax of one star. It is only the
_difference_ between the parallax of the star and that of the comparison
star. We can therefore only assert that the parallax sought cannot be
less than the quantity determined. Viewed in this manner, the
discrepancy between Struve and Bessel vanishes. Bessel asserted that the
distance of 61 Cygni could not be _more_ than sixty billions of miles.
Struve did not contradict this--nay, he certainly confirmed it--when he
showed that the distance could not be more than forty billions.

Nearly half a century has elapsed since Struve made his observations.
Those observations have certainly been challenged; but they are, on the
whole, confirmed by other investigations. In a critical review of the
subject Auwers showed that Struve's determination is worthy of
considerable confidence. Yet, notwithstanding this authoritative
announcement, the study of 61 Cygni has been repeatedly resumed. Dr.
Bruennow, when Astronomer Royal of Ireland, commenced a series of
observations on the parallax of 61 Cygni, which were continued and
completed by the present writer, his successor. Bruennow chose a fourth
comparison star (marked on the diagram), different from any of those
which had been used by the earlier observers. The method of observing
which Bruennow employed was quite different from that of Struve, though
the filar micrometer was used in both cases. Bruennow sought to determine
the parallactic ellipse by measuring the difference in declination
between 61 Cygni and the comparison star.[38] In the course of a year it
is found that the difference in declination undergoes a periodic change,
and from that change the parallactic ellipse can be computed. In the
first series of observations I measured the difference of declination
between the preceding star of 61 Cygni and the comparison star; in the
second series I took the other component of 61 Cygni and the same
comparison star. We had thus two completely independent determinations
of the parallax resulting from two years' work. The first of these makes
the distance forty billions of miles, and the second makes it almost
exactly the same. There can be no doubt that this work supports Struve's
determination in correction of Bessel's, and therefore we may perhaps
sum up the present state of our knowledge of this question by saying
that the distance of 61 Cygni is much nearer to the forty billions of
miles which Struve found than to the sixty billions which Bessel
found.[39]

It is desirable to give the reader the means of forming his own opinion
as to the quality of the evidence which is available in such researches.
The diagram in Fig. 95 here shown has been constructed with this object.
It is intended to illustrate the second series of observations of
difference of declination which I made at Dunsink. Each of the dots
represents one night's observations. The height of the dot is the
observed difference of declination between 61 (B) Cygni and the
comparison star. The distance along the horizontal line--or the
abscissa, as a mathematician would call it--represents the date. These
observations are grouped more or less regularly in the vicinity of a
