was ready to help Daoud against the alliance if it meant striking a blow
against the Monaldeschi.

Before any plans were made, though, there remained the question of
Sordello.

A stout woman in a black gown came into the common room of the Angel and
went straight to the hooded man. The lower part of her face was covered
by a black scarf. Anyone watching the hooded Sordello and the veiled
lady would think theirs was just everyday wickedness--an adulterous
couple meeting for an assignation. She sat beside him on the bench.
Their heads drew together, and Lorenzo, behind a door across the room,
was too far away to hear.

Lorenzo heard a scratching behind him. He turned, but it was too dark
even to see movement.

_Rats_, he thought. _This work continually brings a man into the company
of rats. Four-legged rats and men like Sordello._ He put his eye to the
peephole again, just in time to see a slip of paper disappear into the
woman's deep sleeve. Whoever Sordello was reporting to, he was putting
it in writing. Interesting that the man _could_ write. That put him a
cut above the average bravo, in education, at least.

The innkeeper came over to offer the woman wine, but she waved him away
without looking at him. She stood up, brushing the seat of her gown
fastidiously, like one who was used to sitting in cleaner surroundings.
Without a gesture or a handclasp she left Sordello as quickly as she had
come. Nothing loverlike about those two.

Lorenzo decided to follow the woman, and left by the bolthole the tavern
keeper had shown him. He doubted that the old bravo would do anything
other than sit there and get drunk.

He had to run through the alley beside the inn to catch a glimpse of her
going around a corner. She was hard to see. The darkness of night was
made deeper by the jutting upper stories of the houses, and she was
wearing black.

He kept running, his footfalls muffled by the mushy layers of moldering
refuse that paved the streets. A woman going through the byways of the
poorest part of town after dark was taking a great chance with her purse
and her honor. She was either well paid or very dedicated.

Lorenzo, whispering breathless curses, twice had almost lost her in the
maze before she emerged onto a wider street, the Via di San Remo. There,
lights from windows made her easier to follow. Now he was quite sure
where she was going, and was not at all surprised when she hurried up
the stairs leading to the front door of the Palazzo Monaldeschi. The
door opened. There was a blaze of torchlight, and she pulled down her
scarf to identify herself. Even from across the street Lorenzo knew her.

Ana, the woman who interpreted for the Tartars.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sophia entered Cardinal Ugolini's cabinet holding a letter written by
Simon de Gobignon. It had been pressed into her hand by the French
count's young scudiero when she was out walking. She had read it over
and over again before bringing it to David.

He was alone in the room. As he looked up from his seat on a pile of
cushions on the floor, she caught her breath. In that white light coming
through the translucent glass panes, David's grayish eyes took on an
opalescence.

The cardinal's cabinet on the top floor was the best-lit chamber in the
mansion. When Ugolini was not using the room, David often came here to
study, write, and meditate. And when neither David nor Ugolini was
there, Sophia sometimes came to draw and paint.

She felt as if David were a magician, and that his eyes had cast a spell
on her. In Ugolini's cabinet it was easy to think of magic. She had
always associated magic with darkened chambers and cellars, but Ugolini
practiced his magic at the top of his mansion, in a room with many
windows.

"The long-awaited answer from Simon has come," Sophia said, tossing the
opened scroll down before David.

David spread Simon's letter on his lap and read it, while Sophia looked
around the room. On a table near a window lay that painted skull Ugolini
kept toying with. On one wall were two maps of the heavens. Sophia
recognized the constellations in one of them, but the other was utterly
strange. One arrangement of stars in the second map seemed to take the
form of a Latin cross. She studied with interest the paintings on
scrolls nailed to the walls, of plants and animals so odd-looking that
she thought they might be an artist's inventions. One was a bird without
wings, another a spotted animal that looked like a deer but had an
enormously elongated neck. It might be pleasant to try painting such
creatures herself.

As David's eyes ran over Simon's letter, his lips curled in a faint
smile. Was it a smile of contempt for Simon's passionate outpouring,
which she had, in her delight with it, all but memorized?

    Lady, I cry you mercy. You know it not, but your gentle eyes are
    more puissant than a mighty host. From those eyes have flown such
    bolts as wound but do not kill, and they have pierced my heart. I
    will bleed forever within my breast where none can see, and all will
    wonder at my pallor and my weakness that have no outward cause.

    The physick for any wound or illness, sages tell us, must be like
    that which caused the hurt. Thus only you, who have delivered this
    wound, can cure it. Let me come to you, I beg, under cover of night.
    Let me but adore you in secrecy for a moment, and my strength will
    return....

"He is almost as good as an Arab poet," David said mockingly as he
handed her back the letter. Did it bother him, she wondered, that Simon
wrote words of love to her? David, she saw, was working on a letter of
his own on a tiny, thin scrap of vellum on a writing board which he now
laid over his knees. As if to show her that Simon's letter was of no
moment to him, he added to his own, writing rapidly with a quill dipped
in an inkpot--but from right to left.

"You write backwards?" she said, seating herself beside him on the floor
to look at his work.

"No, Christians do," he said with a faint smile. He covered what he was
writing with his hand, but she caught a glimpse of lines that wavered
and curled like tiny black snakes.

"Why bother to cover it? Do you really imagine that I could read that?"
Lightly she touched the hand that covered the writing, noticing the fine
yellow hairs on its back.

"I have to keep up the habit of secrecy." He gave her one of his rare
full smiles, and she wanted to reach out and hold his face between her
hands. They were so close, she thought, sitting side by side here on the
floor. And alone. They had but to stretch out on this thick Arabian
carpet and wrap their arms around each other. But, of course, Ugolini or
one of his servants might come in at any moment. Her longing for David
was a constant ache. She had not thought of Manfred, save as a figure in
the background of their lives, in weeks. And as long as she did not have
to meet with Simon, she was fully Sophia Karaiannides, and not troubled
by the yearning of Sophia Orfali for the young French count.

If only David did not insist on keeping her at a distance.

"Do you still want me to let Simon de Gobignon visit me secretly?" she
asked.

There was a momentary silence between them.

Then, "Have I told you of any change in plans?" he said gruffly. He
looked down at his scrap of parchment with the tiny crawling lines.

"What shall I let him do when we are together?" she asked quietly.

_I know David is jealous, and I am goading him. I want to hear his
jealousy._

He stood up abruptly and put his writing board on a table. He walked to
an open window and stood looking out, rolling his thin parchment tightly
between his fingers.

She hated this conversation. It turned him into a panderer and her into
a whore. And she sensed that he hated it as much as she did.

"Do what you think is necessary," he said coldly.

"_Necessary to what?_" she demanded through gritted teeth.

He turned toward her and held up a finger. "To win his trust." He held
up a second finger. "To hear and remember anything he may let slip." He
held up a third finger. "Most important, to tell him things."

"Tell him what?"

"Tell him that Cardinal Ugolini has persuaded Fra Tomasso d'Aquino to
oppose the alliance of Christians and Tartars."

"And if Simon believes you have won over Fra Tomasso, what will that
accomplish?"

"The unbelievers are already desperate to repair the damage I have done
to the reputation of the Tartars," David said. "If they think they have
lost Fra Tomasso, they may be provoked to do exactly the wrong thing."

"What would that be?" Sophia had heard that Muslims were devious. She
certainly could not follow Daoud's mind in this.

"Not knowing Fra Tomasso is actually trying to remain neutral, they will
use every means they have to try to win him back, as they think, to
their side. I am hoping they will try to bring Cardinal de Verceuil's
influence to bear. If de Verceuil goes to Fra Tomasso--or, even better,
to Fra Tomasso's superiors--he may well drive the learned friar over to
our side."

"What if you are wrong? What if de Verceuil and the other Franks do
persuade Fra Tomasso to support the alliance? Would it not be better to
leave him where he is, neutral?"

Daoud shook his head. "At least this way we are trying to control what
happens."

She smiled. "I thought you Muslims believed in leaving things up to
fate."

"The efforts of men are part of the workings of fate."

She would probably never understand his Muslim way of thinking. Perhaps
he would not accept her love because he saw her as an unbeliever. It
made her angry to think he might hold himself aloof from her because of
her religion, and he not even a Muslim born.

"The Turks killed your parents," she said. "How can you be a Muslim?" It
was something she had never understood and had wanted to know ever since
she learned what he was, but she asked it now to hurt him.

He gave her that silent, burning stare, and she began to wonder, with a
rippling of fear in the pit of her stomach, if she was in danger.

"That was my fate," he said. "I had to lose my mother and father to find
God."

Before she could catch herself, she started to laugh with a kind of
wildness, a touch of hysteria. She had been angry at him and had goaded
him and feared his striking back, and instead he made a statement that
was utterly absurd.

_I lost my mother and father, and I gained nothing from it. I became
nothing, neither daughter, nor wife, nor mother._

At her laughter, he took a step backward, as if she had struck him, and
his tan face reddened. Now she felt terror. This time she had surely
gone too far.

"Forgive me. Your answer surprised me. It sounds so strange for a man of
your profession to talk of finding God."

"What profession?"

"Well, you are a warrior and a spy, not a holy man."

"We do not need to speak of this." He turned away from her to stare out
the window. She looked past him at red-tiled rooftops. A flock of
pigeons circled in the distance.

"No," she said. "And as an unbeliever I suppose I would not understand."

Surprisingly he approached her and looked down with eyes that were
serious and free of anger. "If you ever, in sincerity, want to know
about Islam, come and ask me, and as best I can I will answer your
questions. But do not speak foolishness. And do not laugh."

She thought she understood a bit better. The Muslims had captured his
body, but then in his enslavement he had freely given his soul to their
religion. He did not serve the Turks. He served the God they called
Allah. How this had come about she could not imagine. But she knew a
little better why his sultan had entrusted him with this undertaking. He
was perfect for it.

"I must go," he said, as if eager not to talk anymore.

"To deliver your message?" She gestured toward the clenched fist that
held the fragile parchment. "Is there truly someone in Orvieto who can
read it?"

He smiled again. Oh, that smile! It so easily overcame her anger and
fear.

"There is no harm in my telling you. It goes to my sultan, by carrier
pigeon and ship." He must be proud, she thought, of his swift and secret
courier system.

"And do you get messages back in the same way?"

"It takes over a month each way, so I have received but one message from
the sultan since coming to Italy."

"Does the cardinal keep the pigeons?"

He had taken a tiny leather capsule out of his belt purse and was
inserting the message into it now. "Madama Tilia keeps the pigeons."

"Then are you going to her house?" Sophia remembered with a feeling of
guilt that she had not thought of Rachel in some time. "Please, David,
will you see how Rachel is while you are there?"

David looked at her quickly and glanced away. She felt a coldness in her
chest.

"What has happened to her?" she demanded. She seized David's arm, lest
he turn away from her.

He did not try to pull free. "She is well. She is already wealthy, in
fact." His eyes did not meet hers at all now.

"Oh, my God! A man has had her!" She let go of David and turned her back
on him.

There was another silence while fury churned in Sophia. She wanted to
turn on David, to scratch his face with her nails. She wanted to tear
her clothing in anguish, in mourning for Rachel's lost innocence. She
hated herself for her part in the child's degradation.

"Sophia." David's voice came from behind her, soft, a little uncertain.
"Were you so much older than Rachel when you--became a woman?"

Wrath overpowered her other feelings, and she turned on him. "Do you
think _that_ is what makes a girl into a woman? And you complain about
speaking foolishness?"

"How old, Sophia?" His voice was more confident now, as if her anger had
put him on firmer ground.

She thought of Alexis, the boy she had loved, and the long afternoons
they had spent together hidden under an old broken arch covered with
vines and lapped by waves on the Aegean side of Constantinople.

She shook her head. "Yes, I was her age. But I was in love. Doing it for
money or for my city came later, when I was alone in the world and
older."

There was appeal in his look. "But you know what it is to be alone and
in need. Just as you freely chose to serve the Emperor of Constantinople
with your body, so Rachel freely chose to sell her virginity for a
fortune in gold."

His obtuseness made her more angry than ever. "You know nothing about
freedom or women. Rachel was no more free to keep her virginity than you
were free to remain a Christian after the Turks captured you. As for me,
at least I know enough to hate the murderers of my parents."

His fingers dug into her shoulders until they hurt and the fire in his
eyes terrified her. But she held her face frozen, refusing to show fear
or pain.

"Say no more," he whispered in a strangled voice. "Not another word."

_Saint Simon, protect me._

_Simon._

She could see the struggle in David's face and body. She had enraged him
to the point where he wanted to hurt her. But he was not going to let
himself do it. She thought she must have taken a hundred breaths before
he released his grip on her shoulders, pushing her away a little.

Again she wondered what he had been through that would give him such
iron self-control. She stood looking at him, breathing heavily in the
aftermath of her terror.

_I am a fool to despise anything as powerful as what he has._

He raked her with his eyes, then turned toward the door.

"Do not bother to find out about Rachel for me," she said. "I will go
myself."

He stopped, and the fury in his face made her brace herself again for an
attack.

"You cannot go. You cannot be seen going into Tilia's."

"Do you think I have served great men for years without learning how to
move about a city unnoticed?"

"Go, then." His normally fair face was scarlet with rage. "And learn
from Rachel's own lips what the Tartar did to her."

For a moment she seemed to go blind and deaf. She felt hot and cold at
once. Her body had reacted to the meaning of his words before her brain
understood them.

"_Tartar!_ The man was a Tartar? You let a Tartar have her?" Sophia
seized the first object near her hand and threw it at him. She saw as it
struck him that it was the painted skull. It hit his chest with a thump,
and he took a step backward.

"You filthy bastard!" she screamed. "Pig of a Turk!"

Expressionless, he turned without another word and left her, closing the
door of Ugolini's cabinet behind him.

She sank weeping to the floor.

_Rachel, Rachel, how could they do this to you? With a Tartar. Oh, no!_

She sat there until her tears stopped and her thoughts began to make
some sense. The skull, lying on its side, seemed to look back at her.

_Thank you, David. You have made my decision for me. Simon de Gobignon
shall have me._




XXIX


This was a fearsome place, thought Daoud as he gazed around the
underground chamber hewn out of the yellow tufa on which the building
stood. Lit with torches, its vault was festooned with ropes and chains,
one wall lined with whips, rods, and scourges hanging from hooks, pokers
and branding irons heating in smoking braziers, a rack in one corner, a
ring of wood and iron six feet in diameter suspended in the center of
the room, on which a man could be spread-eagled. A veritable bazaar of
torture instruments. Its door was of solid oak reinforced with
criss-crossed strips of iron, designed to dash any hope of escape.

Daoud sat in a thronelike chair painted black--Tilia said it had once
belonged to a pope--on a raised platform against a wall. If the damned
chair had a few cushions in it, it might almost be comfortable. This
place, Tilia had told him, was for patrons of hers who liked to
torture--or be tortured.

It was perfect for his purpose. But could he himself be as perfect as
the room? This was a hard and wily man he had to deal with tonight. It
would be difficult to dominate him.

Beside Daoud, a preparation of wine, hashish, and the distilled juice of
the Anatolian poppy simmered in a pot held on a metal tripod over a
candle flame. He sniffed the faint steam that rose from the warm potion.
He warned himself to do no more sniffing, or he would be unable to
conduct the night's proceedings with a clear head. He glanced down at
one broad arm of the throne, where a small brass bowl lay. In the dish
rested a steel needle as long as a forefinger, its tip covered with a
black paste.

A nervous anticipation tingled in the pit of his stomach, but he held
himself very still.

Daoud heard Lorenzo's voice, and a moment later the oak-and-iron door
swung open. A man stumbled through, his head covered with a black hood,
his hands tied behind him, his ankles chained close together with
hobble-gyves. Two of Tilia's mute black slaves held his arms. Behind him
walked Lorenzo, a broad-bladed dagger held at waist level.

Daoud sat straighter in the throne, resting his hands on the arms. The
door boomed shut, and at Lorenzo's command the slaves untied the
prisoner's wrists and pulled the hood off his head.

Sordello stood before Daoud, blinking and staring angrily around him.
Daoud watched, pleased, as the sight of the irons and chains and
scourges bore in on Sordello and the anger on the bravo's face changed
to alarm.

"Why have you done this to me? What the devil is this place?"

An appropriate question, Daoud thought. "You are in hell," he said.

Sordello squinted at Daoud. "And who are you supposed to be, Messer
David, the Prince of Darkness? Is this some sort of miracle play?"

The man's defiance dismayed Daoud. He had hoped that the mere sight of
the chamber would set Sordello to babbling and begging. He needed to be
frightened more.

"Have them chain him to the ring, Lorenzo."

Sordello aimed a kick at one of the slaves following Lorenzo's orders.
The African gave Sordello's arm a quick twist and got a howl of pain out
of him. Soon the aging bravo, arms stretched out, legs spread apart, was
suspended upright in the great hoop. The ring of iron hung from the
ceiling on a single chain wrapped around a huge beam, allowing it to
rotate slowly. Daoud imagined how helpless Sordello must feel hanging
there.

Lorenzo took hold of the ring and gave it a spin. Face and back, face
and back, face and back, Sordello whirled before Daoud. His eyes bulged.

"Figlii di cagne!" he shouted.

_Still more angry than frightened. But perhaps he is just good at
concealing his fear._

Daoud made a small hand gesture, and Lorenzo stopped the spin of the
ring so that Sordello was facing Daoud.

Daoud studied Sordello, looking for the subtle signs that would reveal
his true feelings. His eyes gleamed like a caged hyena's, full of hatred
for Daoud.

Lorenzo had kept Sordello locked in a pitch-black cubicle in Cardinal
Ugolini's mansion for a day and a night before bringing him here. Daoud
studied the man. It was obvious from his pallor, his red-rimmed
eyelids, and his sagging mouth that Sordello had lain awake much of the
time in the darkness. Daoud could see the fear, too, in the clenching
and unclenching of Sordello's jaw muscles.

Daoud flicked a finger at Lorenzo. "Read the love song you found on this
trovatore when you seized him."

Lorenzo unfolded a square scrap of parchment and read:

    Your Magnificence:

    On Thursday last Donna Sophia left the Cardinal's mansion alone, on
    foot and heavily veiled. As she clearly did not want to be seen,
    your servant thought much was to be gained by following her, and so
    did. I regret to say she spent the afternoon wandering in the
    craftsmen's market, shopping for gloves, purses, and other
    adornments. Before Nones she went to the Church of Sant' Andrea,
    where she prayed a while, then went to Confession. Your servant
    attempted to approach close enough to overhear, but was unable to do
    so without being seen.

Lorenzo looked up and shook his head. "What a furfante you are! Trying
to eavesdrop on penitents." He went on with the reading.

    David of Trebizond has spent his days riding about Orvieto, meeting
    with the fattori of various trading houses that deal in silks and
    spices. Your servant adds a list below. The cardinal sleeps most of
    the day and works through the night behind the locked door of his
    cabinet on the top floor of the palazzo. Sometimes he mounts to the
    roof and studies the stars with the aid of magical instruments. Of
    the servant Giancarlo I am unable to make report, having not seen
    him all this week.

Lorenzo laughed. "That is the only true statement in this list of lies.
You did not see me all week because I have been constantly at _your_
back."

Sordello spat at Lorenzo's feet. "Ladruncolo! Sneak!" At this Lorenzo
and Daoud broke into laughter, while Sordello glared at them helplessly.
The hoop on which he was splayed turned slowly one way and then back the
other.

"You are indignant at being spied upon?" Lorenzo chuckled. "Then imagine
how we feel. And what is worse, you do not even tell the truth about
us."

"I piss in your teeth," Sordello snarled.

"For instance, what you write about Madonna Sophia," Lorenzo went on,
unperturbed. "You lost her a mere three streets from the cardinal's
mansion. She knew you were following her and took pains to rid herself
of your unwanted attentions. But you could not admit to your master what
a buffone you are, so you made up all that about her buying gloves in
the bazaar and going to church."

Actually, Daoud thought, that was the afternoon Sophia had come here, to
Tilia's house, to see Rachel, and it would have been disastrous if
Sordello had followed her. They would then have had to kill him, which
would have been unfortunate, since this way of handling him was so much
better.

Of course, they might still have to kill him. He already knew enough
about them to send them all to the stake if he ever spoke out. He must
be brought under control, to serve their purposes, or he must quietly
disappear.

"So, you not only spy on us, but you lie about us," said Daoud. "And to
whom do you send these lies? When the Bulgarian woman Ana takes your
weekly reports back to the Palazzo Monaldeschi, to whom does she deliver
them? De Verceuil? De Gobignon?"

"Go peddle your silks and spices, Messer David." The man was so
ill-tempered he had not the sense to try to protect himself by hiding
his anger and defiance.

Daoud gritted his teeth in frustration. Sordello was not breaking
quickly enough.

Daoud sent Lorenzo a signal with two fingers. Lorenzo sprang at Sordello
with his blade, a dagger so big it was almost a short sword, and slashed
at his tunic, belt, and hose. The blacks grinned. Sordello roared his
protests. A last flick of the blade cut away his grimy loincloth. In a
moment Sordello hung naked on the ring, his shredded clothes hanging
from his ankles or lying on the flagstone floor. His body was wiry and
muscular, with only a small paunch at the waist. The flickering
torchlight picked out the shadows of scars crossing his chest and belly.
Daoud stared with curiosity and faint distaste at the uncircumcised
penis peeping from its thicket of grizzled hair.

Daoud put his fingertips together and casually crossed his legs,
lounging back in the throne, letting the contrast between his position
and Sordello's sink in. He prayed that the man might succumb. His soul
must be made of sand; how could it be otherwise?

The ring slowly rotated. Sordello twisted his head to look over his
shoulder at Daoud.

"If you kill me, he will know." There was the faintest quiver in his
voice.

Daoud chose not to ask the obvious question--who "he" was--but said,
keeping his voice soft and kindly, "What will he learn from your death,
Sordello?"

Before Sordello could answer, Lorenzo burst out, "We are not going to
kill him for a long while, are we, Messer David? You promised me I could
have some sport."

"Quiet, Giancarlo," said Daoud, narrowing his eyes. "You shall have your
sport."

"Why torture me? Why kill me?" There was a plea in Sordello's voice now.
"I have told nothing that could hurt you."

"You have told _us_ nothing, Sordello." Daoud stood up. The platform on
which the throne chair stood gave him impressive height, and the torches
high in the wall behind him threw his shadow across the room.

"I admire your fidelity to your master, whoever he is," Daoud said with
a smile. "What a pity he will never know about it. As I told you, this
is hell, and you are dead already. You will just vanish, like a bit of
rubbish washed out of the city by the rain. Your master will probably
think you deserted him, as your sort of wandering ladrone so often
does."

"I am not a highwayman!" Sordello's cry echoed against the stone vault.
"I am a man of honor. I am an educated man, a trovatore."

"You are feccia!" Lorenzo shouted, and slapped Sordello's face hard.

"For that I will one day slice open your guts," Sordello growled.

Exasperated, Daoud saw that hurting Sordello only made him angrier. If
they hurt him enough, certainly, they would have him begging for mercy,
but by then they might have injured him so badly he would be of no use
to them.

"Let him be, Giancarlo," Daoud snapped.

"I saved your life," Sordello said to Daoud. "I killed a man for you. Is
this how you repay me--letting this pig strip me and beat me?" His
narrowed eyes gave a hint of slyness. "I could be worth ten of this
Neapolitan mezzano to you."

"You dare call me a pimp!" Lorenzo lunged at Sordello again, this time
aiming the point of the huge dagger at his belly. Sordello twisted his
body in the chains and gave a cry of fright.

"Giancarlo!" Daoud shouted sternly. "Back!"

Sordello hung rigid in his chains. Sweat ran down his face. His whole
body was covered with sweat, glistening in the torchlight, and Daoud
suspected he would be cold to the touch. Sordello's eyes rolled from
Lorenzo, who stood frozen with the dagger outstretched, to Daoud and
back again. The two blacks stood behind Lorenzo, smiling broadly.

"You are worth nothing to me at the moment, Sordello, because you refuse
even to give me the one harmless piece of information I ask for. You
will not tell me who set you to spy on me. So I might as well give you
to Giancarlo here for his amusement." He held a hand out to Lorenzo, as
if giving him leave to proceed.

"It is Simon de Gobignon!" Sordello cried. "It is to him my messages
go."

Daoud's heart leapt with exultation, and he allowed himself a satisfied
little sigh. A flicker of a finger told Lorenzo to lower his knife.
Sordello had made the first surrender, on which all further success with
him depended.

But--de Gobignon. That was a surprise. Daoud had been sure it would be
Cardinal de Verceuil who would try to place a spy in his camp. A
Frankish knight like de Gobignon would prefer the frontal attack, the
pitched battle, to trickery. That was why the Franks were gradually
losing their grip on the land they called Outremer. The French cardinal
was another story. Daoud had seen in him a combination of pride,
ambition, and lack of scruple that would use any means to defeat an
enemy.

How to find out the truth? He ground his teeth.

"You are lying," Daoud said firmly. "It is Cardinal de Verceuil you
serve. Giancarlo--" Daoud gestured, and Lorenzo went over to the brazier
and slowly drew out an iron. The tip of it glowed red in the dim light
of the chamber. His teeth flashing white under his thick mustache,
Lorenzo advanced on Sordello.

"No! It is the truth!" Sordello shrieked, the chain that suspended the
hoop rattling as he tried to pull himself away from Lorenzo and the
smoking metal rod he held. As Lorenzo slowly approached, Sordello
babbled out a tale of having been sent to Venice by Charles d'Anjou,
brother of the King of France, to recruit and command archers for Count
Simon. He had gotten into a brawl and wounded an Armenian prince who had
come to Venice with the Tartars, and Simon had sent him away.

"I cannot serve Count Simon openly because the Armenians still want my
blood," Sordello explained. "So he set me to spy on you instead."

The frantic haste with which Sordello spilled out his story gave it the
sound of truth. This was going much better. Daoud's tense jaw muscles
were relaxing.

Daoud picked up the bowl with the needle in it, gestured Lorenzo back,
and slowly strolled across the chamber to Sordello. He gave the bowl to
Lorenzo to hold, and drew closer until his face was only a hand's width
from Sordello's, until he could smell the inner rot on the man's breath.
Sordello's eyes rolled sideways, trying to watch the needle in the bowl
Lorenzo was holding.

"What does de Gobignon say of me?" Daoud whispered. "What does he think
I am?"

"He thinks you are a foreigner brought here by Ugolini to thwart the
French plans for a crusade," Sordello gasped. "He says Ugolini is an
agent of the Hohenstaufen king. He thinks Giancarlo is gathering a band
of men to murder the Tartars. Please, for the love of God, do not hurt
me, Messere." His eyes would fall out of his head if he stared any
harder at the needle.

"Give me a candle, Giancarlo," said Daoud. He reached out without
looking, and Lorenzo pressed the lighted candle into his hand. Taking a
step back, he held the flame before Sordello's sweating face. His lips
trembling, Sordello turned his head away.

"Look at the flame, Sordello," said Daoud softly. "Just look at the
flame and listen to me. Look at the flame, and I will tell you what I
really am." Daoud passed the candle back and forth before Sordello's
face, murmuring reassurance. Sordello's eyes followed the candle.

He wondered if this would work. It seemed too much like magic. He had
seen it done by Hashishiyya imams, but he had never done it himself.

"I am a sorcerer, Sordello, a mighty wizard. I can pass through any
obstacle. I can see what people are doing thousands of leagues away. I
can bring the dead back to life. I told you that you are a dead man,
Sordello. You are truly dead, but you have nothing to fear, because my
power can bring you back to life."

The bravo hung lax in the chains, his half-shut eyes still moving from
right to left, following the candle flame. His knees had buckled and his
belly sagged.

Daoud handed the candle to Lorenzo and beckoned to one of the Africans,
who took the simmering pot of drugged wine from the tripod, holding it
by a wooden handle, and gave it to Daoud.

"Where are you, Sordello?"

"I am in hell."

"And what are you?"

"A dead man."

"And I?"

"A mighty wizard."

"Very good. Now drink this." Daoud felt the lip of the pot to make sure
it was not too hot, then brought it to Sordello's mouth. Obediently
Sordello lifted his chin and opened his lips, allowing Daoud to pour the
warm wine into his mouth, and then swallowed. Daoud poured more into him
and then gave the pot back to Tilia's servant.

"Now you will truly know my power, Sordello. Prepare yourself for the
most wonderful night of your life. You will make a journey from hell to
heaven. Close your eyes and raise your head." Lorenzo held out the brass
bowl with the needle, and Daoud took the needle, holding it firmly with
his thumb and first two fingers. Gesturing to Lorenzo to bring the
candle close to Sordello's throat, he searched out a vein just where the
neck met the shoulder.

"You can feel nothing. You can feel no pain at all."

Daoud took a deep breath and prayed to God to guide his hand. He jabbed
the needle into Sordello's neck. The bravo remained utterly motionless,
and Daoud heard Lorenzo gasp in amazement. Daoud left the needle stuck
in the pale, pink flesh. He watched Sordello closely and put his palm
before his lax mouth. He could feel Sordello's breath on his palm, slow
and steady, the breath of a sleeping man. After a time the craggy block
of a head fell forward, and the body hung limp in the chains.

So far, all was working as he had hoped. But the man was stronger than
he had thought. He had been harder to break. There was always the danger
that somewhere deep in his soul a part would remain free. Daoud had
heard of such things happening, of slaves of the Old Man of the Mountain
who suddenly rebelled. The methods of the Hashishiyya were not perfect.

He would have to chance it. It was in God's hands now.

"Are you sure he is not dead?" Lorenzo said in a low, awed voice.

"Look for yourself. He breathes. His heart beats."

Lorenzo shook his head. "What is that stuff?"

Daoud pointed to the two Africans, who stood calmly by, awaiting orders.
"_They_ know. In the jungle below the great desert, where it is very hot
and wet, a body can rot in hours. Tiny men, less than half our size,
live there, and they hunt large animals for their meat. They smear this
stuff on their darts. It comes from a mushroom that grows in their
forest. The animal struck is paralyzed and unconscious, but it lives.
They have time to carry it back to their village, which may take days,
and then they can slaughter it and butcher it."

