
    And sowed with stars the Heavens thick as a field.--vii. 358.

    Amongst innumerable stars, that shone
    Stars distant, but nigh hand seemed other worlds.--iii. 564-65.

                                            her reign
    With thousand lesser lights dividual holds,
    With thousand thousand stars, that then appeared
    Spangling the hemisphere.--vii. 381-84.

Milton describes the number of the fallen angels as

                              an host
    Innumerable as the stars of night.--v. 744-45,

and the attention of Satan is directed by the archangel Uriel to the
multitude of stars formed from the chaotic elements of matter:

    Numberless as thou seest, and how they move;
    Each had his place appointed, each his course;
    The rest in circuit walls this universe.--iii. 719-21.



Though Milton was doubtless familiar with the leading orbs of the
firmament and knew their names, and the constellations in which they are
situated, yet he makes no direct allusion to any of them in his poem.
Neither Arcturus, which is mentioned in the Book of Job, nor Sirius,
which attracted the attention of Homer, who compared the brightness of
Achilles' armour to the dazzling brilliancy of the dog-star, finds a
place in 'Paradise Lost.' And yet the superior magnitude and brilliancy
of some stars when compared with those of others did not escape Milton's
observation when, in describing the lofty eminence of Satan in heaven,
prior to his fall, he represents him as

                      brighter once amidst the host
    Of angels than that star the stars among.--vii. 132-33.

There is but one star to which Milton makes individual allusion, and,
though not of any conspicuous brilliancy, yet it is one of much
importance to astronomers--

            the fleecy star that bears
    Andromeda far off Atlantic seas
    Beyond the horizon.--iii. 558-60.

This is Alpha Arietis, the first point in the constellation of that
name, which signifies the Ram, and from which the right ascensions of
the stars are measured on the celestial sphere. In the time of
Hipparchus the ecliptic intersected the celestial equator in Aries,
which indicated the commencement of the astronomical year and the
occurrence of the vernal equinox; but, owing to precession, this point
is now 30 deg. westward of Aries and in the constellation Pisces. The star
was called Hamal by the Arabs, signifying a sheep, and the animal is
represented as looking backwards. Manilius writes:--

    First Aries, glorious in his golden wool,
    Looks back and wonders at the mighty Bull.

Aries is associated with the legend of the Golden Fleece, in quest of
which Jason and his valiant crew sailed in the ship 'Argo.' In the
autumn, Andromeda is situated above Aries, and would seem to be borne by
the latter, which accounts for Milton's description of the relative
positions of those two constellations.

Milton alludes to the starry sphere in several passages in his poem, and
also mentions the starry pole above which he soared in imagination up to
the Empyrean or Heaven of Heavens. His contemplation of the Galaxy must
have impressed his mind with the magnitude and extent of the sidereal
universe, for he was aware that this luminous zone which encircles the
heavens consists of myriads of stars, so remote as to be incapable of
definition by unaided vision. Milton's description of this vast
assemblage of stars is worthy of its magnificence, and the purpose with
which he poetically associates this glorified highway testifies to the
sublimity of his thoughts and to the originality of his genius. In those
parts of his poem in which he describes the glories of the celestial
regions, and instances the beautiful phenomena associated with the
individual orbs of the firmament, we are able to perceive with what
exquisite delight he beheld them all.

The invention of the telescope, and the important discoveries made by
Kepler, Galileo, and Newton in the seventeenth century, were the means
of effecting a rapid advance in the science of astronomy; but that
branch of it known as sidereal astronomy was not then in existence. The
star depths, owing to inadequate telescopic power, remained unexplored,
and the secrets associated with those distant regions were inviolable,
and lay beyond the reach of human knowledge. The physical constitution
of the stars was unknown, nor was it ascertained with any degree of
certainty that they were suns. The knowledge possessed by astronomers in
those days was but meagre compared with what is now known of the
sidereal heavens. Milton's astronomical knowledge, we find, was
commensurate with what was known of the stellar universe, and this he
has conspicuously displayed in his poem.




CHAPTER VIII

DESCRIPTION OF CELESTIAL OBJECTS MENTIONED IN 'PARADISE LOST'


THE SUN

The surpassing splendour of the Sun, as compared with that of any of the
other orbs of the firmament, is not more impressive than his stupendous
magnitude, and the important functions which it is his prerogative to
fulfil. Situated at the centre of our system--of which he may be
regarded as 'both eye and soul'--the orb has a diameter approaching
1,000,000 miles, and a mass 750 times greater than that of all the
planets combined. These, by his attractive power, he retains in their
several paths and orbits, and even far distant Neptune acknowledges his
potent sway. With prodigal liberality he dispenses his vast stores of
light and heat, which illumine and vivify the worlds circling around
him, and upon the constant supply of which all animated beings depend
for their existence. Deprived of the light of the Sun, this world would
be enveloped in perpetual darkness, and we should all miserably perish.

The Sun is distant from the Earth about 93,000,000 miles. His diameter
is 867,000 miles, or nearly four times the extent of the radius of the
Moon's orbit. The mass of the orb exceeds that of the Earth 330,000
times, and in volume 1,305,000 times. The Sun is a sphere, and rotates
on his axis from west to east in 25 days 8 hours. The velocity of a
point at the solar equator is 4,407 miles an hour. The density of the
Sun is only one-fourth that of the Earth, or, in other words, bulk for
bulk, the Earth is four times heavier than the Sun. The force of gravity
at the Sun's surface is twenty-seven times greater than it is on the
Earth; it would therefore be impossible for beings constituted as we are
to exist on the solar surface.

The dazzling luminous envelope which indicates to the naked eye the
boundary of the solar disc is called the PHOTOSPHERE. It is most
brilliant at the centre of the Sun, and diminishes in brightness towards
the circumference, where its luminosity is but one-fourth that of the
central portion of the disc. The photosphere consists of gaseous vapours
or clouds, of irregular form and size, separated by less brilliant
interstices, and glowing white with the heat derived from the interior
of the Sun. In the telescope the photosphere is not of uniform
brilliancy, but presents a mottled or granular appearance, an effect
created by the intermixture of spaces of unequal brightness. Small
nodules of intense brilliance, resembling 'rice-grains,' but which,
according to Nasmyth, are of a willow-leaf shape with pointed
extremities, which form a network over portions of the photosphere, are
sprinkled profusely over a more faintly luminous background. These
'grains' consist of irregular rounded masses, having an area of several
hundred miles. By the application of a high magnifying power they can be
resolved into 'granules'--minute luminous dots which constitute
one-fifth of the Sun's surface and emit three-fourths of the light. This
granulation is not uniform over the surface of the photosphere; in some
parts it is indistinct, and appears to be replaced by interlacing
filamentous bands, which are most apparent in the penumbrae of the spots
and around the spots themselves. The 'granules' are the tops of
ascending masses of intensely luminous vapour; the comparatively dark
'pores' consist of similar descending masses, which, having radiated
their energy, are returning to be again heated underneath the surface of
the photosphere.

In certain regions of the photosphere several dark patches are usually
visible, which are called 'sun-spots.' At occasional times they are
almost entirely absent from the solar disc. It has been observed that
they occupy a zone extending from 10 deg. to 35 deg. north and south of the
solar equator, but are not found in the equatorial and polar regions of
the Sun. A sun-spot is usually described as consisting of an irregular
dark central portion, called the _umbra_; surrounding it is an edging or
fringe less dark, consisting of filaments radiating inwards called the
_penumbra_. Within the umbra there is sometimes seen a still darker
spot, called the _nucleus_. The umbra is generally uniformly dark, but
at times filmy luminous clouds have been observed floating over it. The
nucleus is believed to be the orifice of a tubular depression in the
floor of the umbra, prolonged downwards to an unknown depth. The
penumbra is brightest at its inner edge, where the filaments present a
marked contrast when compared with the dark cavity of the umbra which
they surround and overhang. Sometimes lengthened processes unite with
those of the opposite side and form bands and 'bridges' across the
umbra. The darkest portion of the penumbra is its external edge, which
stands out conspicuously against the adjoining bright surface of the
Sun. One penumbra will sometimes enclose several umbrae whilst the nuclei
may be entirely wanting.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--A Sun-spot magnified.

(_Janssen._)]

Sun-spots usually appear in groups; large isolated spots are of rare
occurrence, and are generally accompanied by several smaller ones of
less perfect formation. The exact moment of the origin of a sun-spot
cannot be ascertained, because it arises from an imperceptible point; it
grows very rapidly, and often attains its full size in a day.

Prior to its appearance there is an unusual disturbance of the solar
surface over the site of the spot: luminous ridges, called _faculae_, and
dark 'pores' become conspicuous, between which greyish patches appear,
that seem to lie underneath a thin layer of the photosphere; this is
rapidly dispelled and a fully formed spot comes into view. When a
sun-spot has completed its period of existence, the photospheric matter
overwhelms the penumbra, and rushes into the umbra, which it
obliterates, causing the spot to disappear. The duration of sun-spots is
subject to considerable variation; some last for weeks or months, and
others for a few days or hours. A spot when once fully formed maintains
its shape, which is usually rounded, until the period of its breaking
up. Spots of long duration rotate with the Sun. Those which become
visible at the edge of the Sun's limb have been observed to travel
across his disc in less than a fortnight, disappearing at the margin of
the opposite limb; afterwards, if sufficiently long-lived, they have
reappeared in twelve or thirteen days on the surface of the orb where
first observed. It was by observation of the spots that the period of
the axial rotation of the Sun became known.

Sun-spots vary very much in size--some are only a few hundred miles in
width, whilst others have a diameter of 40,000 or 50,000 miles or
upwards. In some instances the umbra alone has a breadth of 20,000 or
30,000 miles--three times the extent of the diameter of the Earth. Spots
of this size are visible to the naked eye when the Sun is partially
obscured by fog, or when his brilliancy is diminished by vapours near
the horizon. A year seldom passes without the occurrence of several of
such spots being recorded. The largest sun-spot ever observed had a
diameter of about 150,000 miles. A group of spots, including their
penumbrae, will occupy an area of many millions of square miles.

By long observation it has been ascertained that sun-spots increase and
diminish in number with periodical regularity, and that a maximum
sun-spot period occurs at the end of each eleven years. When spots are
numerous on the Sun's disc there is great disturbance of the solar
surface, accompanied by fierce rushes of intensely heated gases. This
solar activity is known to influence terrestrial magnetism by causing a
marked oscillation of the magnetic needle, and giving rise to so-called
'magnetic storms,' accompanied by magnificent displays of aurorae, with
variations in electrical earth-currents. It would therefore appear that
sun-spots have a pronounced effect upon magnetic terrestrial phenomena,
but how this is produced remains unknown.

Besides sun-spots, there are seen on the solar disc bright flocculent
streaks or ridges of luminous matter called _faculae_; they are found
over the whole surface of the Sun, but are most numerous near the limb
and in the immediate vicinity of the spots. They have been compared to
immense waves--vast upheavals of photospheric matter, indicative of
enormous pressure, and often extending in length for many thousands of
miles.

Nearly all observers have arrived at the conclusion that sun-spots are
depressions or cavities in the photosphere, but considerable difference
of opinion exists as to how they are formed. The most commonly accepted
theory is that they are caused by the pressure of descending masses of
vapour having a reduced temperature, which absorb the light and prevent
it reaching us. Our knowledge of the Sun is insufficient to admit of any
accurate conclusion on this point; though we are able to perceive that
the surface of the orb is in a state of violent agitation and perpetual
change, yet his great distance and intense luminosity prevent our
capability of perceiving the ultimate minuter details which go to form
the _texture_ of the solar surface. 'Bearing in mind that a second of
arc on the Sun represents 455 miles, it follows that an object 150 miles
in diameter is about the _minimum visible_ even as a mere mathematical
point, and that anything that is sufficiently large to give the
slightest impression of shape and extension of surface must have an
area of at least a quarter of a million square miles; ordinarily
speaking, we shall not gather much information about any object that
covers less than a million.'[13] Since the British Islands have only an
area of 120,700 square miles, it is evident that on the surface of the
Sun there are many phenomena and physical changes occurring which escape
our observation. Though the changes which occur in the spots and faculae
appear to be slow when observed through the telescope, yet in reality
they are not so. Tremendous storms and cyclones of intensely heated
gases, which may be compared to the flames arising from a great furnace,
sweep over different areas of the Sun with a velocity of hundreds of
miles an hour. Vast ridges and crests of incandescent vapour are
upheaved by the action of internal heat, which exceeds in intensity the
temperature at which the most refractory of terrestrial substances can
be volatilised; and downrushes of the same photospheric matter take
place after it has parted with some of its stores of thermal energy.
Sun-spots of considerable magnitude have been observed to grow rapidly
and then disappear in a very short period of time; occasionally a spot
is seen to divide into two or more portions, the fragments flying
asunder with a velocity of not less than 1,000 miles an hour. It is by
these upheavals and convulsions of the solar atmosphere that the light
and heat are maintained which illumine and vivify the worlds that
gravitate round the Sun.

During total eclipses of the Sun, several phenomena become visible which
have enabled astronomers to gain some further knowledge of the nature of
the solar appendages. The most important of these is the CHROMOSPHERE,
which consists of layers of incandescent gases that envelop the
photosphere and completely surround the Sun. Its average depth is from
5,000 to 6,000 miles, and when seen during an eclipse is of a beautiful
rose colour, resembling a sheet of flame. As seen in profile at the edge
of the Sun's disc, it presents an irregular serrated appearance, an
effect created by the protuberance of luminous ridges and
processes--masses of flame which arise from over its entire surface. The
chromosphere consists chiefly of glowing hydrogen, and an element called
_helium_, which has been recently discovered in a terrestrial substance
called cleveite; there are also present the vapours of iron, calcium,
cerium, titanium, barium, and magnesium. From the surface of this ocean
of fire, jets and pointed spires of flaming hydrogen shoot up with
amazing velocity, and attain an altitude of ten, twenty, fifty, and even
one hundred thousand miles in a very short period of time. They are,
however, of an evanescent nature, change rapidly in form and appearance,
and often in the course of an hour or two die down so as not to be
recognisable. These _prominences_, as they are called, have been divided
into two classes. Some are in masses that float like clouds in the
atmosphere, which they resemble in form and appearance; they are
usually attached to the chromosphere by a single stem, or by slender
columns; occasionally they are entirely free. These are called
_quiescent_ prominences; they consist of clouds of hydrogen, and are of
more lasting duration than the other variety, called _eruptive_ or
metallic prominences. The latter are usually found in the vicinity of
