where his fate at last had caught up to him.

But it was only a moment. It was relieved by Professor Guinness's
picking up the chunk of radium ore his former partner had hewn from
the cavern's wall. He held it up for all to see, and smiled.

"Here it is," he said simply.

Then he led the way into his earth-borer, and the little door closed
quietly and firmly into place.

For a few minutes slight tappings came from within, as if a wrench or
a screwdriver were being used. Then the tappings stopped, and all was
silence.

A choke, a starting cough, came from beneath the sphere. A torrent of
rushing sound burst out, and spears of orange flame spurted from the
bottom and splashed up its sides, bathing it in fierce, brilliant
light. It stirred. Then, slowly and smoothly, the great ball of metal
raised up.

It hit the edge of the hole in the ceiling, and hung there,
hesitating. Side-rockets flared, and the sphere angled over. Then it
slid, roaring, through the hole.

Swiftly the spots of orange from its rocket-tube exhausts died to
pin-points. There were now almost twenty of them. And soon these
pin-points wavered, and vanished utterly.

Then there was only blackness in the hole that went up to the surface.
Blackness in the hole, calm night on the desert above--and silence, as
if the cavern were brooding on the puny figures and strange machines
that had for the first time dared invade its solitude, in the realms
four miles within the earth....




The Lake of Light

_By Jack Williamson_

[Illustration: _The monster emanated power, sinister, malevolent
power._]

[Sidenote: In the frozen wastes at the bottom of the world two
explorers find a strange pool of white fire--and have a strange
adventure.]


The roar of the motor rang loud in the frosty air above a desert of
ice. The sky above us was a deep purple-blue; the red sun hung like a
crimson eye low in the north. Three thousand feet below, through a
hazy blue mist of wind-whipped, frozen vapor, was the rugged
wilderness of black ice-peaks and blizzard-carved hummocks of snow--a
grim, undulating waste, black and yellow, splotched with crystal
white. The icy wind howled dismally through the struts. We were flying
above the weird ice-mountains of the Enderby quadrant of Antarctica.

That was a perilous flight, across the blizzard-whipped bottom of the
world. In all the years of polar exploration by air, since Byrd's
memorable flights, this area had never been crossed. The intrepid
Britisher, Major Meriden, with the daring American aviatrix whom the
world had known as Mildred Cross before she married him, had flown
into it nineteen years before--and like many others they had never
returned.

Faintly, above the purring drone of the motor, I heard Ray Summers'
shout. I drew my gaze from the desolate plateau of ice below and
leaned forward. His lean, fur-hooded face was turned back toward me. A
mittened hand was pointing, and thin lips moved in words that I did
not hear above the roar of the engine and the scream of the wind.

I turned and looked out to the right, past the shimmering silver disk
of the propeller. Under the blue haze of ice-crystals in the air, the
ice lay away in a vast undulating plain of black and yellow, broken
with splotches of prismatic whiteness, lying away in frozen desolation
to the rim of the cold violet sky. Rising against that sky I saw a
curious thing.

It was a mountain of fire!

Beyond the desert of ice, a great conical peak pointed straight into
the amethystine gloom of the polar heavens. It was brilliantly white,
a finger of milky fire, a sharp cone of pure light. It shone with
white radiance. It was brighter, far brighter, than is the sacred cone
of Fujiyama in the vivid day of Japan.

       *       *       *       *       *

For many minutes I stared in wonder at it. Far away it was; it looked
very small. It was like a little heap of light poured from the hand of
a fire-god. What it might be, I could not imagine. At first sight, I
imagined it might be a volcano with streams of incandescent lava
flowing down the side. I knew that this continent of mystery boasted
Mt. Erebus and other active craters. But there was none of the smoke
or lurid yellow flame which accompanies volcanic eruptions.

I was still watching it, and wondering, when the catastrophe took
place--the catastrophe which hurled us into a mad extravaganza of
amazing adventure.

Our little two-place amphibian was flying smoothly, through air
unusually good for this continent of storms. The twelve cylinders of
the motor had been firing regularly since we took off from Byrd's old
station at Little America fifteen hours before. We had crossed the
pole in safety. It looked as if we might succeed in this attempt to
penetrate the last white spot on the map. Then it Happened.

A sudden crack of snapping metal rang out sharp as a pistol report. A
bright blade of metal flashed past the wing-struts, to fall in a
flashing arc. The motor broke abruptly into a mad, deep-voiced roar.
Terrific vibration shook the ship, until I feared that it would go to
pieces.

Ray Summers, with his usual quick efficiency, cut the throttle.
Quickly the motor slowed to idling speed; the vibration stopped. A
last cough of the engine, and there was no sound save the shrill
screaming of the wind in the gloomy twilight of this unknown land
beyond the pole.

"What in the devil!" I exclaimed.

"The prop! See!" Ray pointed ahead.

I looked, and the dreadful truth flashed upon me. The steel propeller
was gone, or half of it at least. One blade was broken off at a jagged
line just above the hub.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The propeller! What made it break? I've never heard--"

"Search me!" Ray grinned. "The important thing is that it did. It was
all-metal, of course, tested and guaranteed. The guarantee isn't worth
much here. A flaw in the forging, perhaps, that escaped detection.
And this low temperature. Makes metal as brittle as glass. And the
thing may have been crystallized by the vibration."

The plane was coming down in a shallow glide. I looked out at the grim
expanse of black ice-crags and glistening snow below us, and it was
far from a comforting prospect. But I had a huge amount of confidence
in Ray Summers. I have known him since the day he appeared, from his
father's great Arizona ranch, to be a freshman in the School of Mines
at El Paso, where I was then an instructor in geology. We have knocked
about queer corners of the world together for a good many years. But
he is still but a great boy, with the bluff, simple manners of the
West.

"Do you think we can land?" I asked.

"Looks like we've got to," he said, grimly.

"And what after that?"

"How should I know? We have the sledge, tent, furs. Food, and fuel for
the primus to last a week. There's the rifle, but it must be a
thousand miles to anything to shoot. We can do our best."

"We should have had an extra prop."

"Of course. But it was so many pounds, when every pound counted. And
who knew the thing would break?"

"We'll never get out on a week's provisions."

"Not a shot! Too bad to disappoint Captain Harper." Ray grinned wanly.
"He ought to have the _Albatross_ around there by this time, waiting
for us." The _Albatross_ was the ship which had left us at Little
America a few months before, to steam around and pick us up at our
destination beyond Enderby Land. "We're in the same boat with Major
Meriden and his wife--and all those others. Lost without a trace."

"You've read Scott's diary--that he wrote after he visited the pole in
1912--the one they found with the bodies?"

"Yes. Not altogether cheerful. But we won't be trying to get out. No
use of that." He looked at me suddenly, grinning again. "Say, Jim, why
not try for that shining mountain we saw? It looks queer enough to be
interesting. We ought to make it in a week."

"I'm with you," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

I did not speak again, for the jagged ice-peaks were coming rather
near. I held my breath as the little plane veered around a slender
black spire and dropped toward a tiny scrap of smooth snow among the
ice-hummocks. I might have spared my anxiety. Under Ray's consumately
skilful piloting, the skids struck the snow with hardly a shock. We
glided swiftly over the ice and came to rest just short of a yawning
crevasse.

"Suppose," said Ray, "that we spend the first night in the plane. We
are tired already. We can keep warm here, and sleep. We've plenty of
ice to melt for water. Then we're off for the shining mountain."

I agreed: Ray Summers is usually right. We got out the sledge, packed
it, took our bearings, and made all preparations for a start to the
luminous mountain, which was about a hundred miles away. The
thermometer stood at twenty below, but we were comfortable enough in
our furs as we ate a scanty supper and went to sleep in the cabin of
the plane.

We started promptly the next morning, after draining the last of the
hot chocolate from our vacuum bottles, which we left behind. We had a
light but powerful sporting rifle, with telescopic sights, and several
hundred rounds of ammunition. Ray put them in the pack, though I
insisted that we would never need them, unless a quick way out of our
predicament.

"No, Jim," he said. "We take 'em along. We don't know what we're going
to find at the shining mountain."

The air was bitterly cold as we set out: it was twenty-five below and
a sharp wind was blowing. Only our toiling at the sledge kept us warm.
We covered eighteen miles that day, and made a good camp in the lee
of a bare stone ridge.

That night there was a slight fall of snow. When we went on it was
nearly thirty-five degrees below zero. The layer of fresh snow
concealed irregularities in the ice, making our pulling very hard.
After an exhausting day we had made hardly fifteen miles.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the following day the sky was covered with gray clouds, and a
bitterly cold wind blew. We should have remained in the tent, but the
shortage of food made it imperative that we keep moving. We felt
immensely better after a reckless, generous fill of hot pemmican stew;
but the next morning my feet were so painful from frost-bite that I
could hardly get on my fur boots.

Walking was very painful to me that day, but we made a good distance,
having come to smoother ice. Ray was very kind in caring for me. I
became discouraged about going on at all: it was very painful, and I
knew there was no hope of getting out. I tried to get some of our
morphine tablets, but Ray had them, and refused to be convinced that
he ought to go on without me.

On the next march we came in sight of the luminous mountain, which
cheered me considerably. It was a curious thing, indeed. A
straight-sided cone of light it was, rather steeper than the average
volcano. Its point was sharp, its sides smooth as if cut with a
mammoth plane. And it shone with a pure white light, with a steady and
unchanging milky radiance. It rose out of the black and dull yellow of
the ice wilderness like a white finger of hope.

The next morning it was a little warmer. Ray had been caring for my
feet very attentively, but it took me nearly two hours to get on my
footgear. Again I tried to get him to leave me, but he refused.

We arrived at the base of the shining mountain in three more marches.
On the last night the fuel for the primus was all gone, having been
used up during the very cold weather, and we were unable to melt water
to drink. We munched the last of our pemmican dry.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes after we had started on the last morning, Ray stopped
suddenly.

"Look at that!" he cried.

I saw what he had seen--the wreck of an airplane, the wings crumpled
up and blackened with fire. We limped up to it.

"A Harley biplane!" Ray exclaimed. "That is Major Meriden's ship! And
look at that wing! It looks like it's been in an electric furnace!"

I examined the metal wing; saw that it had been blackened with heat.
The metal was fused and twisted.

"I've seen a good many wrecks, Jim. I've seen planes that burned as
they fell. But nothing like that. The fuselage and engines were not
even afire. Jim, something struck out from that shining mountain and
brought them down!"

"Are they--" I began.

Ray was poking about in the snow in the cockpits.

"No. Not here. Probably would have been better for them if they had
been killed in the plane. Quick and merciful."

He examined the engines and propellers.

"No. Seems to be nothing wrong. Something struck them down!"

Soon we went on.

The shining mountain rose before us like a great cone of fire. It must
have been three thousand feet high, and about that in diameter at the
bottom. Its walls were as smooth and straight as though turned from
milky rock crystal in a gigantic lathe. It shone with a steady,
brilliantly white radiance.

"That's no natural hill!" Ray grunted beside me as we limped on.

We were less than a mile from the foot of the cone of fire. Soon we
observed another remarkable thing about it. It seemed that a straight
band of silvery metal rose from the snow about its foot.

"Has it a wall around it?" I exclaimed.

"Evidently," said Ray. "Looks as if it's built on a round metal
platform. But by whom? When? Why?"

       *       *       *       *       *

We approached the curious wall. It was of a white metal, apparently
aluminum, or a silvery alloy of that metal. In places it was
twenty-five feet high, but more usually the snow and ice was banked
high against it. The smooth white wall of the gleaming mountain stood
several hundred yards back from the wall.

"Let's have a look over it." Ray suggested. "We can get up on that
hummock, against it. You know, this place must have been built by
men!"

We clambered up over the ice, as he suggested, until our heads came
above the top of the wall.

"A lake of fire!" cried Ray.

Indeed, a lake of liquid fire lay before us. The white aluminum wall
was hardly a foot thick. It formed a great circular tank, nearly a
mile across, with the cone of white fire rising in the center. And the
tank was filled, to within a foot of the top, with shimmeringly
brilliant white fluid, bright and luminous as the cone--liquid light!

Ray dipped a hand into it. The hand came up with fingers of fire,
radiant, gleaming, with shining drops falling from them. With a
spasmodic effort, he flung off the luminous drops, rubbed his hand on
his garments, and got it back into its fur mitten.

"Gee, it's cold!" he muttered. "Freeze the horns off a brass
billy-goat!"

"Cold light!" I exclaimed. "What wouldn't a bottle of that stuff be
worth to a chemist back in the States!"

"That cone must be a factory to make the stuff." Ray suggested,
hugging his hand. "They might pump the liquid up to the top, and then
let it trickle down over the sides: that would explain why the cone is
so bright. The stuff might absorb sunlight, like barium sulphide. And
there could be chemical action with the air, under the actinic rays."

"Well, if somebody's making cold light, where does he use it?"

"I'd like to find out, and strike him for a hot meal," Ray said,
grinning. "It's too cold to live on top of the ground around here.
They must run it down in a cave."

"Then let's find the hole."

"You know it's possible we won't be welcome. This mountain of light
may be connected with the vanishing of all the aviators. We'd better
take along the rifle."

       *       *       *       *       *
