Reflexion do reflect it most easily._

For we shewed above, in _Prop._ 8. that the cause of Reflexion is not
the impinging of Light on the solid impervious parts of Bodies, but some
other power by which those solid parts act on Light at a distance. We
shewed also in _Prop._ 9. that Bodies reflect and refract Light by one
and the same power, variously exercised in various circumstances; and in
_Prop._ 1. that the most strongly refracting Surfaces reflect the most
Light: All which compared together evince and rarify both this and the
last Proposition.


PROP. XV.

_In any one and the same sort of Rays, emerging in any Angle out of any
refracting Surface into one and the same Medium, the Interval of the
following Fits of easy Reflexion and Transmission are either accurately
or very nearly, as the Rectangle of the Secant of the Angle of
Refraction, and of the Secant of another Angle, whose Sine is the first
of 106 arithmetical mean Proportionals, between the Sines of Incidence
and Refraction, counted from the Sine of Refraction._

This is manifest by the 7th and 19th Observations.


PROP. XVI.

_In several sorts of Rays emerging in equal Angles out of any refracting
Surface into the same Medium, the Intervals of the following Fits of
easy Reflexion and easy Transmission are either accurately, or very
nearly, as the Cube-Roots of the Squares of the lengths of a Chord,
which found the Notes in an Eight_, sol, la, fa, sol, la, mi, fa, sol,
_with all their intermediate degrees answering to the Colours of those
Rays, according to the Analogy described in the seventh Experiment of
the second Part of the first Book._

This is manifest by the 13th and 14th Observations.


PROP. XVII.

_If Rays of any sort pass perpendicularly into several Mediums, the
Intervals of the Fits of easy Reflexion and Transmission in any one
Medium, are to those Intervals in any other, as the Sine of Incidence to
the Sine of Refraction, when the Rays pass out of the first of those two
Mediums into the second._

This is manifest by the 10th Observation.


PROP. XVIII.

_If the Rays which paint the Colour in the Confine of yellow and orange
pass perpendicularly out of any Medium into Air, the Intervals of their
Fits of easy Reflexion are the 1/89000th part of an Inch. And of the
same length are the Intervals of their Fits of easy Transmission._

This is manifest by the 6th Observation. From these Propositions it is
easy to collect the Intervals of the Fits of easy Reflexion and easy
Transmission of any sort of Rays refracted in any angle into any Medium;
and thence to know, whether the Rays shall be reflected or transmitted
at their subsequent Incidence upon any other pellucid Medium. Which
thing, being useful for understanding the next part of this Book, was
here to be set down. And for the same reason I add the two following
Propositions.


PROP. XIX.

_If any sort of Rays falling on the polite Surface of any pellucid
Medium be reflected back, the Fits of easy Reflexion, which they have at
the point of Reflexion, shall still continue to return; and the Returns
shall be at distances from the point of Reflexion in the arithmetical
progression of the Numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, &c. and between these
Fits the Rays shall be in Fits of easy Transmission._

For since the Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission are of a
returning nature, there is no reason why these Fits, which continued
till the Ray arrived at the reflecting Medium, and there inclined the
Ray to Reflexion, should there cease. And if the Ray at the point of
Reflexion was in a Fit of easy Reflexion, the progression of the
distances of these Fits from that point must begin from 0, and so be of
the Numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, &c. And therefore the progression of the
distances of the intermediate Fits of easy Transmission, reckon'd from
the same point, must be in the progression of the odd Numbers 1, 3, 5,
7, 9, &c. contrary to what happens when the Fits are propagated from
points of Refraction.


PROP. XX.

_The Intervals of the Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission,
propagated from points of Reflexion into any Medium, are equal to the
Intervals of the like Fits, which the same Rays would have, if refracted
into the same Medium in Angles of Refraction equal to their Angles of
Reflexion._

For when Light is reflected by the second Surface of thin Plates, it
goes out afterwards freely at the first Surface to make the Rings of
Colours which appear by Reflexion; and, by the freedom of its egress,
makes the Colours of these Rings more vivid and strong than those which
appear on the other side of the Plates by the transmitted Light. The
reflected Rays are therefore in Fits of easy Transmission at their
egress; which would not always happen, if the Intervals of the Fits
within the Plate after Reflexion were not equal, both in length and
number, to their Intervals before it. And this confirms also the
proportions set down in the former Proposition. For if the Rays both in
going in and out at the first Surface be in Fits of easy Transmission,
and the Intervals and Numbers of those Fits between the first and second
Surface, before and after Reflexion, be equal, the distances of the Fits
of easy Transmission from either Surface, must be in the same
progression after Reflexion as before; that is, from the first Surface
which transmitted them in the progression of the even Numbers 0, 2, 4,
6, 8, &c. and from the second which reflected them, in that of the odd
Numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, &c. But these two Propositions will become much more
evident by the Observations in the following part of this Book.




THE

SECOND BOOK

OF

OPTICKS


_PART IV._

_Observations concerning the Reflexions and Colours of thick transparent
polish'd Plates._

There is no Glass or Speculum how well soever polished, but, besides the
Light which it refracts or reflects regularly, scatters every way
irregularly a faint Light, by means of which the polish'd Surface, when
illuminated in a dark room by a beam of the Sun's Light, may be easily
seen in all positions of the Eye. There are certain Phaenomena of this
scatter'd Light, which when I first observed them, seem'd very strange
and surprizing to me. My Observations were as follows.

_Obs._ 1. The Sun shining into my darken'd Chamber through a hole one
third of an Inch wide, I let the intromitted beam of Light fall
perpendicularly upon a Glass Speculum ground concave on one side and
convex on the other, to a Sphere of five Feet and eleven Inches Radius,
and Quick-silver'd over on the convex side. And holding a white opake
Chart, or a Quire of Paper at the center of the Spheres to which the
Speculum was ground, that is, at the distance of about five Feet and
eleven Inches from the Speculum, in such manner, that the beam of Light
might pass through a little hole made in the middle of the Chart to the
Speculum, and thence be reflected back to the same hole: I observed upon
the Chart four or five concentric Irises or Rings of Colours, like
Rain-bows, encompassing the hole much after the manner that those, which
in the fourth and following Observations of the first part of this Book
appear'd between the Object-glasses, encompassed the black Spot, but yet
larger and fainter than those. These Rings as they grew larger and
larger became diluter and fainter, so that the fifth was scarce visible.
Yet sometimes, when the Sun shone very clear, there appear'd faint
Lineaments of a sixth and seventh. If the distance of the Chart from the
Speculum was much greater or much less than that of six Feet, the Rings
became dilute and vanish'd. And if the distance of the Speculum from the
Window was much greater than that of six Feet, the reflected beam of
Light would be so broad at the distance of six Feet from the Speculum
where the Rings appear'd, as to obscure one or two of the innermost
Rings. And therefore I usually placed the Speculum at about six Feet
from the Window; so that its Focus might there fall in with the center
of its concavity at the Rings upon the Chart. And this Posture is always
to be understood in the following Observations where no other is
express'd.

_Obs._ 2. The Colours of these Rain-bows succeeded one another from the
center outwards, in the same form and order with those which were made
in the ninth Observation of the first Part of this Book by Light not
reflected, but transmitted through the two Object-glasses. For, first,
there was in their common center a white round Spot of faint Light,
something broader than the reflected beam of Light, which beam sometimes
fell upon the middle of the Spot, and sometimes by a little inclination
of the Speculum receded from the middle, and left the Spot white to the
center.

This white Spot was immediately encompassed with a dark grey or russet,
and that dark grey with the Colours of the first Iris; which Colours on
the inside next the dark grey were a little violet and indigo, and next
to that a blue, which on the outside grew pale, and then succeeded a
little greenish yellow, and after that a brighter yellow, and then on
the outward edge of the Iris a red which on the outside inclined to
purple.

This Iris was immediately encompassed with a second, whose Colours were
in order from the inside outwards, purple, blue, green, yellow, light
red, a red mix'd with purple.

Then immediately follow'd the Colours of the third Iris, which were in
order outwards a green inclining to purple, a good green, and a red more
bright than that of the former Iris.

The fourth and fifth Iris seem'd of a bluish green within, and red
without, but so faintly that it was difficult to discern the Colours.

_Obs._ 3. Measuring the Diameters of these Rings upon the Chart as
accurately as I could, I found them also in the same proportion to one
another with the Rings made by Light transmitted through the two
Object-glasses. For the Diameters of the four first of the bright Rings
measured between the brightest parts of their Orbits, at the distance of
six Feet from the Speculum were 1-11/16, 2-3/8, 2-11/12, 3-3/8 Inches,
whose Squares are in arithmetical progression of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4.
If the white circular Spot in the middle be reckon'd amongst the Rings,
and its central Light, where it seems to be most luminous, be put
equipollent to an infinitely little Ring; the Squares of the Diameters
of the Rings will be in the progression 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. I measured
also the Diameters of the dark Circles between these luminous ones, and
found their Squares in the progression of the numbers 1/2, 1-1/2, 2-1/2,
3-1/2, &c. the Diameters of the first four at the distance of six Feet
from the Speculum, being 1-3/16, 2-1/16, 2-2/3, 3-3/20 Inches. If the
distance of the Chart from the Speculum was increased or diminished, the
Diameters of the Circles were increased or diminished proportionally.

_Obs._ 4. By the analogy between these Rings and those described in the
Observations of the first Part of this Book, I suspected that there
were many more of them which spread into one another, and by interfering
mix'd their Colours, and diluted one another so that they could not be
seen apart. I viewed them therefore through a Prism, as I did those in
the 24th Observation of the first Part of this Book. And when the Prism
was so placed as by refracting the Light of their mix'd Colours to
separate them, and distinguish the Rings from one another, as it did
those in that Observation, I could then see them distincter than before,
and easily number eight or nine of them, and sometimes twelve or
thirteen. And had not their Light been so very faint, I question not but
that I might have seen many more.

_Obs._ 5. Placing a Prism at the Window to refract the intromitted beam
of Light, and cast the oblong Spectrum of Colours on the Speculum: I
covered the Speculum with a black Paper which had in the middle of it a
hole to let any one of the Colours pass through to the Speculum, whilst
the rest were intercepted by the Paper. And now I found Rings of that
Colour only which fell upon the Speculum. If the Speculum was
illuminated with red, the Rings were totally red with dark Intervals, if
with blue they were totally blue, and so of the other Colours. And when
they were illuminated with any one Colour, the Squares of their
Diameters measured between their most luminous Parts, were in the
arithmetical Progression of the Numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and the Squares
of the Diameters of their dark Intervals in the Progression of the
intermediate Numbers 1/2, 1-1/2, 2-1/2, 3-1/2. But if the Colour was
varied, they varied their Magnitude. In the red they were largest, in
the indigo and violet least, and in the intermediate Colours yellow,
green, and blue, they were of several intermediate Bignesses answering
to the Colour, that is, greater in yellow than in green, and greater in
green than in blue. And hence I knew, that when the Speculum was
illuminated with white Light, the red and yellow on the outside of the
Rings were produced by the least refrangible Rays, and the blue and
violet by the most refrangible, and that the Colours of each Ring spread
into the Colours of the neighbouring Rings on either side, after the
manner explain'd in the first and second Part of this Book, and by
mixing diluted one another so that they could not be distinguish'd,
unless near the Center where they were least mix'd. For in this
Observation I could see the Rings more distinctly, and to a greater
Number than before, being able in the yellow Light to number eight or
nine of them, besides a faint shadow of a tenth. To satisfy my self how
much the Colours of the several Rings spread into one another, I
measured the Diameters of the second and third Rings, and found them
when made by the Confine of the red and orange to be to the same
Diameters when made by the Confine of blue and indigo, as 9 to 8, or
thereabouts. For it was hard to determine this Proportion accurately.
Also the Circles made successively by the red, yellow, and green,
differ'd more from one another than those made successively by the
green, blue, and indigo. For the Circle made by the violet was too dark
to be seen. To carry on the Computation, let us therefore suppose that
the Differences of the Diameters of the Circles made by the outmost red,
the Confine of red and orange, the Confine of orange and yellow, the
Confine of yellow and green, the Confine of green and blue, the Confine
of blue and indigo, the Confine of indigo and violet, and outmost
violet, are in proportion as the Differences of the Lengths of a
Monochord which sound the Tones in an Eight; _sol_, _la_, _fa_, _sol_,
_la_, _mi_, _fa_, _sol_, that is, as the Numbers 1/9, 1/18, 1/12, 1/12,
2/27, 1/27, 1/18. And if the Diameter of the Circle made by the Confine
of red and orange be 9A, and that of the Circle made by the Confine of
blue and indigo be 8A as above; their difference 9A-8A will be to the
difference of the Diameters of the Circles made by the outmost red, and
by the Confine of red and orange, as 1/18 + 1/12 + 1/12 + 2/27 to 1/9,
that is as 8/27 to 1/9, or 8 to 3, and to the difference of the Circles
made by the outmost violet, and by the Confine of blue and indigo, as
1/18 + 1/12 + 1/12 + 2/27 to 1/27 + 1/18, that is, as 8/27 to 5/54, or
as 16 to 5. And therefore these differences will be 3/8A and 5/16A. Add
the first to 9A and subduct the last from 8A, and you will have the
Diameters of the Circles made by the least and most refrangible Rays
75/8A and ((61-1/2)/8)A. These diameters are therefore to one another as
75 to 61-1/2 or 50 to 41, and their Squares as 2500 to 1681, that is, as
3 to 2 very nearly. Which proportion differs not much from the
proportion of the Diameters of the Circles made by the outmost red and
outmost violet, in the 13th Observation of the first part of this Book.

_Obs._ 6. Placing my Eye where these Rings appear'd plainest, I saw the
Speculum tinged all over with Waves of Colours, (red, yellow, green,
blue;) like those which in the Observations of the first part of this
Book appeared between the Object-glasses, and upon Bubbles of Water, but
much larger. And after the manner of those, they were of various
magnitudes in various Positions of the Eye, swelling and shrinking as I
moved my Eye this way and that way. They were formed like Arcs of
concentrick Circles, as those were; and when my Eye was over against the
center of the concavity of the Speculum, (that is, 5 Feet and 10 Inches
distant from the Speculum,) their common center was in a right Line with
that center of concavity, and with the hole in the Window. But in other
postures of my Eye their center had other positions. They appear'd by
the Light of the Clouds propagated to the Speculum through the hole in
the Window; and when the Sun shone through that hole upon the Speculum,
his Light upon it was of the Colour of the Ring whereon it fell, but by
its splendor obscured the Rings made by the Light of the Clouds, unless
when the Speculum was removed to a great distance from the Window, so
that his Light upon it might be broad and faint. By varying the position
of my Eye, and moving it nearer to or farther from the direct beam of
the Sun's Light, the Colour of the Sun's reflected Light constantly
varied upon the Speculum, as it did upon my Eye, the same Colour always
appearing to a Bystander upon my Eye which to me appear'd upon the
Speculum. And thence I knew that the Rings of Colours upon the Chart
were made by these reflected Colours, propagated thither from the
Speculum in several Angles, and that their production depended not upon
the termination of Light and Shadow.

_Obs._ 7. By the Analogy of all these Phaenomena with those of the like
Rings of Colours described in the first part of this Book, it seemed to
me that these Colours were produced by this thick Plate of Glass, much
