Lower Straight Muscle.]

[Sidenote: 58. The watery fluid passing over the eyeball? Design of the
arrangement? Winking?]

58. Thus we observe that the gland which forms the tears is placed at the
outer part of the eye, while their means of exit is at the inner angle of
the eye; which fact renders it necessary that this watery fluid shall pass
over the surface of the eyeball before it can escape. This arrangement
cannot be accidental, but evinces design, for it thus secures the perfect
lubrication of the surface of the eye, and cleanses it from the smaller
particles of dust {203} which may enter it, in spite of the vigilance of
the lids and lashes. The act of winking, which is generally unconsciously
performed, and which takes place six or more times in a minute, assists
this passage of the tears across the eye, and is especially frequent when
the secretion is most abundant.

[Sidenote: 59. Describe the shape of the eyeball. Its structure.]

59. THE EYEBALL.--The remarkable optical instrument called the eyeball, or
the globe of the eye, upon which sight depends, is, as the name indicates,
spherical in shape. It is not a perfect sphere, since the front part
projects somewhat beyond the rest, and at the posterior part the optic
nerve (Fig. 48, N) is united to it, resembling the junction of the stem
with a fruit. In its long diameter, that is, the horizontal or from side to
side, it measures a little more than an inch; in other directions it is
rather less than an inch. In structure, the ball of the eye is firm, and
its tense round contour may in part be felt by pressing the fingers over
the closed lids.

[Sidenote: 60. Of what is the eyeball composed? State how.]

60. The eyeball is composed chiefly of three internal, transparent media,
called _humors_; and three investing coats, or _tunics_. The former are the
_aqueous humor_, Fig. 48, A, the _crystalline lens_ L, and the _vitreous
humor_ V. Of these the lens alone is solid. The three coats of the eyeball
are called the _sclerotic_ S, the _choroid_ CH, and the _retina_ R. This
arrangement exists in respect to five-sixths of the globe of the eye, but
in the anterior one-sixth, these coats are replaced by the _cornea_ C,
which is thin and transparent, so that the rays of light pass freely
through it, as through a clear window-pane.

[Sidenote: 61. The shape of the cornea? Its structure? The "white of the
eye?"]

61. In shape, the cornea is circular and prominent, resembling a miniature
watch-glass, about 1/25 of an inch thick. In structure, it resembles horn
(as the name signifies), or the nail of the finger, and is destitute of
{204} blood-vessels. The _Sclerotic_ (from _scleros_, hard) is composed of
dense, white fibrous tissue, and gives to the eyeball its firmness of
figure and its white color; in front, it constitutes the part commonly
called "the white of the eye." It is one of the strongest tissues in the
body; it possesses very few vessels, and is not very sensitive. It affords
protection to the extremely delicate interior parts of the eye; and the
little muscles which effect its movements are inserted into the sclerotic a
short distance behind the cornea (see Fig. 48, Y, Z). It is perforated
posteriorly to admit the optic nerve.

[Sidenote: 62. The second or middle coat of the eyeball? Its dark color?]

62. The _Choroid_ is the second or middle coat of the eyeball, and lies
closely attached to the inner surface of the sclerotic. Unlike the latter
tunic, its structure is soft and tender, it is dark in color, and possesses
a great abundance of blood-vessels. Its dark color is due to a layer of
dark brown or chocolate-colored cells spread out over its inner surface.
This dark layer serves to absorb the rays of light after they have
traversed the transparent structures in front of it; if the rays were
reflected from side to side within the eye, instead of being thus absorbed,
confused vision would result from the multitude of images which would be
impressed upon the optic nerve.

[Sidenote: 63. Similar mechanism in microscopes? The albinos? White
rabbits?]

63. This mechanism has been unconsciously imitated by the opticians, who,
when they make a microscope or telescope, take care that the interior of
its tube shall be coated with a thick layer of black paint or lamp-black;
for without it, a clear delineation of the object to be viewed is
impossible. The albinos, in whom these dark cells of the choroid are
wanting, have imperfect vision, especially in the daytime and in strong
lights. The dark cells are also wanting in white rabbits, and other animals
that have red or pink eyes; their vision appears to be imperfect in the
presence of a bright light. {205}

[Sidenote: 64. What is the iris? Its construction? How is the size of the
pupil regulated?]

64. THE IRIS.--Continuous with the choroid, in the front part of the globe
of the eye, is a thin, circular curtain, which occasions the brown, blue,
or gray color of the eye in different individuals. On account of the
varieties of its color, this membrane has received the name _Iris_, which
is the Greek word for "rainbow" (see Fig. 48, I). A front view of it is
shown in Fig. 47. The iris is pierced in its centre by a round opening,
called the _pupil_ (P), which is constantly varying in size. In olden times
it was spoken of as the "apple of the eye." The hinder surface of the iris,
except in albinos, has a layer of dark coloring matter resembling that of
the choroid. The iris is a muscular organ, and contains two distinct sets
of fibres; one of which is circular, while the other radiates outward from
the pupil. The action of these sets of fibres regulates the size of the
pupil; for when the circular set acts, the pupil contracts, and when the
other set acts, the opening expands. Their action is involuntary, and
depends on the reflex system of nerves, which causes the contraction of the
pupil when a strong light falls upon the eye, and its expansion when the
illumination is feeble.

[Sidenote: 65. The admission of light to the eye? The action of the iris
under different circumstances? The lustre of the eye, how affected in youth
and old age?]

65. The iris, accordingly, serves a very useful purpose in regulating the
admission of light to the eye. It, however, does not act instantaneously;
and hence, when we pass quickly from a dark room into the bright sunlight,
the vision is at first confused by the glare of light, but as soon as the
pupil contracts, the ability to see becomes perfect. On the other hand,
when we enter a dark apartment, such as a cellar, for a short time we can
see nothing clearly; but as soon as the pupil expands and admits more
light, we are enabled to distinguish the surrounding objects. Animals of
the cat species, and others which prowl around after nightfall, are enabled
to see in the dark by {206} having the iris very dilatable. The size of the
pupil affects the lustre of the eye. When it is large, as it usually is
during youth, the eye appears clear and brilliant; while in old age the
pupil is small and the eye is dull. The brilliancy of the eye is in part,
at least, dependent upon the reflection of light from the front surface of
the crystalline lens.

[Sidenote: 66. Means used to increase the beauty of the eye? The injurious
consequences?]

66. Certain poisonous vegetables have the property of causing the pupil to
dilate, and have been used in small doses to increase the beauty of the
eye. One of these drugs has been so largely used by the ladies for this
purpose, that it has received the name _belladonna_, from the Italian words
meaning "beautiful lady." This hazardous practice has resulted more than
once in the death of the person desiring thus to increase her personal
attraction. The common English name for belladonna is "deadly nightshade."
(In the diagram on page 214 the shape and relations of the iris are more
accurately shown than in the figure referred to above.)

[Sidenote: 67. What part does the retina constitute? How formed? Its
texture? Color? Sensitiveness?]

67. THE RETINA constitutes the third and inner coat of the globe of the
eye. This, the important part of the eye that is sensitive to light, is a
kind of nervous membrane, formed by the expansion of the ultimate filaments
of the optic nerve. Its texture is soft, smooth, and very thin; it is
translucent and of an opaline, or grayish-white color. It is sensitive to
light alone; and if any form of mechanical irritation be applied to it, the
sensations of touch and pain are not experienced, but flashes of fire,
sparks, and other luminous appearances are perceived. Thus an electric
shock given to the eye-ball occasions a flash of light; and a sudden fall,
or a blow upon the eye, is often apparently accompanied by the vision of
"stars."

[Sidenote: 68. Specific energy of the optic nerve? Trial in Germany?]

68. These phenomena are due to what is termed the {207} "specific energy"
of the optic nerve, which nerve, in common with the other nerves of special
sense, obeys a general law of nature, which requires that, whenever one of
these nerves is stimulated, it shall respond with the sensation peculiar to
itself. These flashes of retinal light have no power to illuminate external
objects, although the opposite of this statement has been maintained. On
the occasion of a remarkable trial in Germany, it was claimed by a person
who had been severely assaulted on a very dark night, that the flashes of
light caused by repeated blows upon the head enabled him to see with
sufficient distinctness to recognize his assailant. But the evidence of
scientific men entirely refuted this claim, by pronouncing that the eye,
under the circumstances named, was incapacitated for vision. Too intense
light occasions a feeling of pain, but it is of a peculiar kind, and is
termed "dazzling."

[Illustration: FIG. 49.]

[Sidenote: 69. Sensitiveness of all parts of the retina? Experiment to
prove the existence of the "blind spot."]

69. All parts of the retina are not equally sensitive, and singularly
enough, the point of entry of the nerve of sight, in the back part of the
eyeball, is entirely insensible to light, and is called the "blind spot."
The existence of this point may be proven by a simple experiment. Hold the
accompanying figure, on page 207, directly in front of and parallel with
the eyes. Close the left eye, and fix the sight steadily on the left-hand
circle; then, by gradually varying the distance of the figure from the eye,
at a certain distance (about six inches), the right-hand circle will
disappear, {208} but nearer or further than that, it will be plainly seen.
The other eye may be also tried, with a similar result: if the gaze be
directed to the right-hand circle, the left one will seem to disappear. The
experiment may be repeated by using two black buttons on the marble top of
a bureau, or on some other white surface. The blind spot does not
practically interfere with vision, since the eye is seldom fixed immovably
on an object, and the insensitive parts of the two eyes can never be
directed upon the same object at the same time.

[Sidenote: 70. Duration of impressions upon the retina? How illustrated?]

70. Impressions made upon the retina are not at once lost, but persist a
measurable length of time, and then gradually fade away. Thus, a bright
light or color, gazed at intently, cannot be immediately dismissed from
sight by closing or turning away the eyes. A stick lighted at one end, if
whirled around rapidly in the dark, presents the appearance of an unbroken
luminous ring; and the spokes of a rapidly revolving carriage-wheel seem to
be merged into a plane surface. If an object move too rapidly to produce
this sort of lasting impression, it is invisible, as in the case of a
cannon-ball passing through the air in front of us.

[Sidenote: 71. What further illustration? Winking, why it is not noticed.
Ease with which the retina is fatigued or deprived of sensibility? How
shown?]

71. If a card, painted with two primary colors--as red and yellow--be made
to rotate swiftly, the eye perceives neither of them distinctly; but the
card appears painted with their secondary color--orange. The average
duration of retinal images is estimated at one-eighth of a second; and it
is because they thus endure, that the act of winking, which takes place so
frequently, but so quickly, is not noticed and does not interrupt the
vision. The retina is easily fatigued or deprived of its sensibility. After
looking steadfastly at a bright light, or at a white object on a black
ground, a dark spot, corresponding in shape to the bright object, {209}
presents itself in whatever direction we look. This spot passes away as the
retina resumes its activity.

[Sidenote: 72. How further shown? How is the result accounted for?
"Color-blindness?"]

72. If a bright color be gazed at intently, and the eyes then be turned to
a white surface, a spot will appear; but its color will be the complement
of that of the object. Fix the eye upon a red wafer upon a white ground,
and on removing the wafer a greenish spot of the same shape takes its
place. This result happens because a certain portion of the retina has
exhausted its power to perceive the red ray, and perceives only its
complementary ray, which is green. The color thus substituted by the
exhausted retina is called a physiological or accidental color. In some
persons the retina is incapable of distinguishing different colors, when
they are said to be affected with "color-blindness." Thus, red and green
may appear alike, and then a cherry-tree, full of ripe fruit, will seem of
the same color in every part. Railroad accidents have occurred because the
engineer of the train, who was color-blind, has mistaken the color of a
signal.

[Sidenote: 73. The location of the crystalline lens? How supported? Its
color and texture? Shape? Size?]

73. THE CRYSTALLINE LENS.--Across the front of the eye, just behind the
iris, is situated the _Crystalline lens_, enclosed within its own capsule.
It is supported in its place partly by a delicate circular ligament, and
partly by the pressure of adjacent structures. It is colorless and
perfectly transparent, and has a firm but elastic texture. In shape it is
doubly convex, and may be rudely compared to a small lemon-drop. The front
face of the lens is flatter than the other, and is in contact with the iris
near its pupillary margin, as is represented in the diagram on page 214. It
is only one-fourth of an inch thick.

[Sidenote: 74. Cataract? Aqueous humor? Vitreous humor?]

74. When this little body becomes opaque, and no longer affords free
passage to the rays of light, as often happens {210} with the advance of
age, an affection termed "cataract" is produced. Between the crystalline
lens and the cornea is a small space which contains the _aqueous humor_
(see Fig. 48, A). This humor consists of five or six drops of a clear,
colorless liquid very much like water, as its name implies. That part of
the globe of the eye lying behind the lens is occupied by the _vitreous
humor_, so called from its fancied resemblance to melted glass (Fig. 48,
V). This humor is a transparent, jelly-like mass, enclosed within an
exceedingly thin membrane. It lies very closely applied to the retina, or
nervous membrane of the eye, and constitutes fully two-thirds of the bulk
of the eyeball.

[Illustration: FIG. 50.--THE RETINAL IMAGE.]

[Sidenote: 75. What is a lens and its focus? The miniature image, how
produced?]

75. THE USES OF THE CRYSTALLINE LENS.--A convex lens has the property of
converging the rays of light which pass through it; and the point at which
it causes them to meet is termed its focus. If a lens of this description,
such as a magnifying or burning-glass, be held in front of an open window,
in such a position as to allow its focus to fall upon a piece of paper, it
will be found to depict upon the paper a miniature image of the scene
outside of the window. It will be further noticed that the image is
inverted, or upside down, and that the paper {211} at the place upon which
the image is thrown is much brighter than any other part.

[Sidenote: 76. How are figures painted upon the retina? How proved?]

76. Now all the transparent structures of the eye, but especially the
crystalline lens, operate upon its posterior part, or retina, as the convex
lens acts upon the paper; that is, they paint upon the retina a bright
inverted miniature of the objects that appear in front of the eye (Fig.
50). That this actually takes place may be proved by experiment. If the
eyeball of a white rabbit, the walls of which are transparent, be examined
while a lighted candle is held before the cornea, an image of the
candle-flame may be seen upon the retina.

[Sidenote: 77. What can be said in respect to the form and structure of the
crystalline lens?]

77. The form and structure of the crystalline lens endow it with a
remarkable degree of refractive power, and enable it to converge all the
rays of light that enter it through the pupil, to a focus exactly at the
surface of the retina. When this lens is removed from the eye, as is
frequently done for the cure of cataract, it is found that the rays of
light then have their focus three-eighths of an inch behind the retina;
that the image is four times larger than in the healthy eye, that it is
less brilliant, and that its outline is very indistinct. From this we learn
that one of the uses of the crystalline lens is to make the retinal image
bright and sharply-defined, at the same time that it reduces its size.
Indeed, the small size of the image is a great advantage, as it enables the
limited surface of the retina to receive, at a glance, impressions from a
considerable field of vision.

[Sidenote: 78. How is the inverted image upon the retina presented in its
true position to the mind?]

78. As the image upon the retina is inverted, how does the mind perceive
the object in its true, erect position? Many explanations have been
advanced, but the simplest and most satisfactory appears to be found in the
fact that {212} the retina observes no difference, so to speak, between the
right and left or the upper and lower positions of objects. In fact, the
mind is never conscious of the formation of a retinal image, and until
instructed, has no knowledge that it exists. Consequently, our knowledge of
the relative location of external objects must be obtained from some other
source than the retina. The probable source of this knowledge is the
habitual comparison of those objects with the position of our own bodies:
thus, to see an elevated object, we know we must raise the head and eyes;
and to see one at our right hand, we must turn the head and eyes to the
right.

[Illustration: FIG. 51.--THE DIFFERENT SHAPES OF THE GLOBE OF THE EYE.

N, The Natural Eye. M, The Short-sighted Eye. H, The Long-sighted Eye.
S, Parallel Rays from the Sun.]

[Sidenote: 79. The uniform perfection of the eye? Examples? The most common
imperfection?]

79. LONG-SIGHT OR HYPEROPIA, AND SHORT-SIGHT OR MYOPIA.--The eye is not in
all cases perfectly formed. For example, persons may from birth have the
cornea too prominent or too flat, or the lens may be too thick or too thin.
In either of these conditions sight will be more or less defective from the
first, and the defect will not tend to disappear as life advances. The most
common imperfection, however, is in the shape of the globe; which may be
short (Fig. 51, H), as compared with the natural eye, N, or it may be too
long, M.
