few seeds, and the illegitimate offspring thus produced were very sterile; but
they were more sterile than might have been expected relatively to the
difficulty of effecting the union of the parent sexual elements. No point is
more remarkable in regard to the crossing of species than their unequal
reciprocity. Thus species A will fertilise B with the greatest ease; but B will
not fertilise A after hundreds of trials. We have exactly the same case with
illegitimate unions; for the mid-styled Lythrum salicaria was easily fertilised
by pollen from the longest stamens of the short-styled form, and yielded many
seeds; but the latter form did not yield a single seed when fertilised by the
longest stamens of the mid-styled form.

Another important point is prepotency. Gartner has shown that when a species is
fertilised with pollen from another species, if it be afterwards fertilised with
its own pollen, or with that of the same species, this is so prepotent over the
foreign pollen that the effect of the latter, though placed on the stigma some
time previously, is entirely destroyed. Exactly the same thing occurs with the
two forms of a heterostyled species. Thus several long-styled flowers of Primula
veris were fertilised illegitimately with pollen from another plant of the same
form, and twenty-four hours afterwards legitimately with pollen from a short-
styled dark-red polyanthus which is a variety of P. veris; and the result was
that every one of the thirty seedlings thus raised bore flowers more or less
red, showing plainly how prepotent the legitimate pollen from a short-styled
plant was over the illegitimate pollen from a long-styled plant.

In all the several foregoing points the parallelism is wonderfully close between
the effects of illegitimate and hybrid fertilisation. It is hardly an
exaggeration to assert that seedlings from an illegitimately fertilised
heterostyled plant are hybrids formed within the limits of one and the same
species. This conclusion is important, for we thus learn that the difficulty in
sexually uniting two organic forms and the sterility of their offspring, afford
no sure criterion of so-called specific distinctness. If any one were to cross
two varieties of the same form of Lythrum or Primula for the sake of
ascertaining whether they were specifically distinct, and he found that they
could be united only with some difficulty, that their offspring were extremely
sterile, and that the parents and their offspring resembled in a whole series of
relations crossed species and their hybrid offspring, he might maintain that his
varieties had been proved to be good and true species; but he would be
completely deceived. In the second place, as the forms of the same trimorphic or
dimorphic heterostyled species are obviously identical in general structure,
with the exception of the reproductive organs, and as they are identical in
general constitution (for they live under precisely the same conditions), the
sterility of their illegitimate unions and that of their illegitimate offspring,
must depend exclusively on the nature of the sexual elements and on their
incompatibility for uniting in a particular manner. And as we have just seen
that distinct species when crossed resemble in a whole series of relations the
forms of the same species when illegitimately united, we are led to conclude
that the sterility of the former must likewise depend exclusively on the
incompatible nature of their sexual elements, and not on any general difference
in constitution or structure. We are, indeed, led to this same conclusion by the
impossibility of detecting any differences sufficient to account for certain
species crossing with the greatest ease, whilst other closely allied species
cannot be crossed, or can be crossed only with extreme difficulty. We are led to
this conclusion still more forcibly by considering the great difference which
often exists in the facility of crossing reciprocally the same two species; for
it is manifest in this case that the result must depend on the nature of the
sexual elements, the male element of the one species acting freely on the female
element of the other, but not so in a reversed direction. And now we see that
this same conclusion is independently and strongly fortified by the
consideration of the illegitimate unions of trimorphic and dimorphic
heterostyled plants. In so complex and obscure a subject as hybridism it is no
slight gain to arrive at a definite conclusion, namely, that we must look
exclusively to functional differences in the sexual elements, as the cause of
the sterility of species when first crossed and of their hybrid offspring. It
was this consideration which led me to make the many observations recorded in
this chapter, and which in my opinion make them worthy of publication.


CHAPTER VI.
CONCLUDING REMARKS ON HETEROSTYLED PLANTS.

The essential character of heterostyled plants.
Summary of the differences in fertility between legitimately and illegitimately
fertilised plants.
Diameter of the pollen-grains, size of anthers and structure of stigma in the
different forms.
Affinities of the genera which include heterostyled species.
Nature of the advantages derived from heterostylism.
The means by which plants became heterostyled.
Transmission of form.
Equal-styled varieties of heterostyled plants.
Final remarks.

In the foregoing chapters all the heterostyled plants known to me have been more
or less fully described. Several other cases have been indicated, especially by
Professor Asa Gray and Kuhn, in which the individuals of the same species differ
in the length of their stamens and pistils (6/1. Asa Gray 'American Journal of
Science' 1865 page 101 and elsewhere as already referred to. Kuhn 'Botanische
Zeitung' 1867 page 67.); but as I have been often deceived by this character
taken alone, it seems to me the more prudent course not to rank any species as
heterostyled, unless we have evidence of more important differences between the
forms, as in the diameter of the pollen-grains, or in the structure of the
stigma. The individuals of many ordinary hermaphrodite plants habitually
fertilise one another, owing to their male and female organs being mature at
different periods, or to the structure of the parts, or to self-sterility, etc.;
and so it is with many hermaphrodite animals, for instance, land-snails or
earth-worms; but in all these cases any one individual can fully fertilise or be
fertilised by any other individual of the same species. This is not so with
heterostyled plants: a long-styled, mid-styled or short-styled plant cannot
fully fertilise or be fertilised by any other individual, but only by one
belonging to another form. Thus the essential character of plants belonging to
the heterostyled class is that the individuals are divided into two or three
bodies, like the males and females of dioecious plants or of the higher animals,
which exist in approximately equal numbers and are adapted for reciprocal
fertilisation. The existence, therefore, of two or three bodies of individuals,
differing from one another in the above more important characteristics, offers
by itself good evidence that the species is heterostyled. But absolutely
conclusive evidence can be derived only from experiments, and by finding that
pollen must be applied from the one form to the other in order to ensure
complete fertility.

In order to show how much more fertile each form is when legitimately fertilised
with pollen from the other form (or in the case of trimorphic species, with the
proper pollen from one of the two other forms) than when illegitimately
fertilised with its own-form pollen, I will append Table 6.33 giving a summary
of the results in all the cases hitherto ascertained. The fertility of the
unions may be judged by two standards, namely, by the proportion of flowers
which, when fertilised in the two methods, yield capsules, and by the average
number of seeds per capsule. When there is a dash in the left hand column
opposite to the name of the species, the proportion of the flowers which yielded
capsules was not recorded.

TABLE 6.33. Fertility of the legitimate unions taken together, compared with
that of the illegitimate unions together. The fertility of the legitimate
unions, as judged by both standards, is taken as 100.

Column 1: Name of species.
Column 2: Illegitimate unions : proportional number of flowers which produced
capsules.
Column 3: Illegitimate unions : average number of seeds per capsule.

Primula veris : 69 : 65.

Primula elatior : 27 : 75.

Primula vulgaris : 60 : 54.

Primula Sinensis : 84 : 63.

Primula Sinensis (second trial) : 0 : 53.

Primula Sinensis (Hildebrand) : 100 : 42.

Primula auricula (Scott) : 80 : 15.

Primula Sikkimensis (Scott) : 95 : 31.

Primula cortusoides (Scott) : 74 : 66.

Primula involucrata (Scott) : 72 : 48.

Primula farinosa (Scott) : 71 : 44.

Average of the nine species of Primula : 88.4 : 69.

Hottonia palustris (H. Muller) : - : 61.

Linum grandiflorum (the difference probably is much greater) : - : 69.

Linum perenne : - : 20.

Linum perenne (Hildebrand) : 0 : 0.

Pulmonaria officinalis (German stock, Hildebrand) : 0 : 0.

Pulmonaria angustifolia : 35 : 32.

Mitchella repens : 20 : 47.

Borreria, Brazilian sp. : - : 0.

Polygonum fagopyrum : - : 46.

Lythrum salicaria : 33 : 46.

Oxalis Valdiviana (Hildebrand) : 2 : 34.

Oxalis Regnelli : 0 : 0.

Oxalis speciosa : 15 : 49.

The two or three forms of the same heterostyled species do not differ from one
another in general habit or foliage, as sometimes, though rarely, happens with
the two sexes of dioecious plants. Nor does the calyx differ, but the corolla
sometimes differs slightly in shape, owing to the different position of the
anthers. In Borreria the hairs within the tube of the corolla are differently
situated in the long-styled and short-styled forms. In Pulmonaria there is a
slight difference in the size of the corolla, and in Pontederia in its colour.
In the reproductive organs the differences are much greater and more important.
In the one form the stamens may be all of the same length, and in the other
graduated in length, or alternately longer and shorter. The filaments may differ
in colour and thickness, and are sometimes nearly thrice as long in the one form
as in the other. They adhere also for very different proportional lengths to the
corolla. The anthers sometimes differ much in size in the two forms. Owing to
the rotation of the filaments, the anthers, when mature, dehisce towards the
circumference of the flower in one form of Faramea, and towards the centre in
the other form. The pollen-grains sometimes differ conspicuously in colour, and
often to an extraordinary degree in diameter. They differ also somewhat in
shape, and apparently in their contents, as they are unequally opaque. In the
short-styled form of Faramea the pollen-grains are covered with sharp points, so
as to cohere readily together or to an insect; whilst the smaller grains of the
long-styled form are quite smooth.

With respect to the pistil, the style may be almost thrice as long in the one
form as in the other. In Oxalis it sometimes differs in hairiness in the three
forms. In Linum the pistils either diverge and pass out between the filaments,
or stand nearly upright and parallel to them. The stigmas in the two forms often
differ much in size and shape, and more especially in the length and thickness
of their papillae; so that the surface may be rough or quite smooth. Owing to
the rotation of the styles, the papillose surface of the stigma is turned
outwards in one form of Linum perenne, and inwards in the other form. In flowers
of the same age of Primula veris the ovules are larger in the long-styled than
in the short-styled form. The seeds produced by the two or three forms often
differ in number, and sometimes in size and weight; thus, five seeds from the
long-styled form of Lythrum salicaria equal in weight six from the mid-styled
and seven from the short-styled form. Lastly, short-styled plants of Pulmonaria
officinalis bear a larger number of flowers, and these set a larger proportional
number of fruit, which however yield a lower average number of seed, than the
long-styled plants. With heterostyled plants we thus see in how many and in what
important characters the forms of the same undoubted species often differ from
one another--characters which with ordinary plants would be amply sufficient to
distinguish species of the same genus.

As the pollen-grains of ordinary species belonging to the same genus generally
resemble one another closely in all respects, it is worth while to show, in
Table 6.34, the difference in diameter between the grains from the two or three
forms of the same heterostyled species in the forty-three cases in which this
was ascertained. But it should be observed that some of the following
measurements are only approximately accurate, as only a few grains were
measured. In several cases, also, the grains had been dried and were then soaked
in water. Whenever they were of an elongated shape their longer diameters were
measured. The grains from the short-styled plants are invariably larger than
those from the long-styled, whenever there is any difference between them. The
diameter of the former is represented in the table by the number 100.

TABLE 6.34. Relative diameter of the pollen-grains from the forms of the same
heterostyled species; those from the short-styled form being represented by 100.

DIMORPHIC SPECIES.

Column 1: Name of species.
Column 2: From the long-styled form : relative diameter.

Primula veris : 67.

Primula vulgaris : 71.

Primula Sinensis (Hildebrand) : 57.

Primula auricula : 71.

Hottonia palustris (H. Muller) : 61.

Hottonia palustris (self) : 64.

Linum grandiflorum : 100.

Linum perenne (diameter variable) : 100 (?).

Linum flavum : 100.

Pulmonaria officinalis : 78.

Pulmonaria angustifolia : 91.

Polygonum fagopyrum : 82.

Leucosmia Burnettiana : 99.

Aegiphila elata : 62.

Menyanthes trifoliata : 84.

Limnanthemum Indicum : 100.

Villarsia (sp.?) : 75.

Forsythia suspensa : 94.

Cordia (sp.?) : 100.

Gilia pulchella : 100.

Gilia micrantha : 81.

Sethia acuminata : 83.

Erythroxylum (sp.?) : 93.

Cratoxylon formosum : 86.

Mitchella repens, pollen-grains of the long-styled a little smaller.

Borreria (sp.?) : 92.

Faramea (sp.?) : 67.

Suteria (sp.?) (Fritz Muller) : 75.

Houstonia coerulea : 72.

Oldenlandia (sp.?) : 78.

Hedyotis (sp.?) : 88.

Coccocypselum (sp.?) (Fritz Muller) : 100.

Lipostoma (sp.?) : 80.

Cinchona micrantha : 91.

TRIMORPHIC SPECIES.

Column 1: Name of species.
Column 2: Ratio expressing the extreme differences in diameter of the pollen-
grains from the two sets of anthers in the three forms.

Lythrum salicaria : 60.

Nesaea verticillata : 65.

Oxalis Valdiviana (Hildebrand) : 71.

Oxalis Regnelli : 78.

Oxalis speciosa : 69.

Oxalis sensitiva : 84.

Pontederia (sp.?) : 55.

Column 1: Name of species.
Column 2: Ratio between the diameters of the pollen-grains of the two sets of
anthers in the same form.

Oxalis rosea, long-styled form (Hildebrand) : 83.

Oxalis compressa, short-styled form : 83.

Pontederia (sp.?) short-styled form : 87.

Pontederia other sp. mid-styled form : 86.

We here see that, with seven or eight exceptions out of the forty-three cases,
the pollen-grains from one form are larger than those from the other form of the
same species. The extreme difference is as 100 to 55; and we should bear in mind
that in the case of spheres differing to this degree in diameter, their contents
differ in the ratio of six to one. With all the species in which the grains
differ in diameter, there is no exception to the rule that those from the
anthers of the short-styled form, the tubes of which have to penetrate the
longer pistil of the long-styled form, are larger than the grains from the other
form. This curious relation led Delpino (as it formerly did me) to believe that
the larger size of the grains in the short-styled flowers is connected with the
greater supply of matter needed for the development of their longer tubes. (6/2.
'Sull' Opera, la Distribuzione dei Sessi nelle Piante' etc 1867 page 17.) But
the case of Linum, in which the grains of the two forms are of equal size,
whilst the pistil of the one is about twice as long as that of the other, made
me from the first feel very doubtful with respect to this view. My doubts have
since been strengthened by the cases of Limnanthemum and Coccocypselum, in which
the grains are of equal size in the two forms; whilst in the former genus the
pistil is nearly thrice and in the latter twice as long as in the other form. In
those species in which the grains are of unequal size in the two forms, there is
no close relationship between the degree of their inequality and that of their
pistils. Thus in Pulmonaria officinalis and in Erythroxylum the pistil in the
long-styled form is about twice the length of that in the other form, whilst in
the former species the pollen-grains are as 100 to 78, and in the latter as 100
to 93 in diameter. In the two forms of Suteria the pistil differs but little in
length, whilst the pollen-grains are as 100 to 75 in diameter. These cases seem
to prove that the difference in size between the grains in the two forms is not
determined by the length of the pistil, down which the tubes have to grow. That
with plants in general there is no close relationship between the size of the
pollen-grains and the length of the pistil is manifest: for instance, I found
that the distended grains of Datura arborea were .00243 of an inch in diameter,
and the pistil no less than 9.25 inches in length; now the pistil in the small
flowers of Polygonum fagopyrum is very short, yet the larger pollen-grains from
the short-styled plants had exactly the same diameter as those from the Datura,
with its enormously elongated pistil.

Notwithstanding these several considerations, it is difficult quite to give up
the belief that the pollen-grains from the longer stamens of heterostyled plants
have become larger in order to allow of the development of longer tubes; and the
foregoing opposing facts may possibly be reconciled in the following manner. The
tubes are at first developed from matter contained within the grains, for they
are sometimes exserted to a considerable length, before the grains have touched
