ellipses during the daytime rotate slightly, causing their blades to face
first to one side and then to another. Although we can see how the slight
periodical movements of leaves in a vertical plane could be easily
converted into the greater yet simple nyctitropic movements, we do not at
present know by what graduated steps the more complex movements, effected
by the torsion of the pulvini, have been acquired. A probable explanation
could be given in each case only after a close investigation of the
movements in all the allied forms.

From the facts and considerations now advanced we may conclude that
nyctitropism, or the sleep of leaves
[page 413]
and cotyledons, is merely a modification of their ordinary circumnutating
movement, regulated in its period and amplitude by the alternations of
light and darkness. The object gained is the protection of the upper
surfaces of the leaves from radiation at night, often combined with the
mutual protection of the several parts by their close approximation. In
such cases as those of the leaflets of Cassia--of the terminal leaflets of
Melilotus--of all the leaflets of Arachis, Marsilea, etc.--we have ordinary
circumnutation modified to the extreme extent known to us in any of the
several great classes of modified circumnutation. On this view of the
origin of nyctitropism we can understand how it is that a few plants,
widely distributed throughout the Vascular series, have been able to
acquire the habit of placing the blades of their leaves vertically at
night, that is, of sleeping,--a fact otherwise inexplicable.

The leaves of some plants move during the day in a manner, which has
improperly been called diurnal sleep; for when the sun shines brightly on
them, they direct their edges towards it. To such cases we shall recur in
the following chapter on Heliotropism. It has been shown that the leaflets
of one form of Porlieria hygrometrica keep closed during the day, as long
as the plant is scantily supplied with water, in the same manner as when
asleep; and this apparently serves to check evaporation. There is only one
other analogous case known to us, namely, that of certain Gramineae, which
fold inwards the sides of their narrow leaves, when these are exposed to
the sun and to a dry atmosphere, as described by Duval-Jouve.* We have also
observed the same phenomenon in Elymus arenareus.

* 'Annal. des Sc. Nat. (Bot.),' 1875, tom. i. pp. 326-329.
[page 414]

There is another movement, which since the time of Linnaeus has generally
been called sleep, namely, that of the petals of the many flowers which
close at night. These movements have been ably investigated by Pfeffer, who
has shown (as was first observed by Hofmeister) that they are caused or
regulated more by temperature than by the alternations of light and
darkness. Although they cannot fail to protect the organs of reproduction
from radiation at night, this does not seem to be their chief function, but
rather the protection of the organs from cold winds, and especially from
rain, during the day. the latter seems probable, as Kerner* has shown that
a widely different kind of movement, namely, the bending down of the upper
part of the peduncle, serves in many cases the same end. The closure of the
flowers will also exclude nocturnal insects which may be ill-adapted for
their fertilisation, and the well-adapted kinds at periods when the
temperature is not favourable for fertilisation. Whether these movements of
the petals consist, as is probable, of modified circumnutation we do not
know.

Embryology of Leaves.--A few facts have been incidentally given in this
chapter on what may be called the embryology of leaves. With most plants
the first leaf which is developed after the cotyledons, resembles closely
the leaves produced by the mature plant, but this is not always the case.
the first leaves produced by some species of Drosera, for instance by D.
Capensis, differ widely in shape from those borne by the mature plant, and
resemble closely the leaves of D. rotundifolia, as was shown to us by Prof.
Williamson of Manchester. The first true leaf of

* 'Die Schutzmittel des Pollens,' 1873, pp. 30-39.
[page 415]

the gorse, or Ulex, is not narrow and spinose like the older leaves. On the
other hand, with many Leguminous plants, for instance, Cassia, Acacia
lophantha, etc., the first leaf has essentially the same character as the
older leaves, excepting that it bears fewer leaflets. In Trifolium the
first leaf generally bears only a single leaflet instead of three, and this
differs somewhat in shape from the corresponding leaflet on the older
leaves. Now, with Trifolium Pannonicum the first true leaf on some
seedlings was unifoliate, and on others completely trifoliate; and between
these two extreme states there were all sorts of gradations, some seedlings
bearing a single leaflet more or less deeply notched on one or both sides,
and some bearing a single additional and perfect lateral leaflet. Here,
then, we have the rare opportunity of seeing a structure proper to a more
advanced age, in the act of gradually encroaching on and replacing an
earlier or embryological condition.

The genus Melilotus is closely allied to Trifolium, and the first leaf
bears only a single leaflet, which at night rotates on its axis so as to
present one lateral edge to the zenith. Hence it sleeps like the terminal
leaflet of a mature plant, as was observed in 15 species, and wholly unlike
the corresponding leaflet of Trifolium, which simply bends upwards. It is
therefore a curious fact that in one of these 15 species, viz., M. Taurica
(and in a lesser degree in two others), leaves arising from young shoots,
produced on plants which had been cut down and kept in pots during the
winter in the green-house, slept like the leaves of a Trifolium, whilst the
leaves on the fully-grown branches on these same plants afterwards slept
normally like those of a Melilotus. If young shoots rising from the ground
may be considered as new individuals, partaking to a certain extent of the
nature of seedlings, then the peculiar manner in which their leaves slept
may be considered
[page 416]
as an embryological habit, probably the result of Melilotus being descended
from some form which slept like a Trifolium. This view is partially
supported by the leaves on old and young branches of another species, M.
Messanensis (not included in the above 15 species), always sleeping like
those of a Trifolium.

The first true leaf of Mimosa albida consists of a simple petiole, often
bearing three pairs of leaflets, all of which are of nearly equal size and
of the same shape: the second leaf differs widely from the first, and
resembles that on a mature plant (see Fig. 159, p. 379), for it consists of
two pinnae, each of which bears two pairs of leaflets, of which the inner
basal one is very small. But at the base of each pinna there is a pair of
minute points, evidently rudiments of leaflets, for they are of unequal
sizes, like the two succeeding leaflets. These rudiments are in one sense
embryological, for they exist only during the youth of the leaf, falling
off and disappearing as soon as it is fully grown.

With Desmodium gyrans the two lateral leaflets are very much smaller than
the corresponding leaflets in most of the species in this large genus; they
vary also in position and size; one or both are sometimes absent; and they
do not sleep like the fully-developed leaflets. They may therefore be
considered as almost rudimentary; and in accordance with the general
principles of embryology, they ought to be more constantly and fully
developed on very young than on old plants. But this is not the case, for
they were quite absent on some young seedlings, and did not appear until
from 10 to 20 leaves had been formed. This fact leads to the suspicion that
D. gyrans is descended through a unifoliate form (of which some exist) from
a trifoliate species; and that the little lateral leaflets reappear through
reversion. However this may be,
[page 417]
the interesting fact of the pulvini or organs of movement of these little
leaflets, not having been reduced nearly so much as their blades--taking
the large terminal leaflet as the standard of comparison--gives us probably
the proximate cause of their extraordinary power of gyration.
[page 418]


CHAPTER VIII.

MODIFIED CIRCUMNUTATION: MOVEMENTS EXCITED BY LIGHT.

Distinction between heliotropism and the effects of light on the
periodicity of the movements of leaves--Heliotropic movements of Beta,
Solanum, Zea, and Avena--Heliotropic movements towards an obscure light in
Apios, Brassica, Phalaris, Tropaeolum, and Cassia--Apheliotropic movements
of tendrils of Bignonia--Of flower-peduncles of Cyclamen--Burying of the
pods--Heliotropism and apheliotropism modified forms of circumnutation--
Steps by which one movement is converted into the other--
Transversal-heliotropismus or diaheliotropism influenced by epinasty, the
weight of the part and apogeotropism--Apogeotropism overcome during the
middle of the day by diaheliotropism--Effects of the weight of the blades
of cotyledons--So called diurnal sleep--Chlorophyll injured by intense
light--Movements to avoid intense light

SACHS first clearly pointed out the important difference between the action
of light in modifying the periodic movements of leaves, and in causing them
to bend towards its source.* The latter, or heliotropic movements are
determined by the direction of the light, whilst periodic movements are
affected by changes in its intensity and not by its direction. The
periodicity of the circumnutating movement often continues for some time in
darkness, as we have seen in the last chapter; whilst heliotropic bending
ceases very quickly when the light fails. Nevertheless, plants which have
ceased through long-continued darkness to move periodically, if re-exposed
to the light are still, according to Sachs, heliotropic.

Apheliotropism, or, as usually designated, negative

* 'Physiologie Veg.' (French Translation), 1868, pp. 42, 517, etc.
[page 419]

heliotropism, implies that a plant, when unequally illuminated on the two
sides, bends from the light, instead of, as in the last sub-class of cases,
towards it; but apheliotropism is comparatively rare, at least in a
well-marked degree. There is a third and large sub-class of cases, namely,
those of "transversal-Heliotropismus" of Frank, which we will here call
diaheliotropism. Parts of plants, under this influence, place themselves
more or less transversely to the direction whence the light proceeds, and
are thus fully illuminated. There is a fourth sub-class, as far as the
final cause of the movement is concerned; for the leaves of some plants
when exposed to an intense and injurious amount of light direct themselves,
by rising or sinking or twisting, so as to be less intensely illuminated.
Such movements have sometimes been called diurnal sleep. If thought
advisable, they might be called paraheliotropic, and this term would
correspond with our other terms.

It will be shown in the present chapter that all the movements included in
these four sub-classes, consist of modified circumnutation. We do not
pretend to say that if a part of a plant, whilst still growing, did not
circumnutate--though such a supposition is most improbable--it could not
bend towards the light; but, as a matter of fact, heliotropism seems always
to consist of modified circumnutation. Any kind of movement in relation to
light will obviously be much facilitated by each part circumnutating or
bending successively in all directions, so that an already existing
movement has only to be increased in some one direction, and to be lessened
or stopped in the other directions, in order that it should become
heliotropic, apheliotropic, etc., as the case may be. In the next chapter
some observations on the sensitiveness of plants to light, their
[page 420]
rate of bending towards it, and the accuracy with which they point towards
its source, etc., will be given. Afterwards it will be shown--and this
seems to us a point of much interest--that sensitiveness to light is
sometimes confined to a small part of the plant; and that this part when
stimulated by light, transmits an influence to distant parts, exciting them
to bend.

Heliotropism.--When a plant which is strongly heliotropic (and species
differ much in this respect) is exposed to a bright lateral light, it bends
quickly towards it, and the course pursued by the stem is quite or nearly
straight. But if the light is much dimmed, or occasionally interrupted, or
admitted in only a slightly oblique direction, the course pursued is more
or less zigzag; and as we have seen and shall again see, such zigzag
movement results from the elongation or drawing out of the ellipses, loops,
etc., which the plant would have described, if it had been illuminated from
above. On several occasions we were much struck with this fact, whilst
observing the circumnutation of highly sensitive seedlings, which were
unintentionally illuminated rather obliquely, or only at successive
intervals of time.

Fig. 168. Beta vulgaris: circumnutation of hypocotyl, deflected by the
light being slightly lateral, traced on a horizontal glass from 8.30 A.M.
to 5.30 P.M. Direction of the lighted taper by which it was illuminated
shown by a line joining the first and penultimate dots. Figure reduced to
one-third of the original scale.

[For instance two young seedlings of Beta vulgaris were placed in the
middle of a room with north-east windows, and were kept covered up, except
during each observation which lasted for only a minute or two; but the
result was that their hypocotyls bowed themselves to the side, whence some
light occasionally entered, in lines which were
[page 421]
only slightly zigzag. Although not a single ellipse was even approximately
formed, we inferred from the zigzag lines - and, as it proved, correctly--
that their hypocotyls were circumnutating, for on the following day these
same seedlings were placed in a completely darkened room, and were observed
each time by the aid of a small wax taper held almost directly above them,
and their movements were traced on a horizontal glass above; and now their
hypocotyls clearly circumnutated (Fig. 168, and Fig. 39, formerly given, p.
52); yet they moved a short distance towards the side where the taper was
held up. If we look at these diagrams, and suppose that the taper had been
held more on one side, and that the hypocotyls, still circumnutating, had
bent themselves within the same time much more towards the light, long
zigzag lines would obviously have been the result.

Fig. 169. Avena sativa: heliotropic movement and circumnutation of
sheath-like cotyledon (1 ½ inch in height) traced on horizontal glass from
8 A.M. to 10.25 P.M. Oct. 16th.

Again, two seedlings of Solanum lycopersicum were illuminated from above,
but accidentally a little more light entered on one than on any other side,
and their hypocotyls became slightly bowed towards the brighter side; they
moved in a zigzag line and described in their course two little triangles,
as seen in Fig. 37 (p. 50), and in another tracing not given. The
sheath-like cotyledons of Zea mays behaved, under nearly similar
circumstances, in a nearly similar manner as described in our first chapter
(p. 64), for they bowed themselves during the whole day towards one side,
making, however, in their course some conspicuous flexures. Before we knew
how greatly ordinary circumnutation was modified by a lateral light, some
seedling oats, with rather old and therefore not highly sensitive
cotyledons, were placed in front of a north-east window, towards which they
bent all day in a strongly zigzag course. On the following day they
continued to bend in the same direction (Fig. 169), but zigzagged much
less. The sky, however, became between 12.40 and 2.35 P.M.
[page 422]
overcast with extraordinarily dark thunder-clouds, and it was interesting
to note how plainly the cotyledons circumnutated during this interval.

The foregoing observations are of some value, from having been made when we
were not attending to heliotropism; and they led us to experiment on
several kinds of seedlings, by exposing them to a dim lateral light, so as
to observe the gradations between ordinary circumnutation and heliotropism.
Seedlings in pots were placed in front of, and about a yard from, a
north-east window; on each side and over the pots black boards were placed;
in the rear the pots were open to the diffused light of the room, which had
a second north-east and a north-west window. By hanging up one or more
blinds before the window where the seedlings stood, it was easy to dim the
light, so that very little more entered on this side than on the opposite
one, which received the diffused light of the room. Late in the evening the
blinds were successively removed, and as the plants had been subjected
during the day to a very obscure light, they continued to bend towards the
window later in the evening than would otherwise have occurred. Most of the
seedlings were selected because they were known to be highly sensitive to
light, and some because they were but little sensitive, or had become so
from having grown old. The movements were traced in the usual manner on a
horizontal glass cover; a fine glass filament with little triangles of
paper having been cemented in an upright position to the hypocotyls.
Whenever the stem or hypocotyl became much bowed towards the light, the
latter part of its course had to be traced on a vertical glass, parallel to
the window, and at right angles to the horizontal glass cover.
Fig. 170. Apios graveolens: heliotropic movement of hypocotyl (.45 of inch
in height) towards a moderately bright lateral light, traced on a
horizontal glass from 8.30 A.M. to 11.30 A.M. Sept. 18th. Figure reduced to
one-third of original scale.

Apios graveolens.--The hypocotyl bends in a few hours rectan-
[page 423]
gularly towards a bright lateral light. In order to ascertain how straight
a course it would pursue when fairly well illuminated on one side,
seedlings were first placed before a south-west window on a cloudy and
rainy morning; and the movement of two hypocotyls were traced for 3 h.,
during which time they became greatly bowed towards the light. One of these
tracings is given on p. 422 (Fig. 170), and the course may be seen to be
almost straight. But the amount of light on this occasion was superfluous,
for two seedlings were placed before a north-east window, protected by an
ordinary linen and two muslin blinds, yet their hypocotyls moved towards
this rather dim light in only slightly zigzag lines; but after 4 P.M., as
the light waned, the lines became distinctly zigzag. One of these
seedlings, moreover, described in the afternoon an ellipse of considerable
size, with its longer axis directed towards the window.

We now determined that the light should be made dim enough, so we began by
exposing several seedlings before a north-east window, protected by one
linen blind, three muslin blinds, and a towel. But so little light entered
that a pencil cast no perceptible shadow on a white card, and the
hypocotyls did not bend at all towards the window. During this time, from
8.15 to 10.50 A.M., the hypocotyls zigzagged or circumnutated near the same
spot, as may be seen at A, in Fig. 171. The towel, therefore, was removed
at 10.50 A.M., and replaced by two muslin blinds, and now the light passed
through one ordinary linen and four muslin blinds. When a pencil was held
upright on a card close to the seedlings, it cast a shadow (pointing from
the window) which could only just be distinguished. Yet this very slight
excess of light on one side sufficed to cause the hypocotyls of all the
seedlings immediately to begin bending in zigzag lines towards the window.
The course of one is shown at A (Fig. 171): after moving towards the window
from 10.50 A.M. to 12.48 P.M. it bent from the window, and then returned in
a nearly parallel line; that is, it almost completed between 12.48 and 2
P.M. a narrow ellipse. Late in the evening, as the light waned, the
hypocotyl ceased to bend towards the window, and circumnutated on a small
scale round the same spot; during the night it moved considerably
backwards, that is, became more upright, through the action of
apogeotropism. At B, we have a tracing of the movements of another seedling
from the hour (10.50 A.M.) when the towel was removed; and it is in all
essential respects
[page 424]
similar to the previous one. In these two cases there could be no doubt
that the ordinary circumnutating movement of the hypocotyl was modified and
rendered heliotropic.

Fig. 171. Apios graveolens: heliotropic movement and circumnutation of the
hypocotyls of two seedlings towards a dim lateral light, traced on a
horizontal glass during the day. The broken lines show their return
nocturnal courses. Height of hypocotyl of A .5, and of B .55 inch. Figure
reduced to one-half of original scale.

Brassica oleracea.--The hypocotyl of the cabbage, when not disturbed by a
lateral light, circumnutates in a complicated
[page 425]
manner over nearly the same space, and a figure formerly given is here
reproduced (Fig. 172). If the hypocotyl is exposed to a moderately strong
lateral light it moves quickly towards this side, travelling in a straight,
or nearly straight, line. But when the lateral light is very dim its course
is extremely tortuous, and evidently consists of modified circumnutation.
Seedlings were placed before a north-east window, protected by a linen and
muslin blind and by a towel. The sky was cloudy, and whenever the clouds
grew a little lighter an additional muslin blind was temporarily suspended.
The light from the window was

Fig. 172. Brassica oleracea: ordinary circumnutating movement of the
hypocotyl of a seedling plant.

thus so much obscured that, judging by the unassisted eye, the seedlings
appeared to receive more light from the interior of the room than from the
window; but this was not really the case, as was shown by a very faint
shadow cast by a pencil on a card. Nevertheless, this extremely small
excess of light on one side caused the hypocotyls, which in the morning had
stood upright, to bend at right angles towards the window, so that in the
evening (after 4.23 P.M.) their course had to be traced on a vertical glass
parallel to the window. It should be stated that at 3.30 P.M., by which
time the sky had become darker, the towel was removed and replaced by an
additional muslin blind, which itself was removed at 4 P.M., the other two
[page 426]
blinds being left suspended. In Fig. 173 the course pursued, between 8.9
A.M. and 7.10 P.M., by one of the hypocotyls thus

Fig. 173. Brassica oleracea: heliotropic movement and circumnutation of a
hypocotyl towards a very dim lateral light, traced during 11 hours, on a
horizontal glass in the morning, and on a vertical glass in the evening.
Figure reduced to one-third of the original scale.

exposed is shown. It may be observed that during the first 16 m. the
hypocotyl moved obliquely from the light, and this,
[page 427]
no doubt, was due to its then circumnutating in this direction. Similar
cases were repeatedly observed, and a dim light rarely or never produced
any effect until from a quarter to three-quarters of an hour had elapsed.
After 5.15 P.M., by which time the light had become obscure, the hypocotyl
began to circumnutate about the same spot. The contrast between the two
figures (172 and 173) would have been more striking, if they had been
originally drawn on the same scale, and had been equally reduced. But the
movements shown in Fig. 172 were at first more magnified, and have been
reduced to only one-half of the original scale; whereas those in Fig. 173
were at first less magnified, and have been reduced to a one-third scale. A
tracing made at the same time with the last of the movements of a second
hypocotyl, presented a closely analogous appearance; but it did not bend
quite so much towards the light, and it circumnutated rather more plainly.

Fig. 174. Phalaris Canariensis: heliotropic movement and circumnutation of
a rather old cotyledon, towards a dull lateral light, traced on a
horizontal glass from 8.15 A.M. Sept. 16th to 7.45 A.M. 17th. Figure
reduced to one-third of original scale.

Phalaris Canariensis.--The sheath-like cotyledons of this monocotyledonous
plant were selected for trial, because they are very sensitive to light and
circumnutate well, as formerly shown (see Fig. 49, p. 63). Although we felt
no doubt about the result, some seedlings were first placed before a
south-west window on a moderately bright morning, and the movements of one
were traced. As is so common, it moved
[page 428]
for the first 45 m. in a zigzag line; it then felt the full influence of
the light, and travelled towards it for the next 2 h. 30 m. in an almost
straight line. The tracing has not been given, as it was almost identical
with that of Apios under similar circumstances (Fig. 170). By noon it had
bowed itself to its full extent; it then circumnutated about the same spot
and described two ellipses; by 5 P.M. it had retreated considerably from
the light, through the action of apogeotropism. After some preliminary
trials for ascertaining the right degree of obscurity, some seedlings were
placed (Sept. 16th) before a north-east window, and light was admitted
through an ordinary linen and three muslin blinds. A pencil held close by
the pot now cast a very faint shadow on a white card, pointing from the
window. In the evening, at 4.30 and again at 6 P.M., some of the blinds
were removed. In Fig. 174 we see the course pursued under these
circumstances by a rather old and not very sensitive cotyledon, 1.9 inch in
height, which became much bowed, but was never rectangularly bent towards
the light. From 11 A.M., when the sky became rather duller, until 6.30
P.M., the zigzagging was conspicuous, and evidently consisted of drawn-out
ellipses. After 6.30 P.M. and during the night, it retreated in a crooked
line from the window. Another and younger seedling moved during the same
time much more quickly and to a much greater distance, in an only slightly
zigzag line towards the light; by 11 A.M. it was bent almost rectangularly
in this direction, and now circumnutated about the same place.

Tropaeolum majus.--Some very young seedlings, bearing only two leaves, and
therefore not as yet arrived at the climbing stage of growth, were first
tried before a north-east window without any blind. The epicotyls bowed
themselves towards the light so rapidly that in little more than 3 h. their
tips pointed rectangularly towards it. The lines traced were either nearly
straight or slightly zigzag; and in this latter case we see that a trace of
circumnutation was retained even under the influence of a moderately bright
light. Twice whilst these epicotyls were bending towards the window, dots
were made every 5 or 6 minutes, in order to detect any trace of lateral
movement, but there was hardly any; and the lines formed by their junction
were nearly straight, or only very slightly zigzag, as in the other parts
of the figures. After the epicotyls had bowed themselves to the full extent
towards the light, ellipses of considerable size were described in the
usual manner.
[page 429]

After having seen how the epicotyls moved towards a moderately bright
light, seedlings were placed at 7.48 A.M. (Sept. 7th) before a north-east
window, covered by a towel, and shortly afterwards by an ordinary linen
blind, but the epicotyls still moved towards the window. At 9.13 A.M. two
additional muslin blinds were suspended, so that the seedlings received
very little more light from the window than from the interior of the room.
The sky varied in brightness, and the seedlings occasionally

Fig. 175. Tropaeolum majus: heliotropic movement and circumnutation of the
epicotyl of a young seedling towards a dull lateral light, traced on a
horizontal glass from 7.48 A.M. to 10.40 P.M. Figure reduced to one-half of
the original scale.

received for a short time less light from the window than from the opposite
side (as ascertained by the shadow cast), and then one of the blinds was
temporarily removed. In the evening the blinds were taken away, one by one.
the course pursued by an epicotyl under these circumstances is shown in
Fig. 175. During the whole day, until 6.45 P.M., it plainly bowed itself
towards the light; and the tip moved over a considerable space. After 6.45
P.M. it moved backwards, or from the window, till
[page 430]
10.40 P.M., when the last dot was made. Here, then, we have a distinct
heliotropic movement, effected by means of six elongated figures (which if
dots had been made every few minutes would have been more or less elliptic)
directed towards the light, with the apex of each successive ellipse nearer
to the window than the previous one. Now, if the light had been only a
little brighter, the epicotyl would have bowed itself more to the light, as
we may safely conclude from the previous trials; there would also have been
less lateral movement, and the ellipses or other figures would have been
drawn out into a strongly marked zigzag line, with probably one or two
small loops still formed. If the light had been much brighter, we should
have had a slightly zigzag line, or one quite straight, for there would
have been more movement in the direction of the light, and much less from
side to side.

Fig. 176. Tropaeolum majus: heliotropic movement and circumnutation of an
old internode towards a lateral light, traced on a horizontal glass from 8
A.M. Nov. 2nd to 10.20 A.M. Nov. 4th. Broken lines show the nocturnal
course.

Sachs states that the older internodes of this Tropaeolum are
apheliotropic; we therefore placed a plant, 11 3/4 inches high, in a box,
blackened within, but open on one side in front of a north-east window
without any blind. A filament was fixed to the third internode from the
summit on one plant, and to the fourth internode of another. These
internodes were either not old enough, or the light was not sufficiently
bright, to induce apheliotropism, for both plants bent slowly towards,
instead of from the window during four days. The course, during two days of
the first-mentioned internode, is given in Fig. 176; and we see that it
either circumnutated on a small scale, or travelled in a zigzag line
towards the light. We have thought this case of feeble heliotropism in one
of the older internodes of a plant,
[page 431]
which, whilst young, is so extremely sensitive to light, worth giving.

Fig. 177. Cassia tora: heliotropic movement and circumnutation of a
hypocotyl (1 ½ inch in height) traced on a horizontal glass from 8 A.M. to
10.10 P.M. Oct. 7th. Also its circumnutation in darkness from 7 A.M. Oct.
8th to 7.45 A.M. Oct. 9th.

Cassia tora.--The cotyledons of this plant are extremely sensitive to
light, whilst the hypocotyls are much less sensitive than those of most
other seedlings, as we had often observed with surprise. It seemed
therefore worth while to trace their movements. They were exposed to a
lateral light before a north-east window, which was at first covered merely
by a muslin blind, but as the sky grew brighter about 11 A.M., an
additional linen blind was suspended. After 4 P.M. one blind and then the
other was removed. The seedlings were protected on each side and above, but
were open to the diffused light of the room in the rear. Upright filaments
were fixed to the hypocotyls of two seedlings, which stood vertically in
the morning. The accompanying figure (Fig. 177) shows the course pursued by
one of them during two days; but it should be particularly noticed that
during the second day the seedlings were kept in darkness, and they then
circumnutated round nearly the same small space. On the first day (Oct.
7th) the hypocotyl moved from 8 A.M. to 12.23 P.M., toward the light in a
zigzag line, then turned abruptly to the left and afterwards described a
small ellipse. Another irregular
[page 432]
ellipse was completed between 3 P.M. and about 5.30 P.M., the hypocotyl
still bending towards the light. The hypocotyl was straight and upright in
the morning, but by 6 P.M. its upper half was bowed towards the light, so
that the chord of the arc thus formed stood at an angle of 20o with the
perpendicular. After 6 P.M. its course was reversed through the action of
apogeotropism, and it continued to bend from the window during the night,
as shown by the broken line. On the next day it was kept in the dark
(excepting when each observation was made by the aid of a taper), and the
course followed from 7 A.M. on the 8th to 7.45 A.M. on the 9th is here
likewise shown. The difference between the two parts of the figure (177),
namely that described during the daytime on the 7th, when exposed to a
rather dim lateral light, and that on the 8th in darkness, is striking. The
difference consists in the lines during the first day having been drawn out
in the direction of the light. The movements of the other seedling, traced
under the same circumstances, were closely similar.

Apheliotropism.--We succeeded in observing only two cases of
apheliotropism, for these are somewhat rare; and the movements are
generally so slow that they would have been very troublesome to trace.

Fig. 178. Bignonia capreolata: apheliotropic movement of a tendril, traced
on a horizontal glass from 6.45 A.M. July 19th to 10 A.M. 20th. Movements
as originally traced, little magnified, here reduced to two-thirds of the
original scale.

Bignonia capreolata.--No organ of any plant, as far as we have seen, bends
away so quickly from the light as do the tendrils of this Bignonia. They
are also remarkable from circumnutating much less regularly than most other
tendrils, often remaining stationary; they depend on apheliotropism for
coming into
[page 433]
contact with the trunks of trees.* The stem of a young plant was tied to a
stick at the base of a pair of fine tendrils, which projected almost
vertically upwards; and it was placed in front of a north-east window,
being protected on all other sides from the light. The first dot was made
at 6.45 A.M., and by 7.35 A.M. both tendrils felt the full influence of the
light, for they moved straight away from it until 9.20 A.M., when they
circumnutated for a time, still moving, but only a little, from the light
(see Fig. 178 of the left-hand tendril). After 3 P.M. they again moved
rapidly away from the light in zigzag lines. By a late hour in the evening
both had moved so far, that they pointed in a direct line from the light.
During the night they returned a little in a nearly opposite direction. On
the following morning they again moved from the light and converged, so
that by the evening they had become interlocked, still pointing from the
light. The right-hand tendril, whilst converging, zigzagged much more than
the one figured. Both tracings showed that the apheliotropic movement was a
modified form of circumnutation.

Cyclamen Persicum.--Whilst this plant is in flower the peduncles stand
upright, but their uppermost part is hooked so that the flower itself hangs
downwards. As soon as the pods begin to swell, the peduncles increase much
in length and slowly curve downwards, but the short, upper, hooked part
straightens itself. Ultimately the pods reach the ground, and if this is
covered with moss or dead leaves, they bury themselves. We have often seen
saucer-like depressions formed by the pods in damp sand or sawdust; and one
pod (.3 of inch in diameter) buried itself in sawdust for three-quarters of
its length.** We shall have occasion hereafter to consider the object
gained by this burying process. The peduncles can change the direction of
their curvature, for if a pot, with plants having their peduncles already
bowed downwards, be placed horizontally, they slowly bend at right angles
to their former direction towards the centre of the earth. We therefore at
first attributed the movement to geotropism; but a pot which had lain
horizontally with the pods

* 'The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants,' 1875, p. 97.

** The peduncles of several other species of Cyclamen twist themselves into
a spire, and according to Erasmus Darwin ('Botanic Garden,' Canto., iii. p.
126), the pods forcibly penetrate the earth. See also Grenier and Godron,
'Flore de France,' tom. ii. p. 459.
[page 434]

all pointing to the ground, was reversed, being still kept horizontal, so
that the pods now pointed directly upwards; it was then placed in a dark
cupboard, but the pods still pointed upwards after four days and nights.
The pot, in the same position, was next brought back into the light, and
after two days there was some bending downwards of the peduncles, and on
the fourth day two of them pointed to the centre of the earth, as did the
others after an additional day or two. Another plant, in a pot which had
always stood upright, was left in the dark cupboard for six days; it bore 3
peduncles, and only one became within this

Fig. 179. Cyclamen Persicum: downward apheliotropic movement of a
flower-peduncle, greatly magnified (about 47 times?), traced on a
horizontal glass from 1 P.M. Feb. 18th to 8 A.M. 21st.

time at all bowed downwards, and that doubtfully. The weight, therefore, of
the pods is not the cause of the bending down. This pot was then brought
back into the light, and after three days the peduncles were considerably
bowed downwards. We are thus led to infer that the downward curvature is
due to apheliotropism; though more trials ought to have been made.

In order to observe the nature of this movement, a peduncle bearing a large
pod which had reached and rested on the ground, was lifted a little up and
secured to a stick. A filament was fixed across the pod with a mark
beneath, and its move-
[page 435]
ment, greatly magnified, was traced on a horizontal glass during 67 h. The
plant was illuminated during the day from above. A copy of the tracing is
given on p. 434 (Fig. 179); and there can be no doubt that the descending
movement is one of modified circumnutation, but on an extremely small
scale. The observation was repeated on another pod, which had partially
buried itself in sawdust, and which was lifted up a quarter of an inch
above the surface; it described three very small circles in 24 h.
Considering the great length and thinness of the peduncles and the
lightness of the pods, we may conclude that they would not be able to
excavate saucer-like depressions in sand or sawdust, or bury themselves in
moss, etc., unless they were aided by their continued rocking or
circumnutating movement.]

Relation between Circumnutation and Heliotropism.--Any one who will look at
the foregoing diagrams, showing the movements of the stems of various
plants towards a lateral and more or less dimmed light, will be forced to
admit that ordinary circumnutation and heliotropism graduate into one
another. When a plant is exposed to a dim lateral light and continues
during the whole day bending towards it, receding late in the evening, the
movement unquestionably is one of heliotropism. Now, in the case of
Tropaeolum (Fig. 175) the stem or epicotyl obviously circumnutated during
the whole day, and yet it continued at the same time to move
heliotropically; this latter movement being effected by the apex of each
successive elongated figure or ellipse standing nearer to the light than
the previous one. In the case of Cassia (Fig. 177) the comparison of the
movement of the hypocotyl, when exposed to a dim lateral light and to
darkness, is very instructive; as is that between the ordinary
circumnutating movement of a seedling Brassica (Figs. 172, 173), or that of
Phalaris (Figs. 49, 174), and their heliotropic movement towards a window
protected by blinds. In both these cases,
[page 436]
and in many others, it was interesting to notice how gradually the stems
began to circumnutate as the light waned in the evening. We have therefore
many kinds of gradations from a movement towards the light, which must be
considered as one of circumnutation very slightly modified and still
consisting of ellipses or circles,--though a movement more or less strongly
zigzag, with loops or ellipses occasionally formed,--to a nearly straight,
