gets it name."

"But this is mere nomenclature. In what sense are there three worlds?"

Corpang passed his hand over his forehead. "All this we can discuss as
we go along. It's a torment to me to be standing still."

Maskull stared again at the spot where Leehallfae's body had lain, quite
bewildered at the extraordinary disappearance. He could scarcely tear
himself away from the place, so mysterious was it. Not until Corpang
called to him a second time did he make up his mind to follow him.

They set off from the rock wall straight across the airlit plain,
directing their course toward the nearest trees. The subdued light, the
absence of shadows, the massive shafts, springing grey-white out of the
jetlike ground, the fantastic trees, the absence of a sky, the deathly
silence, the knowledge that he was underground--the combination of all
these things predisposed Maskull's mind to mysticism, and he prepared
himself with some anxiety to hear Corpang's explanation of the land and
its wonders. He already began to grasp that the reality of the outside
world and the reality of this world were two quite different things.

"In what sense are there three worlds?" he demanded, repeating his
former question.

Corpang smote the end of his staff on the ground. "First of all,
Maskull, what is your motive for asking? If it's mere intellectual
curiosity, tell me, for we mustn't play with awful matters."

"No, it isn't that," said Maskull slowly. "I'm not a student. My journey
is no holiday tour."

"Isn't there blood on your soul?" asked Corpang, eying him intently.

The blood rose steadily to Maskull's face, but in that light it caused
it to appear black.

"Unfortunately there is, and not a little."

The other's face was all wrinkles, but he made no comment.

"And so you see," went on Maskull, with a short laugh, "I'm in the very
best condition for receiving your instruction."

Corpang still paused. "Underneath your crimes I see a man," he said,
after a few minutes. "On that account, and because we are commanded to
help one another, I won't leave you at present, though I little thought
to be walking with a murderer.... Now to your question.... Whatever a
man sees with his eyes, Maskull, he sees in three ways--length, breadth,
depth. Length is existence, breadth is relation, depth is feeling."

"Something of the sort was told me by Earthrid, the musician, who came
from Threal."

"I don't know him. What else did he tell you?"

"He went on to apply it to music. Continue, and pardon the
interruption."

"These three states of perception are the three worlds. Existence is
Faceny's world, relation is Amfuse's world, feeling is Thire's world."

"Can't we come down to hard facts?" said Maskull, frowning. "I
understand no more than I did before what you mean by three worlds."

"There are no harder facts than the ones I am giving you. The first
world is visible, tangible Nature. It was created by Faceny out of
nothingness, and therefore we call it Existence."

"That I understand."

"The second world is Love--by which I don't mean lust. Without love,
every individual would be entirely self-centred and unable deliberately
to act on others. Without love, there would be no sympathy--not even
hatred, anger, or revenge would be possible. These are all imperfect and
distorted forms of pure love. Interpenetrating Faceny's world of Nature,
therefore, we have Amfuse's world of Love, or Relation."

"What grounds have you for assuming that this so-called second world is
not contained in the first?"

"They are contradictory. A natural man lives for himself; a lover lives
for others."

"It may be so. It's rather mystical. But go on--who is Thire?"

"Length and breadth together without depth give flatness. Life and love
without feeling produce shallow, superficial natures. Feeling is the
need of men to stretch out toward their creator."

"You mean prayer and worship?"

"I mean intimacy with Thire. This feeling is not to be found in either
the first or second world, therefore it is a third world. Just as depth
is the line between object and subject, feeling is the line between
Thire and man."

"But what is Thire himself?"

"Thire is the afterworld."

"I still don't understand," said Maskull. "Do you believe in three
separate gods, or are these merely three ways of regarding one God?"

"There are three gods, for they are mutually antagonistic. Yet they are
somehow united."

Maskull reflected a while. "How have you arrived at these conclusions?"

"None other are possible in Threal, Maskull."

"Why in Threal--what is there peculiar here?"

"I will show you presently."

They walked on for above a mile in silence, while Maskull digested what
had been said. When they came to the first trees, which grew along the
banks of a small stream of transparent water, Corpang halted.

"That bandage around your forehead has long been unnecessary," he
remarked.

Maskull removed it. He found that the line of his brow was smooth and
uninterrupted, as it had never yet been since his arrival in Tormance.

"How has this come about--and how did you know it?"

"They were Faceny's organs. They have vanished, just as the phaen's body
vanished."

Maskull kept rubbing his forehead. "I feel more human without them. But
why isn't the rest of my body affected?"

"Because its living will contains the element of Thire."

"Why are we stopping here?"

Corpang broke off the tip of one of the aerial roots of a tree, and
proffered it to him. "Eat this, Maskull."

"For food, or something else?"

"Food for body and soul."

Maskull bit into the root. It was white and hard; its white sap was
bleeding. It had no taste, but after eating it, he experienced a change
of perception. The landscape, without alteration of light or outline,
became several degrees more stern and sacred. When he looked at Corpang
he was impressed by his aspect of Gothic awfulness, but the perplexed
expression was still in his eyes.

"Do you spend all your time here, Corpang?"

"Occasionally I go above, but not often."

"What fastens you to this gloomy world?"

"The search for Thire."

"Then it's still a search?"

"Let us walk on."

As they resumed their journey across the dim, gradually rising plain,
the conversation became even more earnest in character than before.
"Although I was not born here," proceeded Corpang, "I've lived here for
twenty-five years, and during all that time I have been drawing nearer
to Thire, as I hope. But there is this peculiarity about it--the first
stages are richer in fruit and more promising than the later ones. The
longer a man seeks Thire, the more he seems to absent himself. In the
beginning he is felt and known, sometimes as a shape, sometimes as a
voice, sometimes an overpowering emotion. Later on all is dry, dark, and
harsh in the soul. Then you would think that Thire was a million miles
off."

"How do you explain that?"

"When everything is darkest, he may be nearest, Maskull."

"But this is troubling you?"

"My days are spent in torture."

"You still persist, though? This day darkness can't be the ultimate
state?"

"My questions will be answered."

A silence ensued.

"What do you propose to show me?" asked Maskull.

"The land is about to grow wilder. I am taking you to the Three Figures,
which were carved and erected by an earlier race of men. There, we will
pray."

"And what then?"

"If you are truehearted, you will see things you will not easily
forget."

They had been walking slightly uphill in a sort of trough between two
parallel, gently sloping downs. The trough now deepened, while the hills
on either side grew steeper. They were in an ascending valley and, as
it curved this way and that, the landscape was shut off from view.
They came to a little spring, bubbling up from the ground. It formed
a trickling brook, which was unlike all other brooks in that it was
flowing up the valley instead of down. Before long it was joined by
other miniature rivulets, so that in the end it became a fair-sized
stream. Maskull kept looking at it, and puckering his forehead.

"Nature has other laws here, it seems?"

"Nothing can exist here that is not a compound of the three worlds."

"Yet the water is flowing somewhere."

"I can't explain it, but there are three wills in it."

"Is there no such thing as pure Thire-matter?"

"Thire cannot exist without Amfuse, and Amfuse cannot exist without
Faceny."

Maskull thought this over for some minutes. "That must be so," he said
at last. "Without life there can be no love, and without love there can
be no religious feeling."

In the half light of the land, the tops of the hills containing the
valley presently attained such a height that they could not be seen. The
sides were steep and craggy, while the bed of the valley grew narrower
at every step. Not a living organism was visible. All was unnatural and
sepulchral.

Maskull said, "I feel as if I were dead, and walking in another world."

"I still do not know what you are doing here," answered Corpang.

"Why should I go on making a mystery of it? I came to find Surtur."

"That name I've heard--but under what circumstances?"

"You forget?"

Corpang walked along, his eyes fixed on the ground, obviously troubled.
"Who is Surtur?"

Maskull shook his head, and said nothing.

The valley shortly afterward narrowed, so that the two men, touching
fingertips in the middle, could have placed their free hands on the rock
walls on either side. It threatened to terminate in a cul-de-sac, but
just when the road seemed least promising, and they were shut in by
cliffs on all sides, a hitherto unperceived bend brought them suddenly
into the open. They emerged through a mere crack in the line of
precipices.

A sort of huge natural corridor was running along at right angles to the
way they had come; both ends faded into obscurity after a few hundred
yards. Right down the centre of this corridor ran a chasm with
perpendicular sides; its width varied from thirty to a hundred feet,
but its bottom could not be seen. On both sides of the chasm, facing one
another, were platforms of rock, twenty feet or so in width; they too
proceeded in both directions out of sight. Maskull and Corpang emerged
onto one of these platforms. The shelf opposite was a few feet higher
than that on which they stood. The platforms were backed by a double
line of lofty and unclimbable cliffs, whose tops were invisible.

The stream, which had accompanied them through the gap, went straight
forward, but, instead of descending the wall of the chasm as a
waterfall, it crossed from side to side like a liquid bridge. It then
disappeared through a cleft in the cliffs on the opposite side.

To Maskull's mind, however, even more wonderful than this unnatural
phenomenon was the absence of shadows, which was more noticeable here
than on the open plain. It made the place look like a hall of phantoms.

Corpang, without delay, led the way along the shelf to the left. When
they had walked about a mile, the gulf widened to two hundred feet.
Three large rocks loomed up on the ledge opposite; they resembled three
upright giants, standing motionless side by side on the extreme edge of
the chasm. Corpang and Maskull drew nearer, and then Maskull saw that
they were statues. Each was about thirty feet high, and the workmanship
was of the rudest. They represented naked men, but the limbs and
trunks had been barely chipped into shape--the faces alone had had care
bestowed on them, and even these faces were merely generalised. It was
obviously the work of primitive artists. The statues stood erect with
knees closed and arms hanging straight down their sides. All three were
exactly alike.

As soon as they were directly opposite, Corpang halted.

"Is this a representation of your three Beings?" asked Maskull, awed by
the spectacle in spite of his constitutional audacity.

"Ask no questions, but kneel," replied Corpang. He dropped onto his own
knees, but Maskull remained standing.

Corpang covered his eyes with one hand, and prayed silently. After a
few minutes the light sensibly faded. Then Maskull knelt as well, but he
continued looking.

It grew darker and darker, until all was like the blackest night. Sight
and sound no longer existed; he was alone with his own spirit.

Then one of the three Colossi came slowly into sight again. But it had
ceased to be a statue--it was a living person. Out of the blackness of
space a gigantic head and chest emerged, illuminated by a mystic, rosy
glow, like a mountain peak bathed by the rising sun. As the light grew
stronger Maskull saw that the flesh was translucent and that the glow
came from within. The limbs of the apparition were wreathed in mist.

Before long the features of the face stood out distinctly. It was that
of a beardless youth of twenty years. It possessed the beauty of a girl
and the daring force of a man; it bore a mocking, cryptic smile. Maskull
felt the fresh, mysterious thrill of mingled pain and rapture of one
who awakes from a deep sleep in midwinter and sees the gleaming, dark,
delicate colours of the half-dawn. The vision smiled, kept still, and
looked beyond him. He began to shudder, with delight--and many emotions.
As he gazed, his poetic sensibility acquired such a nervous and
indefinable character that he could endure it no more; he burst into
tears.

When he looked up again the image had nearly disappeared, and in a few
moments more he was plunged back into total darkness.

Shortly afterward a second statue reappeared. It too was transfigured
into a living form, but Maskull was unable to see the details of its
face and body, because of the brightness of the light that radiated from
them. This light, which started as pale gold, ended as flaming golden
fire. It illumined the whole underground landscape. The rock ledges,
the cliffs, himself and Corpang on their knees, the two unlighted
statues--all appeared as if in sunlight, and the shadows were black and
strongly defined. The light carried heat with it, but a singular heat.
Maskull was unaware of any rise in temperature, but he felt his heart
melting to womanish softness. His male arrogance and egotism faded
imperceptibly away; his personality seemed to disappear. What was left
behind was not freedom of spirit or lightheartedness, but a passionate
and nearly savage mental state of pity and distress. He felt a
tormenting desire to serve. All this came from the heat of the statue,
and was without an object. He glanced anxiously around him, and fastened
his eyes on Corpang. He put a hand on his shoulder and aroused him from
his praying.

"You must know what I am feeling, Corpang."

Corpang smiled sweetly, but said nothing.

"I care nothing for my own affairs any more. How can I help you?"

"So much the better for you, Maskull, if you respond so quickly to the
invisible worlds."

As soon as he had spoken, the figure began to vanish, and the light to
die away from the landscape. Maskull's emotion slowly subsided, but
it was not until he was once more in complete darkness that he became
master of himself again. Then he felt ashamed of his boyish exhibition
of enthusiasm, and thought ruefully that there must be something wanting
in his character. He got up onto his feet.

The very moment that he arose, a man's voice sounded, not a yard from
his ear. It was hardly raised above a whisper, but he could distinguish
that it was not Corpang's. As he listened he was unable to prevent
himself from physically trembling.

"Maskull, you are to die," said the unseen speaker.

"Who is speaking?"

"You have only a few hours of life left. Don't trifle the time away."

Maskull could bring nothing out.

"You have despised life," went on the low-toned voice. "Do you really
imagine that this mighty world has no meaning, and that life is a joke?"

"What must I do?"

"Repent your murders, commit no fresh ones, pay honour to..."

The voice died away. Maskull waited in silence for it to speak again.
All remained still, however, and the speaker appeared to have taken
his departure. Supernatural horror seized him; he fell into a sort of
catalepsy.

At that moment he saw one of the statues fading away, from a pale, white
glow to darkness. He had not previously seen it shining.

In a few more minutes the normal light of the land returned. Corpang got
up, and shook him out of his trance.

Maskull looked around, but saw no third person. "Whose statue was the
last?" he demanded.

"Did you hear me speaking?"

"I heard your voice, but no one else's."

"I've just had my death foretold, so I suppose I have not long to live.
Leehallfae prophesied the same thing."

Corpang shook his head. "What value do you set on life?" he asked.

"Very little. But it's a fearful thing all the same."

"Your death is?"

"No, but this warning."

They stopped talking. A profound silence reigned. Neither of the two men
seemed to know what to do next, or where to go. Then both of them heard
the sound of drumming. It was slow, emphatic, and impressive, a long way
off and not loud, but against the background of quietness, very marked.
It appeared to come from some point out of sight, to the left of where
they were standing, but on the same rock shelf. Maskull's heart beat
quickly.

"What can that sound be?" asked Corpang, peering into the obscurity.

