after (he suspected the thought was not original).  Certainly his
self-endowed character Stephen had been trapped, feeling rare moments
of freedom and longing for the sky, but always coming back to himself
in a dirty world.  More trapped in the human shell than in Dublin.  Did
he ever truly fly?  Certainly the rambling phrases were incoherent.....

And so at long length his thoughts become more natural and sleep came
back to him, and shutting his eyesmind and heart, he passed through a
thick black night without dream.


*


The next morning after some time alone and a second examination, he
returned to his rooms.  Someone had extinguished the candle for him but
it was still there, the igniter beside it.  He resisted the urge to
contact Mandlik and ask him how many hours, or had they yet been
discovered.  There was no reason, he knew, to go looking for a fight.
It would come to him.  He had had time to work things through, and
believed he now possessed a clearer understanding.

The first few moments in that place were difficult, for all his renewed
spirit of resolve.  To be left here in this state, weakened and
sick.....  He still feared for the future, which he knew stalked him
inexorably.  At stake, no more and no less than his spiritual life and
death.  It was no use trying to prepare himself against all
contingencies.  If his wife was not there, or was dead or
unaccounted-for, a part of himself would die forever, and the tiny
flame of faith to which he clung would be lost beyond recall.  Even now
it flickered feebly in that dark place, shivered by the cold winds of
doubt.

He mastered his trepid nature as best he could, and stayed there.  He
lay down and read for many hours, somewhat heartened by his mind's
endurance, and by the sudden turn from hopelessness he perceived in
Joyce's work.  'Exiles.'  It filled all his mind with true thought and
carried him for a time from himself, and he loved in those moments both
the medium and the man, so beyond his understanding.

Moved as it were to make some account of himself he rose, wrapped the
robe about him, went to the desk-table and, without looking at the
verses he had scrawled the day before, wrote a simple, passionate poem
to his wife.

But the feelings went too deep and he could not yet read back what he
had written.

He called and a nurse brought him a soft and frugal meal, and before
she left he looked into her face and said sincerely, "Thank you," for
she had reminded him that other lives existed outside his own.

After he ate for a time he was unwell, and lay down in the bed and
waited for the aching nausea to pass.  Weariness and exhaustion came
over him when the other left, and having little choice, yet also
wanting to trust, he surrendered.  And after a further time he slept.

He did not wake until late in the evening.  Without looking or even
thinking about the clock he went to his writing desk and flipped over
the written pages of the pad.  A thought had come to him, whether in
dream or rising from it he could not recall, nor did it matter.  He had
his answer.  He wrote on a blank sheet of paper with a quiet warm peace
inside him:

If you believe in too much, or nothing at all, either way you will be
hurt.

With this he became calm and thoughtful.  What was the use of despair,
or endless worry?  Running around wildly, trying by one's own efforts
to turn back an imagined tide of evil and malicious fate, or believing,
at the most, that life was nothing but a primal struggle without order
or lasting hope.  If there truly was nothing beyond man and the grave,
then what was the use of trying at all? when the bravest and most
determined lives must eventually end in ruin and death?  In this sense
even the existentialists were wiser than the proponents of human will
and self-made destiny.

And on the other side of the coin, were those who put their faith and
trust in Gods and religions they did not understand, accepting without
trial or common sense the narrow dogmas of fearful (or even wise) old
men.  MEN.  What made their observations and conclusions more
enlightened than his own, or those of anyone who sought with both heart
and mind, using Nature and experience as a guide?

It was all so obvious and clear; how could anyone not see it?  Yet now
he, Olaf Augustine Brunner, must take this lesson and apply it to that
Universe, often cold and unreasoning, OUT THERE.  He did not know if he
was equal to the task.  He only knew that he must try.

His mind and confidence thus piqued, he turned back to the poems
written earlier, hoping, perhaps, to find some further sign of his own
understanding---something to set against the huge, dark uncertainty
beyond his window.  There were the two from the previous night, as well
as the poem to his wife.




NIGHT

                Sipping sadness, from the young girl
                So afraid to go unnoticed

                Young man, stalking forests in his dreams
                Heightens all his senses
                        to you.

                Madman, racing knives across a windstorm
                Searching
                        For the blood that he will spill.

..................

EVIL

                Rising slowly
                        hideous figure
                                cast aside
                Black with bitter
                        twisted passions
                                seeking only

                The murder of a child.

............................

And the last, to his wife:


PLIGHTED TROTH

                Ara
                What is my life without you?
                To be your knight
                        to fight for you
                Is all that holds my will together
                Unraveled, and dispossessed
                        by Distance, time and empty suffering

                Now you are taken from me,
                One comfort only can I find:
                That I loved you then, not less than now
                And thanked dear Heaven
                        you were mine.

............................


A year, a month, a day ago he might have cried; but this was not the
time.  Emotion and sentiment would not bring her back to him, nor would
dashing his heart upon the rocks.  The mind was the stronger instrument
now, a bit cold, but maybe that was best.  He gave it free rein to
pursue its ends.

The poems showed him that indeed, both elements, love and hatred,
yielding and aggression, lived inside him.  And both were needed.
Hadn't he felt them?  Hadn't their constant battle for use and mastery
tormented him?  Yes!  That was what had made him so miserable.  Fool!
It was simply (or merely) a question of knowing which to listen to at a
given moment---exerting supreme effort when called for, and having
enough faith in God, or life, to accept the consequences of what was
beyond human will to affect.  Faith and disillusion, professed as
different creeds, were one and the same, either half without the other
like a man trying to stand on one leg.

With that he became calm again, knowing he must save his strength.
Later that night he lit the candle and set it beside the picture of his
wife, and prayed a short, fervent prayer to Whom he did not know.  His
own image was no longer important.  He vowed to find his wife, however
long it took, and to do what he could in the war, though he detested
violence and a part of his prayer was that it would soon end.

The next day, the second of his confinement, passed without serious
(personal) incident.  That night he took one of the lozenges, knowing
he would be unable to sleep without it.  For the Morannon system,
code-named Dracus by the Belgians, would be reached the following day,
and they no longer moved in secret.  The Alliance, apparently piercing
their detection shields, had detached a fighter-destroyer group to
intercept them.  As near as anyone could tell, battle would be joined
somewhere within the system itself.

In the morning he rose, and reported to the bridge, and with a hard
bitter determination that grew out of and suppressed his anxiety,
prepared himself for the fight.  Because for all his introspection and
self-doubt, there was another side of him, as yet only half realized.

Not for nothing had Dubcek made him his pupil; and not for nothing was
he second officer to Mandlik.  His military and psychological testing
had revealed that whatever other characteristics he might possess, when
cornered and left no option, he responded with a resourcefulness and
tenacity that were almost off the scale.  This fact was so striking in
one of his (outwardly) skittish nature, that more than one of the
military leaders who reviewed it (including Dubcek) went back to the
examining psychologist to ask for an explanation.

The psychologist had told them simply, "It's no mistake.  In ordinary
circumstances he is much like Hamlet---wavering, indecisive,
introspective to a fault.  But when pushed to the final need, somehow
he raises himself to another level, and reacts with a courage and
cunning that are. . .remarkable."

And that was well, because the fight came, hard and long, and in it the
upper bridge was wracked by internal explosion, killing Mandlik and
half his officers.  Without the Soviet cruiser, which the Belgian-Swiss
had not detected, the battle would almost certainly have gone against
them.
        Brunner's first order, upon assuming command, was to stay near,
and protect the planet's prison complex, which in their late
desperation he feared the Alliance commanders might try to destroy.
        And he was right.



*                        *                        *



The browning, grapple wrist, raised stiffly before him like a manikin,
or a marionette, preceded the old man from the chamber.  The entire
body moved with it in stiff, convulsive strides, out onto the porch of
the Parthenon, between the pillars and onto the marble steps.

One not of that place might have been shocked by his appearance,
distorted as it was by bony growths, the jaw torn to one side by a
madman's rock.  Some half-buried sense had drawn him---sight it might
be called---to stand there and watch the night sky.

Distant lightnings played before his eyes, soft bursts of light and
almost, a pool fancied, distant sounds.  Perhaps Mars had come at last,
to liberate and destroy them.  Through the dull horror of his
marrowmind, twisted like the frame, he recalled verses from a book long
ago, that set his knife-tattered soul on edge.


From Olympus mighty thunderbolts rain down
As futile, Titans reach to steal the crown
Of He whose strength and glory forged the lands
For greater power, rests within His hands.



        His broken mouth produced a strange, pitiful utterance, as an
unbearable anguish of hope came over him.


*                        *                        *



As the last Alliance vessels retreated, or were caught and subdued by
the tractor beams of the Leningrad, Brunner's thoughts returned quickly
to the planet below.  Though his battle fury was still running
hot---his own vessel was badly damaged, and there were wounded to look
after---his mind would think of nothing else.  He started to assign
damage and medical crews, but found the work was already being done.
And their primary mission was, in fact, the release and rescue of the
prisoners.

But with the main bridge knocked out and the lower malfunctioning, he
could gather no news of the inhabitants of the prison-domes on the
planet's surface.  "Getting very confused readings," his scanning
officer told him.

"Signs of life?"  A momentary panic.

"Yes, Lieutenant, but they cannot be right."

"Why?"

"Well, sir, Intelligence reports over two million inhabitants were
shipped here, and the internal structures are certainly large enough to
house that number.  But I register less than two hundred life-forms."

"WHAT?"

"It's got to be the equipment, sir:  they don't even register as human.
 The calcium content is much too high."  Even as he spoke the console
went dead with a smell of burned fiber and sparks.

"Communications Officer."  He could not remember her name.  "Have you
contacted Colonel Joyce?"

"Yes,  Lieutenant.  The viewscreens are out, but we still have audio."

"Very well.  Put me through."

She handed him a headset.

"Colonel Joyce.  Brunner.  Do you still intend to call for Soviet
reinforcements?"

"They are on the way."

"Will they be here soon enough to secure the area?"

"Yes."

"And will you provide transports for the prisoners?"

"That will not.....  One thing at a time, Olaf."

"What do you mean?  Those people have been separated from their
families for months.  What the hell are you waiting for?"

...  "Is your scanning equipment working?"

"No, the upper bridge was destroyed.  That's why I contacted you."

"And Mandlik?"

"Dead."

"You have assumed command?"

"Yes."

"Then I think you should organize a landing party and come to the
Leningrad.  Have you an operational shuttle?"  Brunner turned to one of
his officers, who nodded.

"Yes.  For God's sake, what is happening?"

"I will tell you when you come."

"Sergei.  My wife....."

"Not like this.  Gather your party and come."

Brunner ordered the landing party assembled, and met it at the shuttle
dock.  Among those he found there was the nurse, the only medical
persona that could be spared, whom he had been so aware of two days
before.  He tried not to look at her.  With a knotting throat and a
rising anxiety he could not contain, he guided the ship himself into
the open receiving dock of the Leningrad.

One other shuttle craft entered behind them, landing also on the dull
white metal floor, but no more.  The bay doors were closed slowly and
the dock began to repressurize.  But in his drunken state the very
sound of it was like her name hissed by witches.

As a double-line of Soviet personnel---in breathing suits and
armed---emerged from an opened passage and made their way to the two
large landing vessels, one of them a hospital ship, he opened the hatch
of his own vehicle and moved weakly down the steps.

Colonel Joyce approached him with another, as if for support.  Brunner
recognized him from an earlier visit---Chief Scientist Stoltzyn.  He
had no patience left.

"Why only two Coalition parties?  Didn't you contact the other ships?"

"Two will be enough. . .to represent your peoples."

"Represent?  What the HELL IS GOING ON?"  Some of the Soviet
technicians within the enclosure---there were perhaps two dozen,
wheeling in odd gear, among its contents special breathing masks for
the Czechs---looked over in surprise to hear a Soviet Colonel addressed
in this way.

But none were more taken back than Joyce himself.  He seemed unable to
look Brunner in the eye or speak the words he had to speak, a thing
which he had never experienced.  Finally it was Stoltzyn who spoke.

"There's been some kind of plague."

Brunner felt his heart heave, then fall in upon itself like collapsing
leprous flesh.  His voice a fainting whisper.

"What?  Sergei?"

Joyce finally master himself and spoke, though slowly.  "Of the two
million inhabitants, perhaps two hundred still live.  Five of the six
domes are emptied of life.  You will be going to the sixth.  But I. .
.want you to be prepared."

"Tell me."

Joyce strode back and forth a few times, irritated, agitated, then
faced Brunner almost angrily.

"Stoltzyn will tell you the rest.  I am sorry, Olaf.  I can say no
more."  He turned and left the enclosure.

The chief scientist was more composed.  "There will be many corpses.
Also, those who still live may be gruesome to look upon, and almost
certainly will not be rational.  Something in the atmosphere has caused
the rapid growth and multiplication of bone cells and calcium
deposits....."

Stoltzyn would have continued but the young German lieutenant had lost
consciousness and slithered to the floor.

When Brunner came to he found the nurse, the one he did not wish to
think about, looking into his face full of concern.  All this took only
a short time, so that as she and another helped him to his feet, the
Soviet and Czech chief scientists (the latter with considerably less
detachment) had only begun to discuss the dangers and consequences of
such a landing.
