cracked. The lava from the interior, oozing out, spread itself on both
sides of the cracks. This certainly explains pretty satisfactorily why
those flat glistening streaks are of much greater width than the
fissures through which the lava had at first made its way to the
surface."

"Well done for an Englishman!" cried Ardan in great spirits.

"He's no Englishman," said M'Nicholl, glad to have an opportunity of
coming off with some credit. "He is the famous Scotch engineer who
invented the steam hammer, the steam ram, and discovered the 'willow
leaves' in the Sun's disc."

"Better and better," said Ardan--"but, powers of Vulcan! What makes it
so hot? I'm actually roasting!"

This observation was hardly necessary to make his companions conscious
that by this time they felt extremely uncomfortable. The heat had become
quite oppressive. Between the natural caloric of the Sun and the
reflected caloric of the Moon, the Projectile was fast turning into a
regular bake oven. This transition from intense cold to intense heat was
already about quite as much as they could bear.

"What shall we do, Barbican?" asked Ardan, seeing that for some time no
one else appeared inclined to say a word.

"Nothing, at least yet awhile, friend Ardan," replied Barbican, "I have
been watching the thermometer carefully for the last few minutes, and,
though we are at present at 38 deg. centigrade, or 100 deg. Fahrenheit, I have
noticed that the mercury is slowly falling. You can also easily remark
for yourself that the floor of the Projectile is turning away more and
more from the lunar surface. From this I conclude quite confidently, and
I see that the Captain agrees with me, that all danger of death from
intense heat, though decidedly alarming ten minutes ago, is over for the
present and, for some time at least, it may be dismissed from further
consideration."

"I'm not very sorry for it," said Ardan cheerfully; "neither to be
baked like a pie in an oven nor roasted like a fat goose before a fire
is the kind of death I should like to die of."

"Yet from such a death you would suffer no more than your friends the
Selenites are exposed to every day of their lives," said the Captain,
evidently determined on getting up an argument.

"I understand the full bearing of your allusion, my dear Captain,"
replied Ardan quickly, but not at all in a tone showing that he was
disposed to second M'Nicholl's expectations.

He was, in fact, fast losing all his old habits of positivism. Latterly
he had seen much, but he had reflected more. The deeper he had
reflected, the more inclined he had become to accept the conclusion that
the less he knew. Hence he had decided that if M'Nicholl wanted an
argument it should not be with him. All speculative disputes he should
henceforth avoid; he would listen with pleasure to all that could be
urged on each side; he might even skirmish a little here and there as
the spirit moved him; but a regular pitched battle on a subject purely
speculative he was fully determined never again to enter into.

"Yes, dear Captain," he continued, "that pointed arrow of yours has by
no means missed its mark, but I can't deny that my faith is beginning to
be what you call a little 'shaky' in the existence of my friends the
Selenites. However, I should like to have your square opinion on the
matter. Barbican's also. We have witnessed many strange lunar phenomena
lately, closer and clearer than mortal eye ever rested on them before.
Has what we have seen confirmed any theory of yours or confounded any
hypothesis? Have you seen enough to induce you to adopt decided
conclusions? I will put the question formally. Do you, or do you not,
think that the Moon resembles the Earth in being the abode of animals
and intelligent beings? Come, answer, _messieurs_. Yes, or no?"

"I think we can answer your question categorically," replied Barbican,
"if you modify its form a little."

"Put the question any way you please," said Ardan; "only you answer it!
I'm not particular about the form."

"Good," said Barbican; "the question, being a double one, demands a
double answer. First: _Is the Moon inhabitable?_ Second: _Has the Moon
ever been inhabited?_"

"That's the way to go about it," said the Captain. "Now then, Ardan,
what do _you_ say to the first question? Yes, or no?"

"I really can't say anything," replied Ardan. "In the presence of such
distinguished scientists, I'm only a listener, a 'mere looker on in
Vienna' as the Divine Williams has it. However, for the sake of
argument, suppose I reply in the affirmative, and say that _the Moon is
inhabitable_."

"If you do, I shall most unhesitatingly contradict you," said Barbican,
feeling just then in splendid humor for carrying on an argument, not, of
course, for the sake of contradicting or conquering or crushing or
showing off or for any other vulgar weakness of lower minds, but for the
noble and indeed the only motive that should impel a philosopher--that
of _enlightening_ and _convincing_, "In taking the negative side,
however, or saying that the Moon is not inhabitable, I shall not be
satisfied with merely negative arguments. Many words, however, are not
required. Look at her present condition: her atmosphere dwindled away to
the lowest ebb; her 'seas' dried up or very nearly so; her waters
reduced to next to nothing; her vegetation, if existing at all, existing
only on the scantiest scale; her transitions from intense heat to
intense cold, as we ourselves can testify, sudden in the extreme; her
nights and her days each nearly 360 hours long. With all this positively
against her and nothing at all that we know of positively for her, I
have very little hesitation in saying that the Moon appears to me to be
absolutely uninhabitable. She seems to me not only unpropitious to the
development of the animal kingdom but actually incapable of sustaining
life at all--that is, in the sense that we usually attach to such a
term."

"That saving clause is well introduced, friend Barbican," said
M'Nicholl, who, seeing no chance of demolishing Ardan, had not yet made
up his mind as to having another little bout with the President. "For
surely you would not venture to assert that the Moon is uninhabitable by
a race of beings having an organization different from ours?"

"That question too, Captain," replied Barbican, "though a much more
difficult one, I shall try to answer. First, however, let us see,
Captain, if we agree on some fundamental points. How do we detect the
existence of life? Is it not by _movement_? Is not _motion_ its result,
no matter what may be its organization?"

"Well," said the Captain in a drawling way, "I guess we may grant that."

"Then, dear friends," resumed Barbican, "I must remind you that, though
we have had the privilege of observing the lunar continents at a
distance of not more than one-third of a mile, we have never yet caught
sight of the first thing moving on her surface. The presence of
humanity, even of the lowest type, would have revealed itself in some
form or other, by boundaries, by buildings, even by ruins. Now what
_have_ we seen? Everywhere and always, the geological works of _nature_;
nowhere and never, the orderly labors of _man_. Therefore, if any
representatives of animal life exist in the Moon, they must have taken
refuge in those bottomless abysses where our eyes were unable to track
them. And even this I can't admit. They could not always remain in these
cavities. If there is any atmosphere at all in the Moon, it must be
found in her immense low-lying plains. Over those plains her inhabitants
must have often passed, and on those plains they must in some way or
other have left some mark, some trace, some vestige of their existence,
were it even only a road. But you both know well that nowhere are any
such traces visible: therefore, they don't exist; therefore, no lunar
inhabitants exist--except, of course, such a race of beings, if we can
imagine any such, as could exist without revealing their existence by
_movement_."

"That is to say," broke in Ardan, to give what he conceived a sharper
point to Barbican's cogent arguments, "such a race of beings as could
exist without existing!"

"Precisely," said Barbican: "Life without movement, and no life at all,
are equivalent expressions."

"Captain," said Ardan, with all the gravity he could assume, "have you
anything more to say before the Moderator of our little Debating Society
gives his opinion on the arguments regarding the question before the
house?"

"No more at present," said the Captain, biding his time.

"Then," resumed Ardan, rising with much dignity, "the Committee on Lunar
Explorations, appointed by the Honorable Baltimore Gun Club, solemnly
assembled in the Projectile belonging to the aforesaid learned and
respectable Society, having carefully weighed all the arguments advanced
on each side of the question, and having also carefully considered all
the new facts bearing on the case that have lately come under the
personal notice of said Committee, unanimously decides negatively on the
question now before the chair for investigation--namely, 'Is the Moon
inhabitable?' Barbican, as chairman of the Committee, I empower you to
duly record our solemn decision--_No, the Moon is not inhabitable_."

Barbican, opening his note-book, made the proper entry among the minutes
of the meeting of December 6th.

"Now then, gentlemen," continued Ardan, "if you are ready for the second
question, the necessary complement of the first, we may as well approach
it at once. I propound it for discussion in the following form: _Has the
Moon ever been inhabited?_ Captain, the Committee would be delighted to
hear your remarks on the subject."

"Gentlemen," began the Captain in reply, "I had formed my opinion
regarding the ancient inhabitability of our Satellite long before I ever
dreamed of testing my theory by anything like our present journey. I
will now add that all our observations, so far made, have only served to
confirm me in my opinion. I now venture to assert, not only with every
kind of probability in my favor but also on what I consider most
excellent arguments, that the Moon was once inhabited by a race of
beings possessing an organization similar to our own, that she once
produced animals anatomically resembling our terrestrial animals, and
that all these living organizations, human and animal, have had their
day, that that day vanished ages and ages ago, and that, consequently,
_Life_, extinguished forever, can never again reveal its existence there
under any form."

"Is the Chair," asked Ardan, "to infer from the honorable gentleman's
observations that he considers the Moon to be a world much older than
the Earth?"

"Not exactly that," replied the Captain without hesitation; "I rather
mean to say that the Moon is a world that grew old more rapidly than the
Earth; that it came to maturity earlier; that it ripened quicker, and
was stricken with old age sooner. Owing to the difference of the volumes
of the two worlds, the organizing forces of matter must have been
comparatively much more violent in the interior of the Moon than in the
interior of the Earth. The present condition of its surface, as we see
it lying there beneath us at this moment, places this assertion beyond
all possibility of doubt. Wrinkled, pitted, knotted, furrowed, scarred,
nothing that we can show on Earth resembles it. Moon and Earth were
called into existence by the Creator probably at the same period of
time. In the first stages of their existence, they do not seem to have
been anything better than masses of gas. Acted upon by various forces
and various influences, all of course directed by an omnipotent
intelligence, these gases by degrees became liquid, and the liquids grew
condensed into solids until solidity could retain its shape. But the two
heavenly bodies, though starting at the same time, developed at a very
different ratio. Most undoubtedly, our globe was still gaseous or at
most only liquid, at the period when the Moon, already hardened by
cooling, began to become inhabitable."

"_Most undoubtedly_ is good!" observed Ardan admiringly.

"At this period," continued the learned Captain, "an atmosphere
surrounded her. The waters, shut in by this gaseous envelope, could no
longer evaporate. Under the combined influences of air, water, light,
and solar heat as well as internal heat, vegetation began to overspread
the continents by this time ready to receive it, and most undoubtedly--I
mean--a--incontestably--it was at this epoch that _life_ manifested
itself on the lunar surface. I say _incontestably_ advisedly, for Nature
never exhausts herself in producing useless things, and therefore a
world, so wonderfully inhabitable, _must_ of necessity have had
inhabitants."

"I like _of necessity_ too," said Ardan, who could never keep still; "I
always did, when I felt my arguments to be what you call a little
shaky."

"But, my dear Captain," here observed Barbican, "have you taken into
consideration some of the peculiarities of our Satellite which are
decidedly opposed to the development of vegetable and animal existence?
Those nights and days, for instance, 354 hours long?"

"I have considered them all," answered the brave Captain. "Days and
nights of such an enormous length would at the present time, I grant,
give rise to variations in temperature altogether intolerable to any
ordinary organization. But things were quite different in the era
alluded to. At that time, the atmosphere enveloped the Moon in a gaseous
mantle, and the vapors took the shape of clouds. By the screen thus
formed by the hand of nature, the heat of the solar rays was tempered
and the nocturnal radiation retarded. Light too, as well as heat, could
be modified, tempered, and _genialized_ if I may use the expression, by
the air. This produced a healthy counterpoise of forces, which, now that
the atmosphere has completely disappeared, of course exists no longer.
Besides--friend Ardan, you will excuse me for telling you something new,
something that will surprise you--"

--"Surprise me, my dear boy, fire away surprising me!" cried Ardan. "I
like dearly to be surprised. All I regret is that you scientists have
surprised me so much already that I shall never have a good, hearty,
genuine surprise again!"

--"I am most firmly convinced," continued the Captain, hardly waiting
for Ardan to finish, "that, at the period of the Moon's occupancy by
living creatures, her days and nights were by no means 354 hours long."

"Well! if anything could surprise me," said Ardan quickly, "such an
assertion as that most certainly would. On what does the honorable
gentleman base his _most firm conviction_?"

"We know," replied the Captain, "that the reason of the Moon's present
long day and night is the exact equality of the periods of her rotation
on her axis and of her revolution around the Earth. When she has turned
once around the Earth, she has turned once around herself. Consequently,
her back is turned to the Sun during one-half of the month; and her face
during the other half. Now, I don't believe that this state of things
existed at the period referred to."

"The gentleman does not believe!" exclaimed Ardan. "The Chair must be
excused for reminding the honorable gentleman that it can not accept his
incredulity as a sound and valid argument. These two movements have
certainly equal periods now; why not always?"

"For the simple reason that this equality of periods is due altogether
to the influence of terrestrial attraction," replied the ready Captain.
"This attraction at present, I grant, is so great that it actually
disables the Moon from revolving on herself; consequently she must
always keep the same face turned towards the Earth. But who can assert
that this attraction was powerful enough to exert the same influence at
the epoch when the Earth herself was only a fluid substance? In fact,
who can even assert that the Moon has always been the Earth's
satellite?"

"Ah, who indeed?" exclaimed Ardan. "And who can assert that the Moon did
not exist long before the Earth was called into being at all? In fact,
who can assert that the Earth itself is not a great piece broken off the
Moon? Nothing like asking absurd questions! I've often found them
passing for the best kind of arguments!"

"Friend Ardan," interposed Barbican, who noticed that the Captain was a
little too disconcerted to give a ready reply; "Friend Ardan, I must say
you are not quite wrong in showing how certain methods of reasoning,
legitimate enough in themselves, may be easily abused by being carried
too far. I think, however, that the Captain might maintain his position
without having recourse to speculations altogether too gigantic for
ordinary intellect. By simply admitting the insufficiency of the
primordeal attraction to preserve a perfect balance between the
movements of the lunar rotation and revolution, we can easily see how
the nights and days could once succeed each other on the Moon exactly as
they do at present on the Earth."

"Nothing can be clearer!" resumed the brave Captain, once more rushing
to the charge. "Besides, even without this alternation of days and
nights, life on the lunar surface was quite possible."

"Of course it was possible," said Ardan; "everything is possible except
what contradicts itself. It is possible too that every possibility is a
fact; therefore, it _is_ a fact. However," he added, not wishing to
press the Captain's weak points too closely, "let all these logical
niceties pass for the present. Now that you have established the
existence of your humanity in the Moon, the Chair would respectfully ask
how it has all so completely disappeared?"

"It disappeared completely thousands, perhaps millions, of years ago,"
replied the unabashed Captain. "It perished from the physical
impossibility of living any longer in a world where the atmosphere had
become by degrees too rare to be able to perform its functions as the
great resuscitating medium of dependent existences. What took place on
the Moon is only what is to take place some day or other on the Earth,
when it is sufficiently cooled off."

"Cooled off?"

"Yes," replied the Captain as confidently and with as little hesitation
as if he was explaining some of the details of his great machine-shop in
Philadelphia; "You see, according as the internal fire near the surface
was extinguished or was withdrawn towards the centre, the lunar shell
naturally cooled off. The logical consequences, of course, then
gradually took place: extinction of organized beings; and then
extinction of vegetation. The atmosphere, in the meantime, became
thinner and thinner--partly drawn off with the water evaporated by the
terrestrial attraction, and partly sinking with the solid water into the
crust-cracks caused by cooling. With the disappearance of air capable of
respiration, and of water capable of motion, the Moon, of course, became
uninhabitable. From that day it became the abode of death, as completely
as it is at the present moment."

"That is the fate in store for our Earth?"

"In all probability."

"And when is it to befall us?"

"Just as soon as the crust becomes cold enough to be uninhabitable."

"Perhaps your philosophership has taken the trouble to calculate how
many years it will take our unfortunate _Terra Mater_ to cool off?"

"Well; I have."

"And you can rely on your figures?"

"Implicitly."

"Why not tell it at once then to a fellow that's dying of impatience to
know all about it? Captain, the Chair considers you one of the most
tantalizing creatures in existence!"

"If you only listen, you will hear," replied M'Nicholl quietly. "By
careful observations, extended through a series of many years, men have
been able to discover the average loss of temperature endured by the
Earth in a century. Taking this as the ground work of their
calculations, they have ascertained that our Earth shall become an
uninhabitable planet in about--"

"Don't cut her life too short! Be merciful!" cried Ardan in a pleading
tone half in earnest. "Come, a good long day, your Honor! A good long
day!"

"The planet that we call the Earth," continued the Captain, as grave as
a judge, "will become uninhabitable to human beings, after a lapse of
400 thousand years from the present time."

"Hurrah!" cried Ardan, much relieved. "_Vive la Science!_ Henceforward,
what miscreant will persist in saying that the Savants are good for
nothing? Proudly pointing to this calculation, can't they exclaim to all
defamers: 'Silence, croakers! Our services are invaluable! Haven't we
insured the Earth for 400 thousand years?' Again I say _vive la
Science!_"

"Ardan," began the Captain with some asperity, "the foundations on
which Science has raised--"

"I'm half converted already," interrupted Ardan in a cheery tone; "I do
really believe that Science is not altogether unmitigated homebogue!
_Vive_--"

--"But what has all this to do with the question under discussion?"
