  boss.             |  4 in | 11 in |  9 in |  5 in |  9 in | 10 in
Number of blades    |   4   |   4   |   3   |   3   |   3   |   3
Blade area of one   |       |       |       |       |       |
 screw.             |   72  |   87  |   60  |   47  |   24  |   24
Shape of blade.     |Fig. 2.|Fig. 3.|Fig. 2.|Fig. 2.|Fig. 4.|Fig. 4
 Pitch              |       |       |       |       |       |
----------          |  1.25 |  1.22 |  1.3  |  1.34 |  1.2  |  1.34
Diameter            |       |       |       |       |       |
  Disk              |       |       |       |       |       |
--------            |  2.62 |  2.92 |  2.75 |  2.82 |  3.6  |  3.96
Blade area          |       |       |       |       |       |
Immersion of        |  9 ft |  5 ft |       |  4 ft |  2 ft |  1 ft
  screw.            |       |  3 in | ....  |  4 in |  9 in | 10 in
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The slips of these screws vary from 10 to 171/2 per cent., which is certainly
not an extensive range, considering the widely different working
conditions. Slip, as an indication of the efficiency of the screw, is not
only an interesting subject, but it is often one of importance. In these
ships, however, there is nothing about the slips which would give rise to
any doubts as to the fitness of the screws for their work.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. & FIG. 6.]

The ancient fallacy that small slip meant a high screw efficiency was
supported by the great authority of the late Professor Rankine. Experience
proved that considerable slips and efficient screws were companions. The
late Mr. Froude offered an explanation of this general rule in a paper read
before this Institution in 1878, and gave a curve of efficiency with
varying true slip. In Mr. R E. Froude's paper last year there was a form of
this curve, with an arbitrary abscissa scale for the slip, devised to
illustrate in one diagram the wide conditions covered by his experiments.
In the screws now under consideration, the values of the pitch/diameter
vary only from 1.2 to 1.34, and for these the abscissa values for the same
slips do not differ much. Taking the mean value, and bringing the slips to
a common scale, Fig. 5 is obtained, which would approximately represent the
relation between the efficiency of any one of these screws and its true
slip, if this curve were applicable to full sized screws propelling actual
ships. The slips in Fig. 5 being real or true, are not the slips of
commerce, which are the apparent slips, such as those given in the table.
Let us endeavor to split up these real slips into the apparent slips and
another item, the speed of the wake. We then at once meet with the
difficulty that the wake in which the screw works has not a uniform motion.
Complex, however, as are the motions of the wake, the screw may be assumed
to work in a cylinder of water having such a uniform forward velocity as
will produce the same effect as the actual wake on the thrust of the screw.
It is then readily seen that the real slip is the sum of the apparent slip
and the speed of the hypothetical wake. To make this clear, let V be the
speed of the ship, Vs the speed of the screw, _i.e._, revolutions x pitch,
and V the speed of the wake; then--

Apparent slip = Vs - V.
    Real slip = Vs - speed of ship with respect to the wake.
            " = Vs - (V - V) = (Vs - V) + Vw.
            " = Apparent slip + speed of the wake.

If the apparent slip be zero, the real slip is the speed of the wake, and
if the apparent slip be negative, the real slip is less than the speed of
the wake. The real slip is greater than the apparent slip, and can never be
a negative quantity. From Mr. Froude's model experiments, it appears that
this speed of wake for the A class of ship amounts to about 10 per cent. of
the speed of the A screw. If this value is correct, then the real slip is
(10 + 17.6) per cent., or 27.6 per cent. This is shown in Fig. 6, where O
is the point of no slip, being 17.64 from the point of real slip. Slips to
the right of O are positive apparent slips, slips to the left are negative
apparent slips. The vessel F would certainly have a wake with a speed
considerably less than that of A's wake. From the model experiments, the
wake for F is about one-half that for the A class, or, roughly, 5 per cent.
of the speed of the screw. For the ship F, O is the point of no apparent
slip, and the real slip is (5 + 11.4) or 16.4 per cent. For E, the point of
real slip is approximately the same as for F. For B and D, the positions on
the curve would be about the same. The ship B has a higher speed of wake
than D, but the screw D has the greater apparent slip. The influence of the
number of blades on the scale for the slip has been neglected. If this
efficiency curve were applicable to full sized screws propelling actual
ships, and if the determination of the wakes were beyond question, then we
should have a proof that our screws were at or near the maximum efficiency.
But, as we know, from the total propulsive efficiencies, that the screws
have high and not widely different efficiencies on these ships, we may
argue the other way, and say that there is good reason to consider that at
least the upper part of the curve agrees with experience obtained from
actual ships. Now take Fig. 6 and consider the general laws there
represented. Take the speed of the wake as 10 per cent. of the speed of the
screw, which is probably an average of widely different conditions,
including many single as well as twin screw ships. Then this curve shows
that considerable negative slips mean inefficient screws; that screws may
have very different positive slips without any appreciable difference in
their efficiencies; and that very large positive slips and inefficient
screws may be companions. For instance, a screw with a large positive slip
in smooth water is frequently inefficient at sea against a head wind, which
increases the resistance, and necessitates an increase of slip. I venture
to say that these statements, taken in a general manner, are not at
variance with experience obtained from the performances of screw ships.
Before it is possible to satisfactorily decide if this curve applies in a
general manner to full sized screws propelling ships, we require the
results of trials of various ships where the screws are working about the
region of no slip. Model experiments teach that the scale for the slip
varies with the design of the screw, and that with a given screw the speed
of the wake (which decides the point of no apparent slip) varies with the
type of ship and with the position of the screw with respect to the hull.
Remembering these disturbances, it is not improbable that it may be
possible to account for or explain what at first sight may appear
departures from the curve. The diameters of the screws in the table are not
compared with the diameters given by the method explained by Mr. Froude in
his paper last year, for there are differences in the slips, the
proportions of blade area to disk, and, to some extent, in the shapes of
the blades, which are not taken into account in that method. Assuming,
however, as Mr. Froude does, a constant proportion of blade area to disk,
and a uniform pattern of blade, the determination of the diameter for a
given set of conditions may, as a rule, be a complete solution of the
problem of the design of a screw, but these assumptions do not cover all
the necessities of actual practice, which make it extremely desirable to
know something about the influence or efficiency of various proportions of
blade area to disk, and of the form or distribution of a given area.

During the discussion which followed, Mr. John said that, both as regarded
the mercantile marine and the Royal Navy, there were few data to work upon,
but few ships having been built with twin screws. Mr. Linnington's
proportions of pitch to diameter of 1.2 to 1.34 was not invariably adhered
to. He mentioned a couple of small twin screw vessels where the proportion
of pitch to diameter came nearly to 1.5, and he remembered a few years ago
the propellers in one of these vessels being changed and the pitch
increased, the result being a very considerable improvement. He believed
they might go with quick running twin screw engines to a larger proportion
of pitch to diameter than they could with a single screw. He might instance
the change in the Iris. She was first engined with the pitch equal to the
diameter, and she gained two knots or thereabout when the diameter was
reduced 2 ft. and the pitch increased 2 ft.

Admiral De Horsey said that he tried experiments with the single screw in
the Aurora. She had a feathering serew, and when the sails were used to
assist, they commonly altered the pitch of the screw according to the
strength of the wind. The screw could be altered while it was revolving,
and as the wind freshened they coarsened the pitch, and when they wanted to
stop the engines they coarsened the pitch so as to bring the screw right
fore and aft, so that they never altered the way of the ship in changing
from steam to sail alone. The reason why twin screws had been adopted in
the navy was that if one was damaged there was the other still available.
But it gave them a still further advantage, as it enabled them to have a
fore and aft bulkhead, which with a single screw was difficult. The
mercantile marine had not as yet looked favorably on twin screws. Their
finest and fastest ships were single screws, probably because, in very bad
weather, the single screw was better.

Mr. Spyer said that in designing propellers for ships of war, they were
obliged to attempt to obtain the highest possible speed, and that was not
necessarily coincident with a propeller of maximum efficiency. On the other
hand, for mercantile purposes, coal consumption was obviously of paramount
importance, and the speed of any particular vessel must be obtained with
the smallest possible amount of indicated horse power, and a propeller of
maximum efficiency. Regarding the position of the propellers in a small
pinnace, the propellers were shifted six or seven inches further out, and
with about ten per cent. less indicated horse power she obtained three
tenths of a knot more speed.

Mr. Barnaby asked Mr. Linnington whether, in designing twin screws for a
vessel of 8,000 i.h.p., he would make each screw, which would have to take
4,000 i.h.p., of the same diameter as a screw for a single ship of 4,000
i.h.p., of the same speed. Unfortunately in high speed vessels, from one
point of view, the faster they went for a given power the smaller the
diameter of the screw had to be, and the larger the pitch, so that in very
high speed twin screw vessels the ratio of pitch to diameter would be found
to come out very great indeed. In a twin screw torpedo boat, to be tried
shortly, they had a ratio as high as 1.64. In the case of the Inflexible it
was found, owing possibly to the position of the screw, that the whole of
the plates immediately over the screws were damaged. Mr. Beckett Hill had
been using, during the past three or four years, the twin screw steamers
the Ludgate Hill, Richmond Hill, and Tower Hill. These were all over 4,000
tons register, and indicated, when at work at full speed, 2,500 h.p. Before
he and his friends built these steamers, they built some very large tug
boats on the twin screw principle. At the present moment, four of the
fastest steamers building for the Atlantic service were to have twin
screws. The great obstacle to the extension of the twin screw in the
mercantile navy had been the fear that the projection of these screws would
make the vessels very difficult to handle, but he had found no such
difficulties. He had found it an advantage to put the point of the
propeller as near the deadwood as he could, without actually touching it,
and in the large steamers, as well as in the tugs, the distance was a few
inches. As to the point of safety, he thought it a great advantage to have
twin screws, and on two occasions twin screw vessels had met with accidents
which, but for the twin screws, would have necessitated their putting back
to New York for repairs. The Richmond Hill, on one occasion, met with an
accident to her machinery two days after leaving New York; but she was able
to come on with the second set of engines, and was only one day late in the
passage. No difficulty had been found in the docking and undocking of these
vessels, either in London or Liverpool, and while with single screw vessels
they had sometimes to employ one or two dock boats to dock and undock them,
they never had to do so with the twin screw vessels. These vessels were 400
ft. long, with 48 ft. breadth of beam--a very large size to handle in a
river like the Thames. He noticed in the paper a propeller with a diameter
of 15 ft. 6 in. to indicate 11,110 h.p., so that a great Atlantic steamer,
which should indicate 11,000 or 12,000 h.p., and have a beam of about
65ft., would have her screws very well protected.

Mr. White said that as soon as it was found that with twin screws they lost
nothing in efficiency, ship owners generally were contemplating their
adoption, an admirable example of which had been set in the vessels of the
Hill line. In adopting twin screws, the question whether they should
overlap was one that deserved very serious consideration, and it was
interesting to know, from experience gained by the vessels of the Hill
line, that there was no difficulty in the way of the projection of the
screws. With a moderate power, and with vessels of considerable size, the
screws were well sheltered: but in the large ships which were contemplated,
where there must necessarily be larger screws, this might be different, and
become a difficulty.

Mr. Linnington, in reply, said there was no reason to think that the twin
screw at sea might not be as satisfactory, in comparison with the single
screw, as it appeared in smooth water. As a matter of fact, one of the
great advantages of twin screws was that at sea the condition of weather
which would bring the single screw out of the water, and make it extremely
inefficient, would have no appreciable effect on the twin screws. In
vessels of deep draught especially, they were well immersed, and they were
really more efficient at sea than in smooth water. In ships of full form,
the longitudinal position of the screws was of importance; but in the ships
referred to in this table the run was very fine, and the screws were well
covered by the hull. He did not think, in such a case, any small difference
in longitudinal position would affect the performance. If any alteration
were made, it would probably be better to put the screws farther off. When
the rudder was hard over, the blades of the screw should be about a foot
clear of the rudder.--_Industries_.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECENT ADVANCES IN SEWING MACHINERY.

[Footnote: A recent lecture before the Society of Arts, London.]

By JOHN W. URQUHART.


The distinct improvements in sewing machinery to which I would invite your
attention this evening have reference more particularly to the results of
inventive effort within the past ten years. But although marked development
in the machines has occurred in so short a time, it may be taken for
granted that those advances are but the accumulated results of many years'
prior invention and experience of stitching appliances.

The history of the sewing machine, and the decision of the great question,
Who invented an apparatus that would unite fabrics by stitches? do not at
present concern us. Many sources of information are open to those who would
decide that extremely involved problem. But whether the production of the
first device of this kind be claimed for England or for America, it is
quite certain that no one man invented the perfect machine, and that those
fine specimens of sewing apparatus shown here to-night embody the labors of
many earnest workers, both in Europe and America.

Most of us are familiar with the arrangements of an ordinary lock stitch
machine, and an able paper by Mr. Edwin P. Alexander, embracing not only a
good account of its history, but most of the elements of the earlier
machines, has already (April 5, 1863), been read before you. This, and
sundry descriptions of such apparatus in the engineering papers, confine my
remarks to the more recent improvements in three great classes of machines.
These are, briefly, plain sewing machines; sewing machines as used in
factories, where they are moved by steam power; and special sewing
machines, embracing many interesting forms, only recently introduced. We
have thus to consider, in the first place, the general efficiency of the
machine as a plain stitcher. Secondly, its adaptability to high rates of
speed, and the provision that has been made to withstand such velocities
for a reasonable time. And, thirdly, the apparatus and means employed to
effect the controlling of the motive power when applied to the machines.

To deal with the subject in this way must, I fear, involve a good deal of
technical description; and I hope to be pardoned if in attempting to
elucidate the more important devices, use must be made of words but seldom
heard outside of a machinists' workshop.

It appears scarcely necessary to premise that the sewing machine of twenty
years ago has almost faded away, save, perhaps, in general exterior
appearance; that the bell crank arms, the heart cams, the weaver's
shuttles, the spring "take ups," rectangular needle bars, and gear wheels,
have developed into very different devices for performing the various
functions of those several parts.

The shuttle is perhaps the most important part of a lock stitch machine.
But what is a shuttle? So many devices for performing the functions of the
early weaver's shuttle have been introduced of late, that the word shuttle,
if it be used at all, must not be accepted as meaning "to shoot." We have
vibrating shuttles, which are, strictly speaking, the only surviving
representatives of the weaver's shuttle in these new orders of machines;
and stationary shuttles, oscillating shuttles, and revolving shuttles,
besides the earlier rotating hook, in several new forms, difficult to name.
But the general acceptation of the word shuttle, as indicating those
devices that pass bodily through the loop of upper thread, is, I venture to
think, sufficiently correct.

Many changes have been effected in the form, size, and movements of the
shuttle, and we may profitably inquire into the causes that have induced
manufacturers to abandon the earlier forms. The long, weaver's kind of
shuttle, originally used by Howe and Singer, had many drawbacks. Mr. A.B.
Wilson's ingenious device, the lock stitch rotating hook, was not free from
corresponding faults. The removal of these in both has led to the adoption
of an entirely new class of both shuttles and revolving hooks. It is well
known that the lock stitch is formed by the crossing of two threads, one of
which lies over, and the other under, the cloth to be sewn. This crossing
point, to insure integrity of the stitch, must occur as nearly as possible
in the middle of the thickness of the fabric. The crossing must also be
effected while a certain strain, called tension, is imposed upon both
threads. If the tension of one thread should outweigh that of the other,
the locking point becomes displaced. If the tension be insignificant, the
stitches will be loose. If the tension should vary, as in the long shuttle,
there will occur faulty points in the seam.

In the earlier rotating hook the tension depended upon the friction
developed between the spool and the hook. This tension, therefore, varied
in proportion to the speed of the latter, and could never be constant. This
was quite apart from the frictional resistance offered to the upper thread
in passing over the cavity of the hook.

In the shuttle the tension was obtained by threading through holes in the
shell, or beneath a tension plate, as in Howe's machine. This tension, so
long as the reel ran between spring centers, was never constant. The
variation was chiefly due to the angular strain set up when unwinding from
the reel. This strain varied according to the point of unwinding. It was
light in the middle of the reel and heavy at either extremity. These
drawbacks caused immense anxiety to the first makers of sewing machines,
and numerous attempts to overcome them led to little improvement. With
reference to high rates of speed, the older shuttle, requiring a long and
noisy reciprocation, had its disadvantages.

The only effective remedy for these drawbacks was a radical one. It was
necessary to substitute depth of reel for length. Hence, several attempts
have been made to construct disk or ring shuttles. Many forms of those have
been tried. They all depend upon the principle of coiling up the thread in
a vertical plane, rather than in horizontal spirals. Some makers placed the
disk in a horizontal plane, and caused it to revolve. Nothing could be
worse, as will be seen, if we follow the course the enveloping loop must
take in encircling such a shuttle. But a complete solution of the
difficulty of employing a ring shuttle has been achieved in the oscillating
form, invented by Mr. Phil. Diehl, and known as Singer's (Fig. 1). A short
examination of it may profitably engage your attention. The shuttle itself
is sufficiently well known, but certain features of it, and to which it
owes its efficiency, appear to call for some explanation. Its introduction
dates back some years, during which time it has undergone certain
modifications.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

It consists of a thick disk bobbin of thread, _h_, fitting loosely in a
case constructed in the form of a bivalve, _a_ and _d_. This case is
furnished with a long beak, usually forming a continuation of the
periphery. The beak is intended to enter and detain the loops of upper
thread, and lead them so that they ultimately envelop the shuttle, a motion
of the thread which is chiefly due to the oscillation of the shuttle in a
vertical plane. The oscillating movement is to the extent of 180 degs. of
the circle, which suffices to cast the loops freely over the shuttle. The
center of oscillation is not coincident with the center of the shuttle; but
it is nearly so with the periphery of the thread reel, and exactly
coincides with the point where the under thread is drawn from the shuttle,
_g_. The shuttle thread is thus entirely freed from any tendency to twist,
an objection frequently urged against circular or revolving shuttles. It
will be observed, also, that the body of the shuttle is extremely narrow.
Bulging of the thread loops to one side or the other is thus obviated.

But the long beak in this description of shuttle serves an important
purpose other than that of seizing the upper thread loops, otherwise a very
short beak would be preferable. It adds so much to the efficiency of the
machine that a little further explanation of it appears essential. In the
old fashioned machines the thread required to envelop the shuttle was
dragged downward through the cloth, while the needle still remained in the
fabric. This necessitated the use of large needles with deep side channels,
to enable the thread to run freely, and as a consequence the punctures that
had to be made in the fabric were unnecessarily large, and could not in any
case be entirely filled by the thread, a condition which is now recognized
as essential in linen stitching and for waterproof boots.

The long beak in both shuttles and hooks offers an immediate solution of
the old difficulty experienced with long shuttles. When the needle begins
to rise, the shuttle commences to oscillate, through the loop, the motions
so coinciding that the long beak, c, merely detains the loop until the eye
of the needle has ascended above the cloth; then, and then only, does the
envelopment of the shuttle commence, and the thread required for it flows
downward through the puncture. The envelopment is completed before the
needle has attained its highest point, and the consequent loose thread is
immediately pulled up by a lever, called a positive take-up, before the
needle begins to descend for a fresh stitch. In this way little or no
movement of the thread is required in the cloth while the puncture made is
occupied by the needle. The result is the capability of such apparatus to
work with an incredibly fine needle--indeed, so fine as to be no thicker
than the incompressed thread itself. This would have been considered quite
impossible of accomplishment by our earlier machine makers. The advantage
thereby gained in stitching linen goods, and in sewing leather, where every
puncture of the needle should be quite filled by the thread, is at once
apparent. Indeed, a rubber or leather sack, stitched in this way, will
contain water without leakage--a very extreme test.

_Revolving Shuttles_.--The class of shuttles known as revolving or
rotating, and which really consist of a combination of the disk shuttle and
the earlier rotating hook of Wilson, have been under trial by several
makers for many years. If, for example, the oscillating shuttle we have
just examined were to complete its circular movement, it would constitute a
revolving shuttle, but would not be quite similar to those devices now
known as such. The most remarkable device of this kind yet introduced is to
be found in Wheeler & Wilson's machine known as No. 10 D, and invented by
Mr. Dials last year. It consists, in fact, of a detached hook, and its
inventor declines to class it with shuttles at all, styling it a detached
hook. It consists of an exterior shell or skeleton of steel, capable of
rotation in an annular raceway. Its detachment from the axis forms a
striking exception to the general construction of interlocking apparatus in
this company's machines. Under the beak of this curious device is found an
oblong recess, into which fits loosely a carrier or driver, rotating with a
differential or variable motion. The space between the carrier and the
sides of the recess is sufficient to permit the free passage of the thread
in encircling the shuttle, and the differential movement ingeniously
releases the contact between the hook and carrier. The skeleton of this
device is only one-sided, and does not really carry its bobbin in the
course of its revolution. The bobbin is placed in a cup-like holder, which
lies within the shuttle or hook body, and is retained in position by a
latch hinged to the bed of the machine. The cup and bobbin are prevented
from partaking of the rotatory movement by a steel spur projecting from the
cup, and fitting loosely into a notch in the latch. Tension upon the under
