exercises so slight an action upon the bodies dissolved--evaporate the
water away, and the dissolved substance is obtained in an unchanged
condition; at any rate, this is the general rule.

The function of water in nature is essentially that of a solvent or a
medium of circulation; it is not, in any sense, a food, yet without it no
food can be assimilated by an animal. Without water the solid materials of
the globe would be unable to come together so closely as to interchange
their elements; and unless the temperatures were sufficiently high to
establish an igneous fluidity, such as undoubtedly exists in the sun, there
would be no circulation of matter to speak of, and the earth would be, as
it were, locked up or dead.

When we look upon water as the nearest approach to a universal solvent that
even the astute scientist of to-day has been able to discover, who can
wonder that it is never found absolutely pure in nature? For wherever it
accumulates it dissolves something from its surroundings. Still, in a
rain-drop just formed we have very nearly pure water; but even this
contains dissolved air to the extent of about one-fiftieth of its volume,
and as the drop falls downward it takes up such impurities as may be
floating in the atmosphere; so that if our rain-drop is falling
immediately after a long drought, it becomes charged with nitrate or
nitrite of ammonia and various organic matters--perhaps also the spores or
germs of disease. Thus it will be seen that rain tends to wonderfully clear
or wash the atmosphere, and we all know how much a first rain is
appreciated as an air purifier, and how it carries down with it valuable
food for plants. The rain-water, in percolating through or over the land,
flows mainly toward the rivers, and in doing so it becomes more or less
charged with mineral matter, lime salts and common salt being the chief of
them; while some of that water which has penetrated more deeply into the
earth takes up far more solid matter than is ordinarily found in river
water. The bulk of this more or less impure water tends toward the ocean,
taking with it its load of salt and lime. Constant evaporation, of course,
takes place from the surface of the sea, so that the salt and lime
accumulate, this latter being, however, ultimately deposited as shells,
coral, and chalk, while nearly pure or naturally distilled water once more
condenses in the form of clouds. This process, by which a constant supply
of purified water is kept up in the natural economy, is imitated on a small
scale when water is converted into steam by the action of heat, and this
vapor is cooled so as to reproduce liquid water, the operation in question
being known as distillation.

For this purpose an apparatus known as a still is required; and although by
law one must pay an annual license fee for the right to use a still, it is
not usual for the government authorities to enforce the law when a still is
merely used for purifying water.

One of the best forms of still for the photographer to employ consists of a
tin can or bottle in which the water is boiled, and to this a tin tube is
adapted by means of a cork, one end of this tin tube terminating in a coil
passing through a tub or other vessel of cold water. A gas burner, as
shown, is a convenient source of heat, and in order to insure a complete
condensation of the vapor, the water in the cooling tub must be changed now
and again.

[Illustration]

Sometimes the vapor is condensed by being allowed to play against the
inside of a conical cover which is adapted to a saucepan, and is kept cool
by the external application of cold water; and in this case the still takes
the form represented by the subjoined diagrams; such compact and portable
stills being largely employed in Ireland for the private manufacture of
whisky.

[Illustration]

It is scarcely necessary to say that the condensed water trickles down on
the inside of the cone, and flows out at the spout.

An extemporized arrangement of a similar character may be made by passing a
tobacco pipe through the side of a tin saucepan as shown below, and
inverting the lid of the saucepan; if the lid is now kept cool by frequent
changes of water inside it, and the pipe is properly adjusted so as to
catch the drippings from the convex side of the lid, a considerable
quantity of distilled water may be collected in an hour or so.

The proportion of solid impurities present in water as ordinarily met with
is extremely variable: rain water which has been collected toward the end
of a storm contains only a minute fraction of a grain per gallon, while
river or spring water may contain from less than thirty grains per gallon
or so and upward. Ordinary sea water generally contains from three to four
per cent. of saline matter, but that of the Dead Sea contains nearly
one-fourth of its weight of salts.

[Illustration]

The three impurities of water which most interest the photographer are lime
or magnesia salts, which give the so-called hardness; chlorides (as, for
example, chloride of sodium or common salt), which throw down silver salts;
and organic matter, which may overturn the balance of photographic
operations by causing premature reduction of the sensitive silver
compounds. To test for them is easy. Hardness is easily recognizable by
washing one's hands in the water, the soap being curdled; but in many cases
one must rather seek for a hard water than avoid it, as the tendency of
gelatine plates to frill is far less in hard water than in soft water. It
is, indeed, a common and useful practice to harden the water used for
washing by adding half an ounce or an ounce of Epsom salts (sulphate of
magnesia) to each bucket of water. Chlorides--chloride of sodium or common
salt being that usually met with--may be detected by adding a drop or two
of nitrate of silver to half a wineglassful of the water, a few drops of
nitric acid being then added. A slight cloudiness indicates a trace of
chlorides, and a decided milkiness shows the presence of a larger quantity.
If it is wished to get a somewhat more definite idea of the amount, it is
easy to make up a series of standards for comparison, by dissolving known
weights of common salt in distilled or rain water, and testing samples of
them side by side with the water to be examined.

Organic matters may be detected by adding a little nitrate of silver to the
water, filtering off from any precipitate of chloride of silver, and
exposing the clear liquid to sunlight; a clean stoppered bottle being the
most convenient vessel to use. The extent to which a blackening takes place
may be regarded as approximately proportionate to the amount of organic
matter present.

Filtration on a small scale is not altogether a satisfactory mode of
purifying water, as organic impurities often accumulate in the filter, and
enter into active putrefaction when hot weather sets in.--_Photo. News._

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED FIRE-DAMP DETECTER.


According to the London _Mining Journal_, Mr. W.E. Garforth, of Normanton,
has introduced an ingenious invention, the object of which is to detect
fire-damp in collieries with the least possible degree of risk to those
engaged in the work. Mr. Garforth's invention, which is illustrated in the
diagram given below, consists in the use of a small India rubber hand ball,
without a valve of any description; but by the ordinary action of
compressing the ball, and then allowing it to expand, a sample of the
suspected atmosphere is drawn from the roof, or any part of the mine,
without the great risk which now attends the operation of testing for gas
should the gauze of the lamp be defective. The sample thus obtained is then
forced through a small protected tube on to the flame, when if gas is
present it is shown by the well-known blue cap and elongated flame. From
this description, and from the fact that the ball is so small that it can
be carried in the coat pocket, or, if necessary, in the waistcoat pocket,
it will be apparent what a valuable adjunct Mr. Garforth's invention will
prove to the safety-lamp. It has been supposed by some persons that
explosions have been caused by the fire-trier himself, but owing to his own
death in most cases the cause has remained undiscovered. This danger will
now be altogether avoided. It is well known that the favorite form of lamp
with the firemen is the Davy, because it shows more readily the presence of
small quantities of gas; but the Davy was some years ago condemned, and is
now strictly prohibited in all Belgian and many English mines. Recent
experience, gained by repeated experiments with costly apparatus, has
resulted in not only proving the Davy and some other descriptions of lamps
to be unsafe, but some of our Government Inspectors and our most
experienced mining engineers go so far as to say that "no lamp in a strong
current of explosive gas is safe unless protected by a tin shield."

[Illustration]

If such is the case, Mr. Garforth seems to have struck the key-note when,
in the recent paper read before the Midland Institute of Mining and Civil
Engineers, and which we have now before us, he says: "It would seem from
the foregoing remarks that in any existing safety-lamp where one
qualification is increased another is proportionately reduced; so it is
doubtful whether all the necessary requirements of sensitiveness,
resistance to strong currents, satisfactory light, self-extinction, perfect
combustion, etc., can ever be combined in one lamp."

The nearest approach to Mr. Garforth's invention which we have ever heard
of is that of a workman at a colliery in the north of England, who, more
than twenty years ago, to avoid the trouble of getting to the highest part
of the roof, used a kind of air pump, seven or eight feet long, to extract
the gas from the breaks; and some five years ago Mr. Jones, of Ebbw Vale,
had a similar idea. It appears that these appliances were so cumbersome,
besides requiring too great length or height for most mines, and
necessitating the use of both hands, that they did not come into general
use. The ideas, however, are totally different, and the causes which have
most likely led to the invention of the ball and protected tube were
probably never thought of until recently; indeed, Mr. Garforth writes that
he has only learned about them since his paper was read before the Midland
Institute, and some weeks after his patent was taken out.

No one, says Mr. Garforth, in his paper read before the Midland Institute,
will, I presume, deny that the Davy is more sensitive than the tin shield
lamp, inasmuch as in the former the surrounding atmosphere or explosive
mixture has only one thickness of gauze to pass through, and that on a
level with the flame; while the latter has a number of small holes and two
or three thicknesses of gauze (according to the construction of the lamp),
which the gas must penetrate before it reaches the flame. Moreover, the tin
shield lamp, when inclined to one side, is extinguished (though not so
easily as the Mueseler); and as the inlet holes are 6 inches from the top,
it does not show a thin stratum of fire-damp near the roof as perceptibly
as the Davy, which admits of being put in almost a horizontal position.
Although the Davy lamp was, nearly fifty years ago, pronounced unsafe, by
reason of its inability to resist an ordinary velocity of eight feet per
second, yet it is still kept in use on account of its sensitiveness. Its
advocates maintain that a mine can be kept safer by using the Davy, which
detects small quantities of gas, and thereby shows the real state of the
mine, than by a lamp which, though able to resist a greater velocity, is
not so sensitive, and consequently is apt to deceive. Assuming the Davy
lamp to be condemned (as it has already been in Belgium and in some English
mines), the Stephenson and some of the more recently invented lamps
pronounced unsafe, then if greater shielding is recommended the question
is, what means have we for detecting small quantities of fire-damp?

It would seem from the foregoing remarks that in any existing safety-lamp,
where one qualification is increased another is proportionately reduced; so
it is doubtful whether all the necessary requirements of sensitiveness,
resistance to strong currents, satisfactory light, self-extinction, perfect
combustion, etc., can ever be combined in one lamp. The object of the
present paper is to show that with the assistance of the fire-damp
detecter, the tin shield, or any other description of lamp, is made as
sensitive as the Davy, while its other advantages of resisting velocity,
etc., are not in any way interfered with. As a proof of this I may mention
that a deputy of experience recently visited a working place to make his
inspection. He reported the stall to be free from gas, but when the manager
and steward visited it with the detecter, which they applied to the roof
(where it would have been difficult to put even a small Davy), it drew a
sample of the atmosphere which, on being put to the test tube in the
tin-shield lamp, at once showed the presence of fire-damp. Out of
twenty-eight tests in a mine working a long-wall face the Davy showed gas
only eleven times, while the detecter showed it in every case. The
detecter, as will be perceived from the one exhibited, and the accompanying
sectional drawing, consists simply of an oval-shaped India rubber ball,
fitted with a mouthpiece. The diameter is about 21/4 inches by 3 inches, its
weight is two ounces, and it is so small that it can be carried without any
inconvenience in the coat or even in the waistcoat pocket. Its capacity is
such that all the air within it may be expelled by the compression of one
hand.

The mouthpiece is made to fit a tube in the bottom of the lamp, and when
pressed against the India rubber ring on the ball-flange, a perfectly tight
joint is made, which prevents the admission of any external air. The tube
in the bottom of the lamp is carried within a short distance of the height
of the wick-holder. It is covered at the upper end with gauze, besides
being fitted with other thicknesses of gauze at certain distances within
the tube; and if it be found desirable to further protect the flame against
strong currents of air, a small valve may be placed at the inlet, as shown
in the drawing. This valve is made of sufficient weight to resist the force
of a strong current, and is only lifted from its seat by the pressure of
the hand on the mouthpiece. It will be apparent from the small size and
elasticity of the detecter that the test can easily be made with one hand,
and when the ball is allowed to expand a vacuum is formed within it, and a
sample of the atmosphere drawn from the breaks, cavities, or highest parts
of the roof, or, of course, any portion of the mine. When the sample is
forced through the tube near the flame, gas if present at once reveals
itself by the elongation of the flame in the usual way, at the same time
giving an additional proof by burning with a blue flame on the top of the
test tube. If gas is not present, the distinction is easily seen by the
flame keeping the same size, but burning with somewhat greater brightness,
owing to the increased quality of oxygen forced upon it.

I venture to claim for this method of detecting fire-damp among other
advantages: 1. The detecter, on account of its size, can be placed in a
break in the roof where an ordinary lamp--even a small Davy--could not be
put, and a purer sample of the suspected atmosphere is obtained than would
be the case even a few inches below the level of the roof, 2. The obtaining
and testing of a sample in the manner above described takes away the
possibility of an explosion, which might be the result if a lamp with a
defective gauze were placed in an explosive atmosphere. No one knows how
many explosions have not been caused by the fire-trier himself. This will
now be avoided. (Although lamps fitted with a tin shield will be subjected
to the same strict examination as hitherto, still they do not admit of the
same frequent inspection as those without shields, for in the latter case
each workman can examine his own lamp as an extra precaution; whereas the
examination of the tin shield lamps will rest entirely with the lamp man.)
3. The lamp can be kept in a pure atmosphere while the sample is obtained
by the detecter, and at a greater height than the flame in a safety-lamp
could be properly distinguished. The test can afterward be made in a safe
place, at some distance from the explosive atmosphere; and, owing to the
vacuum formed, the ball (without closing the mouthpiece) has been carried a
mile or more without the gas escaping. 4. The detecter supplies a better
knowledge of the condition of the working places, especially in breaks and
cavities in the roof; which latter, with the help of a nozzle and staff,
may be reached to a height of ten feet or more, by the detecter being
pressed against the roof and sides, or by the use of a special form of
detecter. 5. Being able at will to force the contents of the detecter on to
the flame, the effects of an explosion inside the lamp need not be feared.
(This danger being removed, admits, I think, of the glass cylinder being
made of a larger diameter, whereby a better light is obtained; it may also
be considered quite as strong, when used with the detecter, as a lamp with
a small diameter, when the latter is placed in an explosive atmosphere.) 6.
The use of the detecter will permit the further protection of the present
tin shield lamp, by an extra thickness of gauze, if such addition is found
advantageous in resisting an increased velocity. 7. In the Mueseler,
Stephenson, and other lamps, where the flame is surrounded by glass, there
is no means of using the wire for shot firing. The detecter tube, although
protected by two thicknesses of gauze, admits of this being done by the use
of a special form of valve turned by the mouthpiece of the detecter. The
system of firing shots or using open lamps in the same pit where safety
lamps are used is exceedingly objectionable; still, under certain
conditions shots may be fired without danger. Whether safety lamps or
candles are used, it is thought the use of the detecter will afford such a
ready means of testing that more examinations will be made before firing a
shot, thereby insuring greater safety. 8. In testing for gas with a safety
lamp there is a fear of the light being extinguished, when the lamp is
suddenly placed in a quantity of gas, or in endeavoring to get a very
small light; this is especially the case with some kinds of lamps. With the
detecter this is avoided, as a large flame can be used, which is considered
by some a preferable means of testing for small quantities; and the test
can be made without risk. Where gas is present in large quantities, the
blue flame at the end of the test tube will be found a further proof. This
latter result is produced by the slightest compression of the ball. (I need
not point out the inconvenience and loss of time in having to travel a mile
or more to relight.) As regards the use of the detecter with open lights,
several of the foregoing advantages or modifications of them will apply.
Instead of having to use the safety lamp as at present, it is thought that
the working place will be more frequently examined, for a sample of the
suspected atmosphere can be carried to a safe place and forced on to the
naked light, when, if gas be present, it simply burns at the end of the
mouthpiece like an ordinary gas jet. There are other advantages, such as
examining the return airways without exposing the lamp, etc., which will be
apparent, and become of more or less importance according to the conditions
under which the tests are made.

In conclusion, I wish to paint out that the practice adopted at some
collieries, of having all the men supplied with the most approved lamp
(such as the Mueseler or tin shield lamp) is not a safe one. If the
strength of a chain is only equal to the weakest link, it may be argued
that the safety of a mine is only equal to that of the most careless man or
most unsafe lamp in it. If, therefore, the deputies, whose duty it is to
look for gas and travel the most dangerous parts of the mine, are obliged
to use the Davy on account of its sensitiveness, may it not be said that,
as their lamps are exposed equally with the workmen's to the high
velocities of air, they are the weak links in the safety of the mine? For
the reasons given, I venture to submit that the difficulties and dangers I
have mentioned will be largely reduced, if not wholly overcome, by the use
of the fire-damp detecter.

       *       *       *       *       *




CAMERA ATTACHMENT FOR PAPER PHOTO NEGATIVES.


In computing the weight of the various items for a photographic tour, the
glass almost invariably comes out at the head of the list, and the farther
or longer the journey, so much more does the weight of the plates stand out
pre-eminent; indeed, if one goes out on a trip with only three dozen
half-plates, the glass will probably weigh nearly as much as camera, backs,
and tripod, in spite of the stipulation with the maker to supply plates on
"thin glass."

Next in importance to glass as a support comes paper, and it is quite easy
to understand that the tourist in out of the way parts might be able to
take an apparatus containing a roll of sensitive paper, when it would be
altogether impracticable for him to take an equivalent surface of coated
glass, and in such a case the roller slide becomes of especial value.

The roller slide of Melhuish is tolerably well known, and is, we believe,
now obtainable as an article of commerce. The slide is fitted up with two
rollers, _a a_, and the sensitive sheets, _b b_, are gummed together,
making one long band, the ends of which are gummed to pieces of paper
always kept on the rollers. The sensitive sheets are wound off the left or
reserve roller on to the right or exposed roller, until all are exposed.

[Illustration]

The rollers are supported on springs, _a a_, to render their motion
equal; they are turned by the milled heads, _m m_, and clamped when each
fresh sheet is brought into position by the nuts, _a squared a squared_. _c_, is a board
which is pressed forward by springs, _c c_, so as to hold the sheet to be
exposed, and keep it smooth against the plate of glass, _d_; when the sheet
has been exposed, the board is drawn back from the glass in order to
release the exposed sheet, and allow it to be rolled on the exposed roller;
the board is kept back while this is being done by turning the square rod,
_c squared_, half round, so that the angles of the square will not pass back
through the square opening until again turned opposite to it; _e e_ are
doors, by opening which the operator can see (through the yellow glass, _y
y_) to adjust the position of the sensitive sheets when changing them.

The remarkable similarity of such a slide to the automatic printing-frame
described last week will strike the reader; and, like the printing-frame,
it possesses the advantage of speed in working--no small consideration to
the photographer in a distant, and possibly hostile, country.

Fine paper well sized with an insoluble size and coated with a sensitive
emulsion is, we believe, the very best material to use in the roller slide;
and such a paper might be made in long lengths at a very low price, a
coating machine similar to that constructed for use in making carbon tissue
being employed. We have used such paper with success, and hope that some
manufacturer will introduce it into commerce before long. But the question
suggests itself, how are the paper negatives to be rendered transparent,
and how is the grain of the paper to be obliterated? Simply by pressure, as
extremely heavy rolling will render such paper almost as transparent as
glass, a fact abundantly demonstrated by Mr. Woodbury in his experiments on
the Photo-Filigrane process, and confirmed by some trials which we have
made.

It must be confessed that roller slide experiments which we have made with
sensitive films supported on gelatine sheets, or on such composite sheets
as the alternate rubber and collodion pellicle of Mr. Warnerke, have been
hardly satisfactory--possibly, however, from our own want of skill; while
no form of the Calotype process which we have tried has proved so
satisfactory as gelatino-bromide paper.--_Photo. News_.

       *       *       *       *       *




INSTANTANEOUS PHOTO SHUTTER.


M. Audra, in the name of M. Braun, of Angouleme, has presented to the Photo
Society of France a new instantaneous shutter. The shutter is formed by a
revolving metallic disk out of which a segment has been taken. This disk is
placed in the center of the diaphragms, in order to obtain the greatest
rapidity combined with the least possible distance to travel. On the axis
to which this circular disk is fixed is a small wheel, to which is attached
a piece of string, and when the disk is turned round for the exposure the
string is wound round the wheel. If the string be pulled, naturally the
disk will revolve back to its former position so much the more quickly the
more violently the string is pulled. M. Braun has replaced the hand by a
steel spring attached to the drum of the lens (Fig. 2) By shortening or
lengthening the string, more or less rapid exposures may be obtained.

[Illustration: AAA, lens; B, aperture of lens; C, metallic disk; D,
wheel on the axis; E, cord or string; EEEE, knots in string; G, steel
spring; H, catch; K, socket for catch.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SULPHUROUS ACID.--EASY METHOD OF PREPARATION FOR PHOTOGRAPHIC PURPOSES.


Within a short period sulphurous acid has become an important element in
the preparation of an excellent pyro developer for gelatine plates; and as
it is more or less unstable in its keeping qualities, some easy method of
preparing a small quantity which shall have a uniform strength is
desirable. A method recently described in the _Photographic News_ will
afford the amateur photographer a ready way of preparing a small quantity
of the acid.

[Illustration]

