     these supposed shells, was equally uttered formerly against
     firearms and torpedoes, both of which are now employed without
     scruple. Until we know the effects of such asphyxiating shells,
     there was no saying whether they would be more or less merciful
     than missiles now permitted. That it was illogical, and not
     demonstrably humane, to be tender about asphyxiating men with
     gas, when all are prepared to admit that it was allowable to
     blow the bottom out of an ironclad at midnight, throwing four
     or five hundred into the sea, to be choked by water, with
     scarcely the remotest chance of escape.

As Captain Mahan says, the same objection has been raised at the
introduction of each new weapon of war, even though it proved to be no
more cruel than the old. The modern rifle ball, swift and small and
sterilized by heat, does not make so bad a wound as the ancient sword
and spear, but we all remember how gunpowder was regarded by the dandies
of Hotspur's time:

  And it was great pity, so it was,
  This villainous saltpeter should be digg'd
  Out of the bowels of the harmless earth
  Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd
  So cowardly; and but for these vile guns
  He would himself have been a soldier.

The real reason for the instinctive aversion manifested against any new
arm or mode of attack is that it reveals to us the intrinsic horror of
war. We naturally revolt against premeditated homicide, but we have
become so accustomed to the sword and latterly to the rifle that they do
not shock us as they ought when we think of what they are made for. The
Constitution of the United States prohibits the infliction of "cruel and
unusual punishments." The two adjectives were apparently used almost
synonymously, as though any "unusual" punishment were necessarily
"cruel," and so indeed it strikes us. But our ingenious lawyers were
able to persuade the courts that electrocution, though unknown to the
Fathers and undeniably "unusual," was not unconstitutional. Dumdum
bullets are rightfully ruled out because they inflict frightful and
often incurable wounds, and the aim of humane warfare is to disable the
enemy, not permanently to injure him.

[Illustration: From "America's Munitions" THE CHLORPICRIN PLANT AT THE
EDGEWOOD ARSENAL

From these stills, filled with a mixture of bleaching powder, lime, and
picric acid, the poisonous gas, chlorpicrin, distills off. This plant
produced 31 tons in one day]

[Illustration: Courtesy of the Metal and Thermit Corporation, N.Y.

REPAIRING THE BROKEN STERN POST OF THE U.S.S. NORTHERN PACIFIC, THE
BIGGEST MARINE WELD IN THE WORLD

On the right the fractured stern post is shown. On the left it is being
mended by means of thermit. Two crucibles each containing 700 pounds of
the thermit mixture are seen on the sides of the vessel. From the bottom
of these the melted steel flowed down to fill the fracture]

In spite of the opposition of the American and British delegates the
First Hague Conference adopted the clause, "The contracting powers agree
to abstain from the use of projectiles the [sole] object of which is the
diffusion of asphyxiating or deleterious gases." The word "sole"
(_unique_) which appears in the original French text of The Hague
convention is left out of the official English translation. This is a
strange omission considering that the French and British defended their
use of explosives which diffuse asphyxiating and deleterious gases on
the ground that this was not the "sole" purpose of the bombs but merely
an accidental effect of the nitric powder used.

The Hague Congress of 1907 placed in its rules for war: "It is expressly
forbidden to employ poisons or poisonous weapons." But such attempts to
rule out new and more effective means of warfare are likely to prove
futile in any serious conflict and the restriction gives the advantage
to the most unscrupulous side. We Americans, if ever we give our assent
to such an agreement, would of course keep it, but our enemy--whoever he
may be in the future--will be, as he always has been, utterly without
principle and will not hesitate to employ any weapon against us.
Besides, as the Germans held, chemical warfare favors the army that is
most intelligent, resourceful and disciplined and the nation that stands
highest in science and industry. This advantage, let us hope, will be on
our side.




CHAPTER XIII

PRODUCTS OF THE ELECTRIC FURNACE


The control of man over the materials of nature has been vastly enhanced
by the recent extension of the range of temperature at his command. When
Fahrenheit stuck the bulb of his thermometer into a mixture of snow and
salt he thought he had reached the nadir of temperature, so he scratched
a mark on the tube where the mercury stood and called it zero. But we
know that absolute zero, the total absence of heat, is 459 of
Fahrenheit's degrees lower than his zero point. The modern scientist can
get close to that lowest limit by making use of the cooling by the
expansion principle. He first liquefies air under pressure and then
releasing the pressure allows it to boil off. A tube of hydrogen
immersed in the liquid air as it evaporates is cooled down until it can
be liquefied. Then the boiling hydrogen is used to liquefy helium, and
as this boils off it lowers the temperature to within three or four
degrees of absolute zero.

The early metallurgist had no hotter a fire than he could make by
blowing charcoal with a bellows. This was barely enough for the smelting
of iron. But by the bringing of two carbon rods together, as in the
electric arc light, we can get enough heat to volatilize the carbon at
the tips, and this means over 7000 degrees Fahrenheit. By putting a
pressure of twenty atmospheres onto the arc light we can raise it to
perhaps 14,000 degrees, which is 3000 degrees hotter than the sun. This
gives the modern man a working range of about 14,500 degrees, so it is
no wonder that he can perform miracles.

When a builder wants to make an old house over into a new one he takes
it apart brick by brick and stone by stone, then he puts them together
in such new fashion as he likes. The electric furnace enables the
chemist to take his materials apart in the same way. As the temperature
rises the chemical and physical forces that hold a body together
gradually weaken. First the solid loosens up and becomes a liquid, then
this breaks bonds and becomes a gas. Compounds break up into their
elements. The elemental molecules break up into their component atoms
and finally these begin to throw off corpuscles of negative electricity
eighteen hundred times smaller than the smallest atom. These electrons
appear to be the building stones of the universe. No indication of any
smaller units has been discovered, although we need not assume that in
the electron science has delivered, what has been called, its
"ultim-atom." The Greeks called the elemental particles of matter
"atoms" because they esteemed them "indivisible," but now in the light
of the X-ray we can witness the disintegration of the atom into
electrons. All the chemical and physical properties of matter, except
perhaps weight, seem to depend upon the number and movement of the
negative and positive electrons and by their rearrangement one element
may be transformed into another.

So the electric furnace, where the highest attainable temperature is
combined with the divisive and directive force of the current, is a
magical machine for accomplishment of the metamorphoses desired by the
creative chemist. A hundred years ago Davy, by dipping the poles of his
battery into melted soda lye, saw forming on one of them a shining
globule like quicksilver. It was the metal sodium, never before seen by
man. Nowadays this process of electrolysis (electric loosening) is
carried out daily by the ton at Niagara.

The reverse process, electro-synthesis (electric combining), is equally
simple and even more important. By passing a strong electric current
through a mixture of lime and coke the metal calcium disengages itself
from the oxygen of the lime and attaches itself to the carbon. Or, to
put it briefly,

  CaO  +  3C   -->   CaC_{2} + CO
  lime   coke       calcium    carbon
                      carbide    monoxide

This reaction is of peculiar importance because it bridges the gulf
between the organic and inorganic worlds. It was formerly supposed that
the substances found in plants and animals, mostly complex compounds of
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, could only be produced by "vital forces."
If this were true it meant that chemistry was limited to the mineral
kingdom and to the extraction of such carbon compounds as happened to
exist ready formed in the vegetable and animal kingdoms. But fortunately
this barrier to human achievement proved purely illusory. The organic
field, once man had broken into it, proved easier to work in than the
inorganic.

But it must be confessed that man is dreadfully clumsy about it yet. He
takes a thousand horsepower engine and an electric furnace at several
thousand degrees to get carbon into combination with hydrogen while the
little green leaf in the sunshine does it quietly without getting hot
about it. Evidently man is working as wastefully as when he used a
thousand slaves to drag a stone to the pyramid or burned down a house to
roast a pig. Not until his laboratory is as cool and calm and
comfortable as the forest and the field can the chemist call himself
completely successful.

But in spite of his clumsiness the chemist is actually making things
that he wants and cannot get elsewhere. The calcium carbide that he
manufactures from inorganic material serves as the raw material for
producing all sorts of organic compounds. The electric furnace was first
employed on a large scale by the Cowles Electric Smelting and Aluminum
Company at Cleveland in 1885. On the dump were found certain lumps of
porous gray stone which, dropped into water, gave off a gas that
exploded at touch of a match with a splendid bang and flare. This gas
was acetylene, and we can represent the reaction thus:

  CaC_{2} + 2 H_{2}O --> C_{2}H_{2} + CaO_{2}H_{2}

  calcium carbide _added_ to water _
    gives_ acetylene _and_ slaked lime

We are all familiar with this reaction now, for it is acetylene that
gives the dazzling light of the automobiles and of the automatic signal
buoys of the seacoast. When burned with pure oxygen instead of air it
gives the hottest of chemical flames, hotter even than the oxy-hydrogen
blowpipe. For although a given weight of hydrogen will give off more
heat when it burns than carbon will, yet acetylene will give off more
heat than either of its elements or both of them when they are separate.
This is because acetylene has stored up heat in its formation instead of
giving it off as in most reactions, or to put it in chemical language,
acetylene is an endothermic compound. It has required energy to bring
the H and the C together, therefore it does not require energy to
separate them, but, on the contrary, energy is released when they are
separated. That is to say, acetylene is explosive not only when mixed
with air as coal gas is but by itself. Under a suitable impulse
acetylene will break up into its original carbon and hydrogen with great
violence. It explodes with twice as much force without air as ordinary
coal gas with air. It forms an explosive compound with copper, so it has
to be kept out of contact with brass tubes and stopcocks. But compressed
in steel cylinders and dissolved in acetone, it is safe and commonly
used for welding and melting. It is a marvelous though not an unusual
sight on city streets to see a man with blue glasses on cutting down
through a steel rail with an oxy-acetylene blowpipe as easily as a
carpenter saws off a board. With such a flame he can carve out a pattern
in a steel plate in a way that reminds me of the days when I used to
make brackets with a scroll saw out of cigar boxes. The torch will
travel through a steel plate an inch or two thick at a rate of six to
ten inches a minute.

[Illustration: Courtesy of the Carborundum Company, Niagara Falls

MAKING ALOXITE IN THE ELECTRIC FURNACES BY FUSING COKE AND BAUXITE

In the background are the circular furnaces. In the foreground are the
fused masses of the product]

[Illustration: Courtesy of the Carborundum Co., Niagara Falls

A BLOCK OF CARBORUNDUM CRYSTALS]

[Illustration: Courtesy of the Carborundum Co., Niagara Falls

MAKING CARBORUNDUM IN THE ELECTRIC FURNACE

At the end may be seen the attachments for the wires carrying the
electric current and on the side the flames from the burning carbon.]

The temperatures attainable with various fuels in the compound blowpipe
are said to be:


  Acetylene with oxygen        7878 deg. F.
  Hydrogen with oxygen         6785 deg. F.
  Coal gas with oxygen         6575 deg. F.
  Gasoline with oxygen         5788 deg. F.

If we compare the formula of acetylene, C_{2}H_{2} with that of
ethylene, C_{2}H_{4}, or with ethane, C_{2}H_{6}, we see that acetylene
could take on two or four more atoms. It is evidently what the chemists
call an "unsaturated" compound, one that has not reached its limit of
hydrogenation. It is therefore a very active and energetic compound,
ready to pick up on the slightest instigation hydrogen or oxygen or
chlorine or any other elements that happen to be handy. This is why it
is so useful as a starting point for synthetic chemistry.

To build up from this simple substance, acetylene, the higher compounds
of carbon and oxygen it is necessary to call in the aid of that
mysterious agency, the catalyst. Acetylene is not always acted upon by
water, as we know, for we see it bubbling up through the water when
prepared from the carbide. But if to the water be added a little acid
and a mercury salt, the acetylene gas will unite with the water forming
a new compound, acetaldehyde. We can show the change most simply in this
fashion:

  C_{2}H_{2} + H_{2}O --> C_{2}H_{4}O

  acetylene _added to_ water _forms_ acetaldehyde

Acetaldehyde is not of much importance in itself, but is useful as a
transition. If its vapor mixed with hydrogen is passed over finely
divided nickel, serving as a catalyst, the two unite and we have
alcohol, according to this reaction:

  C_{2}H_{4}O + H_{2} --> C_{2}H_{6}O

  acetaldehyde _added to_ hydrogen _forms_ alcohol

Alcohol we are all familiar with--some of us too familiar, but the
prohibition laws will correct that. The point to be noted is that the
alcohol we have made from such unpromising materials as limestone and
coal is exactly the same alcohol as is obtained by the fermentation of
fruits and grains by the yeast plant as in wine and beer. It is not a
substitute or imitation. It is not the wood spirits (methyl alcohol,
CH_{4}O), produced by the destructive distillation of wood, equally
serviceable as a solvent or fuel, but undrinkable and poisonous.

Now, as we all know, cider and wine when exposed to the air gradually
turn into vinegar, that is, by the growth of bacteria the alcohol is
oxidized to acetic acid. We can, if we like, dispense with the bacteria
and speed up the process by employing a catalyst. Acetaldehyde, which is
halfway between alcohol and acid, may also be easily oxidized to acetic
acid. The relationship is readily seen by this:

  C{2}H_{6}O -->  CC_{2}H_{4}O --> C_{2}H_{4}O_{3}

  alcohol         acetaldehyde      acetic acid

Acetic acid, familiar to us in a diluted and flavored form as vinegar,
is when concentrated of great value in industry, especially as a
solvent. I have already referred to its use in combination with
cellulose as a "dope" for varnishing airplane canvas or making
non-inflammable film for motion pictures. Its combination with lime,
calcium acetate, when heated gives acetone, which, as may be seen from
its formula (C_{3}H_{6}O) is closely related to the other compounds we
have been considering, but it is neither an alcohol nor an acid. It is
extensively employed as a solvent.

Acetone is not only useful for dissolving solids but it will under
pressure dissolve many times its volume of gaseous acetylene. This is a
convenient way of transporting and handling acetylene for lighting or
welding.

If instead of simply mixing the acetone and acetylene in a solution we
