These figures, multiplied by the actual evaporative powers as
calculated, give:

              POUNDS OF WATER EVAPORATED FROM 212 deg. F. FOR $1.

                Anthracite. Bituminous. Petroleum. Coal Generator Water
                                                   gas    gas.    gas.

  New York        5040         4643       2948     338    220     577
  Chicago         4032         5638       2684     451    220     577
  New Orleans     3366         5638       2155     188    220     577
  San Francisco   1683         2634       2684     188    179     484
  London          4032         6581       1966     751    228     640
  Port Natal      1611         1797       1342           Ap-     Ap-
  Sydney          1683         2819       1191           proxi-  proxi-
  Valparaiso      1755         2634       1776           mate.   mate.

                           RELATIVE COSTS.

                Anthracite. Bituminous. Petroleum. Coal Generator Water
                                                   gas    gas.    gas.

  New York         $1 00       $1 08      $1 71   $14 92  $22 90  $8 70
  Chicago           1 00          71       1 50     8 72   18 30   7 00
  New Orleans       1 00          59       1 56    17 90   15 30   5 80
  San Francisco     1 00          64       1 50     8 75    9 40   3 50
  London            1 00          61       2 05     7 16   17 70   6 30
  Port Natal        1 00          90       1 21
  Sydney            1 00          34       1 39
  Valparaiso        1 00          44       1 03

These figures are very much against the fluid fuels, but there may be
circumstances in which the benefits to be derived from their use will
exceed the additional cost. It is difficult to make a comparison without
considering particular cases, but for intermittent heating petroleum
would probably be more economical, though for a steady fire coal holds
its own.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MANUFACTURE OF STEEL CASTINGS.


At the opening meeting for the winter session of the Iron and Steel
Works Managers' Institute, held at Dudley on September 12, Mr. R.
Smith-Casson in the chair, Mr. B.F. McCallem, of Glasgow, read a paper
on "Steel Castings," which developed an interesting discussion upon
steel casting practice. Mr. McCallem said that it was thirty years since
the first crucible steel castings were made in Sheffield in the general
way, and with one exception the method of manufacture was pretty much
the same now as at that early date. The improvement was the employment
of gas furnaces instead of the old coke holes for melting. Important
economies had resulted from this introduction. Where before it required
3 tons of coke to melt 1 ton of steel, the same thing was now done with
35 cwt. of very poor slack. Though it was apparently easy to make
crucible steel castings, it was not in reality easy to make a true
steel, that was to say, to make a metal that contained only the correct
proportions of carbon and silicon and manganese. The only real way to
make crucible castings of true steel was to melt the proper proportions
of cast steel scrap with the proper amounts of silicon and manganese to
produce that chemical composition which was known to be necessary in
best castings. It was in consequence of this difficulty that many makers
resorted to the addition of hematite pigs. The Bessemer process was used
much more extensively upon the Continent than in this country in the
manufacture of castings. It seemed likely that Mr. Allen's agitator for
agitating the steel in the ladle so as to remove the gases would be
taken up largely for open-hearth castings and open-hearth mild steel, as
it had a wonderful effect. The Wilson gas producer, working in
conjunction with the open-hearth furnace, had recently produced some
extremely wonderful results. In some large works, steel was by its aid
being melted from slack which was previously absolutely a waste product.
The method of making open-hearth steel castings might be varied greatly.
The ordinary method generally practiced in this country was a
modification of the Terre Noire process. The moulds employed were only
of secondary importance to the making of the steel itself. Unless the
mould was good, no matter how good the steel was, the casing was
spoiled. The best composition which had been found for moulds was that
of a large firm in Sheffield, but unfortunately it was rather expensive.
A good steel casting ought to contain about 0.3 per cent. carbon and 0.3
per cent. of silicon and from 0.6 to 1 per cent. of manganese. Such a
casting, if free from other impurities, would have a strength of between
30 and 40 tons, and on an 8 inch specimen would give an elongation of 20
per cent. or even more. It was possible by the Terre Noire process to
produce by casting as good a piece of steel as could be made by any
amount of rolling and hammering.

The chairman said that, as they had so high an authority as Mr. McCallem
present, Staffordshire men would like to know his opinion upon the open
hearth basic system, in which they were greatly interested.

Mr. McCallem said that he believed that the basic process would be
worked successfully in this country in the open-hearth furnace before it
would be in the converter. At the Brymbo Works, in Wales, he had seen
the basic process worked very successfully in the open-hearth furnace;
and he was recently informed by the manager that he was producing ingots
at the remarkably low sum of 65s. per ton.

The chairman said that some samples which had been sent into
Staffordshire from Brymbo for rolling into sheets had behaved admirably.
He thought that the Patent Shaft and Axletree Company, at Wednesbury,
were at the present moment putting down an open-hearth furnace on the
basic process.

The discussion was continued with considerable vigor by Messrs. H.
Fisher (vice-president), James Rigby, J. Tibbs, M. Millard, Walker, W.
Yeomans (secretary), and others. Several of these gave it as their
experience that the best castings contained the most blowholes, and Mr.
McCallem accepted the pronouncement, with some slight qualification.

       *       *       *       *       *




SCIENCE IN DIMINISHING CASUALTIES AT SEA.


At the recent meeting of the British Association, Don Arturo de
Marcoartu read a paper on the above subject.

He stated that he wished to draw special attention to increasing the
safety of navigation against storms, fogs, fire, and collisions with
wrecks, icebergs, or vessels, and recommending the development of
maritime telegraphy. He urged that vessels should be supplied with
apparatus to communicate with and telegraph to each other and to the
nearest coast the weather and sea passed over by them, and that reports
given by vessels should be used as "warnings" more extensively. He
wished the mid-Atlantic stations connected by telegraph for the same
purpose.

In regard to the use of oil on rough seas, he said that Dr. Badeley in
1857, Mr. John Shields five years ago at Peterhead and last year at
Folkestone, the Board of Trade in 1883, and a committee on life saving
appliances of the United States had made experiments. The conclusions of
the committee were that in deep water oil had a calming effect upon a
rough sea, but there was nothing in either source of information which
yet answered the question whether or not there is in the force exerted
by the wind a point beyond which oil cannot counteract its influence in
causing the sea to break. He thought it appeared that oil had some
utility on tidal bars; on wrecks, to facilitate the operations of
rescue; on lifeboats and on lifebuoys. In regard to icebergs, he thought
the possibility of obtaining an echo from an iceberg when in dangerous
proximity to a ship should be tried. He advocated the use of automatic
sprinklers in the case of fire, the establishment of parabolic
reflectors for concentration of sound, and the further prosecution of
experiments by Professor Bell in establishing communication between
vessels some distance apart by means of interrupted electrical currents.
The improvement of navigation, he said, meant an international code of
police to improve police rules of navigation; an international code of
universal telegraphy for navigation; an international office of
meteorology and navigation to collect the studies; experiments on the
weather, on the sea, on the casualties; and the discovery by experiment
of new apparatus and appliances to diminish maritime disaster.

He had called the attention of two governments to this matter, and he
hoped that before long there would be proposed an international
congress--such as the postal, telegraph, and sanitary congresses, and
the international convention to fix the common meridian--by one of the
maritime powers, by which would be founded an international institution
to diminish casualties at sea. He recommended a universal system of
buoys. The great losses of life and property every year were worthy the
devotion of L300,000 by an international institution, which would be
much less than the monthly average loss in navigation.

Admiral Pim said that ships were improperly built--some were ten times
longer than their beam. There was nothing in the world so ticklish as a
ship; touch her in the waist, and down she goes. He believed sailing
ships ought not to exceed four times their beam, and steamers certainly
not more than six times. He pointed out that a fruitful cause of
accidents was the stopping of steaming all at once in the case of
impending collision, by which the rudder lost control of the vessel. If
constructors looked more to the form of the ships, and got them to steer
better, collisions would be avoided.

The Lord Advocate said it had always occurred to him that one great
secret of collisions at sea was the present system of lights, which made
it impossible for the vessel at once to inform another vessel what it
was about. The method of signaling was very crude, and he ventured to
say that it was quite out of date when vessels met each other at a rate
of speed of 24 to 25 knots. He had, as an amateur, tried a method which
he would attempt to explain. His idea was to fit up a lantern on deck,
showing an electric light. The instrument would be controlled by the
rudder, and the commanding officer of the vessel would be able so to
turn it when the helm was put up or down that the light would flash at
some distance in front of either bow of the vessel, and thus be a signal
to a vessel coming in an opposite direction. When the helm was
amidships, the light was shown straight ahead, and could not be moved
until the helm was shifted. The direction in which the vessel was going
could not by any possibility be mistaken, and it was plain that if the
lights from two ships crossed each other, then there was danger. If the
lights were clear of each other, then the ships would pass safely.

Sir James Douglass asked if his Lordship had made any experiments.

The Lord Advocate said he had not. The Board of Trade had such a number
of inventions on this subject on hand that he supposed they were already
disgusted. Besides, he was only an amateur, and left the carrying out of
the suggestion to others.

Sir James Douglass said this idea of a lantern did very well for a short
distance, but for a long distance it utterly failed. It was very
difficult to realize a movement from a distance of over a mile out to
sea, and signals were required to be visible for from two to three
miles.

The Lord Advocate said his idea depended not upon the object light, but
upon the sweep of the light on the water.

Sir James Douglass said all those questions were of the utmost
importance to a maritime country. In regard to experiments with oil on
troubled water, he had witnessed them, and he had carefully studied all
the reports, and had come to the conclusion that they were all very well
in a tub of water or a pond, but on the ocean they were utterly
hopeless. He would stake his reputation on that. They had been tried in
the neighborhood of Aberdeen, and he had prophesied the results before
they were commenced. It was utterly hopeless to think that a quantity of
oil had the power of laying a storm--all the world could not produce oil
enough to bring about that result.

There might be something in maritime telegraphy, and he hoped the
experiments of Mr. Graham Bell, in transmitting through two or three
mile distances, would come to something. He did not believe in powerful
lights. Increase the lights to any very great extent, and a dazzling
effect was the result. In regard to sound, he wondered that no more
effective alarm was used than the whistle. It was well known that, as
the whistle instrument was enlarged, the sound became more and more a
roar. He would have ships use all their boiler power in sounding a
siren, so that the sound could be heard at a distance of not less than
two or three miles in any weather. With such a signal as that there
ought to be, not absolute safety, but collisions would be more easily
prevented. He was glad to say that a universal system of buoys had been
practically arranged, thanks to the Duke of Edinburgh and his committee,
so that, as soon as an old system can be changed to a new one, all the
buoys would bear one universal language.

Admiral Pim pointed out that a red light would show four miles, while a
green light was only visible for two miles and a half, so that, if a
green light were seen, it indicated that the two vessels were within two
miles and a half of each other.

Sir James Douglass said there was undoubtedly a weakness in regard to
these lights; and he held that in the manufacture of lights effect
should be given to the difference that existed in the various lights, so
that, by making the green light more powerful, it could penetrate as far
as the red, and in the same way making the red and green lights
proportionately more powerful, so that they would penetrate as far as
the white light.

Sir James Douglass said he had seen a parabolic reflector for sound
tried, but, unfortunately, the reflector so intensified and focused all
the sounds about the vessel and the noise of the sea that the operator
could hear nothing but a chaos of sound.

       *       *       *       *       *




A PLAN FOR A CARBONIZING HOUSE.


The operation of carbonizing woolen rags for the purpose of obtaining
pure wool, through the destruction of the vegetable substances contained
in the raw material, maybe divided into two parts, viz., the immersion
of the rags in acid, with subsequent washing and drying, and the
carbonization properly so called. The first part is so well known, and
is so simple in its details and apparatus, that it is useless to dwell
upon it in this place. But the second requires more scientific
arrangements than those that seem to be generally adopted, and, as
carbonization is now tending to constitute a special industry, we think
it is of interest to give here a typical plan for a plant of this kind.
It will be remarked that this plan contains all the parts in duplicate.
The object of this arrangement is to permit of a greater production, by
rendering the operation continuous through half of the apparatus being
in operation while the other half is being emptied and filled.

Figs. 4 and 5 give plans of the ground floor and first story, and Figs.
1, 2, and 3 give vertical sections. The second story is arranged like
the first, and serves as a drier. As we have said, there is a double
series of chambers for carbonization, drying, and work generally. These
two series are arranged on each side of a central portion, which
contains the heating and ventilating apparatus and a stone stairway
giving access to the upper stories. The heating apparatus is a hot air
stove provided with a system of piping. The rags to be carbonized or the
wool to be dried are placed upon wire cloth frames.

The carbonization is effected in the following way: When the heating
apparatus has been fired up, and has been operating for about half an
hour, the apertures, i, are opened so as to let the air in, as are also
those, m, which allow the hot air to pass into the chambers. The hot air
then descends from the top of the chamber into the wool or rags, and,
becoming saturated and heavier, descends and makes its exit from the
chamber through an aperture, n, near the floor, whence it flows to the
central chimney. This latter, which is built of brick or stone, contains
in its center a second chimney (formed of cast or forged iron pipes)
that serves to carry off into the atmosphere the products of combustion
from the heating apparatus. The heat that radiates from these pipes
serves at the same time to heat the annular space through which the
vapors derived from the wool are disengaged.

The air, heated to 40 deg. or 50 deg., is made to pass thus for several hours,
until the greater part of the humidity has been removed. The temperature
is then raised to 80 deg. or 90 deg. by gradually closing the apertures that
give access to the ventilating chimney. In order that it may be possible
to further increase the temperature during the last hour, and raise it
to 90 deg. or 120 deg., an arrangement is provided that prevents all entrance of
the external air into the heating apparatus, and that replaces such air
with the hot air of the chamber; so that this hot air circulates in the
pipes of the stove and thus becomes gradually hotter and hotter. The hot
vapors that issue from the lower chamber rise into the upper one, where
they are used for the preliminary drying of another part of the
materials.

The hot air stove should be well lined with refractory clay, in order to
prevent the iron from getting red hot, and the grate should be of
relatively wide surface. All the pipes should be of cast iron, and all
the joints be well turned. Every neglect to see to such matters, with a
view to saving money, will surely lead in the long run to bad results.

[Illustration: PLAN OF WORKS FOR CARBONIZING WOOL. (Scale 1-200.)]

The mode of work indicated here is called the moist process. It
necessitates the use of a solution of sulphuric acid, but, as this
latter destroys most colors, it cannot be used when it is desired to
preserve the tint of the woolen under treatment. In this case recourse
is had to the dry process, which consists in substituting the vapors of
nitric acid heated to 115 deg. or 125 deg. for the sulphuric acid. The
arrangement of the rooms must likewise be different. The chambers, which
may be in duplicate, as in the preceding case, are vaulted, and are
about three yards long by three wide and three high. The rags are put
into wire cages that have six divisions, and that are located in the
middle of the chamber, where they are slowly revolved by means of
gearings. Under the floor are the heating flues, and upon it is a
reservoir for holding the vessel that contains the acid to be vaporized.
The arrangements for the admission of air and carrying along the vapors
are the same as in the other case. Great precaution should be taken to
have the flues so constructed as to prevent fire.--_Bull, de la Musee de
l'Industrie_.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR EVAPORATING ORGANIC LIQUIDS.


According to Mr. D'A. Bernard, it is especially important, in the dry
distillation of distiller's wash in a closed vessel, for the production
of methyls, ammonia, acetates, and methylamine, that the mass shall be
divided as completely as possible, since it then takes but a relatively
moderate heat to completely destroy the organic coloring matter
contained in the wash. The apparatus shown in Figs. 1 and 2 is based
upon this observation.

The wash enters, through the hopper, D, and the valve, z, a long boiler,
B, which is heated by the furnace, F, through the intermedium of a
waterbath, w. An agitator, E, moves the mass slowly to the other
extremity of the boiler, from whence it makes its exit in the form of
dust. To the frame, E, are fixed the scrapers, b, and the interrupted
pieces, a, in front of which are the hinged valves, c. In the motion of
the pieces, a, from right to left, these valves free the apertures
thereof and allow the wash to pass, while in the motion from left to
right the apertures are closed and the valves push the mass to be
evaporated before them.

From any motor whatever, the frame, E, receives a double to and fro
motion in a horizontal and vertical direction, the latter of which is
produced by the rods, f, which are provided at their lower, forked
extremity with rollers, e, over which passes the piece, d, that supports
the frame, E. At their upper part the rods, f, pass through the side of
the boiler, through the intermedium of stuffing boxes, and are connected
by their upper extremities, through a link, with levers, g, that revolve
around the point, h. A cam shaft, M, communicates a temporary,
alternately rising and descending motion to the levers, g, and the rods
f. The same shaft, M, opens and closes the valve, z, of the hopper, D,
and thus regulates the entrance of the wash into the boiler. The frame,
E, receives its horizontal to and fro motion from the rod, l, which
traverses a stuffing-box and is moved by a crank on an eccentric, m. The
material in powder derived from the evaporation of the wash is stored at
the extremity of the apparatus into a lixiviating vessel, G, provided
with a stirrer, H. The salts and other analogous matters are dissolved,
and the residuum, which constitutes a carbonaceous mass, is forced out
of the apparatus, while the solution passes directly to the refinery,
where it is evaporated.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR THE EVAPORATION OF ORGANIC LIQUIDS.]

In manufactories where no refining is done, the crude potassa in powder
is pushed on to a prolongation of the apparatus which is cooled by means
of water, and is removed from time to time with shovels by the workmen,
so that the orifice of the boiler remains constantly covered externally
by the mass, and that the air cannot re-enter the apparatus.

The gases disengaged during the operation pass into a cooler, where they
condense into a liquid which contains ammonia and methylamine. The
non-condensable part of the gases is burned in the furnace of the
manufactory.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED LEVELING MACHINE.


In the American Court of the Inventions Exhibition, London, we find a
leveling machine for sheet metals exhibited by Mr. J.W. Britton, of
Cleveland, Ohio, and which we illustrate.

This apparatus is intended to supersede the cold rolling of plates in
order to take the buckle out of them. The sheets are clamped in the jaws
or grips shown, and the stretch is effected by means of a hydraulic ram
connected directly to the nearest pair of jaws. The power is obtained by
means of a pair of pumps run through spur-gearing by the belt pulleys
shown. The action of the machine puts a strain on those parts of the
plates which are not "bagged" or buckled, and this causes the surface to
extend, the slack parts of the plate not being subject to the same
stretching action. The machine shown is designed to operate on sheet
iron from No. 7 to No. 30 gauge, and up to 36 in. wide, the limit for
length being 120 in. About a dozen sheets can be operated on at once.
The machine appears to have met with considerable success in America,
and has been used for mild steel, iron, galvanized or tinned sheets,
copper, brass, and zinc. The details of this machine are given in Figs.
1 to 8. Figs. 1 and 2 are a plan and side elevation of the bed of the
machine, showing the position of the hydraulic ram. Fig. 3 shows the
bars used for holding the back jaws in position, with the holes for
adjusting to different lengths of the plates. Fig. 4 is a back view and
section of the crosshead and one of the bolts that connect the moving
grip with the hydraulic ram. Fig. 5 gives a plan and cross section of
the back grip, and Fig. 6 is a back elevation of the same, with a front
view and section of the gripping part. Fig. 7 shows the gear by which
the jaws are opened and closed.

[Illustration: BRITTON'S PLATE STRAIGHTENING MACHINE.]

