"Affirmative."

Drummer gave a heavy sigh and motioned Brad to a
bench along a bulkhead. They sat and stared at the
bulkhead opposite.

"How far will you go to take the Terminals?"
Drummer asked.

"Destructively?"

"Yes."

"You're in command of the combined fleet, Drummer.
You tell me."

A deep silence settled between them. Drummer
brought his eyes around to where he could observe
Brad's profile. His breath became shallow.

"What I now say to you, Brad, puts my life in
your hands, but say it I must." He paused, as if to
gather strength and conviction, and to organize
his thoughts. "I believe that Narval is deranged. He
would rather see the Solar System's civilization's
grovel in the dust than have them advance, even
survive, without him as their ruler."

"Are you suggesting he be stopped?"

"He must be."

"How?"

"I hoped you would know."

"Me? Why me?"

"You've become the authority on the capabilities
and tactics of this operation. The Plutonian
military Commanders respect you as a leader
and as a professional, as do the Commanders
of the ships soon to join us. Need I say more?"

Brad turned to face Drummer.

"How far do you commit yourself?"

"My life."

"It will take that, and more."

"What do you mean?"

"Betrayal strips men of -- I believe the word is --
honor. Would you accept being a traitor to President
Narval?"

"If it will bring an end to this madness."

"Are you willing to follow my orders -- without
question?"

"To what purpose?"

"Your words: the end of this madness."

"Define your terms, man. Tell me in your words, not
mine, to what end I commit my life, and as you put
it, my honor."

"Confusion and disruption throughout the combined
fleet, destruction of Plutonian warships and,
possibly, those of all INOR; no assault on the
Terminals and, ultimately, removal of Narval from
any position of authority in the Outer Region."

Drummer nodded slowly.

"I commit myself to that purpose. And yourself?"

"Committed."

A knock on the door. The crewman peered in.

"Comm-center has a classified Category One spunnel
message for you, Admiral Drummer," he said.
"It's in the President's personal code, sir, to which
only you have the keys. Have I your permission to
pick up the message and bring it to you?"

"Never mind," Drummer replied. "We're heading back
under the dome. I'll get it."

 ##

Drummer read again the message he had decoded
and handed it to Brad who quickly scanned and silently
returned it. Drummer glanced at the message again
and placed it slowly in the middle of his desk. The
communication bore the dispatch symbols of the
Revenge within the past hour. The text was brief:

"Narval to Drummer. We have left the spunnel node
nearest the conference site, now two hours distant.
Your launch at target must be consistent with the
conference schedule just provided to me by the
Conference Controller.

"Based on conference agenda and schedule
I order you to energize the communications
barrier immediately upon receipt of this message.
Further, I order you to have allegiance sworn to
me by Commanders of all INOR ships' officers and
the Director of the Slingshot Construction Site
not more than four hours following receipt this
message. Spunnel flash to me through the barrier
'mind only' immediately upon taking the objective.
Spunnel flash immediately to me your understanding
of this order."





 Chapter THIRTY-EIGHT


The soft clicks of switches opening and closing and
the soft thunks of levers rammed home were the only
sounds on the Dragon's command deck as Drummer
and Brad climbed the companionway.

Captain Hyk, standing on the bridge platform above
the command deck, took them in with a quick glance,
nodded, and continued about his business directing
and observing the Dragon entering launch.

Brad followed Drummer to a computer in a tiny
alcove on a balcony above the plotting table. They
swung seats out from under the table on which the
console rested, sat, and Brad entered his DNA ID
and password. He followed with instructions that
brought a series of real-time graphics across the
monitor.

Selecting first one, then another, the two men
studied the displays, as they pointed and commented
on their observations. Drummer straightened.

"Recap, Brad," he ordered.

Brad tapped keys and the screen listed each
Plutonian ship in the Assault Force and its
Commander in one column and the readiness level
for launch in the other.

Brad pointed at the highlighted "Fleet readiness 92
percent."

"Allies?"

"Made the trip from home stations along diverse
routes and under detection wraps. They're inside
the comm-barrier an hour from Point Icarus.
It'll take us that long to launch, form up, do the
distance, and position ourselves to receive them."

A crewman's head appeared at the head of the
companionway, looked about and fixed on Drummer.

"Call from security up at the tunnel entrance, sir.
Visitor to see you."

"Who is it?"

"Major Scarf, sir. Says he has urgent business to
discuss with you."

Drummer and Brad exchanged glances. Hyk immediately
gave his full attention to his monitor's screen.
Drummer knew that neither he nor Hyk could refuse
Scarf's request to come aboard. He addressed Hyk.

"Any objections, Har?"

"None, Admiral."

"Very well," Drummer glanced toward the messenger.
"Escort Major Scarf to my quarters."

 ##

The compartment was small, not built for comfort.
Scarf's massive frame crowded the space.

"I'm coming along." Scarf's tone was brusque.

"The hell you are." Drummer's was equally blunt.

Brad eyed Scarf. "Your job is on the surface," he
said. "What purpose can you serve by tagging along?"

Scarf looked from Drummer to Brad and back, not
sure whom he should address. He chose Drummer.

"Coldfield and the surrounding areas are under full
control of my security forces. I've left my deputy
in charge, and he can contact me within seconds
should that be necessary. With Narval away and
us here, there's not much going on in the Command
Section."

Scarf tapped Drummer's chest with his forefinger,
"you've got more'n a thousand of my best troops for
occupation duty on the Terminals. They're mine and
I'm gonna lead them when they go into action. I'm
moving in over my on-site troop commander, that's
all. What's more, I understand you've reassigned
some of my troops to this wagon. That's fine with
me. I'll just move in with them, and assume direct
command until they're back with the main group.
Entirely proper for me to do this as chief of their
Service."

Brad thrust his hands into his pockets to hide the
fists they had formed. His mind worked furiously
on the new threat.

"Our plans are complete, Scarf," he said. "If you
remain, we expect you to follow orders from the
Fleet Commander."

Scarf, sure of his victory, showed his pleasure.

"Sure, sure," he said, a grin creasing his face,
waving the proviso away with the back of his
hand. "Anything the boss says. It's your show. I
understand."

Taking Drummer's silence as acquiescence, Scarf
pivoted in the small space and squeezed out of the
compartment. He barked at the guard to escort him
to the officer-in-charge of the troop detachment.

Drummer issued the launch order. One following the
other, the warships catapulted off of their launch
tracks, rose swiftly into space, and formed up
behind mine sweepers Scamp, Varlet and Scalawag.
The battle cruisers Dragon and Tiger, guarded by
destroyer screens and support ships, turned toward
Point Icarus.

Three million kay ahead, the Slingshot terminals
appeared as just another unblinking light in a
runnel of multicolored jewels.

Slingshot had always been real to Brad; in the
deepening crisis for humankind's survival its
purpose was profound. It had been so to him
as far back as he could remember.

Brad keyed the Slingshot complex closer on a
nearby computer screen. Generally familiar with
the schematics of the Slingshot stations, he
was overwhelmed by the two enormous cones and
their peripherals, which configured the Terminals'
hoppers. Each terminal, almost three kay across
its base, formed an intricate maze of interlocked
spars, beams, panels, conduit and modules.

The Slingshot stations were centers of activity.
Inside and out, the work areas were crowded. In
all directions were massive and intricate fusion
generators, transformers and power distribution
systems; dozens of spherical, rectangular and
cylindrical workshops and clusters of habitat,
first aid stations, transports and tugs and barges
pushing, pulling, warping and traversing. It was a
picture of enormous structures and modules spread
across the visible space ahead. The scene was
geometric, multidimensional, and seemingly chaotic.

Separated from each other by more than a hundred
kay of open space, the Terminal schematic expanded
rapidly on the Dragon's screens as the fleet
narrowed the gap. At Point Icarus the Slingshot
construction site filled more than half the view
tanks space.

Brad and Drummer watched as changes occurred
hastily throughout the Terminals' space. Lights
dimmed or blacked out entirely; others increased
intensity. Three destroyers darted through the
protective force field's gates, deployed, and took
defensive positions. A mine-layer advanced, came
about and laid a pattern of tac-nuclear eggs.

The Plutonian Assault Force had been quickly
detected. Their intentions obvious, Slingshot's
managers prepared as best they could to defend
themselves. Scores of transports were lined up to
escape through the gateway; those that had reached
the outside lumbered away toward deep space.





 Chapter THIRTY-NINE


 SOLAR LEADERS ARRIVE FOR CONFERENCE
 TRANS-SOLAR NEWS SERVICE
 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
 FLASH: SYSTEM-WIDE
 Filed at Solar Conference Site

The Leaders of the United Inner Planetary System
(UIPS) and the Independent Nations of the Outer
Region (INOR) are at the place they selected to
resolve urgent Solar System problems of mutual
concern. Here's how the arrangements worked out.

Consistent with the schedule, the INOR guests
flashed their international identification and ship
numbers to the Conference Control Center to
report that they had formally arrived in response
to President Camari's invitation.

Concurrently, at a signal from the UIPS President's
ship Eagle, the station flashed an array of
multicolored beacons. Docking berths along the
Conference Site's rim opened and controllers
transmitted "Ready" signals to the visiting
flagships. Tugs, utilities, and emergency craft
took their stations.

The UIPS Eagle nosed forward and matched its
headings and moments to the Disk. Mass attractors
took over, fine-tuned the alignment and drift, and
gently drew the Eagle a third its length into the
dock. Mooring beams grasped the vessel and it was
transfixed. A red and white candy-striped umbilical
snaked out from the dock and sealed against the
Eagle's main portal.

Eagle, the host, had docked.

Turning to the guests, the "Ready" signals flashed
again. Taking the lead, Planet Pluto's Revenge
matched up and was drawn into its docking space.
The others followed. The disk was transformed
into a multi-spoke wheel spinning slowly against
the backdrop of sun, planets, satellites, space
colonies and stars.

The umbilicals' seals tested and secure, the Heads
of State disembarked, each followed by an entourage
of advisors, diplomats, strategists, economists,
interplanetary law specialists, sociologists,
philosophers, and others expert in the disciplines
appropriate to the agenda.

The parties walked along separate corridors from
their docking berth to an arched entry into the
conference theater at the hub. The pseudo-gravity
plates had been eased to a comfortable level
for the inhabitants of the Outer Region. The
representatives of Earth wore soft enhancer
boots to compensate.

The central hall was huge, and the round table at
its center wide enough to accommodate them all.
Massive chairs were at the table, and behind each a
row of smaller chairs to accommodate the lessors.
A holoview tank, suspended halfway to the overhead,
glowed softly. The walls were festooned with the
emblems and insignia of all Nations in attendance.

Arriving under the arch, the Leaders paused.
President Camari stepped away from his chair,
his open arms an invitation to all to enter and
join him at the table.

Entering and approaching the table, the Leaders
turned to right and left to greet each other.
Formality aside for the moment, they expressed
their pleasure at seeing one another again, or in
meeting for the first time. They came together
at the table and formed small groups.

Camari and Narval took each other's measure as they
worked their way forward. Camari, as host, paused
at each knot or singular meeting to shake hands
and express his pleasure to each Head of State
for accepting his invitation. Politicians all, supreme
diplomats of the Solar Community, they accommodated
to the occasion and replied in kind.

Camari and Narval came face to face. Silence
gripped the room.

"Greetings, President Narval," Camari said, "your
presence at this conference will contribute much
to its success."

"Greeting to you, President Camari. I feel certain
that it will."

"I remind you, President Narval, these are indeed
desperate times. Extraordinary measures are
essential if we are to preserve our civilizations,
perhaps our species. Separately or collectively,
we must be prepared to take risks for our survival.
Do you agree?"

"Not only do I agree, Mr. President, but I shall
remind you of your words as we proceed through
these deliberations."

"So be it."

Camari nodded and turned away. With everyone's
eyes on him, he strode to his place at the table,
spread his arms again wide in welcome, and sat.

Greetings over, the Solar System's leaders took
their places at the great table. Their advisors
entered and took seats behind them.

The first convocation for the survival of the
entire Solar Community was under way.





 Chapter FORTY


Captain Hyk strode the bridge impatiently.

"Point Icarus in ten minutes," he reported to
Drummer and Brad as they entered the tight
compartment. "The Jovians and Saturnians are
coming up fast, and the Neptune-Uranus team
is close behind. Orders?"

"You'll get yours with the rest, Har," Drummer's
tone reflected his tension. He turned to Brad.

"Brad, I wish to address the Commanders of all
Plutonian ships. Set up closed communications,
please."

