"And that's not all," Manelli said. "Let's say at Jamaica one day
there was a race."

"All right," Malone said agreeably. "That doesn't require a whole lot
of imagination."

"And let's say," Manelli went on, "that the bookies--if there are any
bookies in this town; who knows?--that they got the word about who
came in, win, place and show."

"Sounds natural," Malone said.

"Sure it does," Manelli said. "But there was a foul-up someplace,
because the win animal was disqualified and nobody heard about it
until after a lot of payoffs were made. That costs money." He stopped.
"I mean it would cost money, if it happened," he finished.

"Sure," Malone said. "Certainly would."

"And you tell me it's not the FBI?" Manelli said.

"That's right," Malone said. "As a matter of fact, we're investigating
things like these confusions and inefficiencies all over."

Manelli finished his drink in one long, amazed swallow. "Now, wait a
minute," he said. "Let's say for a joke, like, for laughs, that I am
some kind of a wheel in these things, in bookies and numbers boys and
like that."

"Let's call it a syndicate," Malone said. "Just for laughs."

"Okay, then," Manelli said, with a suspicious gaze at Malone.
"Whatever you call it, a man like me today, he wouldn't be some
two-bit chiseler without brains. He would be a businessman, a
smooth-operating smart businessman. Right?"

"Right," Malone said. "And what I want to know is: how's business?"

"You're kidding?" Manelli said.

"I'm not kidding," Malone said. "I mean it. The FBI's investigating
mix-ups just like the ones you're telling me about. We want to stop
them."

Manelli blinked. "You know, Mr. Malone," he said softly, "I heard
about government interference in private enterprise, but don't you
think this is a little too far out?"

Malone shrugged. "That's what I'm here for," he said. "Take it or
leave it."

"Just so it's understood," Manelli said, "that we're talking about
imaginary things. Theoretical."

"Sure," Malone said. "Imagine away."

"Well," Manelli said slowly, "you heard about this wrecked night-club
in Florida? It happened maybe a month ago, in Miami?"

"I heard about it," Malone said.

"This is just a for-instance, you know," Manelli said. "But suppose
there was a roulette wheel in that club. Just a wheel."

"Okay," Malone said.

"And suppose the wheel was rigged a little bit," Manelli said. "Not
seriously, just a little bit."

"Fine," Malone said. "This is going to explain a wrecked club?"

"Well, sure," Manelli said. "Because something went wrong with the
machinery, or maybe the operator goofed up. And number seven came up
eight times in a row."

"Good old lucky seven," Malone said.

"So there was a riot," Manelli said. "Because some people had money on
the number, and some people got suspicious, and like that. And there
was a riot."

"And the club got wrecked," Malone said. "That's what I call bad
luck."

"Luck?" Manelli said. "What does luck have to do with roulette?
Somebody goofed, that's all."

"Oh," Malone said. "Sure."

"And that's the way it's been going," Manelli said. He puffed on his
cigar, put it in a nearby ashtray, and blew out a great Vesuvian spout
of smoke.

"Too bad," Malone said sympathetically.

"It's all over," Manelli said. "Mistakes and people making the
mistakes, goofing up here and there and everyplace. There have been
guys killed because they made mistakes, and nobody can afford guys
being killed all the time."

"It does run into expense," Malone said.

"And time, and hiring guys to do the killing, and then they goof up,
too," Manelli said. "It's terrible. Some guys have even been killed
without they made any mistakes at all. Just by accident, sort of."

"Well," Malone said carefully, "you can depend on the government to do
everything in its power to straighten things out."

Manelli frowned. "You mean that, Mr. Malone?"

"Of course I do," Malone said honestly. He hadn't, he reminded
himself, promised to help Manelli. He had only promised to straighten
things out. And he could figure out what that might mean later, when
he had the time.

"All I say is, it's funny," Manelli said. "It's crazy."

"That's the way it is," Malone said.

Manelli looked at him narrowly. "Mr. Malone," he said at last, "maybe
you mean it at that. Maybe you do."

"Sure I do," Malone said. "After all, the government is supposed to
help its citizens."

Manelli shook his head. "Mr. Malone," he said, "you can call me
Cesare. Everybody does."

"No, they don't," Malone said. "They call you Cheese. I've got a
research staff too."

"So call me Cheese," Manelli said. "I don't mind."

"There's only one little trouble," Malone said. "If I called you
Cheese, you'd call me Ken. And word would get around."

"I see what you mean," Manelli said.

"I don't think either one of us wants his associates to think we're
friends," Malone said.

"I guess not," Manelli said. "It would cause uneasiness."

"And a certain lack of confidence," Malone said. "So suppose I go on
calling you Mr. Manelli?"

"Fine," Manelli said. "And I'll call you Mr. Malone, like always."

Malone smiled and stood up. "Well, then," he said, "good-bye, Mr.
Manelli."

Manelli rose, too. "Goodbye, Mr. Malone," he said. "And good luck, if
you really mean what you said."

"Oh, I do," Malone said.

"Because things are terrible," Manelli said. "And they're getting
worse every day. You should only know."

"Don't worry," Malone said. "Things will be straightened out pretty
soon." He hoped, as he went out the door and down the corridor, that
he was telling the truth there, at least. He'd sounded fairly
confident, he thought, but he didn't feel quite so confident. The
secretary was busy on the switchboard when he came out into the
anteroom, and he went by without a greeting, his mind busy, churning
and confused.

He felt as if his head were on just a little crooked. Or as if, maybe,
he had a small hole in it somewhere and facts were leaking out onto
the sidewalk.

If he only looked at the problem in the right way, he told himself, he
would see just what was going on.

But what was the right way?

"That," Malone murmured as he hailed a cab for the ride back to 69th
Street, "is the big, sixty-four-thousand-dollar question. And how much
time do I have for an answer?"


11

"Boyd?" the agent-in-charge said. "He went out to talk to Mike Sand
down at the ITU a while ago, and he hasn't come back yet."

"Fine," Malone said. "I'll be in my office if he wants me."

The agent-in-charge picked up a small package. "A messenger brought
this," he said. "It's from the Psychical Research Society, and if it's
ghosts, they're much smaller than last time."

"Dehydrated," Malone said. "Just add ectoplasm and out they come,
shouting _boo_ at everybody and dancing all over the world."

"Sounds wonderful," the agent-in-charge said. "Can I come to the
party?"

"First," Malone said judiciously, "you'd have to be dead. Of course, I
can arrange that--"

"Thanks," the agent-in-charge said, leaving in a hurry. Malone went on
down to his office and opened the package. It contained more
facsimiles from Sir Lewis Carter, all dealing with telepathic
projection. He spent a few minutes looking them over and trying to
make some connected sense out of them, and then he just sat and
thought for awhile.

Finally he picked up the phone. In a few minutes he was talking to Dr.
Thomas O'Connor, at Yucca Flats.

"Telepathic projection?" O'Connor said when Malone asked him the
question he'd thought of. "Well, now. I should say that--no. First,
Mr. Malone, tell me what evidence you have for this phenomenon."

Malone felt almost happy, as if he had done all his homework before
the instructor called on him. "According to what I've been able to get
from the PRS," he said, "ordinary people--people who aren't
telepaths--occasionally receive some sort of messages from other
people."

"I assume," O'Connor said frostily, "that you are speaking of
telepathic messages?"

Malone nodded guiltily. "I didn't mean the phone," he said, "or
letters or things like that. Telepathic messages, or something very
like it."

"Indeed," O'Connor said. "Mr. Malone, I believe you will find that
such occurrences, when accurately reported, are confined to close
relatives or loved ones of the person projecting the message."

Malone thought back. "That's right," he said.

"And, further," O'Connor went on, "I think you'll find that the--ah--
message so received is one indicating that the projector of such a
message is in dire peril. He has, for instance, been badly injured, or
is rapidly approaching death, or else he has narrowly escaped death."

"True," Malone said.

"Under such circumstances," O'Connor said coldly, "it is possible that
the mind of the person projecting the communication might be capable
of generating immense psionic power, thereby forcing even a
non-telepath to recognize the content of the message."

"Good," Malone said. "That's wonderful, Doctor, and I--"

"But," O'Connor said sharply, "the amount of psionic energy necessary
for such a feat is tremendous. Usually, it is the final burst of
energy, the outpouring of all the remaining psionic force immediately
before death. And if death does not occur, the person is at the least
greatly weakened; his mind, if it ever does recover, needs time and
rest to do so."

Malone let that sink in slowly. "Then a person couldn't do it very
often," he said.

"Hardly," O'Connor said.

Malone nodded. "It's like--like giving blood to a blood bank. Giving,
say, three quarts of blood. It might not kill you. But if it didn't,
you'd be weak for a long time."

"Exactly," O'Connor said. "A good analogy, Mr. Malone."

Malone hated himself for it, but he felt pleased when O'Connor praised
him. "Well," he said, "that winds up Cartier Taylor's theory pretty
thoroughly."

"I should think so," O'Connor said. "I am surprised, Mr. Malone, that
you would put any credence whatever in that man's theories. His
factual data, I will admit, is fairly reliable. But his theories are--
well, they are hardly worth the time it takes to read them."

"I see," Malone said. "It did seem like a good answer, though."

"It undoubtedly is a good one," O'Connor said. "It is clever and has
the advantage of being simple. It is contradicted, Mr. Malone, only by
the facts."

"Sure," Malone said sadly. "But--hey. Wait a minute."

"Yes?" O'Connor said.

"One person couldn't do this alone, at least, not very often and not
without serious harm to himself. Right?"

"That is what I said," O'Connor agreed. "Yes, Mr. Malone."

"But how about several people?" Malone said. "I mean, well, let's look
at that blood bank again. You need three quarts of blood. But one
person doesn't have to give it. Suppose twelve people gave half a pint
each. Suppose twenty-four people gave a quarter of a pint each.
Suppose--"

"There is," O'Connor said, "a point of diminishing returns. But I do
see your point, Mr. Malone." He thought for a second. "It might just
be possible," he said. "At least theoretically. But it would take a
great deal of mental co-ordination among the participants. They would
have to be telepathic themselves, for one thing."

"Why?" Malone said, feeling stupid.

"Because they would have to mesh their thoughts closely enough to
direct them properly and at the correct time." O'Connor nodded. "But,
given that, I imagine that it could be done."

"Wonderful," Malone said.

"However," O'Connor said, apparently glad to throw even a little cold
water on the notion, "it could not be done for very long periods of
time, you realize."

"Sure," Malone said happily.

"By the way, Mr. Malone," O'Connor said. "Does this have anything to
do with the hypothesis you presented to me some time ago? Mass
hypnotism, as I recall--"

"No," Malone said. "I've given that idea up for good. I think this is
being done on an individual basis--working on one person at a time."
Then another idea hit him. "You say these people would have to be
telepaths?"

"That's right," O'Connor said.

"Then wouldn't Her Majesty know about them? If they're telepaths? Or
is there some kind of a mind shield or something that a telepath could
work out?"

"Mind shield?" O'Connor said. "Ah, yes. Miss Thompson might be fooled
by such a shield. It would have to be an exceptional one, but such
things do seem to be possible. They belong to the realm of mental
disciplines, of course, rather than psionics."

"Sure," Malone said. "But there could be that kind of shield?"

"There could," O'Connor said. "The mind which created the shield for
itself would have to be of tremendous power and a really high order of
control. A strong, sane mind might conceivably create such a block
that even Miss Thompson, let us say, might believe that she was
picking up a real mind, when she was only picking up surface thoughts,
with the real thought hidden behind the telepathic block."

"Fine," Malone said. "Thanks. Thanks a lot, Dr. O'Connor."

"I am always happy to put my extensive knowledge of science at your
disposal, Mr. Malone," O'Connor said.

Malone watched the image collapse without really seeing it. Instead,
