we expect to rear upon this foundation a clinical structure.
How does this hypothesis apply to surgical operations?


Prevention of Shock by the Application of the Principle of
Anoci-association



Upon this hypothesis a new principle in operative surgery is founded, _i.
e_., operation during the state of _anoci-association_. Assuming that
no unfavorable effect is produced by the anesthetic and that there is
no hemorrhage, the cells of the brain cannot be exhausted in the course
of a surgical operation except by fear or by trauma, or by both.
Fear may be excluded by narcotics and special management until
the patient is rendered unconscious by inhalation anesthesia.
Then if, in addition to inhalation anesthesia, the nerve-paths
between the brain and the field of operation are blocked with
cocain,[*] the patient will be placed in the beneficent state of
_anoci-association_, and at the completion of the operation will be
as free from shock as at the beginning.  In so-called "fair risks"
such precautions may not be necessary, but in cases handicapped
by infections, by anemia, by previous shock, and by Graves'
disease, etc., anoci-association may become vitally important.


[*] See footnote, page 4.@@@


Graves' Disease


By applying the principle of the discharge of nervous energy by
phylogenetic association, and by making the additional hypothesis
that in the discharge of nervous energy the thyroid gland is stimulated
through the nervous system, we can explain many of the phenomena
of Graves' disease and may possibly discover some of the factors
which explain both its genesis and its cure.

In the wild state of animal life in which only the fittest
survive in the struggle for existence, every point of advantage
has its value.  An animal engaged in battle or in a desperate
effort to escape will be able to give a better account of itself
if it have some means of accelerating the discharge of energy--
some influence like that of pouring oil upon the kindling fire.
There is evidence, though perhaps it is not conclusive,
that such an influence is exerted by the thyroid gland.
In myxedema, a condition characterized by a lack of thyroid secretion,
there is dulness of the reflexes and of the intellect, a lowered
muscular power, and generally a sluggish discharge of energy.
In Graves' disease there is an excessive production of thyroid secretion.
In this disease the reflexes are increased, the discharge of
energy is greatly facilitated, and metabolism is at a maximum.
The same phenomena occur also after the administration of thyroid
extract in large doses to normal subjects.  In the course of
sexual activities there is an increased action of the thyroid,
which is indicated by an increase in its size and vascularity.
That in fear and in injury the thyroid, in cases of Graves'
disease, is probably stimulated to increased activity is indicated
by the increased activity of the thyroid circulation, by an increase
in the size of the gland, by the histologic appearance of activity
in the nuclei of the cells, and by an increase of the toxic symptoms.
Finally, Asher has stated that electric stimulation of the nerve supply
of the thyroid causes an increased secretion.  The origin of many cases
of Graves' disease is closely associated with some of the causes
of the discharge of nervous energy, depressive influences especially,
such as nervous shocks, worry and nervous strain, disappointment in love,
business reverses, illness and death of relatives and friends.
The association of thyroid activity with procreation is well known,
hence the coincidence of a strain of overwork or of fear with
the sexual development of maturing girls is obviously favorable
to the incidence of Graves' disease.  The presence of a colloid goiter
is a suitable soil for the development of Graves' disease, and I
fully recognize also the evidence that infection or auto-intoxication
may be contributing factors and must be assigned their role.

I have never known a case of Graves' disease to be caused by success
or happiness alone, or by hard physical labor unattended by
psychic strain, or to be the result of energy voluntarily discharged.
Some cases seem to have had their origin in overdosage with thyroid
extract in too vigorous an attempt to cure a colloid goiter.
One of the most striking characteristics of Graves' disease is
the patient's loss of control and his increased susceptibility
to stimuli, especially to trauma and to fear and to the administration
of thyroid extract.  It has been shown that the various causes
of the discharge of nervous energy produce alterations in the nervous
system and probably in the thyroid gland.  This is especially
true of the fear stimulus, and has been clearly demonstrated
in the brains of rabbits which had been subjected to fear alone
(Fig. 13). Of special interest was the effect of daily fright.
In this case the brain-cells showed a distinct change, although the animal
had been subjected to no fear for twenty-four hours before it was killed
(Fig. 13 C. Now, a great distinction between man and the lower
animals is the greater control man has acquired over his actions.
This quality of control, having been phylogenetically most recently
acquired, is the most vulnerable to various NOCUOUS influences.
The result of a constant noci-integration may be a wearing-out
of the control cells of the brain.  In a typical case of Graves'
disease a marked morphologic change in the brain-cells has
been demonstrated (Fig. 15). As has been previously stated,
the origin of many cases of Graves' disease is associated
with some noci-influence. If this influence causes stimulation
of both the brain and the thyroid, its excessive action may cause
impairment of the brain and also hyperplasia of the thyroid.
As self-control is impaired, fear obtains an ascendency and,
_pari passu_, stimulates the thyroid still more actively (Fig. 16).
Finally, the fear of the disease itself becomes a noci-stimulus.
As the thyroid secretion causes an increase in the facility
with which nervous energy is discharged, a pathologic reciprocal
interaction is established between the brain and the thyroid.
The effect of the constantly recurring stimulus of the noci-influence
is heightened by summation.  This reciprocal goading may
continue until either the brain or the thyroid is destroyed.
If the original noci-stimulus is withdrawn before the fear of the
disease becomes too strong, and before too much injury to the brain
and the thyroid has been inflicted, a spontaneous cure may result.
Recovery may be greatly facilitated by complete therapeutic rest.
A cure implies the return of the brain-cells to their normal state,
with the reestablishment of the normal self-control and the
restoration of the thyroid to its normal state, when the impulses
of daily life will once more have possession of the final
common path and the noci-influence will be dispossessed.
The discovery of the real cause of a given case of Graves' disease is
frequently difficult because it may be of a painful personal nature.
Of extreme interest is the fact that, in the acute stage,
the patient may be unable to refer to the exciting cause without
exhibiting an exacerbation of the symptoms of the disease.
I presume no case should be regarded as cured until reference
can be made to its cause without an abnormal reaction.
It has been established that in Graves' disease injury to any part
of the body, even under inhalation anesthesia, causes an exacerbation
of the disease.  Fear alone may cause an acute exacerbation.
These acute exacerbations are frequently designated "hyperthyroidism"
and are the special hazard of operation.

In applying the principle of anoci-association in operations on
patients with Graves' disease there is scarcely a change in the pulse,
in the respiration, or in the nervous state at the close of the operation.
I know no remedy which can obviate the effect of the inflowing
stimuli from the wound after the cocain[*] has worn off.[t] It
is necessary, therefore,


Beats 70 80 90 100 110 120



Ether ******* ******** ******** ******** ********



N2O ******* ******** ******** ******** *



Anoci.  ******* ******** ******** ** not to venture too far
in serious cases.  Since the adoption of this new method
(anoci-association) my operative results have been so vastly improved
that I now rarely regard any case of Graves' disease as inoperable,
at least to the extent of contraindicating a double ligation (Fig. 17).


[*] See footnote, page 4.@@@

[t] In later papers and in "Anoci-association" (Crile and Lower)
methods of combating postoperative hyperthyroidism are fully discussed.


If we believe that, in accordance with the law of phylogenetic association,
a continuous stimulation of both the brain and the thyroid gland,
accelerated by summation, plays a role in the establishment
of the pathologic interaction seen in Graves' disease, then it
is but the next step to assume that if the nerve connection between
the brain and the thyroid be severed, or if the lobe be excised
and the patient reinforced by a sojourn in a sanatorium or in some
environment free from former noci-associations, he may be restored
to normal health, provided that the brain-cells, the heart,
or other essential organs have not suffered irreparable damage.
There are still many missing links in the solution of this problem,
and the foregoing hypotheses are not offered as final, although from
the viewpoint of the surgeon many of the phenomena of this
disease are explicable.


Sexual-Neurasthenia


The state of sexual neurasthenia is in many respects analogous
to that of Graves' disease.  In the sexual reflexes, summation leads
to a hyperexcitability by psychic and mechanical stimuli of a
specific type which is analogous to the hyperexcitability in Graves'
disease under trauma and fear; the explanation of both conditions
is based on the laws of the discharge of energy by phylogenetic
association and summation.  It would be interesting to observe
the effect of interrupting the nerve impulses from the field of
the sexual receptors by injections of alcohol, or by other agencies,
so as to exclude the associational stimuli until the nervous
mechanism has again become restored to its normal condition.
Interpretation of Some of the Phenomena of Certain Diseases of the
Abdomen in Accordance with the Hypothesis of Phylogenetic Association


The law of phylogenetic association seems to explain many
of the phenomena of certain lesions in the abdominal cavity.
The nociceptors in the abdomen, like nociceptors elsewhere, have been
established as a result of some kind of injury to which during
vast periods of time this region has been frequently exposed.
On this premise, we should at once conclude that there are no
nociceptors for heat within the abdomen because, during countless years,
the intra-abdominal region never came into contact with heat.
That this inference is correct is shown by the fact that the
application of a thermocautery to the intestines when completing
a colostomy in a conscious patient is absolutely painless.
One would conclude also that there are no touch receptors in the
abdominal viscera, and therefore no sense of touch in the peritoneum.
Just as the larynx, the ear, the nose, the sole of the foot,
and the skin have all developed the specific type of nociceptors
which are adapted for their specific protective purposes, and which,
when adequately stimulated, respond in a specific manner in accordance
with the law of phylogenetic association, so, the abdominal viscera
have developed equally specific nociceptors as a protection against
specific nocuous influences.  The principal harmful influences
to which the abdominal viscera have been exposed during vast periods
of time are deep tearing injuries by teeth and claws in the innumerable
struggles of our progenitors with each other and with their enemies
(Fig. 9); peritonitis caused by perforations of the intestinal
tract from ulcers, injuries, appendicitis, gall-stones, etc.;
and overdistention of the hollow viscera by various forms of obstruction.
Whatever may be the explanation, it is a fact that the type
of trauma which results from fighting corresponds closely with
that which causes the most shock in the experimental laboratory.
Division of the intestines with a sharp knife causes no pain,
but pulling on the mesentery elicits pain.  Ligating the stump
of the appendix causes sharp, cramp-like pains.  Sharp division
of the gall-bladder causes no pain, but distention, which is
the gall-bladder's most common pathologic state, produces pain.
Distention of the intestine causes great pain, but sharp cutting or burning
causes none.  In the abdominal viscera, as in the superficial parts,
nociceptors have presumably been developed by specific harmful
influences and each nociceptor is open to stimulation only by a
stimulus of the particular type that produced it.

As a result of the excitation of nociceptors, with which pain
is associated, the routine functions, such as peristalsis, secretion,
and absorption are dispossessed from the control of their respective
nervous mechanisms, just as they are inhibited by fear.  This hypothesis
explains the loss of weight, the lassitude, the indigestion,
the constipation, and the many alterations in the functions of the various
glands and organs of the digestive system in chronic appendicitis.
It readily explains also the extraordinary improvement in the digestive
functions and the general health which follows the removal
of an appendix which is so slightly altered physically that only
the clinical results could persuade one that this slight change could
be an adequate cause for such far-reaching and important symptoms.
This hypothesis explains certain gall-bladder phenomena likewise,--
indigestion, loss of weight, disturbed functions, etc.,--and it
may supply the explanation of the disturbance caused by an active
anal fissure, which is a potent noci-associator, and the consequent
disproportionate relief after the trivial operation for its cure.
Noci-association would well explain also the great functional disturbances
of the viscera which immediately follow abdominal operations.

Postoperative and traumatic neuroses are at once explained on
the ground of noci-association, the resulting strain from which,
upon the brain-cells, causes in them physical lesions.
If one were placed against a wall and were looking into the gun muzzles
of a squad of soldiers, and were told that there were nine chances
out of ten that he would not be killed outright when the volley
was fired, would it help him to be told that he must not be afraid?
Such an experience would be written indelibly on his brain.
This corresponds closely to the position in which some surgical patients
are placed.  In railway wrecks, we can readily understand the striking
difference between the after-effects in the passengers who were conscious
at the time of the accident and those who were asleep or drunk.
In the latter the noci-perceptors and receptors were not aroused,
hence their immunity to the nervous shock.  In the functional disturbances
of the pelvic organs, association and summation may play a large role.
On this hypothesis many cases of neurasthenia may well be explained.
From the behavior of the individual as a whole we may well conclude
that summation is but a scientific expression for "nagging."
Many other pathologic phenomena may be explained in a similar manner.
Thus we can understand the variations in the gastric analyses in a
timid patient alarmed over his condition and afraid of the hospital.
He is integrated by fear, and as fear takes precedence over all
other impulses, no organ functionates normally.  For the same reason,
one sees animals in captivity pine away under the dominance of fear.
The exposure of a sensitive brain to the naked possibility of death from
a surgical operation may be compared to uncovering a photographic plate
in the bright sunlight to inspect it before putting it in the camera.
This principle explains, too, the physical influence of the physician
or surgeon, who, by his PERSONALITY, inspires, like a Kocher,
absolute confidence in his patient.  The brain, through its power
of phylogenetic association, controls many processes that have wholly
escaped from the notice of the "practical man."  It is in accordance
with the law of association that a flower, a word, a touch, a cool breeze,
or even the thought of a fishing rod or of a gun, is helpful.
On the contrary, all suggestions of despair or misfortune--
a corrugated brow, the gloomy silence of despair, or a doubtful word--
are equally depressing.  In like manner, one could add many
illustrations of the symbolism that governs our daily lives.
Thus we see that through the laws of inheritance and noci-association,
we are able to read a new meaning into the clinical phenomena
of various diseases.


Observations on Patients whose Associational Centers are Dulled,
and on Diseases and Injuries of Regions not Endowed with Nociceptors


Reversing the order of our reasoning, let us now glance at the patient
who is unconscious and who, therefore, has lost much of the power
of association.  His mouth is usually dry, the digestive processes
are at a low ebb, the aroma of food causes no secretion of saliva,
tickling the nose causes no sneezing; he catches no cold.
The laryngeal reflex is lost and food may be quietly inhaled;
the entire process of metabolism is low.  The contrast between a man
whose associational centers are keen and a man in whom these centers
are dulled or lost is the contrast between life and death.

In accordance with the law of adaptation through natural selection,
phylogeny, and association, one would expect no pain in abscess
of the brain, in abscess of the liver, in pylephlebitis,
in infection of the hepatic vessels, in endocarditis.
This law explains why there are no nociceptors for cancer,
while there are active nociceptors for the acute infections.
It is because nature has no helpful response to offer against cancer,
while in certain of the acute pyogenic infections the nociceptors
force the beneficent physiologic rest.

Could we dispossess ourselves of the shackles of psychology,
forget its confusing nomenclature, and view the human brain,
as Sherrington has said, "as the organ of, and for the adaptation
of nervous reaction," many clinical phenomena would appear in
a clearer light.


Natural Selection and Chemical Noci-association in the Infections


Thus far we have considered the behavior of the individual as a whole
in his response to a certain type of noci-influences. We have been voicing
our argument in terms of physical escape from GROSS physical dangers,
or of grappling with GROSS NERVE-MUSCULAR enemies of the same or of
other species.  To explain these phenomena we have invoked the aid
of the laws of natural selection and phylogenetic association.
If our conclusions be correct, then it should follow that in the same
laws we may find the explanation of immunity, which, of course,
means a defensive response to our MICROSCOPIC enemies.  There should
be no more difficulty in evolving an efficient army of phagocytes
by natural selection, or in developing specific chemical reactions
against _*microscopic enemies_, than there was in evolving the various
nociceptors for our nerve-muscular defense against our _*gross enemies_.
That immunity is a chemical reaction is no argument against
the application of the law of natural selection or of association.
What essential difference is there between the chemical defense of
the skunk against its NERVE-MUSCULAR enemies and its chemical defense
(immunity) against its MICROSCOPIC ENEMIES?

The administration of vaccines becomes the adequate stimulus which
awakens phylogenetic association of a chemical nature as a result
of which immune bodies are produced.

In discussing this subject I will raise only the question whether
or not the specific character of the inaugural symptoms of some
infectious diseases may be due to phylogenetic association.
These inaugural symptoms are measurably a recapitulation of the leading
phenomena of the disease in its completed clinical picture.
Thus, the furious initiative symptoms of pneumonia, of peritonitis,
or erysipelas, of the exanthemata, are exaggerations of phenomena
which are analogous to the phenomena accompanying physical injury
and fear of physical violence.  Just as the acute phenomena of fear,
or those which accompany the adequate stimulation of nociceptors,
are recapitulations of phylogenetic struggles, so may the inaugural
symptoms of an infection be a similar phylogenetic recapitulation
of the course of the disease.  A certain amount of negative
evidence is supplied by a comparison of the response to a dose
of toxins with the response to a dose of a standard drug.
No drug in therapeutic dosage except the iodin compounds causes
a febrile response; no drug causes a chill; on the other hand,
all specific toxins cause febrile responses and many cause chills.
If a species of animal had been poisoned by a drug during vast periods
of time, and if natural selection had successfully established
a self-defensive response, then the administration of that drug would
cause a noci-association (chemical), and a specific reaction analogous
to that following the administration of Coley's toxins might be expected.
Bacterial noci-association probably operates through the same
law as that through which physical noci-association operates.
Natural selection is impartial, however.  It must be supposed that it
acts impartially upon the microscopic invader and upon the host.
On this ground one must infer that, in accordance with the same law
of natural selection, the bacteria of acute infections have met
by natural selection each advance in the struggle of the host
for immunity.  Hence the fast and furious struggle between man
and his microscopic enemies merely indicates to what extent natural
selection has developed the ATTACK and the DEFENSE respectively.
This struggle is analogous to the quick and decisive battles
of the carnivora when fighting among themselves or when contending
against their ancient enemies.  But when phylogenetically strange
animals meet each other, they do not understand how to conduct a fight:
natural selection has not had the opportunity of teaching them.
The acute infections have the characteristics of being ancient enemies.
On this hypothesis one can understand the high mortality of measles
when it is introduced into a new country.  By natural selection,
measles has become a powerful enemy of the human race, and a race
to which this infection is newly introduced has not had the advantage
of building up a defense against it by the law of natural selection.
May not the phenomena of anaphylaxis be studied on associational lines?
Then, too, there may be chemical noci-associations with enemies
now extinct, which, like the ticklish points, may still be active
on adequate stimulation.  This brief reference to the possible
relation of the phenomena of the acute infections to the laws
of natural selection and of specific chemical noci-association has
been made as a suggestion.  Since the doctrine of evolution explains
all or nothing, I have included many phenomena to see how reasonable
or unreasonable such an explanation might be.


Recapitulation


The following are the principal points presented:  In operations
under inhalation anesthesia the nerve impulses from the trauma
reach every part of the brain--the cerebrum that is apparently
anesthetized as well as the medulla that is known to remain awake--
the proof being the PHYSIOLOGIC exhaustion of and the PATHOLOGIC
change in the nerve-cells. Under ether anesthesia the damage
to the nerve-cells is at least four times greater than under
nitrous oxid.  Inhalation anesthesia is, therefore, but a veneer--
a mask that "covers the deep suffering of the patient."  The cause
of the exhaustion of the brain is the discharge of nervous energy
in a futile effort to energize the paralyzed muscles in an attempt
to escape from the injury just as if no anesthetic had been given.
The exhaustion is, therefore, of the same nature as that from overexertion,
but if the nerve-paths connecting the field of operation
and the brain be blocked, then there is no discharge of nervous
energy from the trauma, and consequently there is no exhaustion,
however severe or prolonged the operation may be.

Fear is a factor in many injuries and operations.  The phenomena
of fear probably are exhibited only by animals whose natural defense
is nerve-muscular. The skunk, the porcupine, the turtle, have little
or no fear.  Fear is born of the innumerable injuries which have
been inflicted in the course of evolution.  Fear, like trauma,
may cause physiologic exhaustion of and morphologic changes
in the brain-cells. The representation of injury, which is fear,
being elicited by phylogenetic association, may be prevented
by the exclusion of the noci-association or by the administration
of drugs like morphin and scopolamin, which so impair the associational
function of the brain-cells that immunity to fear is established.
Animals whose natural defense is in muscular exertion, among which is man,
may have their dischargeable nervous energy exhausted by fear alone,
or by trauma alone, but most effectively by the combination of both.
What is the mechanism of this discharge of energy?  It is the adequate
stimulation of the nociceptors and the physiologic response for the purpose
of self-preservation. According to Sherrington, the nervous system
responds in action as a whole and to but one stimulus at a time.
The integration of the individual as a whole occurs not alone in injury
and fear, but also, though not so markedly, as a result of other
phylogenetic associations, such as those of the chase and procreation.
When adequate stimuli are repeated with such rapidity that the new
stimulus is received before the effect of the previous one has
worn off, a higher maximum effect is produced than is possible
under a single stimulus, however powerful.

Sexual receptors are implanted in the body by natural selection,
and the adequate stimuli excite the nerve-muscular reactions
of conjugation in a manner analogous to the action of the adequate
stimuli of the nociceptors.  The specific response of either
the sexual receptors or the nociceptors is at the expense
of the total amount of nervous energy available at the moment.
Likewise in daily labor, which, in the language of evolution,
is the chase, nervous energy is expended.  Under the dominance
of fear or injury, however, the integration is most nearly
absolute and probably every expenditure of nervous energy which is
not required for efforts toward self-preservation is arrested;
hence fear and injury drain the cup of energy to the dregs.
This is the potential difference between fear and desire,
between injury and conjugation.

What is the practical application of this?  In operative surgery
there is introduced a new principle, which removes from surgery much
of the immediate risk from its trauma by establishing ANOCI-ASSOCIATION;
it places certain of the phenomena of fear on a physical basis;
it explains to us the physical basis for the impairment of the entire
individual under worry or misfortune; it makes evident the physical
results of the daily noci-associations experienced by the individual
as a social unit.  On the other hand, it explains the power
of therapeutic suggestion and of other influences which serve
for the time to change the noci-integration; it shows the physical
basis for the difference between hope and despair; it explains
some of the phenomena of Graves' disease, of sexual neurasthenia,
possibly of hay-fever and of the common cold.  The principle is probably
equally applicable to the acute infections, in each of which chemical
noci-association gives rise to many of the phenomena of the disease
and it explains their cure by natural immunity and by vaccines.
This hypothesis should teach us to view our patients as a whole;
and especially should it teach the surgeon gentleness.  It should
teach us that there is something more in surgery than mechanics,
and something more in medicine than physical diagnosis and drugs.


Conclusion


The brain-cells have existed for eons and, amid the vicissitudes
of change, they have persisted with perhaps less alteration than has
the crust of the earth.  Whether in man or in the lower animals,
they are related to and obey the same general biologic laws,
thus being bound to the entire past and performing their function
in accordance with the law of phylogenetic association.

For so long a time have we directed our attention to tumors,
infections, and injuries that we have not sufficiently considered
the vital force itself.  We have viewed each anatomic and pathologic
part as an entity and man as an isolated phenomenon in nature.
May we not find in the laws of adaptation under natural selection,
and of phylogenetic association, the master key that will disclose
to us the explanation of many pathologic phenomena as they have
already explained many normal phenomena?

And may medicine not correlate the pathologic phenomena of the sick
man with the forces of evolution, as the naturalists have correlated
the phenomena of the sound man, and thus may not disease, as well
as health, be given its evolutionary setting?



PHYLOGENETIC ASSOCIATION IN RELATION TO THE EMOTIONS[*]


[*] Address before the American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia,
April 22, 1911.


The surgeon is familiar with the manifestations of every variety
of the human emotions in the various stations of life, from infancy
to senility, in health and in disease.  Not only does he come
