
"They're the lost tribes of Israel, all right," Nelson decided after a
brief sojourn in that savage land lying beyond Apidanus--the great
boiling river, whose bubbling and scalding currents had for centuries
served as a natural boundary between the two realms. But now the
Jarmuthian armies had crossed it and were steadily pushing back the
demoralized and despairing Atlanteans with savage energy that heaped
the dead in hillocks.

"Their armor," mused the ragged, barefoot prisoner, studying his
silent guards, "looks a lot like a Roman legionnaire's, but that six
pointed star on their helmets is pure Semitic. Yes, this sure is an
Asiatic outfit."

His eyes wandered from one fierce, big-nosed infantryman to another
and noted the splendid physical structure of the majority. Evidently
hardier, much less refined and luxury-loving than the Atlanteans,
these swart warriors disdained robes and other garments. Save for
helmet, armor and brief black kilts, they were quite naked. Like the
Atlantean hoplites the infantrymen carried spears, steam retortii and
quantities of grenades.

The country side through which the prisoner passed had a holiday air,
for garlands of flowers hung in every doorway, and naked, pot-bellied
children squatted by the roadside, industriously weaving crowns and
streamers of gay blossoms.

"Look, Atlantean dog!" commanded the black-bearded leader of the
escort. "Let thine infidel eyes gaze upon the mightiest city of the
world. Seest thou yonder Ziggurat which o'er towers all others?"

Nelson raised eyes red-rimmed from sleeplessness and deep anxiety--for
the crafty Jarmuthians had proved unexpectedly unwilling to credit him
as the Atlantean outcast and would-be renegade he had pretended to be.

"Yes," he said in reply to the English-speaking
_jehar's_--captain's--question. "What's it for?"

"'Tis the temple of the almighty Beelzebub, Steam God of Jarmuth.
Without his hot breath no wheel would turn, our armies would be
powerless and this land would perish under the ice of the outer
world." The dark eyed officer's eye fell speculatively upon his bound
and dust-covered prisoner. "Perchance, dog of a spy, thou wilt die
during to-day's fourth division[2] together with Altara, pale daughter
of the feeble, false god Poseidon."

[Footnote 2: The Atlantean day was divided into six divisions of four
hours each; due to the flame suns there was no sunrise or sunset.]

       *       *       *       *       *

This afternoon?

Nelson could not realize that the time had flown so quickly. Four
short hours separated him from the crisis of his life. A thousand
doubts assailed him. What if Alden or Hero Giles failed in their share
of the great scheme for rescue? Narrowly, the aviator's eye searched
the great, rich plain, then swept the amber-hued sky where, far above
the plain, Jilboa, the nearest flame sun, beat off the Arctic chill
and darkness.

The great, black-bearded jehar eased the straps from which was
suspended the brass coil of his retortii. "Aye," he chuckled, his
thick lips parted in a crafty smile. "Ere long will the fair flesh of
Altara grace the ceremonial board of His Exaltation, the King, and his
priests and princes."

Nelson gasped in horror. The divinely beautiful Altara--butchered for
meat like a calf? Grotesque! Ghastly! "What! You eat your prisoners?"
He felt sick, nauseated.

For answer, the swart Jarmuthian raised an enormous hand and dealt the
captive American a stinging cuff which made his teeth rattle.

"Peace!" he snarled. "Else I slit thy spying throat ere we pass yonder
walls."

Fingering a short blue-black beard that was frizzed into tight curls
in the Assyrian manner, the jehar lengthened his stride as the little
detachment clanked into the shadow of a great wall surrounding
Jezreel, and through a huge gate guarded by two hideous, jackal-headed
effigies.

Hurrying into the city were throngs of eager men, women and children,
interspersed with muscular, black bearded soldiers who cast
threatening, baleful eyes on the pale-skinned prisoner.

       *       *       *       *       *

At first the great metropolis of Jezreel seemed boundless, for
everywhere arose tall, massive monuments of yellow marble whose
facades were engraved with Sanskrit characters, thus bearing out
Nelson's surmise that this was indeed a race of Semitic origin.

Here and there hurried grey-bearded, vulture-eyed priests oddly garbed
in corrupt Occhive and Tyrian regalia. Nelson found it odd to see the
Tablet of the Laws, which Jarmuth so openly ignored, swaying on their
yellow robed breasts; and none cried out more menacingly nor more
loudly against the limping, wan-faced captive, than these same
ecclesiastics, who must have long since forgotten all worship of
Jehovah in the foul service of a bestial golden effigy.

A stone sailed through the air, narrowly missing the American; then
another, which struck his shoulder.

"God, what a rough looking crowd," thought Nelson, as the guards,
cursing, held back the screaming mob. "At this rate I won't live to
even reach the temple!"

Every second his life stood in great danger. Unkempt, sloe-eyed women
hurled themselves, shrieking with fury, against the armored chests of
the guards, who were hard pressed to beat them off with their spear
hafts.

Nelson's one small ray of comfort in this evil hour was the fact that
his .45 pistol remained untouched in a food wallet. At the border the
jehar had cast one contemptuous glance at the weapon, but, no doubt
deeming it some strange culinary tool, he had made no effort to remove
it.

It was a continual struggle for the guards to win their way up a long
flight of stairs, for ever the great stream of humanity grew denser
and more menacing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nelson felt a violent sense of revolt grip his being. "I must win
free," he thought. "If I fail, Alden dies, and--and--" For the first
time he realised how much he wanted to actually see Altara. Like a
clear cameo, an image of her had remained fresh in his memory. Except
for her Grecian garments she might have been a lovely, carefree
English or American girl.

"And these decadent swine would sacrifice her!" The thought was
sickening. Yet how could he prevent the pitiful tragedy?

Fortunately, a detachment of troops--tall, sinewy fellows with conical
helmets, crested with six-pointed stars--reenforced the guards just as
clawing hands began to snatch and tug at the prisoner's ragged
Atlantean chiton of blue cotton.

Almost before he realized it, Nelson was dragged inside a great gloomy
building and into a circular chamber where four eagle-featured elders
sat in council beneath the six-pointed star of Sem. On approaching,
the jehar in command sank on one knee and in humble salute raised both
hands to the tribunal.

"A tough looking desk sergeant they've got," muttered the prisoner to
himself as his eye met the chilling regard of a lean, yellow-faced
priest. "Wonder what I'm booked for?" Idiotically, he recalled being
summoned before a traffic court, years back. "Guess I don't get off
with vagrancy; it'll probably be everything from speeding to mayhem,
with maybe arson and well-poisoning thrown in."

The deliberations of this ominous court proved to be appallingly
short. The dour-faced elders merely put their heads together, muttered
a few sentences, then straightened up almost immediately. The chief
priest--he with the yellow face--thrust out his fist and made the
immemorial signal of death by jerking his thumb at the black marble
floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before the outraged and astounded aviator could utter a word of
protest, powerful guards seized and hauled him off down a dark, narrow
passageway in which the fetid prison smell was very strong. Too wise
to struggle against overwhelming odds, yet appalled at the thought of
his impending doom, Nelson was dragged into a room where four or five
furtive, enslaved Atlanteans, made dumb by the removal of their
tongues, were engaged in a curious occupation.

On a bare stone bench, five other Atlantean captives were sitting in
miserable silence. They made a grotesque array, for their heads were
crowned with gay yellow and blue flowers, and the upper half of their
perfectly formed bodies gleamed with an application of a
sweet-smelling oil. About their wrists and waists were twined fragrant
garlands of yellow roses which hid the leather straps confining their
hands.

Struggling, Nelson was forced on to the bench, whereupon slaves,
skipping to avoid the lash of a scarred, olive-hued slave driver,
hurried to wash the newly arrived prisoner's limbs, face and hands. A
weary-looking old slave with sunken, rheumy eyes listlessly pulled the
blue chiton from Nelson's broad shoulders, and would have removed the
food pouch had not the prisoner winked vigorously. The ministering
slave glanced swiftly sidewise and, discovering the slave driver's
attention directed to another corner, pulled the upper folds of the
chiton over the food pouch and its precious contents, then set a crown
of yellow roses more or less askew on the American's head. For all the
peril of the situation Nelson could not suppress a fleeting smile as
the phrase, "For I'm to be Queen of the May, Mother," leaped
nonsensically into his brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes, I guess they are getting us all dolled up for a sacrifice of
some kind." Nelson's heart began to pound at the thought. Then he
fought for self control. It must be a hideously realistic nightmare!
He, Victor Nelson, American citizen, a quiet birdman, member of the
Caterpillar Club and ex-flight commander of the A. E. F. was about to
be offered as a sacrifice to some hideous, pagan god? Nonsense! He'd
wake up in a minute and hear the drone of a ship on the line.

He blinked, staring fixedly at a single ray of light that came
streaming in through a small, barred window, then glanced sidewise at
his fellow victims, who with Spartan indifference sat waiting for the
end of all things. It was no dream!

From the tiny window came the shrill discordant braying of many
trumpets, and a roar like that of a football crowd arose surprisingly
near. In response, the slave driver lashed the gaudily bedecked
sacrificial victims to their feet with vicious cuts of his pliant
whip, and herded them like a drove of calves down a very long passage,
lit at intervals by those strange column lamps of incandescent gas. In
their red glare the doomed six seemed as though already bathed in
blood.

"Must be some crowd of people outside," muttered Nelson as a great
gale of sound deafened him. Yonder the amber glare of the flame suns
glimmered, and now it was his turn to step into the open!

       *       *       *       *       *

On a sort of spiral roadway he paused, breathless, awed, bewildered,
for there, eddying restlessly about the bases of towers and other huge
structures, was a great sea of up-turned faces. To his surprise he
found the passage he had followed opened perhaps halfway up what must
be the great Ziggurat of Beelzebub. He judged the tower's height must
be immense, for already the crowd was a good hundred feet below.

"_Zarotoa! Zarotoa! u Wlanka!_"[3]

Nelson shivered. How terrible was the wild, bloodthirsty clamor of
that vast throng, when they beheld the six flower-decked prisoners
appear upon the circular winding road which led to the lofty and
wind-swept summit of the great conical pyramid of the people of
Jezreel.

[Footnote 3: Death to the victims!]

Behind the victims marched perhaps eighteen or twenty spearmen
gorgeously uniformed in yellow and black painted armor. Their
retortii were plated with gold, and in the center of a star forming
the crest of each helmet was set a diamond large as a hickory nut.

Preceding the despairing prisoners marched a squad of tall,
clean-shaven priests with great gold hoops in their ears. They blew
mightily upon long, curved horns, and were followed by perhaps a dozen
lithe, posturing girls, half clothed in diaphanous yellow robes. These
priestesses swung golden censers which flung bluish clouds of aromatic
smoke high into the humid air above.

       *       *       *       *       *

Up and up, around and around the great tower temple, Nelson was
dragged, while the vast city of Jezreel, palaces, towers, courts,
dwellings and all, lay like a great panorama below. Up and up, and the
wind grew stronger while Nelson marvelled at the great height of the
structure he was mounting. Immediately in front of him swayed the
naked shoulders of the three captive Atlanteans; he could see rose
petals from their crowns fluttering in the strong warm breeze sweeping
that man-made pinnacle for the worship of a heathen god.

Despairingly, the American's eyes searched the horizon, to discover
nothing but a few great birds wheeling lazily in the bronze-hued sky.
Very clearly he could discern three of the flame suns, casting flame
high from their peaks.

"Alden!" he groaned. "Oh God, Alden, don't fail me!"

Chilled by the fate in store, he scanned the dark and hostile faces
below, but found no friendly visage.

Up and up. The procession was now nearing the summit.

There were hosts of poignant problems before him, each vital if Altara
and the Empire of Atlans were to be saved; but one primary question
immediately confronted him. How could he get his hands free? He
ventured a few words in English to the stolid Atlantean at his side,
whereat the fellow only stared dully and shook his red, flower-crowned
head.

He next tried to cautiously work loose his hands, but to no avail. The
rope of plaited skin binding his aching wrists together was tough as
any rawhide. Cursing, he abandoned the effort, and, as his eyes once
more swept the great bloodthirsty throng below, he felt himself doomed
indeed.


CHAPTER XI

Standing at last on the summit of the great Ziggurat, Nelson found
himself staring up at the fearsome golden image of the dread demon
Beelzebub. The god stood some twelve feet in height and had a hideous
human face, but, in place of hair and beard, countless golden tubes
writhed in all directions. From the end of one, the puzzled prisoner
beheld several tiny feathers of steam creeping forth, indicating that
these hairs were a species of steam vent.

When, with the other captives, he was made to halt near its base, he
further discovered that the idol sat upon a throne of yellow marble,
the sides of which were carved with Sanskrit characters, necessarily
quite meaningless to the doomed aviator.

In a grim and silent rank before Beelzebub's feet, stood some six or
eight priest-executioners bending their black-robed bodies against the
strong wind which swept that ghastly pinnacle.

Just below the base of the image, Nelson noted several great, copper
coils, no doubt conducting steam from the interior of the Ziggurat.
Between the knees of Beelzebub rested a huge, shallow bowl, the use of
which puzzled the American not a little, for he saw that the base of
this ornate receptacle was also wrapped with a number of steam coils.
Two great hands, ending in cruel-looking claws, were stretched
horizontally above the demon's knees, seeming to plead for victims.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly a deep toned brazen gong sounded somewhere below; the
trumpeters blew an ear-piercing note; and, at a gesture from the high
priest, four of the brawny executioner-priests leaped forward, seized
one of the Atlantean victims, hurled him to the stone platform and, in
an unbelievably short interval, strapped the shrieking wretch by
wrists, elbows, knees and ankles to a long, brass rod. Slung like a
dead deer from a rail, they lifted the helpless Atlantean, and, while
five hundred thousand voices roared in acclaim the priests fitted the
pole ends into notches above the hands of the idol with the effect
that the idol actually seemed to be clutching its victim.

Then, from all the pipes composing the hair and beard of Beelzebub,
sprang forth hissing spouts of snowy steam which, whipped by the
rising wind, went whirling madly down the lee of the Ziggurat. At the
same time, from the half open mouth of the demon issued a fearful,
screaming howl, a thousand times louder than the whistle of a speeding
locomotive. Deafening and barbaric, it was reechoed from a hundred
towers and battlements.

A dreadful, exultant yell burst from the multitude below as the
red-robed priest drew from beneath his garments a sickle-shaped knife
that glittered evilly in the light of the flaming suns. Still
chanting, he stooped and quickly made a deep incision over the heart
of the victim. While a piercing, agonized shriek burst from the ashen
lips of the doomed Atlantean, his bright life-blood began to splash
into the golden bowl below where, due to the presence of the steam
coils, it swiftly commenced to hiss and bubble. Very quickly the last
scarlet drops had fallen.

Then while Nelson, sick and horrified, stood watching, the dead body
on its pole was taken down, unstrapped, and hurled, limp and
red-spattered, to the next lower platform where other priests waited
to dismember it for the ceremonial cannibalism soon to follow.

       *       *       *       *       *

In rapid succession two more victims were slaughtered amid the
blood-hungry cheers of the Jarmuthian populace. Now the great bowl
hissed and bubbled with a generous supply of the dark red fluid, from
which rose clouds of evil-smelling steam that fanned the hideous
features above.

From below suddenly arose an excited shout far mightier than any which
had preceded it, when the executioners, sweating from their exertions,
now turned and, spying Nelson, hurried forward. Coincidently, the
