Tallest and most prolific of bloom among our native lilies, as it
is the most variable in color, size, and form, the TURK'S CAP, or
TURBAN LILY (L. superburn), sometimes nearly merges its identity
into its Canadian sister's. Travelers by rail between New York
and Boston know how gorgeous are the low meadows and marshes in
July or August, when its clusters of deep yellow, orange, or
flame-colored lilies tower above the surrounding vegetation. Like
the color of most flowers, theirs intensifies in salt air.
Commonly from three to seven lilies appear in a terminal group;
but under skilful cultivation even forty will crown the stalk
that reaches a height of nine feet where its home suits it
perfectly; or maybe only a poor array of dingy yellowish caps top
a shriveled stem when unfavorable conditions prevail. There
certainly are times when its specific name seems extravagant.

Its range is from Maine to the Carolinas, westward to Minnesota
and Tennessee. A well-conducted Turk's cap is not bell-shaped at
maturity, like the Canada lily: it should open much farther,
until the six points of its perianth curve so far backward beyond
the middle as to expose the stamens for nearly their entire
length. One of the purple-dotted divisions of the flower when
spread out flat may measure anywhere from two and a half to four
inches in length. Smooth, lance-shaped leaves, tapering at both
ends, occur in whorls of threes to eights up the stem, or the
upper ones may be alternate. Abundant food, hidden in a round,
white-shingled storehouse under ground, nourishes the plant, and
similarly its bulb-bearing kin, when emergency may require - a
thrifty arrangement that serves them in good stead during
prolonged drought and severe winters.

Why, one may ask, are some lilies radiantly colored and speckled;
others, like the Easter lily, deep chaliced, white, spotless?
Now, in all our lily kin nectar is secreted in a groove at the
base of each of the six divisions of the flower, and upon its
removal by that insect best adapted to come in contact with
anthers and stigma as it flies from lily to lily depends all hope
of perpetuating the lovely race. For countless ages it has been
the flower's business to find what best pleased the visitors on
whom so much depended. Some lilies decided to woo one class of
insects; some, another. Those which literally set their caps for
color-loving bees and butterflies whose long tongues could easily
drain nectar deeply hidden from the mob for their special
benefit, assumed gay hues, speckling the inner side of their
spreading divisions, even providing lines as pathfinders to their
nectaries in some cases, lest a visitor try to thrust in his
tongue between the petal-like parts while standing on the
outside, and so defeat their well-laid plan. It is almost
pathetic to see how bright and spotted they are inside, that the
visitor may not go astray. Thus we find the chief pollenizers of
the Canada and the Turk's cap lilies to be specialized bees, the
interesting upholsterers, or 1eaf-cutters, conspicuous among the
throng. Nectar they want, of course; but the dark, rich pollen is
needed also to mix with it for the food supply of a generation
still unborn. Anyone who has smelled a lily knows how his nose
looks afterward. The bees have no difficulty whatever in removing
lily pollen and transferring it. So much for the colored lilies.

The long, white, trumpet-shape type of lily chooses for her lover
the sphinx moth. For him she wears a spotless white robe -
speckles would be superfluous - that he may see it shine in the
dusk, when colored flowers melt into the prevailing blackness;
for him she breathes forth a fragrance almost overwhelming at
evening, to guide him to her neighborhood from afar; in
consideration of his very long, slender tongue she hides her
sweets so deep that none may rob him of it, taking the additional
precaution to weld her six once separate parts together into a
solid tube lest any pilferer thrust in his tongue from the side.

The common orange-tan DAY LILY (Hemerocallis fulva) and the
commoner speckled, orange-red TIGER LILY (L. tigrinum) are not
slow in seizing opportunities to escape from gardens into
roadsides and fence corners.


YELLOW ADDER'S TONGUE; TROUT LILY; DOG-TOOTH "VIOLET"
  (Erythronium Americanum)  Lily family

Flower - Solitary, pale russet yellow, rarely tinged with purple,
slightly fragrant, 1 to 2 in. long, nodding from the summit of a
footstalk 6 to 12 in. high, or about as tall as the leaves.
Perianth bell-shaped, of 6 petal-like, distinct segments,
spreading at tips, dark spotted within; 6 stamens; the
club-shaped style with 3 short, stigmatic ridges. Leaves: 2,
unequal, grayish green, mottled and streaked with brown or all
green, oblong, 3 to 8 in. long, narrowing into clasping petioles.
Preferred Habitat - Moist open woods and thickets, brooksides.
Flowering Season - March-May
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Florida, westward to the
Mississippi.

Colonies of these dainty little lilies, that so often grow beside
leaping brooks where and when the trout hide, justify at least
one of their names; but they have nothing in common with the
violet or a dog's tooth. Their faint fragrance rather suggests a
tulip; and as for the bulb, which in some of the lily-kin has
tooth-like scales, it is in this case a smooth, egg-shaped corm,
producing little round offsets from its base. Much fault is also
found with another name on the plea that the curiously mottled
and delicately pencilled leaves bring to mind, not a snake's
tongue, but its skin, as they surely do. Whoever sees the sharp
purplish point of a young plant darting above ground in earliest
spring, however, at once sees the fitting application of adder's
tongue. But how few recognize their plant friends at all seasons
of the year!

Every one must have noticed the abundance of low-growing spring
flowers in deciduous woodlands, where, later in the year, after
the leaves overhead cast a heavy shade, so few blossoms are to be
found, because their light is seriously diminished. The thrifty
adder's tongue, by laying up nourishment in its storeroom
underground through the winter, is ready to send its leaves and
flower upward to take advantage of the sunlight the still naked
trees do not intercept, just as soon as the ground thaws. But the
spring beauty, the rue-anemone, bloodroot, toothwort, and the
first blue violet (palmata) among other early spring flowers,
have not been slow to take advantage of the light either. Fierce
competition, therefore, rages among them to secure visits from
the comparatively few insects then flying - a competition so
severe that the adder's tongue often has to wait until afternoon
for the spring beauty to close before receiving a single caller.
Hive-bees, and others only about half their size, of the Andrena
and Halictus clans, the first to fly, the Bombylius frauds, and
common yellow butterflies, come in numbers then. Guided by the
speckles to the nectaries at the base of the flower, they must
either cling to the stamens and style while they suck, or fall
out. Thus cross-fertilization is commonly effected; but in the
absence of insects the lily can fertilize itself. Crawling
pilferers rarely think it worthwhile to slip and slide up the
smooth footstalk and risk a tumble where it curves to allow the
flower to nod - the reason why this habit of growth is so
popular. The adder's tongue, which is extremely sensitive to the
sunlight, will turn on its stalk to follow it, and expand in its
warmth. At night it nearly closes.

A similar adder's tongue, bearing a white flower, purplish tinged
on the outside, yellow at the base within to guide insects to the
nectaries, is the WHITE ADDER'S TONGUE (E. albidum), rare in the
Eastern States, but quite common westward as far as Texas and
Minnesota.


YELLOW CLINTONIA
  (Clintonia borealis)  Lily-of-the-valley family

Flowers - Straw color or greenish yellow, less than 1 in. long, 3
to 6 nodding on slender pedicels from the summit of a leafless
scape 6 to 15 in. tall. Perianth of 6 spreading divisions, the 6
stamens attached; style, 3-lobed. Leaves: Dark, glossy, large,
oval to oblong, 2 to 5 (usually 3), sheathing at the base. Fruit.
Oval blue berries on upright pedicels.
Preferred Habitat - Moist, rich, cool woods and thickets.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - From the Carolinas and Wisconsin far northward.

To name canals, bridges, city thoroughfares, booming factory
towns after DeWitt Clinton seems to many appropriate enough; but
why a shy little woodland flower? As fitly might a wee white
violet carry down the name of Theodore Roosevelt to posterity!
"Gray should not have named the flower from the Governor of New
York," complains Thoreau. "What is he to the lovers of flowers in
Massachusetts? If named after a man, it must be a man of
flowers." So completely has Clinton, the practical man of
affairs, obliterated Clinton, the naturalist, from the popular
mind, that, were it not for this plant keeping his memory green,
we should be in danger of forgetting the weary, overworked
governor, fleeing from care to the woods and fields; pursuing in
the open air the study which above all others delighted and
refreshed him; revealing in every leisure moment a too-often
forgotten side of his many-sided greatness.


INDIAN CUCUMBER-ROOT
 (Medeola Virginiana)  Lily-of-the-valley family

Flowers - Greenish yellow, on fine, curving footstalks, in a
loose cluster above a circle of leaves. Perianth of 6 wide-spread
divisions about 1/4 in. long; 6 reddish-brown stamens; 3 long
reddish-brown styles, stigmatic on inner side. Stem: 1 to 2 1/2
ft. high, unbranched, cottony when young. Leaves: Of flowering
plants, in 2 whorls; lower whorl of 5 to 9 large, thin, oblong,
taper-pointed leaves above the middle of stem; upper whorl of 3
to 5 small, oval, pointed leaves 1 to 2 in. long, immediately
under flowers. Flowerless plants with a whorl at summit. Fruit:
Round, dark-purple berries.
Preferred Habitat - Moist woods and thickets.
Flowering Season - May-June.
Distribution - Nova Scotia and Minnesota, southward nearly to the
Gulf of Mexico.

Again we see the leaves of a plant coming to the aid of otherwise
inconspicuous flowers to render them more attractive. By placing
themselves in a circle just below these little spidery blossoms
of weak and uncertain coloring, some of the Indian cucumber's
leaves certainly make them at least noticeable, if not showy. It
would be short-sighted philanthropy on the leaves' part to help
the flowers win insect wooers at the expense of the plant's
general health; therefore those in the upper whorl are fewer and
much smaller than the leaves in the lower circle, and a
sufficient length of stem separates them to allow the sunlight
and rain to conjure with the chlorophyll in the group below.
While there is a chance of nectar being pilfered from the flowers
by ants, the stem is cottony and ensnares their feet. In
September, when small clusters of dark-purple berries replace the
flowers, and rich tints dye the leaves, the plant is truly
beautiful - of course to invite migrating birds to disperse its
seeds. It is said the Indians used to eat the horizontal, white,
fleshy rootstock, which has a flavor like a cucumber's.


CARRION-FLOWER
  (Smilax herbacea)  Smilax family

Flowers - Carrion-scented, yellowish-green, 15 to 80 small,
6-parted ones clustered in an umbel on a long peduncle. Stem:
Smooth, unarmed, climbing with the help of tendril-like
appendages from the base of leafstalks. Leaves: Egg-shaped,
heart-shaped, or rounded, pointed tipped, parallel-nerved,
petioled. Fruit: Bluish-black berries.
Preferred Habitat - Moist soil, thickets, woods, roadside fences.
Flowering Season - April-June.
Distribution - Northern Canada to the Gulf States, westward to
Nebraska.

"It would be safe to say," says John Burroughs, "that there is a
species of smilax with an unsavory name, that the bee does not
visit, herbacea. The production of this plant is a curious freak
of nature.... It would be a cruel joke to offer it to any person
not acquainted with it, to smell. It is like the vent of a
charnel-house." (Thoreau compared its odor to that of a dead rat
in a wall!) "It is first cousin to the trilliums, among the
prettiest of our native wild flowers," continues Burroughs, "and
the same bad blood crops out in the purple trillium or
birthroot."

Strange that so close an observer as Burroughs or Thoreau should
not have credited the carrion-flower with being something more
intelligent than a mere repellent freak! Like the purple trillium
(q.v.), it has deliberately adapted itself to please its
benefactors, the little green flesh flies so commonly seen about
untidy butcher shops in summer. These, sharing with many beetles
the unthankful task of removing putrid flesh and fowl from the
earth, acting the part of scavengers for nature, are naturally
attracted to carrion-scented flowers. Of these they have an
ungrudged monopoly. But the purple trillium has an additional
advantage in both smelling and looking like the same thing - a
piece of raw meat past its prime. Bees and butterflies, with
their highly developed aesthetic sense, ever delighting in
beautiful colors, perfume, and nectar, naturally let such flowers
as these alone - another object aimed at by them, for then the
flies get all the pollen they can eat. Some they transfer, of
course, from the larger staminate flowers to the smaller
pistillate ones as they crawl over one umbel of the
carrion-flower, then alight on another.

Presently fruit begins to set, and we can approach the luxuriant
vine without offence to our noses. The beautiful glossy green
foliage takes on resplendent tints in early autumn - again with
interested motives, for are there not seeds within the little
bluish-black berries, waiting for the birds to distribute them
during their migration?

The vicious CATBRIER, GREENBRIER, or HORSEBRIER (S.
rotundifolia), similar to the preceding, except that its
four-angled stem is well armed with green prickles, its beautiful
glossy, decorative leaves are more rounded, and its greenish
flower umbels lack foul odor, scarcely needs description. Who has
not encountered it in the roadside and woodland thickets, where
it defiantly bars the way?

In the most inaccessible part of such a briery tangle, that
rollicking polyglot, the yellow-breasted chat, loves to hide its
nest. Indeed, many birds can say with Br'er Rabbit that they were
"bred en bawn in a brier-patch." Throughout the eastern half of
the United $tates and Upper Canada the catbrier displays its
insignificant little blossoms from April to June for a
miscellaneous lot of flies - insects which are content with the
slightest floral attractions offered. The florist's staple vine
popularly known as "SMILAX" (Myrslphyllum asparagoides), a native
of the Cape of Good Hope, is not even remotely connected with
true Smilaceae.


YELLOW STAR-GRASS
  (Hypoxis hirsuta; H. erecta of Gray)  Amaryllis family

Flowers - Bright yellow within, greenish and hairy outside, about
1/2 in. across, 6-parted; the perianth divisions spreading,
narrowly oblong; a few flowers at the summit of a rough, hairy
scape 2 to 6 in. high. Leaves: All from an egg-shaped corm;
mostly longer than scapes, slender, grass-like, more or less
hairy.
Preferred Habitat - Dry, open woods, prairies, grassy waste
places, fields.
Flowering Season - May-October.
Distribution - From Maine far westward, and south to the Gulf of
Mexico.

Usually only one of these little blossoms in a cluster on each
plant opens at a time; but that one peers upward so brightly from
among the grass it cannot well be overlooked. Sitting in a meadow
sprinkled over with these yellow stars, we see coming to them
many small bees - chiefly Halictus - to gather pollen for their
unhatched babies' bread. Of course they do not carry all the
pollen to their tunneled nurseries; some must often be rubbed off
on the sticky pistil tip in the center of other stars. The
stamens radiate, that self-fertilization need not take place
except as a last extremity. Visitors failing, the little flower
closes, bringing its pollen-laden anthers in contact with its own
stigma.


BLACKBERRY LILY
  (Gemmingia Ciminensis; Pardanthus Chinensis of Gray)  Iris
family

Flowers - Deep orange color, speckled irregularly with crimson
and purple within (Pardos = leopard; anthos = flower); borne in
terminal, forked clusters. Perianth of 6 oblong, petal-like,
spreading divisions; 6 stamens with linear anthers; style
thickest above, with 3 branches. Stem: 1 1/2 to 4 ft. tall,
leafy. Leaves: Like the iris; erect, folded blades, 8 to 10 in.
long. Fruit: Resembling a blackberry; an erect mass of round,
black, fleshy seeds, at first concealed in a fig-shaped capsule,
whose 3 valves curve backward, and finally drop off.
Preferred habitat - Roadsides and hills.
Flowering Season - June-July.
Distribution - Connecticut to Georgia, westward to Indiana and
Missouri.

How many beautiful foreign flowers, commonly grown in our gardens
here, might soon become naturalized Americans were we only
generous enough to lift a few plants, scatter a few seeds over
our fences into the fields and roadsides - to raise the bars of
their prison, as it were, and let them free! Many have run away,
to be sure. Once across the wide Atlantic, or wider Pacific,
their passage paid (not sneaking in among the ballast like the
more fortunate weeds), some are doomed to stay in prim, rigidly
cultivated flower beds forever; others, only until a chance to
bolt for freedom presents itself, and away they go. Lucky are
they if every flower they produce is not picked before a single
seed can be set.

This blackberry lily of gorgeous hue originally came from China.
Escaping from gardens here and there, it was first reported as a
wild flower at East Rock, Connecticut; other groups of vagabonds
were met marching along the roadsides on Long Island; near
Suffern, New York; then farther southward and westward, until it
has already attained a very respectable range. Every plant has
some good device for sending its offspring away from home to
found new colonies, if man would but let it alone. Better still,
give the eager travelers a lift!


LARGE YELLOW LADY'S SLIPPER; WHIPPOORWILL'S SHOE; YELLOW MOCCASIN
FLOWER
  (Cypripedium hirsutum; C. pubescens of Gray)  Orchid family

Flower - Solitary, large, showy, borne at the top of a leafy stem
to 2 ft. high. Sepals 3, 2 of them united, greenish or yellowish,
striped with purple or dull red, very long, narrow; 2 petals,
brown, narrower, twisting; the third an inflated sac, open at the
top, 1 to 2 in. long, pale yellow, purple lined white hairs
within; sterile stamen triangular; stigma thick. Leaves: Oval or
elliptic, pointed, 3 to 5 in, long, parallel-nerved, sheathing.
Preferred Habitat - Moist or boggy woods and thickets; hilly
ground.
Flowering Season - May-July.
Distribution - Nova Scotia to Alabama, westward to Minnesota and
Nebraska.

Swinging outward from a leaf-clasped stem, this orchid attracts
us by its flaunted beauty and decorative form from tip to root,
not less than the aesthetic little bees for which its adornment
and mechanism are so marvelously adapted. Doubtless the heavy,
oily odor is an additional attraction to them. Parallel purplish
lines, converging toward the circular opening of the pale yellow,
inflated pouch, guide the visitor into a spacious banquet-hall
(labellum) such as the pink lady's slipper (q.v.) also entertains
her guests in. Fine hairs within secrete tiny drops of fluid at
their tips - a secretion which hardens into a brittle crust, like
a syrup's, when it dries. Darwin became especially interested in
this flower through a delightful correspondence with Professor
Asa Gray, who was the first to understand it, and he finally
secured a specimen to experiment on.

"I first introduced some flies into the labellum through the
large upper opening," Darwin wrote, "but they were either too
large or too stupid, and did not crawl out properly. I then
caught and placed within the labellum a very small bee which
seemed of about the right size, namely Andrena parvula.... The
bee vainly endeavored to crawl out again the same way it entered,
but always fell backwards, owing to the margins being inflected.
The labellum thus acts like one of those conical traps with the
edges turned inwards, which are sold to catch beetles and
cockroaches in London kitchens. It could not creep out through
the slit between the folded edges of the basal part of the
labellum, as the elongated, triangular, rudimentary stamen here
closes the passage. Ultimately it forced its way out through one
of the small orifices close to one of the anthers, and was found
when caught to be smeared with the glutinous pollen. I then put
the same bee into another labellum; and again it crawled out
through one of the small orifices, always covered with pollen. I
repeated the operation five times, always with the same result. I
afterwards cut away the labellum, so as to examine the stigma,
and found its whole surface covered with pollen. It should be
noticed that an insect in making its escape, must first brush
past the stigma and afterwards one of the anthers, so that it
cannot leave pollen on the stigma, until being already smeared
with pollen from one flower it enters another; and thus there
will be a good chance of cross-fertilization between two distinct
plants.... Thus the use of all parts of the flower, - namely, the
inflected edges, or the polished inner sides of the labellum; the
two orifices and their position close to the anthers and stigma,
- the large size of the medial rudimentary stamen, - are rendered
intelligible. An insect which enters the labellum is thus
compelled to crawl out by one of the two narrow passages, on the
sides of which the pollen-masses and stigma are placed."

These common orchids, which are not at all difficult to
naturalize in a well-drained, shady spot in the garden, should be
lifted with a good ball of earth and plenty of leaf-mould
immediately after flowering. Here we can note little American
Andrena bees unwittingly becoming the flower's slaves. Several
species of exotic cypripediums are so common in the city
florist's shops every one has an opportunity to study their
marvelous structure.

The similar SMALL YELLOW LADY'S SLIPPER (C. parviflorum), a
delicately fragrant orchid about half the size of its big sister,
has a brighter yellow pouch, and occasionally its sepals and
petals are purplish. As they usually grow in the same localities,
and have the same blooming season, opportunities for comparison
are not lacking. This fairer, sweeter, little orchid roams
westward as far as the State of Washington.

YELLOW FRINGED ORCHIS
  (Habenaria ciliaris)  Orchid family

Flowers - Bright yellow or orange, borne in a showy, closely set,
oblong spike, 3 to 6 in. long. The lip of each flower copiously
fringed; the slender spur 1 to 1 1/2 in. long; similar to white
fringed orchis (q.v.); and between the two, intermediate pale
yellow hybrids may be found. Stem: Slender, leafy, 1 to 2 1/2
feet high. Leaves: Lance-shaped, clasping.
Preferred Habitat - Moist meadows and sandy bogs.
Flowering Season - July-August.
Distribution - Vermont to Florida; Ontario to Texas.

Where this brilliant, beautiful orchid and its lovely white
sister grow together in the bog - which cannot be through a very
wide range, since one is common northward, where the other is
rare, and vice versa - the yellow fringed orchis will be found
blooming a few days later. In general structure the plants
closely resemble each other. Their similar method of enforcing
payment for a sip of nectar concealed in a tube so narrow and
deep none but a sphinx moth or butterfly may drain it all (though
large bumblebees occasionally get some too, from brimming
nectaries) has been described (q.v.), to which the interested
reader is referred. Both these orchids have their sticky discs
projecting unusually far, as if raised on a pedicel - an
arrangement which indicates that they "are to be stuck to the
face or head of some nectar-sucking insect of appropriate size
that visits the flowers," wrote Dr. Asa Gray over forty years
ago. Various species of hawk moths, common in different parts of
our area, of course have tongues of various lengths, and
naturally every visitor does not receive his load of pollen on
the same identical spot. At dusk, when sphinx moths begin their
rounds, it will be noticed that the white and yellow flowers
remain conspicuous long after blossoms of other colors have
melted into the general darkness. Such flowers as cater to these
moths, if they have fragrance, emit it then most strongly, as an
additional attraction. Again, it will be noticed that few such
flowers provide a strong projecting petal-platform for visitors
to alight on; that would be superfluous, since sphinx moths suck
while hovering over a tube, with their wings in exceedingly rapid
motion, just like a hummingbird, for which the larger species are
so often mistaken at twilight. This deep-hued orchid apparently
attracts as many butterflies as sphinx moths, which show a
predilection for the white species.

>From Ontario and the Mississippi eastward, and southward to the
Gulf, the TUBERCLED or SMALL PALE GREEN ORCHIS (H. flava) lifts a
spire of inconspicuous greenish-yellow flowers, more attractive
to the eye of the structural botanist than to the aesthete. It
blooms in moist places, as most orchids do, since water with
which to manufacture nectar enough to fill their deep spurs is a
prime necessity. Orchids have arrived at that pinnacle of
achievement that it is impossible for them to fertilize
themselves. More than that, some are absolutely sterile to their
own pollen when it is applied to their stigmas artificially with
insect aid, however, a single plant has produced over 1,000,700
seeds. No wonder, then, that, as a family, they have adopted the
most marvelous blandishments and mechanism in the whole floral
kingdom to secure the visits of that special insect to which each
is adapted, and, having secured him, to compel him unwittingly to
do their bidding. In the steaming tropical jungles, where
vegetation is luxuriant to the point of suffocation, and where
insect life swarms in mvriads undreamed of here, we can see the
best of reasons for orchids mounting into trees and living on air
to escape strangulation on the ground, and for donning larger and
more gorgeous apparel to attract attention in the fierce
competition for insect trade waged about them. Here, where the
struggle for survival is incomparably easier, we have terrestrial
orchids, small, and quietly clad, for the most part.

Having the gorgeous, exotic air plants of the hothouse in mind,
this little tubercled orchis seems a very poor relation indeed.
In June and July, about a week before the ragged orchis comes
out, we may look for this small, fringeless sister. Its clasping
leaves, which decrease in size as they ascend the stem (not to
shut off the light and rain from the lower ones), are
parallel-veined, elliptic, or, the higher ones, lance-shaped. A
prominent tubercle, or palate, growing upward from the lip,
almost conceals the entrance to the nectary. and makes a side
approach necessary. Why? Usually an insect has free, straight
access down the center of a flower's throat, but here he cannot
have it. A slender tongue must be directed obliquely from above
into the spur, and it will enter the discal groove as a thread
enters the eye of a needle. By this arrangement the tongue must
certainly come in contact with one of the sticky discs to which
an elongated pollen gland is attached. The cement on the disc
hardening even while the visitor sucks, the pollen gland is
therefore drawn out, because firmly attached to his tongue. At
first the pollen mass stands erect on the proboscis; but in the
fraction of a moment which it takes a butterfly to flit to
another blossom, it has bent forward automatically into the exact
position required for it to come in contact with the sticky
stigma of the next tubercled orchis entered, where it will be
broken off. Now we understand the use of the palate. Butterfly
collectors often take specimens with remnants of these pollen
stumps stuck to their tongues. In his classical work "On the
Fertilization of Orchids by Insects," Darwin tells of finding a
mottled rustic butterfly whose proboscis was decorated with
eleven pairs of pollen masses, taken from as many blossoms of the
pyramidal orchis. Have these flowers no mercy on their
long-suffering friends? A bee with some orchid pollen-stumps
attached to its head was once sent to Mr. Frank Cheshire, the
English expert who had just discovered some strange bee diseases.
He was requested to name the malady that had caused so abnormal
an outgrowth on the bee's forehead!

Often found growing in the same bog with the tubercled species is
the RAGGED or FRINGED GREEN ORCHIS (H. lacera), so inconspicuous
we often overlook it unawares. Examine one of the dingy,
greenish-yellow flowers that are set along the stern in a spike
to make all the show in the world possible, each with its
three-parted, spreading lip finely and irregularly cut into
thread-like fringe to hail the passing butterfly, and we shall
see that it, too, has made ingenious provision against the
draining of its spur by a visitor without proper pay for his
entertainment. Even without the gay color that butterflies ever
delight in, these flowers contain so much nectar in their spurs,
neither butterflies nor large bumblebees are long in hunting them
out. In swamps and wet woodland from Nova Scotia to Georgia, and
westward to the Mississippi, the ragged orchis blooms in June or
July.


LARGE YELLOW POND or WATER LILY; COW LILY; SPATTER-DOCK
  (Nymphaea advena; Nupisar advena of Gray)  Water-lily family

Flowers - Yellow or greenish outside, rarely purple tinged,
round, depressed, 1 1/2 to 3 1/2 in. across. Sepals 6, unequal,
concave, thick, fleshy; petals stamen-like, oblong, fleshy,
short; stamens very numerous, in 5 to 7 rows; pistil compounded
of many carpels, its stigmatic disc pale red or yellow, with 12
to 24 rays. Leaves: Floating, or some immersed, large, thick,
sometimes a foot long, egg-shaped or oval, with a deep cleft at
base, the lobes rounded.
Preferred Habitat - Standing water, ponds, slow streams.
Flowering Season - April-September.
Distribution - Rocky Mountains eastward, south to the Gulf of
Mexico, north to Nova Scotia.

Comparisons were ever odious. Because the yellow water lily has
the misfortune to claim relationship with the sweet-scented white
species (q.v.), must it never receive its just meed of praise?
Hiawatha's canoe, let it be remembered,

     "Floated on the river
      Like a yellow leaf in autumn,
      Like a yellow water-lily."

But even those who admire Longfellow's lines see no beauty in the
golden flower-bowls floating among the large, lustrous, leathery
leaves.

By assuming the functions of petals, the colored sepals advertise
for insects. Beetles, which answer the first summons to a free
lunch, crowd in as the sepals begin to spread. In the center the
star-like disc, already sticky, is revealed, and on it any pollen
they have carried with them from older flowers necessarily rubs
off. At first, or while the stigma is freshly receptive to
pollen, an insect cannot make his entrance except by crawling
over this large, sticky plate. At this time, the anthers being
closed, self-fertilization is impossible. A day or two later,
after the pollen begins to ripen on countless anthers, the flower
is so widely open that visitors have no cause to alight in the
center; anyway, no harm could result if they did,
cross-fertilization having been presumably accomplished. While
beetles (especially Donacia) are ever abundant visitors, it is
likely they do much more harm than good. So eagerly do they gnaw
both petals and stamens, which look like loops of narrow yellow
ribbon within the bowl of an older flower, that, although they
must carry some pollen to younger flowers as they travel on, it
is probable they destroy ten times more than their share. Flies
transport pollen too. The smaller bees (Halictus and Andrena
chiefly) find some nectar secreted on the outer faces of the
stamen-like petals, which they mix with pollen to make their
babies' bread.

The very beautiful native AMERICAN LOTUS (Nelumbo lutea), also
known as WATER CHINKAPIN or WANKAPIN, found locally in Ontario,
the Connecticut River, some lakes, slow streams, and ponds in New
Jersey, southward to Florida, and westward to Michigan and
Illinois, Indian Territory and Louisiana, displays its pale
yellow flowers in July and August. They measure from four to ten
inches across, and suggest a yellow form of the sweet-scented
white water lily; but there are fewer petals, gradually passing
into an indefinite number of stamens. The great round, ribbed
leaves, smooth above, hairy beneath, may be raised high above the
water, immersed or floating. Both leaf and flower stalks contain
several large air canals. The flowers which are female when they
expand far enough for a pollen-laden guest to crawl into the
center, are afterward male, securing cross-fertilization by this
means, just as the yellow pond lily does; only the small bees
must content themselves here with pollen only - a diet that
pleases the destructive beetles and the flies (Syrphidae)
perfectly.

Japanese artists especially have taught us how much of the beauty
of a Nelumbo we should lose if it ripened its decorative
seed-vessel below the surface as the sweet-scented white water
lily does. This flat-topped receptacle, held erect, has its
little round nuts imbedded in pits in its surface, ready to be
picked out by aquatic birds, and distributed by them in their
wanderings. Both seeds and tubers are farinaceous and edible. In
some places it is known the Indians introduced the plant for
food. Professor Charles Goodyear has written an elaborate,
plausible argument, illustrated, with many reproductions of
sculpture, pottery, and mural painting in the civilized world of
the ancients to prove that all decorative ornamental design has
been evolved from the sacred Egyptian lotus (Nelumbo Nelumubo),
still revered throughout the East (q.v.).


MARSH MARIGOLD; MEADOW-GOWAN; AMERICAN COWSLIP
 (Caltha palustris)  Crowfoot family'
