
    'Twas thine to see the triumph of thy cause;
          Thy grateful eyes beheld a world redeem'd;
    Would that thy wisdom might have shap'd the laws
          Of the new age, and led to heights undream'd!

    Yet art thou gone? Will not thy presence cling
          Like that of all the great who liv'd before?
    Will not new wonders of thy fashioning
          Rise from thy words, as potent as of yore?

    Absent in flesh, thou with a brighter flame
          Shin'st as the beacon of the brave and free;
    Thou art our country's soul--our loftiest aim
          Is but to honour and to follow thee!

                                      H. P. LOVECRAFT.
 January 13, 1919.




 THE UNITED AMATEUR    MARCH 1919


A Note on Howard P. Lovecraft's Verse

Rheinhart Kleiner

Comment occasioned by the verse of Mr. Howard P. Lovecraft, who is a
more or less frequent contributor to the amateur press, has not
consisted of unmixed praise.

Certain critics have regarded his efforts as too obviously imitative of
a style that has long been discredited. Others have accepted his work
with admiration and have even gone so far as to imitate the couplets
which he produces with such apparent ease.

Between these two opinions there is a critical neutral ground, the
holders of which realise how large an element of conscious parody enters
into many of Mr. Lovecraft's longer and more serious productions, and
who are capable of appreciating the cleverness and literary charm of
these pastoral echoes without being dominated by them to the extent of
indiscriminate praise and second-hand imitation.

Those who would beguile Mr. Lovecraft from his chosen path are probably
unaware of the attitude which he consistently maintains toward hostile
criticism. Mr. Lovecraft contends that it gives him pleasure to write as
the Augustans did, and that those who do not relish his excursions into
classic fields need not follow him. He tries to conciliate no one, and
is content to be his own sole reader! What critic, with these facts
before him, will think it worthwhile to break a lance with the poet?

But even Mr. Lovecraft is willing to be original, at times. He has
written verse of a distinctly modern atmosphere, and where his imagery
is not too obtrusively artificial--according to the modern idea--many of
his quatrains possess genuine poetic value.

Many who cannot read his longer and more ambitious productions find Mr.
Lovecraft's light or humorous verse decidedly refreshing. As a satirist
along familiar lines, particularly those laid down by Butler, Swift and
Pope, he is most himself--paradoxical though it seems. In reading his
satires one cannot help but feel the zest with which the author has
composed them. They are admirable for the way in which they reveal the
depth and intensity of Mr. Lovecraft's convictions, while the wit,
irony, sarcasm and humour to be found in them serve as an indication of
his powers as a controversialist. The almost relentless ferocity of his
satires is constantly relieved by an attendant broad humour which has
the merit of causing the reader to chuckle more than once in the perusal
of some attack levelled against the particular person or policy which
may have incurred Mr. Lovecraft's displeasure.


OFFICIAL REPORTS

DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC CRITICISM

=The Coyote= for October-January is a "Special War Number," dedicated to
Cpl. Raymond Wesley Harrington, the editor's valiant soldier brother,
and having a general martial atmosphere throughout. Among the contents
are two bits of verse by the gallant overseas warrior to whom the issue
is inscribed, both of which speak well for the poetic sentiment of their
heroic author.

"Lord Love You, Lad," a poem by Winifred V. Jordan, is the opening
contribution; and deserves highest commendation both for its spirit and
for its construction.

"The Paramount Issue," by William T. Harrington, is a somewhat ambitious
attempt to trace the responsibility for the great war to alcoholic
liquor and its degenerative effect on mankind. The author even goes so
far as to say that "had man been represented in his true and noble form,
then war would have been impossible." Now although the present critic is
and always has been an ardent prohibitionist, he must protest at this
extravagant theory. Vast and far-reaching as are the known evil effects
of drink, it is surely transcending fact to accuse it of causing
mankind's natural greed, pride, and combative instincts, which lie at
the base of all warfare. It may, however, be justly suggested that much
of the peculiar bestiality of the Huns is derived from their swinish
addiction to beer. Technically, Mr. Harrington's essay is marked by few
crudities, and displays an encouraging fluency. Other pieces by Mr.
Harrington are "A Bit of My Diary," wherein the author relates his
regrettably brief military experience at Camp Dodge, and "Victory," a
stirring editorial.

"Black Sheep," by Edna Hyde, is an excellent specimen of blank verse by
our gifted laureate. Line 14 seems to lack a syllable, but this
deficiency is probably the result of a typographical error.

A word of praise is due the general appearance of the magazine. The
cover presents a refreshing bit of home-made pictorial art, whilst the
photograph of Corporal Harrington makes a most attractive frontispiece.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Pathfinder= for January is easily the best issue yet put forth by
its enterprising young editor. "Hope," which adorns the cover, is a poem
of much merit by Annie Pearce. The apparent lack of a syllable in line 2
of the third stanza is probably due to a printer's error whereby the
word =us= is omitted immediately after the word =for=.

"How and Why Roses Are White," by Margaret Mahon, is a fairy legend of
much charm and decided originality, which argues eloquently for its
author's imaginative scope and literary ability.

"Happiness in a Glove" is a very facile and pleasing rendering of a bit
of Spanish dialogue. Through a mistake, the authorship is credited to
the translator, Miss Ella M. Miller, though her own manuscript fully
proclaimed the text as a translation.

"Welcome, 1919," is a brief contemplative essay by Editor Glause; in
spirit admirable, but in phraseology showing some of the uncertainty of
youthful work. Mr. Glause might well pay more attention to compact
precision in his prose, using as few and as forceful words as possible
to express his meaning. For instance, his opening words would gain
greatly in strength if contracted to the following: "Now that a new year
is beginning." Farther down the page we find the word =namely= in a
place which impels us to question its use. Its total omission would
strengthen the sentence which contains it. Another point we must mention
is the excessive punctuation, especially the needless hyphenation of
=amateurdom= and =therefore=, and the apostrophe in the possessive
pronoun =its=. The form =it's= is restricted to the colloquial
contraction of "=it is="; the similarly spelled pronoun is written
solidly without an apostrophe. Additional notes by Mr. Glause are of
equal merit, and his reply to a recent article on travel is highly
sensible and commendable. He is a writer and thinker of much power, and
needs only technical training in order to develop into an essayist of
the first rank. As an editor he cannot be praised too highly for his
faithfulness in publishing his welcome and attractive quarterly.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Pine Cones= for February well maintains the high standard set by Mr.
Pryor in his opening number. "Life, Death and Immortality," by Jonathan
E. Hoag, is a brief but appealing piece from the pen of a gifted and
venerable bard, and thoroughly deserves its place of honour on the
cover. On the next page occurs a metrical tribute to this sweet singer
on his 88th birthday, written by H. P. Lovecraft in the latter's typical
heroic strain.

"The Helpful Twins," a clever child story by Editor Pryor, is the prose
treat of the issue. It would, indeed, be hard to find more than one or
two equally interesting, human, and well-developed bits of fiction in
any current amateur periodicals. Not only are the characters drawn with
delightful naturalness, but there is real humour present; and the plot
moves on to its climax without a single instance of awkwardness or a
single intrusive or extraneous episode. In short, the story is almost a
model of its kind; one which ought to prove a success in a professional
as well as an amateur magazine. Mr. Pryor's humour is more broadly shown
in the smile-producing pseudo-anecdotes of "The Boy Washington."

The bit of unsigned verse, "A New Year Wish," is excellent, though we
question the advisability of having an Alexandrine for the final line.

"Comment Pryoristic" is always interesting, and that in the current
=Pine Cones= forms no exception to the rule. The appearance of this
vigorously alive and intelligently edited publication is proving a great
and gratifying factor in amateurdom's post-bellum renaissance.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Recruiter= for January marks the advent to amateurdom of a new
paper, which easily takes its place among the very best of recent
editorial enterprises. Edited by Misses Mary Faye Durr and L. Evelyn
Schump in the interest of the United recruits whom they are securing,
its thoroughly meritorious quality speaks well for the new members thus
added to our circle.

The issue opens auspiciously with a lyric poem of distinguished
excellence by Helen McFarland, entitled "A Casualty." In depth of
sentiment, fervour of expression, and correctness of construction, these
melodious lines leave little to be desired; and seem to indicate that
the United has acquired one more poet of the first rank.

"Billy," a character sketch by L. Evelyn Schump, introduces to the
Association a light essayist of unusual power and grace, whose work is
vividly natural through keen insight, apt and fluent expression, and
mastery of homely and familiar detail. The present sketch is
captivatingly lifelike and thoroughly well-written, arousing a response
from every lover of children.

"Winter," a brief poem by Hettie Murdock, celebrates in a pleasant way
an unpleasant season. The lines are notable for correctness, spontaneity
and vitality, though not in the least ambitious in scope.

Martha Charlotte Macatee's "Song of Nature" reveals its 12-year-old
creator as a genuine "Galpiness" (if we may coin a word which only
amateurs and Appletonians will understand). Mistress Macatee has
succeeded in infusing more than a modicum of really poetic atmosphere
and imagery into her short lyric, and may be relied upon to produce
important work in the coming years of greater maturity. The chief defect
of her present piece is the absence of rhyme, which should always occur
in a short stanzaic poem. Rhyming is not at all difficult after a little
practice, and we trust that the young writer will employ it in later
verses.

"Tarrytown," by Florence Fitzgerald, is a reminiscent poem of phenomenal
strength, marred only by a pair of false rhymes in the opening stanza.
Assonance must never be mistaken for true rhyme, and combinations like
=boats-float= or =them-brim= should be avoided. The imagery of this
piece is especially appealing, and testifies to its author's fertility
of fancy.

"Shades of Adam," by Mary Faye Durr, is an interesting and humorously
written account of the social side of our 1918 convention. Miss Durr is
exceptionally gifted in the field of apt, quiet, and laconic wit, and in
this informal chronicle neglects no opportunity for dryly amusing
comment on persons and events.

"Spring," by L. Evelyn Schump, is a refreshingly original poem in blank
verse, on a somewhat familiar subject. For inspiration and technique
alike, the piece merits enthusiastic commendation; though we may
vindicate our reputation as a fault-finding critic by asking why
alternate lines are indented despite the non-existence of alternate
rhymes.

=The Recruiter's= editorial column is brief and businesslike,
introducing the magazine as a whole, and its contributors individually.
Amateurdom is deeply indebted to the publishers of this delightful
newcomer, and it is to be hoped that they may continue their efforts;
both toward seeking recruits as high in quality as those here
represented, and toward issuing their admirable journal as frequently as
is feasible.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Silver Clarion= for January comes well up to the usual standard,
containing a number of pieces of considerable power. In "The Temple of
the Holy Ghost," Mr. Arthur Goodenough achieves his accustomed success
as a religious poet, presenting a variety of apt images, and clothing
them in facile metre. The only defect is a lack of uniformity in rhyming
plan. The poet, in commencing a piece like this, should decide whether
or not to rhyme the first and third lines of quatrains; and having
decided, should adhere to his decision. Instead, Mr. Goodenough omits
these optional rhymes in the first stanza and in the first half of the
third and fourth stanzas; elsewhere employing them. The result, while
not flagrantly inharmonious, nevertheless gives an impression of
imperfection, and tends to alienate the fastidious critic. Mr.
Goodenough possesses so great a degree of inspiration, and so wide an
array of allusions and imagery; that he owes it to himself to complete
the excellence of his vivid work with an unexceptionable technique.

"The Cross," a sonnet by Captain Theodore Draper Gottlieb, is dedicated
to the Red Cross, with which the author is serving so valiantly. In
thought and form this piece deserves unqualified praise.

"Death," by Andrew Francis Lockhart, exhibits our versatile Western bard
in sober mood. The poem contains that unmistakable stamp of genuine
emotion which we have come to associate with Mr. Lockhart's work, and is
technically faultless.

"Destiny," by W. F. Pelton, is a sonnet of smooth construction and
thorough excellence by one whom we know better as "Wilfrid Kemble."

The lines "To My Pal, Fred" present Mr. Harry E. Rieseberg, a new
member of the United who has for some time been a regular =Clarion=
contributor. In this piece Mr. Rieseberg falls somewhat below his usual
standard; for though the sentiment is appropriate, the metre is sadly
irregular. Mr. Rieseberg should count the syllables in his lines, for he
is a young poet of much promise, and should allow his technique to keep
pace with his genius.

"Faith," by Winifred V. Jordan, enunciates a familiar doctrine in
melodious and original metaphor, and well sustains the poetical
reputation of its celebrated author.

"The Song Unsung," by W. F. Booker, is a war poem in minor key, which
deserves much praise.

"You're Like a Willow," by Eugene B. Kuntz, is marked by that warmth of
fancy and wealth of imagery for which its author is noted.

"Thoughts," a courtly offering from the quill of James Laurence Crowley,
winds up the poetical part of the magazine; this month a very ample
part. In rhyme and metre this sentimental gem is quite satisfactory.

The only prose in this issue is Mr. Samples' well-written editorial on
"The Passing Year." Herein we find some really excellent passages,
savouring somewhat of the oratorical in style.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Silver Clarion= for February is of ample size and ample merit.
Opening the issue is an excellent poem in heroic couplets by Mrs. Stella
L. Tully of Mountmellick, Ireland, a new member of the United. Mrs.
Tully, whose best work is in a lyric and religious vein, is one endowed
with hereditary or family genius; as the Association no doubt
appreciated when reading the poetry of her gifted sister, Mrs. S. Lilian
McMullen of Newton Centre, in the preceding issue of THE UNITED AMATEUR.
The present piece by Mrs. Tully, "The Greatest of These is Love," is
based upon a Biblical text, and sets forth its ideas very effectively,
despite a few passages whose stiff construction betrays a slight
inexperience in the traditions of heroic verse.

"The Two Crosses," by Capt. Theodore Gottlieb, is also in heroics, and
graphically compares the most holy symbols of today and of nineteen
hundred years ago.

More of the religious atmosphere is furnished by John Milton Samples'
trochaic composition entitled "The Millennium"--from whose title, by the
way, one of the necessary n's is missing. In this pleasing picture of
an impossible age we note but three things requiring critical attention.
(1) The term "super-race" in stanza 5, is too technically philosophical
to be really poetic. (2) The rhyme of =victory= and =eternally= is not
very desirable, because both the rhyming syllables bear only a secondary
accent. (3) There is something grotesque and unconsciously comic in the
prophecy "Then the lamb shall kiss the lion." Such grotesqueness is not
to be found in the original words of Mr. Samples' predecessor and source
of inspiration, the well-known prophet Isaiah. (Vide Isaiah, xi: 6-7.)

"Nature Worship," by Arthur Goodenough, is one of the most meritorious
poems in the issue, despite some dubious grammar in the first stanza,
and an internal rhyme in the final stanza which has no counterpart in
the lines preceding. The first named error consists of a disagreement in
number betwixt subject and verb: "faith and form and ... mazes which ...
perplexes, dazes."

"The New Order," an essay by John Milton Samples, is an eloquent but
fantastically idealistic bit of speculation concerning the wonderful
future which dreamers picture as arising out of the recent war. To us,
there is a sort of pathos in these vain hopes and mirage-like visions of
an Utopia which can never be; yet if they can cheer anyone, they are
doubtless not altogether futile. Indeed, after the successive menaces of
the Huns and the Bolsheviki, we can call almost any future Utopian, if
it will but afford the comparative calm of pre-1914 days!

"No Night So Dark, No Day So Drear," by Mamie Knight Samples, is a poem
which reveals merit despite many crudities. The outstanding fault is
defective metre--Mrs. Samples should carefully count her syllables, and
repeat her lines aloud, to make sure of perfect scansion. Since the
intended metre appears to be iambic tetrameter, we shall here give a
revised rendering of the first stanza; showing how it can be made to
conform to that measure:

    "No night so dark, no day so drear,
    But we may sing our songs of cheer."
    These words, borne from the world without,
    Cheer'd a heart sick with grief and doubt.
    O doubting soul, bow'd down so low,
    If thou couldst feel, and only know
    The darkness is in thee alone,
    For grief and tears it would atone.
    "No night so dark, no day so drear,
    But we may sing our songs of cheer."

Let the authoress note that each line must have eight syllables--no
more, no less. For the trite ideas and hackneyed rhymes, nothing can be
recommended save a more observant and discriminating perusal of standard
poets. It must be kept in mind that the verse found in current family
magazines and popular hymn-books is seldom, if ever, true poetry. The
only authors suitable as models, are those whose names are praised in
histories of English literature.

W. F. Booker's "Song" is a delightful short lyric whose sentiment and
technique deserve naught but praise.

"When I Am Gone," a poem in pentameter quatrains by James Laurence
Crowley, contains the customary allotment of sweet sentiment, together
with some really commendable imagery. Mr. Crowley's genius will shine
brightly before long.

"The Path to Glory," by Andrew Francis Lockhart, is perhaps the poetic
gem of the issue. In this virile anapaestic piece Mr. Lockhart sums up
all the horrors of the trenches in such a way that the reader may guess
at the extent of the sacrifice undergone by those who have given all for
their country.
