



[Continued from SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, No. 451, page 7192.]

PLANETARY WHEEL TRAINS.

By Prof. C.W. MacCORD, Sc. D.

IV.


The arrangement of planetary wheels which has been applied in practice to
the greatest extent and to the most purposes, is probably that in which
the axial motions of the train are derived from a fixed sun wheel.
Numerous examples of such trains are met with in the differential gearing
of hoisting machines, in portable horse-powers, etc. The action of these
mechanisms has already been fully discussed; it may be remarked in
addition that unless the speed be very moderate, it is found advantageous
to balance the weights and divide the pressures by extending the train arm
and placing the planet-wheels in equal pairs diametrically opposite each
other, as, for instance, in Bogardus' horse power, Fig. 31.

[Illustration: PLANETARY WHEEL TRAINS.]

In trains of this description, the velocity ratio is invariable; which for
the above-mentioned objects it should be. But the use of a planetary
combination enables us to cause the motions of two independent trains to
converge, and unite in producing a single resultant rotation. This may be
done in two ways; each of the two independent trains may drive one
sun-wheel, thus determining the motion of the train-arm; or, the train-arm
may be driven by one of them, and the first sun-wheel by the other; then
the motion of the second sun-wheel is the resultant. Under these
circumstances the ratio of the resultant velocity to that of either
independent train is not invariable, since it may be affected by a change
in the velocity of the other one. To illustrate our meaning, we give two
examples of arrangements of this nature. The first is Robinson's
rope-making machine, Fig. 32. The bobbins upon which the strands composing
the rope are wound turn freely in bearings in the frames, G, G, and these
frames turn in bearings in the disk, H, and the three-armed frame or
spider, K, both of which are secured to the central shaft, S. Each
bobbin-frame is provided with a pinion, _a_, and these three pinions
engage with the annular wheel, A. This wheel has no shaft, but is carried
and kept in position by three pairs of rollers, as shown, so that its axis
of rotation is the same as that of the shaft, S; and it is toothed
externally as well as internally. The strands pass through the hollow
axes of the pinions, and thence each to its own opening through the
laying-top, T, fixed upon S, which completes the operation of twisting
them into a rope. The annular wheel, A, it will be perceived, may be
driven by a pinion, E, engaging with its external teeth, at a rate of
speed different from that of the central shaft; and by varying the speed
of that pinion, the velocity of the wheel, A, may be changed without
affecting the velocity of S.

It is true that in making a certain kind of rope, the velocity ratio of A
and S must remain constant, in order that the strands may be equally
twisted throughout; but if for another kind of rope a different degree of
twist is wanted, the velocity of the pinion, E, may be altered by means of
change-wheels, and thus the same machine may be used for manufacturing
many different sorts.

The second combination of this kind was devised by the writer as a
"tell-tale" for showing whether the engines driving a pair of twin
screw-propellers were going at the same rate. In Fig. 33, an index, P, is
carried by the wheel, F: the wheel, A, is loose upon the shaft of the
train-arm, which latter is driven by the wheel, E. The wheels, F and _f_,
are of the same size, but _a_ is twice as large as A; if then A be driven
by one engine, and E by the other, at the same rate but in the opposite
direction, the index will remain stationary, whatever the absolute
velocities. But if either engine go faster than the other, the index will
turn to the right or the left accordingly. The same object may also be
accomplished as shown in Fig. 34, the index being carried by the
train-arm. It makes no difference what the actual value of the ratio A/_a_
may be, but it must be equal to F/_f_: under which condition it is evident
that if A and F be driven contrary ways at equal speeds, small or great,
the train-arm will remain at rest; but any inequality will cause the index
to turn.

In some cases, particularly when annular wheels are used, the train-arm
may become very short, so that it may be impossible to mount the
planet-wheel in the manner thus far represented, upon a pin carried by a
crank. This difficulty may be surmounted as shown in Fig. 35, which
illustrates an arrangement originally forming a part of Nelson's steam
steering gear. The Internal pinions, _a_, _f_, are but little smaller than
the annular wheels, A, F, and are hung upon an eccentric E formed in one
solid piece with the driving shaft, D.

The action of a complete epicyclic train involves virtually and always the
action of two suns and two planets; but it has already been shown that the
two planets may merge into one piece, as in Fig. 10, where the
planet-wheel gears externally with one sun-wheel, and internally with the
other.

But the train may be reduced still further, and yet retain the essential
character of completeness in the same sense, though composed actually of
but two toothed wheels. An instance of this is shown in Fig. 36, the
annular planet being hung upon and carried by the pins of three cranks,
_c_, _c_, _c_, which are all equal and parallel to the virtual train-arm,
T. These cranks turning about fixed axes, communicate to _f_ a motion of
circular translation, which is the resultant of a revolution, _v'_, about
the axis of F in one direction, and a rotation, _v_, at the same rate in
the opposite direction about its own axis, as has been already explained.
The cranks then supply the place of a fixed sun-wheel and a planet of
equal size, with an intermediate idler for reversing the, direction of the
rotation of the planet; and the velocity of F is

V'= v'(1 - f/F).

A modification of this train better suited for practical use is shown in
Fig. 37, in which the sun-wheel, instead of the planet, is annular, and
the latter is carried by the two eccentrics, E, E, whose throw is equal to
the difference between the diameters of the two pitch circles; these
eccentrics must, of course, be driven in the same direction and at equal
speeds, like the cranks in Fig. 36.

[Illustration: PLANETARY WHEEL TRAINS.]

A curious arrangement of pin-gearing is shown in Fig. 38: in this case the
diameter of the pinion is half that of the annular wheel, and the latter
being the driver, the elementary hypocycloidal faces of its teeth are
diameters of its pitch circle; the derived working tooth-outlines for pins
of sensible diameter are parallels to these diameters, of which fact
advantage is taken to make the pins turn in blocks which slide in straight
slots as shown. The formula is the same as that for Fig. 36, viz.:

V' = v'(1 - f/F),

which, since f = 2F, reduces to V' = -v'.

Of the same general nature is the combination known as the "Epicycloidal
Multiplying Gear" of Elihu Galloway, represented in Fig. 39. Upon
examination it will be seen, although we are not aware that attention has
previously been called to the fact, that this differs from the ordinary
forms of "pin gearing" only in this particular, viz., that the elementary
tooth of the driver consists of a complete branch, instead of a
comparatively small part of the hypocycloid traced by rolling the smaller
pitch-circle within the larger. It is self-evident that the hypocycloid
must return into itself at the point of beginning, without crossing: each
branch, then, must subtend an aliquot part of the circumference, and can
be traced also by another and a smaller describing circle, whose diameter
therefore must be an aliquot part of the diameter of the outer
pitch-circle; and since this last must be equal to the sum of the
diameters of the two describing circles, it follows that the radii of the
pitch circles must be to each other in the ratio of two successive
integers; and this is also the ratio of the number of pins to that of the
epicycloidal branches.

Thus in Fig. 39, the diameters of the two pitch circles are to each other
as 4 to 5; the hypocycloid has 5 branches, and 4 pins are used. These pins
must in practice have a sensible diameter, and in order to reduce the
friction this diameter is made large, and the pins themselves are in the
form of rollers. The original hypocycloid is shown in dotted line, the
working curve being at a constant normal distance from it equal to the
radius of the roller; this forms a sort of frame or yoke, which is hung
upon cranks as in Figs. 36 and 38. The expression for the velocity ratio
is the same as in the preceding case:

V¹ = v'(1 - f/F); which in Fig. 39 gives

V¹ = v'(1 - 5/4)= -1/4v':

the planet wheel, or epicycloidal yoke, then, has the higher speed, so
that if it be desired to "gear up," and drive the propeller faster than
the engine goes (and this, we believe, was the purpose of the inventor),
the pin-wheel must be made the driver; which is the reverse of
advantageous in respect to the relative amounts of approaching and
receding action.

In Figs. 40 and 41 are given the skeletons of Galloway's device for ratios
of 3:4 and 2:3 respectively, the former having four branches and three
pins, the latter three branches and two pins. Following the analogy, it
would seem that the next step should be to employ two branches with only
one pin; but the rectilinear hypocycloid of Fig. 38 is a complete
diameter, and the second branch is identical with the first; the straight
tooth, then, could theoretically drive the pin half way round, but upon
its reaching the center of the outer wheel, the driving action would
cease: this renders it necessary to employ two pins and two slots, but it
is not essential that the latter should be perpendicular to each other.

In these last arrangements, the forms of the parts are so different from
those of ordinary wheels, that the true nature of the combinations is at
least partially disguised. But it may be still more completely hidden, as
for instance in the common elliptic trammel, Fig. 42. The slotted cross is
here fixed, and the pins, R and P, sliding respectively in the vertical
and horizontal lines, control the motion of the bar which carries the
pencil, S. At first glance there would seem to be nothing here resembling
wheel works. But if we describe a circle upon R P as a diameter, its
circumference will always pass through C, because R C P is a right angle,
and the instantaneous axis of the bar being at the intersection O of a
vertical line through P, with a horizontal line through R, will also lie
upon this circumference. Again, since O is diametrically opposite to C, we
have C O = R P, whence a circle about center C with radius R P will also
pass through O, which therefore is the point of contact of these two
circles. It will now be seen that the motion of the bar is the same as
though carried by the inner circle while rolling within the outer one, the
latter being fixed; the points P and R describing the diameters L M and K
N, the point D a circle, and S an ellipse; C D being the train-arm. The
distance R P being always the diameter of one circle and the radius of the
other, the sizes of the wheels can be in effect varied by altering that
distance.

Thus we see that this combination is virtually the same in its action as
the one shown in Fig. 43, known as Suardi's Geometrical Pen. In this
particular case the diameter of _a_ is half of that of A; these wheels are
connected by the idler, E, which merely reverses the direction without
affecting the velocity of _a's_ rotation. The working train arm is jointed
so as to pivot about the axis of E, and may be clamped at any angle within
its range, thus changing the length of the virtual train arm, C D. The bar
being fixed to _a_, then, moves as though carried by the wheel, _a¹_,
rolling within A¹; the radius of _a¹_ being C D, and that of A¹ twice as
great.

In either instrument, the semi-major axis C X is equal to S R, and the
semi-minor axis to S P.

The _ellipse_, then, is described by these arrangements because it is a
special form of the epitrochoid; and various other epitrochoids may be
traced with Suardi's pen by substituting other wheels, with different
numbers of teeth, for a in Fig. 43.

Another disguised planetary arrangement is found in Oldham's coupling,
Fig. 44. The two sections of shafting, A and B, have each a flange or
collar forged or keyed upon them; and in each flange is planed a
transverse groove. A third piece, C, equal in diameter to the flanges, is
provided on each side with a tongue, fitted to slide in one of the
grooves, and these tongues are at right angles to each other. The axes of
A and B must be parallel, but need not coincide; and the result of this
connection is that the two shafts will turn in the same direction at the
same rate.

The fact that C in this arrangement is in reality a planetary wheel, will
be perceived by the aid of the diagram, Fig. 45. Let C D be two pieces
rotating about fixed parallel axes, each having a groove in which slides
freely one of the arms, A C, A D, which are rigidly secured to each other
at right angles.

The point C of the upper arm can at the instant move only in the direction
C A; and the point D of the lower arm only in the direction A D, at the
same instant; the instantaneous axis is therefore at the intersection, K,
of perpendiculars to A C and A D, at the points C and D. C A D K being
then a rectangle, A K and C D will be two diameters of a circle whose
center, O, bisects C D; and K will also be the point of contact between
this circle and another whose center is A, and radius A K = C D. If then
we extend the arms so as to form the cross, P K, M N, and suppose this to
be carried by the outer circle, _f_, rolling upon the inner one, F, its
motion will be the same as that determined by the pieces, C D; and such a
cross is identical with that formed by the tongues on the coupling-piece,
C, of Fig. 44.

A O is the virtual train-arm; let the center, A, of the cross move to the
position B, then since the angles A O B at the center, and A C B in the
circumference, stand on the same arc, A B, the former is double the
latter, showing that the cross revolves twice round the center O during
each rotation of C; and since A C B = A D B, C and D rotate with equal
velocities, and these rotations and the revolution about O have the same
direction. While revolving, the cross rotates about its traveling center,
A, in the opposite direction, the contact between the two circles being
internal, and at a rate equal to that of the rotations of C and D, because
the velocities of the axial and the orbital motion are to each other as
_f_ is to F, that is to say, as 1 is to 2. Since in the course of the
revolution the points P and K must each coincide with C, and the points M
and N with D, it follows that each tongue in Fig. 44 must slide in its
groove a distance equal to twice that between the axes of the shafts.

Another example of a disguised planetary train is shown in Fig. 46. Let C
be the center about which the train arm, T, revolves, and suppose it
required that the distant shaft, B, carried by T, shall turn once backward
for each forward revolution of the arm. E is a fixed eccentric of any
convenient diameter, in the upper side of which is a pin, D. On the shaft,
B, is keyed a crank, B G, equal in length to C D; and at any convenient
point, H, on B C, or its prolongation, another crank, H F, equal also to C
D, is provided with a bearing in the train-arm. The three crank pins, F,
D, G, are connected by a rod, like the parallel rod of a locomotive; F D,
D G, being respectively equal to H C, C B. Then, as the train-arm
revolves, the three cranks must remain parallel to each other; but C D
being fixed, the cranks, H F and B G, will remain always parallel to their
original positions, thus receiving the required motion of circular
translation.

The result then is the same as though the periphery of E were formed into
a fixed spurwheel, A, and another, _a_, of the same size, secured on a
shaft, B, the two being connected by the three equal wheels, L, M, N. It
need hardly be stated that instead of the eccentric, E, a stationary crank
similar and equal to B G may be used, should it be found better suited to
the circumstances of the case.

It is possible also to apply the planetary principle to mechanism composed
partially of racks; in fact, a rack is merely a wheel of prodigious
size--the limiting case, just as a right line is a circle of infinite
radius. A very neat application of this principle is found in Villa's
Pantograph, of which a full description and illustration was given in
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, No. 424; the racks, moving side by side,
are the sun-wheels, and the planet-wheels are the pinions, carried by the
traveling socket, by which the motion of one rack is transmitted to the
other.

Thus far attention has been called only to combinations of circular
wheels. In these the velocity ratios are constant, if we except the cases
in which two independent trains converge, the two sun-wheels, or one of
them and the train-arm, being driven separately--and even in those, a
variable motion of the ultimate follower is obtained only by varying the
speed of one or both drivers. It is not, however, necessary to employ
circular wheels exclusively or even at all; wheels of other forms are
capable of acting together in the relation of sun and planet, and in this
way a varying velocity ratio may be produced even with a fixed sun-wheel
and a single driver. We have not found, in the works of any previous
writer, any intimation that noncircular wheels have ever been thus
combined; and we propose in the following article to illustrate some
curious results which may be thus obtained.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FALLACY OF THE PRESENT THEORY OF SOUND.


Dr. H.A. Mott recently delivered a lecture before the New York Academy of
Sciences, in Columbia College, on the Fallacy of the Present Theory of
Sound.

He commenced his lecture by stating that "the object of science was not to
find out what we like or what we dislike; the object of science was
truth." He then said that, as Galileo stated a hypothesis should be judged
by the weight of facts and the force of mathematical deductions, he
claimed the theory of sound should be so examined, and not allowed to
exist as a true theory simply because it is sustained by a long line of
scientific names; as too many theories had been overthrown to warrant the
acceptance of any one authority unless they had been thoroughly tested.
Dr. Mott stated that Dr. Wilford Hall was the first to attack the theory
of sound and show its fallaciousness, and that many other scientists
besides himself had agreed with Dr. Hall in his arguments and had advanced
additional arguments and experiments to establish this fact. Dr. Mott
first gave a very elaborate and still at the same time condensed statement
of the current theory of sound as propounded by such men as Helmholtz,
Tyndall, Lord Rayleigh, Mayer, Rood, Sir Wm. Thomson, and others, and
closed this section of the paper with the remarks made by Tyndall:
"Assuredly no question of science ever stood so much in need of revision
as this of the transmission of sound through the atmosphere. Slowly but
surely we mastered the question, and the further we advance, the more
plainly it appeared that our reputed knowledge regarding it was erroneous
from beginning to end."

Dr. Mott then took up the other side of the question, and treated the same
under the following heads:

1. Agitation of the air. 2. Mobility of the atmosphere. 3. Resonance. 4.
Heat and velocity of the supposed sound waves. 5. Decrease in loudness of
sound. 6. The physical strength of the locust. 7. The barometric theory of
Sir Wm. Thomson. 8. Elasticity and density of the air. 9. Interference and
beats. 10. The membrana tympani and the corti arches.

Under the first head Dr. Mott stated that all experiments and photographs
made to establish the existence of sound waves simply referred to the
necessary agitation of the air accompanying any disturbance, such as would
of necessity be produced by a vibrating body, and had nothing to do
directly with sound. He stated that in the Edison telephone, sound was
converted directly into electricity without vibrating any diaphragm at
all, as attested to by Edison himself. Speaking of the mobility of the
air, he said the particles were free to slip around and not practically be
pushed at all, and that the greatest distance a steam whistle could affect
the air would not exceed 30 feet, and the waves would not travel more than
4 or 5 feet a second, while sound travels 1,120 feet a second. Under heat
and velocity of sound waves, Dr. Mott stated that Newton found by
calculating the exact relative density and elasticity of air that sound
should travel only 916 feet a second, while it was known to travel 1,120
feet a second.

Laplace, by a heat and cold theory, tried to account for the 174 feet, and
supposed that in the condensed portion of a sound wave heat was generated,
and in the rarefied portion cold was produced; the heat augmenting the
elasticity and therefore the sound waves, and the cold produced
neutralizing the heat, thus kept the atmosphere at a constant temperature.
Dr. Mott stated that when Newton first pointed out this discrepancy of 174
feet, the theory should have been dropped at once, and later on he showed
the consequences of Laplace's heat and cold theory.

The great argument of the evening, and the one to which he attached the
most importance, was that all scientists have spoken of the swift movement
of the tuning fork, while in fact it moved 25,000 times slower than the
hour hand of a clock and 300,000,000 times slower than any clock pendulum
ever constructed.

Since a pendulum cannot, according to the high authorities, produce
sonorous air waves on account of its slow movement, Dr. Mott asks some one
to enlighten him how a prong of a tuning fork going 300,000,000 times
slower could be able to produce them. He then showed that there was not
the slightest similarity between the theoretical sound waves and water
waves, and still they are spoken of as "precisely similar" and
"essentially identical," and "move in exactly the same way." Considerable
merriment was occasioned when Dr. Mott showed what a locust stridulating
in the air would be called upon to do if the present theory of sound were
correct. He stated that a locust not weighing more than half a
pennyweight, and that could not move an ounce weight, was supposed capable
of setting 4 cubic miles of atmosphere into vibration, weighing
120,000,000 tons, so that it would be displaced 440 times in one second,
