actuated by variations in the height of the regulator receiver. All the
condensation that occurs in the various parts of the apparatus collects
in a receptacle, 52, so arranged as to perform the office of a separator
and set apart the oil at 20, and the water at 21, through the natural
effect of their difference in density. This latter is likewise utilized
for causing the oil to flow into the vaporizer through 26 and 27, instead
of using a graduated cock that receives a variable pressure from the
receiver. In this way every cause of obstruction is avoided.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--SECTION.]

We have stated that the regulator, C, serves to automatically regulate
the flow of the liquids proportionally to the consumption of the gases
produced. To effect this a communication is established between the
regulator receiver, 59, and the aperture through which the liquids flow,
and the flow is thus modified by the valves, 54 and 55.

The water contained in the reservoir of the regulator serves to wash the
gas which enters through a number of orifices in the disk, 60, this
latter being fixed beneath the level of the water. The gas may be
purified by dissolving metallic salts in the water.

By means of the arrangement above described, there may be manufactured at
will a rich gas from liquid hydrocarburets, hydrogen from water, and gas
obtained by an admixture of two others simultaneously produced and
combined in the apparatus.--_Chronique Industrielle._

       *       *       *       *       *




SUGAR NITRO-GLYCERINE.


A new explosive has been discovered by M. Roca, a French engineer, who
communicates an account of it to _Le Genie Civil_. The discovery was due
entirely to scientific induction from some experiments made upon
different specimens of dynamite, with a view to the determination of the
effect on the explosive force of the various inert or at least slowly
combustible substances with which nitro-glycerine is mixed to produce the
dynamite of commerce. Of late, in place of the infusorial earth which
formed the solid portion of Nobel's dynamite, such substances as sawdust,
powdered bark, and even gunpowder, have been used, probably for the sake
of economy alone, without, except in the latter case, any reference to
the influence which they might have upon the combustion of the
nitro-glycerine; but M. Roca, in testing a variety of samples, was struck
by the difference among them in regard to energy of explosion, and
discovered that if a portion of free carbon, sufficient to combine with
the oxygen disengaged from the nitro-glycerine, was present at the moment
of detonation, the effect was greater than where, as in the case of
gunpowder, the solid portion alone furnished oxygen enough to burn all
the free carbon, without calling upon the nitro-glycerine for any. In
fact, it appeared from experiment that the dose of carbon might with
advantage be so great as not only to be itself oxidized into carbonic
oxide by the oxygen of the nitro-glycerine, but to reduce the carbonic
acid developed by the explosion of the latter itself into carbonic oxide.
The limit of the advantageous effect of free carbon ceased here, and if
more were added to the mixture, the cavities formed by the explosion in
the lead cubes used for test were found simply lined with soot; but up to
the limit necessary for converting all the carbon in the dynamite into
carbonic oxide, the addition of a reducing agent was shown to be an
important gain. This was confirmed by theory, which shows that pure
nitro-glycerine, which is composed of six parts of carbon and two of
hydrogen, combined with three times as much nitric acid and water,
decomposes on explosion into six parts of carbonic acid, five of watery
vapor, one of oxygen, and three of nitrogen, while the addition of seven
more parts of free carbon to the mixture causes the development, by
explosion, of thirteen volumes of carbonic oxide, five parts of watery
vapor, and three of nitrogen, or twenty-one volumes of gas in place of
fifteen. As the power of an explosive depends principally on the amount
of gas which results from its sudden combustion, it was evident that the
addition of pure or nearly pure carbon, in a condition to be readily
combined with the other elements, ought to increase materially the force
of nitro-glycerine, and M. Roca experimented accordingly with an
admixture of sugar, as a highly carbonized body immediately available,
and found that three parts of this, mixed with seven parts of
nitro-glycerine, detonated with a force from thirty to thirty-five per
cent. greater than that of pure nitro-glycerine. Many other organic
carbonaceous substances may be employed in place of sugar, with various
advantages. In comparing these simple compounds with the celebrated
explosive gum, prepared by dissolving gun-cotton in nitro-glycerine, it
is found that the latter is far inferior, having an energy very little
superior to that of pure nitro-glycerine.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CIRCLE-DIVIDER.


This little apparatus, invented by Prof. Mora, of Senlis, permits of
dividing circumferences or circles into equal or proportional parts. It
consists (Fig. 2) of a rule, A, divided into equal or proportional parts,
which pivots in the manner of a compass around a rod, T, that serves as a
central rotary point. Along this rule moves a slide, R, provided with an
aperture, C, which is made to coincide with one of the divisions. This
division corresponds to the number of equal or proportional parts into
which the circle is to be divided. The slide is provided with a wheel, E,
that carries a point which serves at every revolution to trace the points
that indicate the divisions of the circumference.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--MODE OF USING THE CIRCLE DIVIDER. ]

The apparatus operates as follows: Suppose, for example, that it becomes
necessary to divide a circumference into 19 equal parts: We make the
aperture, C, coincide with the 19th division of the rule, and fix the
point of the rod, T, in the center of the circumference, and cause the
rule to revolve around it. The wheel, E, will revolve upon its axis, g,
and, at every revolution, its point will make a mark which corresponds to
the 19th part of the circumference--

Circumf. c / Circumf. C = r / R

It is always necessary that the extremity of the wheel, E, and the
center-point, T, shall be at the same height in order to have the
divisions very accurate.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--THE CIRCLE DIVIDER. ]

       *       *       *       *       *




SOLUBLE GLASS.


Although the manufacture of soluble glass does not strictly belong to the
glass maker's art, yet it is an allied process to that of manufacturing
glass. Of late soluble glass has been used with good effect as a
preservative coating for stones, a fire-proofing solution for wood and
textile fabrics. Very thin gauze dipped in a solution of silicate of
potash diluted with water, and dried, burns without flame, blackens, and
carbonizes as if it were heated in a retort without contact of air. As a
fire-proofing material it would be excellent were it not that the
alkaline reaction of this glass very often changes the coloring matters
of paintings and textile fabrics. Since soluble glass always remains
somewhat deliquescent, even though the fabrics may have been thoroughly
dried, the moisture of the atmosphere is attracted, and the goods remain
damp. This is the reason why its use has been abandoned for preserving
theater decorations and wearing apparel. Another application of soluble
glass has been made by surgeons for forming a protecting coat of silicate
around broken limbs as a substitute for plaster, starch, or dextrine.

The only use where soluble glass has met with success is in the
preservation of porous stones, building materials, paintings in
distemper, and painting on glass. Before we describe these applications,
we will give the processes used in making soluble glass.

The following ingredients are heated in a reverberatory furnace until
fusion becomes quieted: 1,260 pounds white sand, 660 pounds potash of
78 deg.. This will produce 1,690 pounds of transparent, homogeneous glass,
with a slight tinge of amber. This glass is but little soluble in hot
water. To dissolve it, the broken fragments are introduced into a iron
digester charged with a sufficient quantity of water, at a high pressure,
to make a solution marking 33 deg. to 35 deg. Baume. Distilled or rain water
should be used, as the calcareous salts contained in ordinary water would
produce insoluble salts of lime, which would render the solution turbid
and opalescent; this solution contains silica and potash combined
together in the proportion of 70 to 30.

Silicate of soda is made with 180 parts of sand, 100 parts carbonate of
soda (0.91), and is to be melted in the same manner as indicated
previously.

Soluble glass may also be prepared by the following method: A mixture of
sand with a solution of caustic potash or soda is introduced into an iron
boiler, under 5 or 6 atmospheres of pressure, and heated for a few hours.
The iron boiler contains an agitator, which is occasionally operated
during the melting. The liquid is allowed to cool until it reaches 212 deg.,
and is drawn out after it has been allowed to clear by settling; it is
then concentrated until it reaches a density of 1.25, or it may be
evaporated to dryness in an iron kettle. The metal is not affected by
alkaline liquors.

The glass is soluble in boiling water; cold water dissolves but little of
it. The solution is decomposed by all acids, even by carbonic acid.
Soluble glass is apparently coagulated by the addition of an alkaline
salt; mixed with powdered matters upon which alkalies have no effect, it
becomes sticky and agglutinative, a sort of mineral glue.

To apply soluble glass for the preservation of buildings and monuments of
porous materials, take a solution of silicate of potash of 35 deg. Baume,
dilute it with twice its weight of water, paint with a brush, or inject
with a pump; give several coats. Experience has shown that three coats
applied on three successive days are sufficient to preserve the materials
indefinitely, at a cost of about 15 cents per square yard. When applied
upon old materials, it is necessary to wash them thoroughly with water.
The degree of concentration of the solutions to be used varies with the
materials. For hard stones, such as sand and free stones, rock, etc., the
solution should mark 7 deg. to 9 deg. Baume; for soft stones with coarse grit, 5 deg.
to 7 deg.; for calcareous stones of soft texture, 6 deg. to 7 deg.. The last coating
should always be applied with a more dilute solution of 3 deg. to 4 deg. only.

Authorities are divided upon the successful results of the preservation
of stone by silicates. Some claim in the affirmative that the protection
is permanent, while others assert that with time and the humidity of the
atmosphere the beneficial effects gradually disappear. It might be worth
while to experiment upon some of the porous sandstones, which, under the
extreme influence of our climate, rapidly deteriorate; such, for
instance, as the Connecticut sandstone, so popular at one time as a
building material, but which is now generally discarded, owing to its
tendency to crumble to pieces when exposed to the weather even for a few
years.

Soluble glass has also been used in Germany to a great extent for mural
painting, known as stereochromy. The process consists in first laying a
ground with a lime water; when this is thoroughly dry, it is soaked with
a solution of silicate of soda. When this has completely solidified, the
upper coating is applied to the thickness of about one-sixteenth of an
inch, and should be put on very evenly. It is then rubbed with fine
sandstone to roughen the surface. When thoroughly dry, the colors are
applied with water; the wall is also frequently sprinkled with water. The
colors are now set by using a mixture of silicate of potash completely
saturated with silica, with a basic silicate of soda (a flint liquor with
soda base, obtained by melting 2 parts sand with 3 parts of carbonate of
soda). As the colors applied do not stand the action of the brush, the
soluble glass is projected against the wall by means of a spray. After a
few days the walls should be washed with alcohol to remove the dust and
alkali liberated.

The colors used for this style of painting are zinc white, green oxide
of chrome, cobalt green, chromate of lead, colcothar, ochers, and
ultramarine.

Soluble glass has also been used in the manufacture of soaps made with
palm and cocoanut oil; this body renders them more alkaline and harder.

Interesting experiments have been made with soluble glass for coloring
corals and shells. By plunging silicated shells into hot solutions of
salts of chrome, nickel, cobalt, or copper, beautiful dyes in yellow,
green, and blue are produced. Here seems to be a field for further
application of this discovery.

Soluble glass has also been applied to painting on glass in imitation of
glass staining. By using sulphate of baryta, ultramarine, oxide of
chrome, etc., mixed with silicate of potash, fast colors are obtained
similar to the semi-transparent colors of painted windows. By this means
a variety of cheap painted glass may be made. Should these colors be
fired in a furnace, enameled surfaces would be produced. As a substitute
for albumen for fixing colors in calico printing, soluble glass has been
used with a certain degree of success; also as a sizing for thread
previous to weaving textile fabrics. Thus it would seem that this
substance has been used for many purposes, but since its application does
not seem to have been extended to any great degree, the defects here
pointed out in its use as a fire-proofing material perhaps also exist, to
a certain degree, in its other applications. In painting upon glass, for
instance, it is asserted that the brilliancy and finish of ordinary
vitrified colors cannot be obtained.--_Glassware Reporter._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE JET VENTILATOR.


[Illustration: KORTING'S JET VENTILATOR.]

Messrs. Korting bros., of London, induced by the interest that has been
directed to the separate ventilation of mines in which fire-damp is apt
to form, have adopted for this purpose their jet ventilator. The
instrument, which we illustrate in Fig. 1, has been, we understand,
considerable simplified, and adapted for the special object in view. The
ventilators are worked by compressed air, and are so arranged that,
without stopping their action, the quantity of air they deliver can be
rapidly increased or diminished. This ample power of control has been
arranged for by the special wish of the mining authorities, who wish to
regulate the ventilation according to the development of fire-damp or the
greater or less number of men at work. Under circumstances of this kind
the quantity of air taken into the mine can be changed instantly. The
illustrations, Figs. 2, 3, and 4, show different modes of fixing the jet
ventilator. In Fig. 2, it is arranged to blow the air forward; in Fig. 3,
it is shown exhausting the air; and in Fig. 4, it is represented as
exhausting and blowing simultaneously, the efficiency in each case being
always the same. Any bends in the conduit affect the result to a very
slight degree, and the ventilator may be used with advantage when the
conduit is divided as in Fig. 4, in order to get the fresh air to
different points. The ventilators are easily fixed to the air conduits.
If they are to be connected to zinc air pipes, the pipe is simply slipped
over the point, L. in Fig. 1, and if to wooden conduits the apparatus is
simply put into them, and if no other support is required. Furthermore,
they are so light that it suffices for one man to fix them or change
their position.

Messrs. Korting Bros. advance the following claims for this mode of
ventilating mines: Certainty of action, no moving parts whatever,
and, consequently, no need of lubrication; no need of attention.
--_Mech. World_.


       *       *       *       *       *




ON REMELTING OF CAST IRON.


From trials conducted by Ledebur, it appears that cast iron is rendered
suitable for foundry purposes--i.e., to fill the moulds well and to yield
sharp and definite forms free of flaws, to be cut with a chisel, and
turned on a lathe--through a certain percentage of graphite, whose
presence depends on that of carbon and silicium. Cast iron free of
silicium yields on cooling the entire amount of carbon in the amorphous
state, while presence of the former metal gives rise to the formation of
graphite, and, consequently, causes a partial separation of carbon. Iron
suffers on casting loss of graphite, assumes a finely-grained texture,
becomes hard and brittle, and is changed from gray to white. In view of
the fact that samples of cast iron with equal percentage of silicium and
carbon yield on casting a different product, it has become necessary to
institute experiments as to the cause of this behavior. Samples of cast
iron were therefore repeatedly melted, and thin sections of each melt
examined; these sections exhibited a gray color, though less apparent
than in the unmelted sample, and possessed sufficient softness to admit
boring and filing. During these processes of fusing, the amount of
silicium, carbon, and manganese had been gradually decreased, and
amounted to 12.7, 17.6, and 24.4 per centum for silicium in the three
samples examined. It also was observed that the more manganese the iron
contains the less readily the percentage of silicium is diminished; and
since manganese is more subject to oxidation than silicium, it is capable
to reduce silicic acid of the slag or lining to metal, and thus to
augment the amount of silicium in cast iron. The percentage of carbon
also suffers diminution by oxidation, which latter process is impeded by
presence of manganese, a fact of some importance in melting of cast iron
in the cupola furnace. An excess of manganese renders cast iron hard and
brittle, and imparts to it the properties to absorb gases, while an
amount of 1.5 per centum, as found in Scotch iron, undoubtedly has the
effect to produce those properties for which this iron is held in high
repute. The amount of copper is not visibly altered by fusion, but that
of phosphorus and sulphur slowly increased.

Experiments in regard to the relation between chemical composition and
strength of the material have established that a large amount of
silicium, graphite, manganese, and combined carbon reduce the elasticity,
strength, and tenacity of cast iron, and that a limited percentage of
silicium counteracts the injurious influence produced by an excess of
combined carbon. On remelting of cast iron, increase in tensile strength
was observed, which attained its maximum in iron with a small percentage
of silicium after the third, and in such with a large amount after the
fourth melting. The increase in tensile strength was accompanied by a
loss of silicium, graphite, and manganese coupled with a simultaneous
augmentation of combined carbon. A fifth melting of the cast iron renders
it hard, brittle, and white, through oxidation of silicium and subsequent
lowering of the amount of carbon. On lessening the percentage of combined
carbon with formation of graphite the injurious influence of the
accessorial constituents of cast iron is diminished, especially that
produced by the presence of phosphorus.--_Eisenhuettentechnik._

       *       *       *       *       *




FEEDING BOILERS AT THE BOTTOM.


One of the most important things to be considered in boiler construction
is the position and arrangement of the feed apparatus, but it is,
unfortunately, one of the elements that is most often overlooked, or, if
considered at all, only in a very superficial manner. Many seem to think
that it is only necessary to have a hole somewhere in the boiler--no
matter what part--through which water may be pumped, and we have all that
is desired. This is a very grave error. Many boilers have been ruined,
and (we make the assertion with the confidence born of long experience) a
large number of destructive explosions have been directly caused by
introducing the feed water into boilers at the wrong point.
