giving him mentally menial tasks which afforded him in each case a
glimpse of a new facet of financial technique. It was fairly
interesting. He made no friends and he worked diligently.

One day in April when he had returned from lunch and a stroll in the
environs of the Battery--returned to a list of securities and a strip
from an adding machine, which he checked item by item--he was conscious
of a stirring in his vicinity. A woman employee on the opposite side of
a wire wicket was talking shrilly. A vice-president rose from his desk
and hastened down the corridor, his usually composed face suddenly white
and disconcerted. The tension was cumulative. Work stopped and clusters
of people began to chatter. Hugo joined one of them.

"Yeah," a boy was saying, "it's happened before. A couple o' times."

"How do they know he's there?"

"They got a telephone goin' inside and they're talkin' to him."

"I'll be damned."

The boy nodded rapidly. "Yeah--some talk! Tellin' him what to try
next."

"Poor devil!"

"What's the matter?" Hugo asked.

The boy was glad of a new and uninformed listener. "Aw, some dumb vault
clerk got himself locked in, an' the locks jammed an' they can't get him
out."

"Which vault? The big one?"

"Naw. The big one's got pipes for that kinda trouble. The little one
they moved from the old building."

"It's not so darn little at that," someone said.

Another person, a man, chuckled. "Not so darn. But there isn't air in
there to last three hours. Caughlin said so."

"Honest to God?"

"Honest. An' he's been there more than an hour already."

"Jeest!" There was a pregnant, pictorial silence. Someone looked at
Hugo.

"What's eatin' you, Danner? Scared?"

His face was tense and his hands were opening and closing convulsively.
"No," he answered. "Guess I'll go down and have a look."

He rang for an elevator in the corridor and was carried to the basement.
In the small room on which the vault opened were five or six people,
among them a woman who seemed to command the situation. The men were all
smoking; their attitudes were relaxed, their voices hushed.

One repeated nervously: "Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ."

"That won't help, Mr. Quail. I've sent for the expert and he will
probably have the safe open in a short time."

"Blowtorches?" the swearing man asked abruptly.

"Absurd. He would cook before he was out. And three feet of steel and
then two feet more."

"Nitroglycerin?"

"And make jelly out of him?" The woman tapped her finger-nails with her
glasses.

Another arrival, who carried a small satchel, talked with her in an
undertone and then took off his coat. He went first to a telephone on
the wall and said: "Gi' me the inside of the vault. Hello.... Hello? You
there? Are you all right?... Try that combination again." The
safe-expert held the wire and waited. Not even the faintest sounds of
the attempt were audible in the front room. "Hello? You tried it?...
Well, see if those numbers are in this order." He repeated a series of
complicated directions. Finally he hung up. "Says it's getting pretty
stuffy in there. Says he's lying down on the floor."

People came and went. The president himself walked in calmly and
occupied a chair. He lit a cigar, puffed on it, and stared with
ruminative eyes at the shiny mechanism on the front of the safe.

"We are doing everything possible," the woman said to him crisply.

"Of course," he nodded. "I called up the insurance company. We're amply
covered." A pause. "Mrs. Robinson, post one of the guards to keep
people from running in and out of here. There are enough around
already."

No one had given Hugo any attention. He stood quietly in the background.
The expert worked and all eyes were on him. Occasionally he muttered to
himself. The hands of an electric clock moved along in audible jerks.
Nearly an hour passed and the room had become hazy with tobacco smoke.
The man working on the safe was moist with perspiration. His blue shirt
was a darker blue around the armpits. He lit a cigarette, set it down,
whirled the dials again, lit another cigarette while the first one
burned a chair arm, and threw a crumpled, empty package on the floor.

At last he went to the phone again. He waited for some time before it
was answered, and he was compelled to make the man inside repeat
frequently. The new series of stratagems was without result. Before he
went again to his labours, he addressed the group. "Air getting pretty
bad, I guess."

"Is it dark?" one of them asked tremulously.

"No."

Fifteen minutes more. The expert glanced at the bank's president,
hesitated, struggled frenziedly for a while, and then sighed. "I'm
afraid I can't get him out, sir. The combination is jammed and the
time-lock is all off."

The president considered. "Do you know of anyone else who could do
this?"

The man shook his head. "No. I'm supposed to be the best. I've been
called out for this--maybe six times. I never missed before. You see, we
make this safe--or we used to make it. And I'm a specialist. It looks
serious."

The president took his cigar from his mouth. "Well, go ahead
anyway--until it's too late."

Hugo stepped away from the wall. "I think I can get him out."

They turned toward him. The president looked at him coldly. "And who are
you?"

Mrs. Robinson answered. "He's the new man Mr. Shayne recommended so
highly."

"Ah. And how do you propose to get him out, young man?"

Hugo stood pensively for a moment. "By methods known only to me. I am
certain I can do it--but I will undertake it only if you will all leave
the room."

"Ridiculous!" Mrs. Robinson said.

The president's mouth worked. He looked more sharply at Hugo. Then he
rose. "Come on, everybody." He spoke quietly to Hugo. "You have a nerve.
How much time do you want?"

"Five minutes."

"Only five minutes," the president murmured as he walked from the
chamber.

Hugo did not move until they had all gone. Then he locked the door
behind them. He walked to the safe and rapped on it tentatively with his
knuckles. He removed his coat and vest. He planted his feet against the
steel sill under the door. He caught hold of the two handles, fidgeted
with his elbows, drew a deep breath, and pulled. There was a resonant,
metallic sound. Something gave. The edge of the seven-foot door moved
outward and a miasma steamed through the aperture. Hugo changed his
stance and took the door itself in his hands. His back bent. He pulled
again. With a reverberating clang and a falling of broken steel it swung
out. Hugo dragged the man who lay on the floor to a window that gave on
a grated pit. He broke the glass with his fist. The clerk's chest heaved
violently; he panted, opened his eyes, and closed them tremblingly.

Hugo put on his coat and vest and unlocked the door. The people outside
all moved toward him.

"It's all right," Hugo said. "He's out."

Mrs. Robinson glanced at the clerk and walked to the safe. "He's ruined
it!" she said in a shrill voice.

The president was behind her. He looked at the handles of the vault,
which had been bent like hair-pins, and he stooped to examine the
shattered bolts. Then his eyes travelled to Hugo. There was a profoundly
startled expression in them.

The clerk was sobbing. Presently he stopped. "Who got me out?"

They indicated Hugo and he crossed the floor on tottering feet. "Thanks,
mister," he said piteously. "Oh, my God, what a wonderful thing to do!
I--I just passed out when I saw your fingers reaching around--"

"Never mind," Hugo interrupted. "It's all right, buddy."

The president touched his shoulder. "Come up to my office." A doctor
arrived. Several people left. Others stood around the demolished door.

The president was alone when Hugo entered and sat down. He was cold and
he eyed Hugo coldly. "How did you do that?"

Hugo shrugged. "That's my secret, Mr. Mills."

"Pretty clever, I'd say."

"Not when you know how." Hugo was puzzled. His ancient reticence about
himself was acting together with a natural modesty.

"Some new explosive?"

"Not exactly."

"Electricity? Magnetism? Thought-waves?"

Hugo chuckled. "No. All wrong."

"Could you do it on a modern safe?"

"I don't know."

President Mills rubbed his fingers on the mahogany desk. "I presume you
were planning that for other purposes?"

"What!" Hugo said.

"Very well done. Very well acted. I will play up to you, Mr.--"

"Danner."

"Danner. I'll play up to this assumption of innocence. You have saved a
man's life. You are, of course, blushingly modest. But you have shown
your hand rather clearly. Hmmm." He smiled sardonically. "I read a book
about a safe-cracker who opened a safe to get a child out--at the
expense of his liberty and position--or at the hazard of them, anyhow.
Maybe you have read the same book."

"Maybe," Hugo answered icily.

"Safe-crackers--blasters, light fingers educated to the dials, and ears
attuned to the tumblers--we can cope with those things, Mr.--"

"Danner."

"But this new stunt of yours. Well, until we find out what it is, we
can't let you go. This is business, Mr. Danner. It involves money,
millions, the security of American finance, of the very nation. You will
understand. Society cannot afford to permit a man like you to go at
large until it has a thoroughly effective defence against you. Society
must disregard your momentary sacrifice, momentary nobleness. Your
process, unknown by us, constitutes a great social danger. I do not dare
overlook it. I cannot disregard it even after the service you have
done--even if I thought you never intended to put it to malicious use."

Hugo's thoughts were far away--to the fort he had built when he was a
child in Colorado, to the wagon he had lifted up, to the long,
discouraging gauntlet of hard hearts and frightened eyes that his
miracles had met with. His voice was wistful when, at last, he addressed
the banker.

"What do you propose to do?"

"I shan't bandy words, Danner. I propose to hang on to you until I get
that secret. And I shall be absolutely without mercy. That is frank, is
it not?"

"Quite."

"You comprehend the significance of the third degree?"

"Not clearly."

"You will learn about it--unless you are reasonable."

Hugo bowed sadly. The president pressed a button. Two policemen came
into the room. "McClaren has my instructions," he said.

"Come on." Hugo rose and stood between them. He realized that the whole
pantomime of his arrest was in earnest. For one brief instant the
president was given a glimpse of a smile, a smile that worried him for a
long time. He was so worried that he called McClaren on the telephone
and added to his already abundant instructions.

A handful of bystanders collected to watch Hugo cross from the bank to
the steel patrol wagon. It moved forward and its bell sounded. The
policemen had searched Hugo and now they sat dumbly beside him. He was
handcuffed to both of them. Once he looked down at the nickel bonds and
up at the dull faces. His eyebrows lifted a fraction of an inch.

Captain McClaren received Hugo in a bare room shadowed by bars. He was a
thick-shouldered, red-haired man with a flabby mouth from which
protruded a moist and chewed toothpick. His eyes were blue and bland.
He made Hugo strip nude and gave him a suit of soiled clothes. Hugo
remained alone in that room for thirty hours without food or water. The
strain of that ordeal was greater than his jailers could have conceived,
but he bore it with absolute stoicism.

Early in the evening of the second day the lights in the room were put
out, a glaring automobile lamp was set up on a table, he was seated in
front of it, and men behind the table began to question him in voices
that strove to be terrible. They asked several questions and ultimately
boiled them down to one: "How did you get that safe open?" which was
bawled at him and whispered hoarsely at him from the darkness behind the
light until his mind rang with the words, until he was waiting
frantically for each new issue of the words, until sweat glistened on
his brow and he grew weak and nauseated. His head ached splittingly and
his heart pounded. They desisted at dawn, gave him a glass of water,
which he gulped, and a dose of castor oil, which he allowed them to
force into his mouth. A few hours later they began again. It was night
before they gave up.

The remnant of Hugo's clenched sanity was dumbfounded at what followed
after that. They beat his face with fists that shot from the blackness.
They threw him to the floor and kicked him. When his skin did not burst
and he did not bleed, they beat and kicked more viciously. They lashed
him with rubber hoses. They twisted his arms as far as they
could--until the bones of an ordinary man would have become dislocated.

Except for thirst and hunger and the discomfort caused by the castor
oil, Hugo did not suffer. They refined their torture slowly. They tried
to drive a splinter under his nails; they turned on the lights and drank
