"Did you find any more victims of the wreck?" asked the old man.

"No, sah; Mr. Perfessor Amos Henderson, I did not," answered Washington.

"Just plain Professor will do," said Amos Henderson, quietly. "You
needn't give my full name every time."

"All right, Perfessor," went on the colored man. "I didn't find no mo'
pussons entangled in the distribution of debris. Dere was a lot ob
railroad men dere, but dey wasn't hurted. Dey was lookin' fer two boys
what was ridin' on de train when it went kersmash."

"I hope you didn't say anything about these lads, Washington."

"Not one single disjointed word, Perfessor. Dis chile knows when to
persecute de essence ob quietude an' silence."

"There you go again! How many times have I told you not to try and use
big words, Washington? Use simple language. I take it you mean there
were no others injured in the wreck?"

"Perzackly."

"It is a miracle how these boys escaped instant death," the old man went
on.

"I reckon as how it were owin' to de fack dat dey struck in a bank ob
soft sand dat concussioned de fall," explained Washington.

"You mean the soft sand saved them?"

"Dat's de correctness ob it."

"I think you are right," the old man continued, as he fastened the door
securely. "The shock of the sudden stopping of the runaway train, as it
reached the end of the siding and crashed into the bank, probably threw
the lads up in the air, and they came down in the sliding sand where we
found them. Otherwise they would surely have been killed. As it is they
have had severe shocks."

"Are dey goin' to die, Perfessor?"

"I hope not, Washington, but I must see to them."

Amos Henderson went over to the bed on which the two boys were stretched
out, each with the piece of cotton soaked in the preparation over his
mouth and nose.

"I am using a very powerful remedy," the old man muttered. "If they are
not too badly hurt they will recover. Ah, yes, there is a little color
in their pale cheeks."

He bent over the boys. As he had said, Jack's face was tinged with a
light pink, and Mark's eye-lids were moving slightly.

"They are coming around all right," exclaimed the aged professor.
"Hurry, Washington, and get some hot beef broth ready. Put the kettle on
to boil and make some strong tea. They will want something to eat
shortly after they recover their senses."

The colored man, humming softly to himself, began moving about the shed.
It was a rough looking place from the outside, but, within, was fitted
with many comforts. There was a gasoline stove, a table, several chairs,
a bed, and a large case full of books. But the queerest sights of all
were on the walls.

They were literally covered with cog wheels, levers, handles, springs,
pieces of machinery, patterns, models, and strange devices. The room had
two doors. One was that by which the old man and the negro had entered.
The other was behind the bed, and was clamped and fastened with so many
bolts and bars, with locks similar to those on big safes, that it would
seem a rare treasure was concealed behind the portal.

The old man gave no heed to the wonders that surrounded him. Instead he
gave all his attention to the boys. He sat down beside the bed and
watched them as their breathing became stronger. From time to time he
felt of their pulses, and nodded his head as if satisfied.

"Is the beef tea ready?" asked the old man, after a half hour had
passed.

"It am, Perfessor."

"Then turn down the flame a bit so it will keep the stuff warm, and come
back into the work shop with me. I want to get that last bolt in the
engine."

"Are dem young gen'men all hunky-dory?"

"They are coming on nicely," was the old man's reply. "They will recover
consciousness in half an hour and we can feed them, and give them some
medicine. Come along, Washington."

The two passed out through the much-locked door behind the bed, the
undoing of the fastenings taking some time. As the portal swung open it
disclosed a long shed which seemed to be occupied with a big, strange
object.

The old professor and the negro had not been gone more than five minutes
before Jack opened his eyes. He turned over on one side. As he did so
Mark slowly lifted his head.

"Hello!" cried Jack, faintly.

"What's the matter?" asked Mark.

"Matter? What? Where?" inquired Mark, sitting up.

"Here! Everywhere!" replied Jack, raising himself slowly on his elbow.
"All I remember is a terrible crash. Now look at all those wheels.
Wheels! Wheels! Wheels! I wonder if they can be in my head?" and he
tried to smile.

"No, they are real wheels, and they are on the walls," announced Mark.

"Then where in the world are we?" went on Jack. "In a machine shop or a
railroad wreck?"

"Looks like--" began Mark, when he was interrupted by a voice calling:

"Hurry up, Perfessor! De boys has awakened from de unconsciousability!"

And, to the astonishment of Jack and Mark, the old man and his negro
helper hurried from the inner room and stood in front of the bed.




CHAPTER IV

THE AIRSHIP


"Do you feel better?" asked the professor, anxiously, as he came forward
and felt of the boys' pulses.

"A great deal," answered Jack. "But what has happened? Where are we?
What are all these wheels for?"

"Slowly, slowly," said the old man with a pleasant laugh. "One question
at a time. For the first: what happened was a railroad wreck."

"I remember now," said Jack, slowly. "We tried to stop the cars."

"And you didn't succeed very well," went on the old man. "However, the
sand bank did it for you, and stopped you two at the same time. As for
your second question, you are here in my shop. As to the third, those
wheels are parts of my great invention. But I will tell you about that
after a while. I must give you some medicine now, and something to eat.
Here, Washington!"

"Comin', Perfessor!"

Jack and Mark were more surprised than before when they saw a big
colored man, seemingly as strong as an ox, coming toward them with two
steaming bowls of beef broth. Washington was grinning with delight.

"Dis am de best beef stew dat eber transpositioned itself into yo'
vicinity!" he exclaimed, setting the bowls down on a table near the bed.

"Now, Washington," cautioned the old man. "No big words, remember."

"All right, Perfessor," was the answer.

"Do you boys feel like eating?" asked the aged inventor.

"I do," replied Jack. "There was a time, though, when I thought I'd
never get a chance to eat again. That was just before the crash."

"You were both knocked unconscious," the professor went on. "Washington
and I happened to be near by and brought you here. Fortunately I am
something of a doctor as well as an inventor, and I used a strong
medicine I have."

"I'm sure we're much obliged to you," answered Mark.

"Let me see how much improved you are by eating," suggested the old man.
"I can trust Washington to cook good meals, even if he does use big
words."

Then, while the colored man grinned cheerfully at them, Jack and Mark,
sitting up on the bed, for they were still weak and sore, ate the broth.
After that both boys said they felt better.

"See if you can walk," suggested the inventor.

Mark and Jack stepped on the floor. They both uttered cries of pain.
They were stiff and lame from the shaking they had received.

"A day in bed will do you no harm," said their strange rescuer. "I have
some liniment that will soon take the soreness out of every one of your
muscles."

Though the boys protested at being made to remain in bed, the old man
insisted. He made them take off most of their clothes, and then brought
out some liniment. Under his direction Jack and Mark rubbed themselves
well, and experienced almost immediate relief. It was now getting dusk,
and Washington lighted a big lamp that hung in the centre of the room,
first taking care that the shutters were tightly fastened.

The colored man prepared a simple supper for Mr. Henderson, and
afterward got himself a meal. When the dishes were cleared away the old
man, who had noted with smiles the anxious glances Jack and Mark were
casting about the strange room, said:

"I suppose you boys would like to ask lots of questions."

"I'd like to know what all this machinery is for," spoke Jack.

"And what is behind that door," Mark went on, indicating the much-locked
portal.

"I knew it!" exclaimed the old man. "I knew it! Now if I tell you will
you promise to keep it a secret until I give you leave to speak?"

Of course the boys promised eagerly.

"Do you think you have rested enough now to take a look inside?" the
inventor asked, nodding toward the locked door.

"Sure!" exclaimed Jack.

"Then put on your coats and trousers and I'll introduce you to my pet."

Wonderingly, the boys followed him. It took nearly a minute to unfasten
the various bolts and bars, but at last the portal swung open. The place
was dimly lighted by a single big lamp, but in the glare of it the boys
caught sight of a strange, weird object. It looked like an immense
cigar, and swayed slowly back and forward. It seemed to be covered with
a net-work of cords. On the ground beneath it was what seemed to be a
good-sized boat, with a large cabin amidships.

"What in the world is it?" cried Jack.

"It's my airship!" exclaimed Professor Henderson. "The only successful
airship ever invented. It is the electric _Monarch_!"

"What is it for?" asked Mark.

"To navigate the realm of the stars and moon!" cried the old man. "With
that I will rival the eagles in their flight!"

The boys were a little alarmed. The professor was strangely excited. His
eyes sparkled in the reflected light of the lamp. Jack and Mark thought
they might have been brought to the abode of a madman. They shrank back
a little. But they were reassured a moment later when, with a pleasant
laugh, the old man said:

"Don't be frightened, boys. I know what I am talking about. Here,
Washington, more light! We will show them what we have done, hidden away
from the sight of the curious, unbelieving world. Let them see my
_Monarch_!"

"We'll illuminationness dis abode like it was de orb ob day shinin'
heah!" exclaimed the negro, as he started several more lamps aglow.

"Are the shutters closed?" asked Mr. Henderson, anxiously.

"Tight as a drum-head," was the reply.

"Now look!" exclaimed the inventor, turning to the boys.

They were more than astonished at what they saw. They had no idea that
the rough shed held such a perfect piece of machinery.

Up near the roof of the place, which was quite high, there swayed an
immense bag of oiled silk. It was shaped like a cigar, big in the middle
and tapering at both ends. The bag was enclosed in a net of ropes which
extended down to the lower part of the airship.

This lower part, as the boys could see, was just like a steam launch in
shape, only much lighter in weight. It had a sharp bow, and a blunt
stern. From the stern there extended a large propeller, the blades being
made from sheets of aluminum.

The main part of the ship proper, or the part suspended from the gas
bag, was covered by a closed and roofed cabin about forty feet long, ten
feet wide, and extending five feet above the gunwale of the ship. The
cabin had four windows on each side, a companionway fore and aft, and a
sort of look-out or conning tower forward, which, the professor
explained, was the place for the steersman.

"Because this ship can be steered wherever you want to go," he said,
pointing to the big rudder that was hung aft, an opening in it allowing
the screw or propeller to revolve.

The boys were lost in admiration of the wonderful airship. They were
consumed with curiosity as to how the machinery worked, and they thought
no more of their knocks and bruises than as if a mosquito had bitten
them. The professor watched their faces with delight. He loved boys and
mechanical apparatus.

"Now we will enter the _Monarch_," he said. "Turn on the lights,
Washington."

There was a click, and the cabin of the airship was flooded with a soft
glow of incandescent lamps.

"Come on!" called Mr. Henderson, leading the way. The boys followed,
marveling at the wonders on every side.

They found the cabin of the strange craft divided into three parts.
First came a sort of parlor, with a table and seats arranged on the
sides. In the front part of this was a passage leading to the conning
tower, or the place for the steersman. Behind the parlor came the
sleeping quarters and dining room combined. The bunks were arranged to
fold against the wall, and a table in the centre could be shut up when
not in use and hoisted to the ceiling, giving plenty of space.

Next came the engine room, and as they entered it the boys could hardly
restrain from giving cheers of delight. It was almost filled with
machinery, and occupied a little more than half of the whole boat, being
twenty-two by ten feet in size.

The two boys did not know the use of one quarter of the machinery and
apparatus they gazed on. There were electric motors, storage batteries,
two gasoline engines similar to those used in automobiles, pumps, large
and small tanks, instruments for measuring the electric current, for
telling the temperature, the amount of moisture in the air, the speed of
the wind, the speed of the ship, the height to which it went, besides
