of the family not in fruit. An attempt would often be mere guesswork.

In this family is found the poison hemlock (Conium) used by the
ancient Greeks for the elimination of politicians. It is a powerful
poison. The whole plant has a curious mousy odor. It is of European
origin. Our water hemlock is equally poisonous, and much more common.
It is the _Cicuta maculata_ of the swamps--a tall, coarse plant which
has given rise to many sad accidents. _AEthusa cynapium_, another
poisonous plant, known as "fool's parsley," is not uncommon, and
certainly looks much like parsley. This only goes to show how
difficult it is for any but the trained botanist to detect differences
in this group of plants. Side by side may be growing two specimens, to
the ordinary eye precisely alike, yet the one will be innocent and the
other poisonous.

The drug asafetida is a product of this order. All the plants appear
to "form three different principles: the first, a watery acid matter;
the second, a gum-resinous milky substance; and the third, an
aromatic, oily secretion. When the first of these predominates they
are poisonous; the second in excess converts them into stimulants; the
absence of the two renders them useful as esculents; the third causes
them to be pleasant condiments." So that besides the noxious plants
there is a long range of useful vegetables, as parsnips, parsley,
carrots, fennel, dill, anise, caraway, cummin, coriander, and celery.
The last, in its wild state, is said to be pernicious, but etiolation
changes the products and renders them harmless. The flowers of all are
too minute to be individually pretty, but every one knows how charming
are the umbels of our wild carrot, resembling as they do the choicest
old lace. Frequently the carrot has one central maroon colored floret.

Though most of the plants are herbs, Dr. Welwitsch found in Africa a
tree-like one, with a stem one to two feet thick, much prized by the
natives for its medicinal properties, and also valuable for its
timber. In Kamschatka also they assume a sub-arboreous type, as well
as on the steppes of Afghanistan.

As mistakes often occur by confounding the roots of Umbelliferae with
those of horse radish or other esculents, it is well, when in doubt,
to send the plants, _always in fruit_, if possible, for
identification. None of them are poisonous to the touch--at least to
ordinary people. Cases of rather doubtful authenticity are reported
from time to time of injury from the handling of wild carrot. We have
always suspected the proximity of poison ivy; still, it is unwise to
dogmatize on such matters. Some people cannot eat strawberries--more's
the pity!--while the rest of us get along with them very happily.
Lately the _Primula obconica_ has acquired an evil reputation as an
irritant, so there is no telling what may not happen with certain
constitutions.

Difficult as is the study of Umbelliferae, it becomes fascinating on
acquaintance. To hunt up a plant and name it by so scientific a
process brings to the student a sufficient reward.--_American
Naturalist._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE EREMURI.

[Illustration: EREMURUS HIMALAICUS. (Flowers white.)]


It has often been a matter of astonishment to me that eremuri are not
more frequently seen in our gardens. There are certainly very few
plants which have a statelier or more handsome appearance during the
summer months. Both in point of brightness of color and their general
habit and manner of growth they are very much to be recommended. For
some reason or other they have the character of being difficult
plants, but they do not deserve it at all, and a very slight attention
to their requirements is enough to ensure success. They can stand a
good many degrees of frost, and they ask for little more than a soil
which has been deeply worked and well enriched with old rotten manure.
Give them this, and they are certain to be contented with it, and the
cultivator will be well rewarded for his pains. Only one thing should
perhaps be added by way of precaution. If an eremurus appears too soon
above ground, it is well just to cover it over with loose litter of
some sort, so that it may not be nipped by spring frosts; and one
experienced grower has said that it answers to lift them after
blossoming, and to keep them out of the ground for a few weeks, so
that they may be sufficiently retarded. But I have not yet been able
to try this plan myself, and I do not speak from experience about it.
My favorite is Eremurus Bungei, which I think is one of the handsomest
plants I have in my garden. The clear yellow color of the blossom is
so very good, and I like the foliage also; but of course it is not the
most imposing by any means and if height and stateliness are
especially regarded, E. robustus or E. robustus nobilis would carry
off the palm. This commonly rises to the height of eight or nine feet
above the ground, and on one occasion I have known it to be greatly in
excess even of that; but such an elevation cannot be attained for more
than a single year, and it afterward is contented with more moderate
efforts. E. Himalaicus is of the purest possible white, and the spike
is very much to be admired when it is seen at its best. It can be very
easily raised from seed, but a good deal of patience is needed before
its full glory has come. E. Olgae is the last of all, and it shows by
its arrival that summer is hastening on. It is of a peach-colored hue,
and very pretty indeed. Altogether it is a pity that eremuri are not
more commonly grown. I think they are certain to give great
satisfaction, if only a moderate degree of attention and care be
bestowed upon them.--_H. Ewbank, in The Gardeners' Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *




RAPHIDES, THE CAUSE OF THE ACRIDITY OF CERTAIN PLANTS.

By R.A. WEBER, Ph.D.


At the last meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, Prof. W.R. Lazenby reported his studies on the occurrence of
crystals in plants. In this report he expressed the opinion that the
acridity of the Indian turnip was due to the presence of these
crystals or raphides. This opinion was opposed by Prof. Burrill and
other eminent botanists, who claimed that other plants, as the
fuchsia, are not at all acrid, although they contain raphides as
plentifully as the Indian turnip. Here the matter was allowed to rest.

The United States Dispensatory and other works on pharmacy ascribe the
acridity of the Indian turnip to an acrid, extremely volatile
principle insoluble in water, and alcohol, but soluble in ether.
Heating and drying the bulbs dissipates the volatiles principle, and
the acridity is destroyed.

At a recent meeting of Ohio State Microscopical Society this subject
was again brought up for discussion. It was thought by some that the
raphides in the different plants might vary in chemical composition,
and thus the difference in their action be accounted for. This
question the writer volunteered to answer.

Accordingly, four plants containing raphides were selected, two of
which, the _Calla cassia_ and Indian turnip, were highly acrid, and
two, the _Fuchsia_ and _Tradescantia_, or Wandering Jew, were
perfectly bland to the taste.

A portion of each plant was crushed in a mortar, water or dilute
alcohol was added, the mixture was stirred thoroughly and thrown upon
a fine sieve. By repeated washing with water and decanting a
sufficient amount of the crystals was obtained for examination. From
the calla the crystals were readily secured by this means in a
comparatively pure state. In the case of the Indian turnip the
crystals were contaminated with starch, while the crystals from the
fuschia and tradescantia were embedded in an insoluble mucilage from
which it was found impossible to separate them. The crystals were all
found to be calcium oxalate.

Having determined the identity in chemical composition of the
crystals, it was thought that there might be a difference of form of
the crystals in the various plants, from the fact that calcium oxalate
crystallizes both in the tetragonal and the monoclinic systems. A
laborious microscopic examination, however, showed that this theory
also had to be abandoned. The fuchsia and tradescantia contained
bundles of raphides of the same form and equally as fine as those of
the acrid plants. At this point in the investigation the writer was
inclined to the opinion that the acridity of the Indian turnip and
calla was due to the presence of an acrid principle.

Since the works on pharmacy claimed that the active principle of the
Indian turnip was soluble in ether, the investigation was continued in
this direction. A large stem of the calla was cut into slices, and the
juice expressed by means of a tincture press. The expressed juice was
limpid and filled with raphides. A portion of the juice was placed
into a cylinder and violently shaken with an equal volume of ether.
When the ether had separated a drop was placed upon the tongue. As
soon as the effects of the ether had passed away, the same painful
acridity was experienced as is produced when the plant itself is
tasted. This experiment seemed to corroborate the assumption of an
acrid principle soluble in ether. The supernatant ether, however, was
slightly turbid in appearance, a fact which was at first ignored.
Wishing to learn the cause of this turbidity, a drop of the ether was
allowed to evaporate on a glass slide. Under the microscope the slide
was found to be covered with a mass of raphides. A portion of the
ether was run through a Munktell filter. The filtered ether was clear,
entirely free from raphides, and had also lost every trace of its
acridity.

The same operations were repeated upon the Indian turnip with exactly
similar results.

These experiments show conclusively that the acridity of the Indian
turnip and calla is due to the raphides of calcium oxalate only.

The question of the absence of acridity in the other two plants still
remained to be settled. For this purpose some recent twigs and leaves
of the fuchsia were subjected to pressure in a tincture press. The
expressed juice was not limpid, but thick, mucilaginous and ropy.
Under the microscope the raphides seemed as plentiful as in the case
of the two acrid plants. When diluted with water and shaken with
ether, there was no visible turbidity in the supernatant ether, and
when a drop of the ether was allowed to evaporate on a glass slide,
only a few isolated crystals could be seen. From this it will be seen
that in this case the raphides did not separate from the mucilaginous
juice to be held in suspension in the ether. A great deal of time and
labor were spent in endeavoring to separate the crystals completely
from this insoluble mucilage, but without avail. With the tradescantia
similar results were obtained.

From these experiments the absence of acridity in these two plants, in
spite of the abundance of raphides, may readily be explained by the
fact that the minute crystals are surrounded with and embedded in an
insoluble mucilage, which prevents their free movement into the tongue
and surface of the mouth, when portions of the plants are tasted.

The reason why the Indian turnip loses its acridity on being heated
can be explained by the production of starch paste from the abundance
of starch present in the bulbs. This starch paste would evidently act
in a manner similar to the insoluble mucilage of the other two plants.

So also it can readily be seen that when the bulbs of the Indian
turnip have been dried, the crystals can no longer separate from the
hard mass which surrounds them, and consequently can exert no irritant
action when the dried bulbs are placed against the tongue.--_Jour. Am.
Chem. Soc._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE WHALE-HEADED STORK.


[Illustration: THE WHALE-HEADED STORK--BALAENICEPS REX.]

Of all the wonders that inhabit the vast continent of Africa, the most
singular one is undoubtedly the _Balaeniceps_, or whale-headed stork.
It is of relatively recent discovery, and the first description of it
was given by Gould in the early part of 1851. It is at present still
extremely rare. The Paris Museum possesses three specimens of it, and
the Boulogne Museum possesses one. These birds always excite the
curiosity of the public by their strange aspect. At first sight, says
W.P. Parker, in his notes upon the osteology of the balaeniceps, this
bird recalls the boatbill, the heron, and the adjutant. Other birds,
too, suggest themselves to the mind, such as the pelican, the toucan,
the hornbills, and the podarges. The curious form of the bill, in
fact, explains this comparison with birds belonging to so different
groups, and the balaeniceps would merit the name of boatbill equally
well with the bird so called, since its bill recalls the small fishing
boats that we observe keel upward high and dry on our seashores. This
bill is ten inches in length, and four inches in breadth at the base.
The upper mandible, which is strongly convex, exhibits upon its median
line a slight ridge, which is quite wide at its origin, and then
continues to decrease and becomes sensibly depressed as far as to the
center of its length, and afterward rises on approaching the anterior
extremity, where it terminates in a powerful hook, which seems to form
a separate part, as in the albatrosses. Throughout its whole extent,
up to the beginning of the hook, this mandible presents a strong
convexity over its edge, which is turned slightly inward. The lower
mandible, which is powerful, and is indented at its point to receive
the hook, has a very sharp edge, which, with that of the upper
mandible, constitutes a pair of formidable shears. The color of the
bill is pale yellow, passing to horn color toward the median ridge,
and the whole surface is sprinkled with dark brown blotches. The
nostrils are scarcely visible, and are situated in a narrow cleft at
the base of the bill, and against the median ridge. The tongue is very
small and entirely out of proportion to the vast buccal capacity. This
is a character that might assimilate the balaeniceps to the pelican.
The robust head, the neck, and the throat, are covered with
slate-colored feathers verging on green, and not presenting the
repulsive aspect of the naked skin of the adjutant. As in the latter,
the skin of the throat is capable of being dilated so as to form a
voluminous pouch. Upon the occiput the feathers are elongated and
form a small crest. The body is robust and covered upon the back with
slate-colored feathers bordered with ashen gray. Upon the breast the
feathers are lanceolate, and marked with a dark median stripe.
Finally, the lower parts, abdomen, sides, and thighs, are pale gray,
and the remiges and retrices are black. According to Verreaux, the
feathers of the under side of the tail are soft and decompounded, but
at a distance they only recall the beautiful plumes of the adjutant.
The well-developed wings indicate a bird of lofty flight, yet of all
the bones of the limbs, anterior as well as posterior, the humerus
alone is pneumatized. The strong feet terminate in four very long toes
deprived at the interdigital membrane observed in most of the
Ciconidae. The claws are powerful and but slightly curved, and that of
the median toe is not pectinated as in the herons.

The balaeniceps is met with only in or near water, but it prefers
marshes to rivers. It is abundant upon the banks of the Nile only
during the hot season which precedes the rains and when the entire
interior is dried up. During the rest of the year it inhabits natural
ponds and swamps, where the shallow water covers vast areas and
presents numerous small islands, of easier access than the banks of
the Nile, which always slope more or less abruptly into deep water. In
such localities it is met with in pairs or in flocks of a hundred or
more, seeking its food with tireless energy, or else standing
immovable upon one leg, the neck curved and the head resting upon the
shoulder. When disturbed, the birds fly just above the surface of the
water and stop at a short distance. But when they are startled by the
firing of a gun, they ascend to a great height, fly around in a circle
and hover for a short time, and then descend upon the loftiest trees,
where they remain until the enemy has gone.

Water turtles, fish, frogs and lizards form the basis of their food.
According to Petherick, they do not disdain dead animals, whose
carcasses they disembowel with their powerful hooked beak. They pass
the night upon the ground, upon trees and upon high rocks. As regards
nest-making and egg-laying, opinions are most contradictory. According
to Verreaux, the balaeniceps builds its nest of earth, vegetable
debris, reeds, grass, etc., upon large trees. The female lays two eggs
similar to those of the adjutant. It is quite difficult to reconcile
this opinion with that of Petherick, who expresses himself as follows:
"The balaeniceps lays in July and August, and chooses for that purpose
the tall reeds or grasses that border the water or some small and
slightly elevated island. They dig a hole in the ground, and the
female deposits her eggs therein. I have found as many as twelve eggs
in the same nest."

The whale-headed stork is still so little known that there is nothing
in these contradictions that ought to surprise us. Authors are no more
in accord on the subject of the affinities of this strange bird. Gould
claims that it presents the closest affinities with the pelican and is
the wading type of the Pelicanidae. Verreaux believes that its nearest
relative is the adjutant, whose ways it has, and that it represents in
this group what the boatbill represents in the heron genus. Bonaparte
regards it as intermediate between the pelican and the boatbill. If we
listen to Reinhurdt, we must place it, not alongside of the boatbill,
but alongside of the African genus Scopus. The boatbill, says he, is
merely a heron provided with a singular bill, which has but little
analogy with that of the balaeniceps, and not a true resemblance. The
nostrils differ in form and position in those two birds, and in the
boatbill there exists beneath the lower mandible a dilatable pouch
that we do not find in the balaeniceps. An osteological examination
leads Parker to place the balaeniceps near the boatbill, and the
present classification is based upon that opinion. The family of
Ardeidae is, therefore, divided into five sub-families, the three last
of which each comprises a single genus.

Ardeidae.--Ardeineae (herons).
          Botaurineae (bitterns).
          Scopineae (ombrette).
          Cancomineae (boatbill).
          Balaenicepineae (whale-headed stork).

All the whale-headed storks that have been received up to the present
have come from the region of the White Nile; but Mr. H. Johnston, who
traveled in Congo in 1882, asserts that he met with the bird on the
River Cunene between Benguela and Angola, where it was even very
common. Mr. Johnston's assertion has been confirmed by other travelers
worthy of credence, but, unfortunately, the best of all confirmations
is wanting, and that is a skin of this magnificent wader. We can,
therefore, only make a note of Mr. Johnston's statement, and hope that
some traveler may one day enrich our museums with some balaeniceps from
these regions. The presence of this bird in the southwest of Africa
is, after all, not impossible; yet there is one question that arises:
Was the balaeniceps observed by Mr. Johnston of the same species as
that of the White Nile, or was it a new type that will increase this
family, which as yet comprises but one genus and one species--the
_Balaeniceps rex_?--_Le Naturaliste_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CALIFORNIA RAISIN INDUSTRY.


Fresno County, for ten miles about Fresno, furnishes the best example
of the enormous increase in values which follows the conversion of
wheat fields and grazing land into vineyards and orchards. Not even
Riverside can compare with it in the rapid evolution of a great source
of wealth which ten years ago was almost unknown. What has transformed
Fresno from a shambling, dirty resort of cowboys and wheat ranchers
into one of the prettiest cities in California is the raisin grape.
Though nearly all fruits may be grown here, yet this is pre-eminently
the home of the raisin industry, and it is the raisin which in a
single decade has converted 50,000 acres of wheat fields into
vineyards. No other crop in California promises such speedy returns or
such large profits as the raisin grape, and as the work on the
vineyards is not heavy, the result has been a remarkable growth of the
infant industry. It is estimated that in this county, which contains
5,000,000 acres and is nearly as large as Massachusetts, there are
400,000 acres that may be irrigated and are specially adapted to the
grape. As the present crop on about 25,000 acres in full bearing is
valued at $6,000,000, some idea may be formed of the revenue that will
come to the Fresno vineyardists when all this choice valley land is
planted and in full bearing. And what makes the prospect of permanent
prosperity surer is the fact that nine out of ten new settlers are
content with twenty-acre tracts, as one of these is all which a man
can well care for, while the income from this little vineyard will
average $4,000 above all expenses, a larger income than is enjoyed by
three-quarters of the professional men throughout the country.

The raisin industry in California is very young. To be sure, dried
grapes have been known since the time of the Mission Fathers, but the
dried mission grape is not a raisin. The men who thirty years ago sent
over to Europe for the choicest varieties of wine grapes imported
among other cuttings the Muscatel, the Muscat of Alexandria, and the
Feher Zagos; the three finest raisin grapes of Spain. But the raisin,
like the fig, requires skillful treatment, and for years the
California grower made no headway. He read all that had been written
on the curing of the raisin; several enterprising men went to Spain to
study the subject at first hand; but despite all this no progress was
made. Finally several of the pioneer raisin men of Fresno cut loose
from all precedent, dried their grapes in the simple and natural
manner and made a success of it. From that time, not over ten years
ago, the growth of the industry has eclipsed that of every other
branch of horticulture in the State, and the total value of the
product promises soon to exceed the value of the orange crop or the
yield of wine and brandy.

It required a good deal of nerve for the pioneers of Fresno County to
spend hundreds of thousands of dollars in bringing water upon what the
old settlers regarded as a desert, fit only to grow wheat in a very
wet season. In other parts of the State the Mission Fathers had dug
ditches and built aqueducts, so that the settlers who came after them
found a well devised water system, which they merely followed. But in
Fresno no one had ever tried to grow crops by irrigation. When Fremont
came through there from the mountains he found many wild cattle
feeding on the rank grass that grew as high as the head of a man on
horseback. The herds of the native Californians were almost equally
wild. The country was one vast plain which in summer glowed under a
sun that was tropical in its intensity. As late as 1860 one could
travel for a day without seeing a house or any sign of habitation. The
country was owned by great cattle growers, who seldom rode over their
immense ranches, except at the time of the annual "round-up" of stock.
About thirty years ago a number of large wheat growers secured big
tracts of land around Fresno. At their head was Isaac Friedlander,
known as the wheat king of the Pacific Coast. Friedlander would have
transformed this country had not financial ruin overcome him. His
place was taken by others, like Chapman, Easterby, Eisen and
Hughes--men who believed in fruit growing and who had the courage to
carry on their operations in the face of repeated failures.

The great development of Fresno has been due entirely to the colony
system, which has also built up most of the flourishing cities of
Southern California. In 1874 the first Fresno colony was started by
W.S. Chapman. He cut up six sections of land into 20-acre tracts, and
brought water from King's River. The colonists represented all classes
of people, and though they made many disastrous experiments, with poor
varieties of grapes and fruit, still there is no instance of failure
recorded, and all who have held on to their land are now in
comfortable circumstances. Some of the settlers in this colony were
San Francisco school teachers. They obtained their 20-acre tracts for
$400, and many of them retired on their little vineyards at the end of
five or six years. One lady, named Miss Austen, had the foresight to
plant all her property in the best raisin grapes, and for many years
drew a larger annual revenue from the property than the whole place
cost her. The central colony now has an old established look. The
broad avenues are lined with enormous trees; many of the houses are
exceedingly beautiful country villas. What a transformation has been
wrought here may be appreciated when it is said that 150 families now
produce $400,000 a year on the same land which twenty years ago
supported but one family, which had a return of only $35,000 from
wheat. The history of this one colony of six sections of old wheat
land is the key to Fresno's prosperity. It proves better than columns
of argument, or facts or figures, the immense return that careful,
patient cultivation may command in this home of the grape. Near this
colony are a half-dozen others which were established on the same
general plan. The most noteworthy is the Malaga colony, founded by
G.G. Briggs, to whom belongs the credit of introducing the raisin
grape into Fresno.

Fresno City is the center from which one may drive in three directions
and pass through mile after mile of these colonies, all showing signs
of the wealth and comfort that raisin making has brought. Only toward
the west is the land still undeveloped, but another five years promise
to see this great tract, stretching away for twenty miles, also laid
out in small vineyards and fruit farms. Fresno is the natural railroad
center of the great San Joaquin Valley. It is on the main line of the
Southern Pacific and is the most important shipping point between San
Francisco and Los Angeles. The new line of the Santa Fe, which has
been surveyed from Mojave up through the valley, passes through
Fresno. Then there are three local lines that have the place for a
terminus, notably the mountain railway, which climbs into the Sierra,
and which it is expected will one day connect with the Rio Grande
system and give a new transcontinental line. Here are also building
round houses and machine shops of the Southern Pacific Company. These,
with new factories, packing houses, and other improvements, go far to
justify the sanguine expectations of the residents. There has never
been a boom in Fresno, but a high railroad official recently, in
speaking of the growth of the city, said: "Fresno in five years will
be the second city in California." This prediction he based on the
wonderful expansion of its resources in the last decade and the
