or even quite straight, heliotropic course.

A plant, when exposed to a lateral light, though this may be bright,
commonly moves at first in a zigzag line, or even directly from the light;
and this no doubt is due to its circumnutating at the time in a direction
either opposite to the source of the light, or more or less transversely to
it. As soon, however, as the direction of the circumnutating movement
nearly coincides with that of the entering light, the plant bends in a
straight course towards the light, if this is bright. The course appears to
be rendered more and more rapid and rectilinear, in accordance with the
degree of brightness of the light--firstly, by the longer axes of the
elliptical figures, which the plant continues to describe as long as the
light remains very dim, being directed more or less accurately towards its
source, and by each successive ellipse being described nearer to the light.
Secondly, if the light is only somewhat dimmed, by the acceleration and
increase of the movement towards it, and by the retardation or arrestment
of that from the light, some lateral movement being still retained, for the
light will interfere less with a movement at right angles to its direction,
than with one in its own direction.*

* In his paper, 'Ueber orthotrope und plagiotrope Pflanzentheile'
('Arbeiten des Bot. Inst. in Würzburg,' Band ii. Heft ii.
[[page 437]]
1879), Sachs has discussed the manner in which geotropism and heliotropism
are affected by differences in the angles at which the organs of plants
stand with respect to the direction of the incident force.
[page 437]

The result is that the course is rendered more or less zigzag and unequal
in rate. Lastly, when the light is very bright all lateral movement is
lost; and the whole energy of the plant is expended in rendering the
circumnutating movement rectilinear and rapid in one direction alone,
namely, towards the light.

The common view seems to be that heliotropism is a quite distinct kind of
movement from circumnutation; and it may be urged that in the foregoing
diagrams we see heliotropism merely combined with, or superimposed on,
circumnutation. But if so, it must be assumed that a bright lateral light
completely stops circumnutation, for a plant thus exposed moves in a
straight line towards it, without describing any ellipses or circles. If
the light be somewhat obscured, though amply sufficient to cause the plant
to bend towards it, we have more or less plain evidence of still-continued
circumnutation. It must further be assumed that it is only a lateral light
which has this extraordinary power of stopping circumnutation, for we know
that the several plants above experimented on, and all the others which
were observed by us whilst growing, continue to circumnutate, however
bright the light may be, if it comes from above. Nor should it be forgotten
that in the life of each plant, circumnutation precedes heliotropism, for
hypocotyls, epicotyls, and petioles circumnutate before they have broken
through the ground and have ever felt the influence of light.

We are therefore fully justified, as it seems to us, in believing that
whenever light enters laterally, it is the
[page 438]
movement of circumnutation which gives rise to, or is converted into,
heliotropism and apheliotropism. On this view we need not assume against
all analogy that a lateral light entirely stops circumnutation; it merely
excites the plant to modify its movement for a time in a beneficial manner.
The existence of every possible gradation, between a straight course
towards a lateral light and a course consisting of a series of loops or
ellipses, becomes perfectly intelligible. Finally, the conversion of
circumnutation into heliotropism or apheliotropism, is closely analogous to
what takes place with sleeping plants, which during the daytime describe
one or more ellipses, often moving in zigzag lines and making little loops;
for when they begin in the evening to go to sleep, they likewise expend all
their energy in rendering their course rectilinear and rapid. In the case
of sleep-movements, the exciting or regulating cause is a difference in the
intensity of the light, coming from above, at different periods of the
twenty-four hours; whilst with heliotropic and apheliotropic movements, it
is a difference in the intensity of the light on the two sides of the
plant.

Transversal-heliotropismus (of Frank*) or Diaheliotropism.--The cause of
leaves placing themselves more or less transversely to the light, with
their upper surfaces directed towards it, has been of late the subject of
much controversy. We do not here refer to the object of the movement, which
no doubt is that their upper surfaces may be fully illuminated, but the
means by which this position is gained. Hardly a better or more simple
instance can be given

* 'Die natürliche Wagerechte Richtung von Pflanzentheilen,' 1870. See also
some interesting articles by the same author, "Zur Frage über
Transversal-Geo-und Heliotropismus," 'Bot. Zeitung,' 1873, p. 17 et seq.
[page 439]

of diaheliotropism than that offered by many seedlings, the cotyledons of
which are extended horizontally. When they first burst from their
seed-coats they are in contact and stand in various positions, often
vertically upwards; they soon diverge, and this is effected by epinasty,
which, as we have seen, is a modified form of circumnutation. After they
have diverged to their full extent, they retain nearly the same position,
though brightly illuminated all day long from above, with their lower
surfaces close to the ground and thus much shaded. There is therefore a
great contrast in the degree of illumination of their upper and lower
surfaces, and if they were heliotropic they would bend quickly upwards. It
must not, however, be supposed that such cotyledons are immovably fixed in
a horizontal position. When seedlings are exposed before a window, their
hypocotyls, which are highly heliotropic, bend quickly towards it, and the
upper surfaces of their cotyledons still remain exposed at right angles to
the light; but if the hypocotyl is secured so that it cannot bend, the
cotyledons themselves change their position. If the two are placed in the
line of the entering light, the one furthest from it rises up and that
nearest to it often sinks down; if placed transversely to the light, they
twist a little laterally; so that in every case they endeavour to place
their upper surfaces at right angles to the light. So it notoriously is
with the leaves on plants nailed against a wall, or grown in front of a
window. A moderate amount of light suffices to induce such movements; all
that is necessary is that the light should steadily strike the plants in an
oblique direction. With respect to the above twisting movement of
cotyledons, Frank has given many and much more striking instances in the
case of the leaves on
[page 440]
branches which had been fastened in various positions or turned upside
down.

In our observations on the cotyledons of seedling plants, we often felt
surprise at their persistent horizontal position during the day, and were
convinced before we had read Frank's essay, that some special explanation
was necessary. De Vries has shown* that the more or less horizontal
position of leaves is in most cases influenced by epinasty, by their own
weight, and by apogeotropism. A young cotyledon or leaf after bursting free
is brought down into its proper position, as already remarked, by epinasty,
which, according to De Vries, long continues to act on the midribs and
petioles. Weight can hardly be influential in the case of cotyledons,
except in a few cases presently to be mentioned, but must be so with large
and thick leaves. With respect to apogeotropism, De Vries maintains that it
generally comes into play, and of this fact we shall presently advance some
indirect evidence. But over these and other constant forces we believe that
there is in many cases, but we do not say in all, a preponderant tendency
in leaves and cotyledons to place themselves more or less transversely with
respect to the light.

In the cases above alluded to of seedlings exposed to a lateral light with
their hypocotyls secured, it is impossible that epinasty, weight and
apogeotropism, either in opposition or combined, can be the cause of the
rising of one cotyledon, and of the sinking of the other, since the forces
in question act equally on both; and since epinasty, weight and
apogeotropism all act in a vertical plane, they cannot cause the twisting
of the petioles, which occurs in seedlings under the

* 'Arbeiten des Bot. Instituts in Würzburg,' Heft. ii. 1872, pp. 223-277.
[page 441]

above conditions of illumination. All these movements evidently depend in
some manner on the obliquity of the light, but cannot be called
heliotropic, as this implies bending towards the light; whereas the
cotyledon nearest to the light bends in an opposed direction or downwards,
and both place themselves as nearly as possible at right angles to the
light. The movement, therefore, deserves a distinct name. As cotyledons and
leaves are continually oscillating up and down, and yet retain all day long
their proper position with their upper surfaces directed transversely to
the light, and if displaced reassume this position, diaheliotropism must be
considered as a modified form of circumnutation. This was often evident
when the movements of cotyledons standing in front of a window were traced.
We see something analogous in the case of sleeping leaves or cotyledons,
which after oscillating up and down during the whole day, rise into a
vertical position late in the evening, and on the following morning sink
down again into their horizontal or diaheliotropic position, in direct
opposition to heliotropism. This return into their diurnal position, which
often requires an angular movement of 90o, is analogous to the movement of
leaves on displaced branches, which recover their former positions. It
deserves notice that any force such as apogeotropism, will act with
different degrees of power* in the different positions of those leaves or
cotyledons which oscillate largely up and down during the day; and yet they
recover their horizontal or diaheliotropic position.

We may therefore conclude that diaheliotropic movements cannot be fully
explained by the direct action of light, gravitation, weight, etc., any
more

* See former note, in reference to Sachs' remarks on this subject.
[page 442]

than can the nyctitropic movements of cotyledons and leaves. In the latter
case they place themselves so that their upper surfaces may radiate at
night as little as possible into open space, with the upper surfaces of the
opposite leaflets often in contact. These movements, which are sometimes
extremely complex, are regulated, though not directly caused, by the
alternations of light and darkness. In the case of diaheliotropism,
cotyledons and leaves place themselves so that their upper surfaces may be
exposed to the light, and this movement is regulated, though not directly
caused, by the direction whence the light proceeds. In both cases the
movement consists of circumnutation modified by innate or constitutional
causes, in the same manner as with climbing plants, the circumnutation of
which is increased in amplitude and rendered more circular, or again with
very young cotyledons and leaves which are thus brought down into a
horizontal position by epinasty.

We have hitherto referred only to those leaves and cotyledons which occupy
a permanently horizontal position; but many stand more or less obliquely,
and some few upright. the cause of these differences of position is not
known; but in accordance with Wiesner's views, hereafter to be given, it is
probable that some leaves and cotyledons would suffer, if they were fully
illuminated by standing at right angles to the light.

We have seen in the second and fourth chapters that those cotyledons and
leaves which do not alter their positions at night sufficiently to be said
to sleep, commonly rise a little in the evening and fall again on the next
morning, so that they stand during the night at a rather higher inclination
than during the middle of the day. It is incredible that a rising movement
of 2o or 3o, or even of 10o or 20o, can be of
[page 443]
any service to the plant, so as to have been specially acquired. It must be
the result of some periodical change in the conditions to which they are
subjected, and there can hardly be a doubt that this is the daily
alternations of light and darkness. De Vries states in the paper before
referred to, that most petioles and midribs are apogeotropic;* and
apogeotropism would account for the above rising movement, which is common
to so many widely distinct species, if we suppose it to be conquered by
diaheliotropism during the middle of the day, as long as it is of
importance to the plant that its cotyledons and leaves should be fully
exposed to the light. The exact hour in the afternoon at which they begin
to bend slightly upwards, and the extent of the movement, will depend on
their degree of sensitiveness to gravitation and on their power of
resisting its action during the middle of the day, as well as on the
amplitude of their ordinary circumnutating movements; and as these
qualities differ much in different species, we might expect that the hour
in the afternoon at which they begin to rise would differ much in different
species, as is the case. Some other agency, however, besides apogeotropism,
must come into play, either directly or indirectly, in this upward
movement. Thus a young bean (Vicia faba), growing in a small pot, was
placed in front of a window in a klinostat; and at night the leaves rose a
little, although

* According to Frank ('Die nat. Wagerechte Richtung von Pflanzentheilen,'
1870, p. 46) the root-leaves of many plants, kept in darkness, rise up and
even become vertical; and so it is in some cases with shoots. (See
Rauwenhoff, 'Archives Néerlandaises,' tom. xii. p. 32.) These movements
indicate apogeotropism; but when organs have been long kept in the dark,
the amount of water and of mineral matter which they contain is so much
altered, and their regular growth is so much disturbed, that it is perhaps
rash to infer from their movements what would occur under normal
conditions. (See Godlewski, 'Bot. Zeitung,' Feb. 14th, 1879.)
[page 444]

the action of apogeotropism was quite eliminated. Nevertheless, they did
not rise nearly so much at night, as when subjected to apogeotropism. Is it
not possible, or even probable, that leaves and cotyledons, which have
moved upwards in the evening through the action of apogeotropism during
countless generations, may inherit a tendency to this movement? We have
seen that the hypocotyls of several Leguminous plants have from a remote
period inherited a tendency to arch themselves; and we know that the
sleep-movements of leaves are to a certain extent inherited, independently
of the alternations of light and darkness.

In our observations on the circumnutation of those cotyledons and leaves
which do not sleep at night, we met with hardly any distinct cases of their
sinking a little in the evening, and rising again in the morning,--that is,
of movements the reverse of those just discussed. We have no doubt that
such cases occur, inasmuch as the leaves of many plants sleep by sinking
vertically downwards. How to account for the few cases which were observed
must be left doubtful. The young leaves of Cannabis sativa sink at night
between 30o and 40o beneath the horizon; and Kraus attributes this to
epinasty in conjunction with the absorption of water. Whenever epinastic
growth is vigorous, it might conquer diaheliotropism in the evening, at
which time it would be of no importance to the plant to keep its leaves
horizontal. The cotyledons of Anoda Wrightii, of one variety of Gossypium,
and of several species of Ipomoea, remain horizontal in the evening whilst
they are very young; as they grow a little older they curve a little
downwards, and when large and heavy sink so much that they come under our
definition of sleep. In the case of
[page 445]
the Anoda and of some species of Ipomoea, it was proved that the downward
movement did not depend on the weight of the cotyledons; but from the fact
of the movement being so much more strongly pronounced after the cotyledons
have grown large and heavy, we may suspect that their weight aboriginally
played some part in determining that the modification of the circumnutating
movement should be in a downward direction.

The so-called Diurnal Sleep of Leaves, Or Paraheliotropism.--This is
another class of movements, dependent on the action of light, which
supports to some extent the belief that the movements above described are
only indirectly due to its action. We refer to the movements of leaves and
cotyledons which when moderately illuminated are diaheliotropic; but which
change their positions and present their edges to the light, when the sun
shines brightly on them. These movements have sometimes been called diurnal
sleep, but they differ wholly with respect to the object gained from those
properly called nyctitropic; and in some cases the position occupied during
the day is the reverse of that during the night.

[It has long been known* that when the sun shines brightly on the leaflets
of Robinia, they rise up and present their edges to the light; whilst their
position at night is vertically downwards. We have observed the same
movement, when the sun shone brightly on the leaflets of an Australian
Acacia. Those of Amphicarpaea monoica turned their edges to the sun; and an
analogous movement of the little almost rudimentary basal leaflets of
Mimosa albida was on one occasion so rapid that it could be distinctly seen
through a lens. the elongated, unifoliate, first leaves of Phaseolus
Roxburghii stood at 7 A.M. at 20o above the horizon, and no doubt they
afterwards sank a little lower. At noon, after having been exposed for
about 2 h. to

* Pfeffer gives the names and dates of several ancient writers in his 'Die
Periodischen Bewegungen,' 1875, p. 62.
[page 446]

a bright sun, they stood at 56o above the horizon; they were then protected
from the rays of the sun, but were left well illuminated from above, and
after 30 m. they had fallen 40o, for they now stood at only 16o above the
horizon. Some young plants of Phaseolus Hernandesii had been exposed to the
same bright sunlight, and their broad, unifoliate, first leaves now stood
up almost or quite vertically, as did many of the leaflets on the
trifoliate secondary leaves; but some of the leaflets had twisted round on
their own axes by as much as 90o without rising, so as to present their
edges to the sun. The leaflets on the same leaf sometimes behaved in these
two different manners, but always with the result of being less intensely
illuminated. These plants were then protected from the sun, and were looked
at after 1 ½ h.; and now all the leaves and leaflets had reassumed their
ordinary sub-horizontal positions. The copper-coloured cotyledons of some
seedlings of Cassia mimosoides were horizontal in the morning, but after
the sun had shone on them, each had risen 45 1/2o above the horizon. the
movement in these several cases must not be confounded with the sudden
closing of the leaflets of Mimosa pudica, which may sometimes be noticed
when a plant which has been kept in an obscure place is suddenly exposed to
the sun; for in this case the light seems to act, as if it were a touch.

From Prof. Wiesner's interesting observations, it is probable that the
above movements have been acquired for a special purpose. the chlorophyll
in leaves is often injured by too intense a light, and Prof. Wiesner*
believes that it is protected by the most diversified means, such as the
presence of hairs, colouring matter, etc., and amongst other means by the
leaves presenting their edges to the sun, so that the blades then receive
much less light. He experimented on the young leaflets of Robinia, by
fixing them in such a position that they could not escape being intensely
illuminated, whilst others were allowed to place themselves obliquely; and
the former began to suffer from the light in the course of two days.

In the cases above given, the leaflets move either upwards

* 'Die Näturlichen Einrichtungen zum Schutze des Chlorophylls,' etc., 1876.
Pringsheim has recently observed under the microscope the destruction of
chlorophyll in a few minutes by the action of concentrated light from the
sun, in the presence of oxygen. See, also, Stahl on the protection of
chlorophyll from intense light, in 'Bot. Zeitung,' 1880.
[page 447]

or twist laterally, so as to place their edges in the direction of the
sun's light; but Cohn long ago observed that the leaflets of Oxalis bend
downwards when fully exposed to the sun. We witnessed a striking instance
of this movement in the very large leaflets of O. Ortegesii. A similar
movement may frequently be observed with the leaflets of Averrhoa bilimbi
(a member of the Oxalidae); and a leaf is here represented (Fig. 180) on
which the sun had shone. A diagram (Fig. 134) was given in the last
chapter, representing the oscillations by which a leaflet rapidly descended
under these circumstances; and the movement may be seen closely to resemble
that (Fig. 133) by

Fig. 180. Averrhoa bilimbi: leaf with leaflets depressed after exposure to
sunshine; but the leaflets are sometimes more depressed than is here shown.
Figure much reduced.

which it assumed its nocturnal position. It is an interesting fact in
relation to our present subject that, as Prof. Batalin informs us in a
letter, dated February, 1879, the leaflets of Oxalis acetosella may be
daily exposed to the sun during many weeks, and they do not suffer if they
are allowed to depress themselves; but if this be prevented, they lose
their colour and wither in two or three days. Yet the duration of a leaf is
about two months, when subjected only to diffused light; and in this case
the leaflets never sink downwards during the day.]

As the upward movements of the leaflets of Robinia, and the downward
movements of those of Oxalis, have been proved to be highly beneficial to
these plants when subjected to bright sunshine, it seems probable that they
have been acquired for the special purpose of avoiding too intense an
illumination. As it would have been very troublesome in all the above cases
to
[page 448]
have watched for a fitting opportunity and to have traced the movement of
the leaves whilst they were fully exposed to the sunshine, we did not
ascertain whether paraheliotropism always consisted of modified
circumnutation; but this certainly was the case with the Averrhoa, and
probably with the other species, as their leaves were continually
circumnutating.
[page 449]


CHAPTER IX.

SENSITIVENESS OF PLANTS TO LIGHT: ITS TRANSMITTED EFFECTS.

Uses of heliotropism--Insectivorous and climbing plants not heliotropic--
Same organ heliotropic at one age and not at another--Extraordinary
sensitiveness of some plants to light--The effects of light do not
correspond with its intensity--Effects of previous illumination--Time
required for the action of light--After-effects of light--Apogeotropism
acts as soon as light fails--Accuracy with which plants bend to the light--
This dependent on the illumination of one whole side of the part--Localised
sensitiveness to light and its transmitted effects--Cotyledons of Phalaris,
manner of bending--Results of the exclusion of light from their tips--
Effects transmitted beneath the surface of the ground--Lateral illumination
of the tip determines the direction of the curvature of the base--
Cotyledons of Avena, curvature of basal part due to the illumination of
upper part--Similar results with the hypocotyls of Brassica and Beta--
Radicles of Sinapis apheliotropic, due to the sensitiveness of their tips--
Concluding remarks and summary of chapter--Means by which circumnutation
has been converted into heliotropism or apheliotropism.

NO one can look at the plants growing on a bank or on the borders of a
thick wood, and doubt that the young stems and leaves place themselves so
that the leaves may be well illuminated. They are thus enabled to decompose
carbonic acid. But the sheath-like cotyledons of some Gramineae, for
instance, those of Phalaris, are not green and contain very little starch;
from which fact we may infer that they decompose little or no carbonic
acid. Nevertheless, they are extremely heliotropic; and this probably
serves them in another way, namely, as a guide from the buried seeds
through fissures in the ground or through overlying masses of vegetation,
into the light and air. This view
[page 450]
is strengthened by the fact that with Phalaris and Avena the first true
leaf, which is bright green and no doubt decomposes carbonic acid, exhibits
hardly a trace of heliotropism. The heliotropic movements of many other
seedlings probably aid them in like manner in emerging from the ground; for
apogeotropism by itself would blindly guide them upwards, against any
overlying obstacle.

Heliotropism prevails so extensively among the higher plants, that there
are extremely few, of which some part, either the stem, flower-peduncle,
petiole, or leaf, does not bend towards a lateral light. Drosera
rotundifolia is one of the few plants the leaves of which exhibit no trace
of heliotropism. Nor could we see any in Dionaea, though the plants were
not so carefully observed. Sir J. Hooker exposed the pitchers of Sarracenia
for some time to a lateral light, but they did not bend towards it.* We can
understand the reason why these insectivorous plants should not be
heliotropic, as they do not live chiefly by decomposing carbonic acid; and
it is much more important to them that their leaves should occupy the best
position for capturing insects, than that they should be fully exposed to
the light.

Tendrils, which consist of leaves or of other organs modified, and the
stems of twining plants, are, as Mohl long ago remarked, rarely
heliotropic; and here again we can see the reason why, for if they had
moved towards a lateral light they would have been drawn away from their
supports. But some tendrils are apheliotropic, for instance those of
Bignonia capreolata

* According to F. Kurtz ('Verhandl. des Bot. Vereins der Provinz
Brandenburg,' Bd. xx. 1878) the leaves or pitchers of Darlingtonia
Californica are strongly apheliotropic. We failed to detect this movement
in a plant which we possessed for a short time.
[page 451]

and of Smilax aspera; and the stems of some plants which climb by rootlets,
as those of the Ivy and Tecoma radicans, are likewise apheliotropic, and
they thus find a support. The leaves, on the other hand, of most climbing
plants are heliotropic; but we could detect no signs of any such movement
in those of Mutisia clematis.

As heliotropism is so widely prevalent, and as twining plants are
distributed throughout the whole vascular series, the apparent absence of
any tendency in their stems to bend towards the light, seemed to us so
remarkable a fact as to deserve further investigation, for it implies that
heliotropism can be readily eliminated. When twining plants are exposed to
a lateral light, their stems go on revolving or circumnutating about the
same spot, without any evident deflection towards the light; but we thought
that we might detect some trace of heliotropism by comparing the average
rate at which the stems moved to and from the light during their successive
revolutions.* Three young plants (about a foot in height) of Ipomoea
caerulea and four of I. purpurea, growing in separate pots, were placed on
a bright day before a north-east window in a room otherwise darkened, with
the tips of their revolving stems fronting the window. When the tip of each
plant pointed directly from the window, and when again towards it, the
times were recorded. This was continued from 6.45 A.M. till a little after
2 P.M. on June 17th. After a few observations we concluded that we could
safely estimate the time

* Some erroneous statements are unfortunately given on this subject, in
'The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants,' 1875, pp. 28, 32, 40, and
53. Conclusions were drawn from an insufficient number of observations, for
we did not then know at how unequal a rate the stems and tendrils of
climbing plants sometimes travel in different parts of the same revolution.
[page 452]

taken by each semicircle, within a limit of error of at most 5 minutes.
Although the rate of movement in different parts of the same revolution
varied greatly, yet 22 semicircles to the light were completed, each on an
average in 73.95 minutes; and 22 semicircles from the light each in 73.5
minutes. It may, therefore, be said that they travelled to and from the
light at exactly the same average rate; though probably the accuracy of the
result was in part accidental. In the evening the stems were not in the
least deflected towards the window. Nevertheless, there appears to exist a
vestige of heliotropism, for with 6 out of the 7 plants, the first
semicircle from the light, described in the early morning after they had
been subjected to darkness during the night and thus probably rendered more
sensitive, required rather more time, and the first semicircle to the light
considerably less time, than the average. Thus with all 7 plants, taken
together, the mean time of the first semicircle in the morning from the
light, was 76.8 minutes, instead of 73.5 minutes, which is the mean of all
the semicircles during the day from the light; and the mean of the first
semicircle to the light was only 63.1, instead of 73.95 minutes, which was
the mean of all the semicircles during the day to the light.

Similar observations were made on Wistaria Sinensis, and the mean of 9
semicircles from the light was 117 minutes, and of 7 semicircles to the
light 122 minutes, and this difference does not exceed the probable limit
of error. During the three days of exposure, the shoot did not become at
all bent towards the window before which it stood. In this case the first
semicircle from the light in the early morning of each day, required rather
less time for its performance than did the first semicircle to the light;
and this result,
[page 453]
if not accidental, appears to indicate that the shoots retain a trace of an
original apheliotropic tendency. With Lonicera brachypoda the semicircles
from and to the light differed considerably in time; for 5 semicircles from
the light required on a mean 202.4 minutes, and 4 to the light, 229.5
minutes; but the shoot moved very irregularly, and under these
circumstances the observations were much too few.

It is remarkable that the same part on the same plant may be affected by
light in a widely different manner at different ages, and as it appears at
different seasons. The hypocotyledonous stems of Ipomoea caerulea and
purpurea are extremely heliotropic, whilst the stems of older plants, only
about a foot in height, are, as we have just seen, almost wholly insensible
to light. Sachs states (and we have observed the same fact) that the
hypocotyls of the Ivy (Hedera helix) are slightly heliotropic; whereas the
stems of plants grown to a few inches in height become so strongly
apheliotropic, that they bend at right angles away from the light.
Nevertheless, some young plants which had behaved in this manner early in
the summer again became distinctly heliotropic in the beginning of
September; and the zigzag courses of their stems, as they slowly curved
towards a north-east window, were traced during 10 days. The stems of very
young plants of Tropaeolum majus are highly heliotropic, whilst those of
older plants, according to Sachs, are slightly apheliotropic. In all these
cases the heliotropism of the very young stems serves to expose the
cotyledons, or when the cotyledons are hypogean the first true leaves,
fully to the light; and the loss of this power by the older stems, or their
becoming apheliotropic, is connected with their habit of climbing.

Most seedling plants are strongly heliotropic, and
[page 454]
it is no doubt a great advantage to them in their struggle for life to
expose their cotyledons to the light as quickly and as fully as possible,
for the sake of obtaining carbon. It has been shown in the first chapter
that the greater number of seedlings circumnutate largely and rapidly; and
as heliotropism consists of modified circumnutation, we are tempted to look
at the high development of these two powers in seedlings as intimately
connected. Whether there are any plants which circumnutate slowly and to a
small extent, and yet are highly heliotropic, we do not know; but there are
several, and there is nothing surprising in this fact, which circumnutate
largely and are not at all, or only slightly, heliotropic. Of such cases
Drosera rotundifolia offers an excellent instance. The stolons of the
strawberry circumnutate almost like the stems of climbing plants, and they
are not at all affected by a moderate light; but when exposed late in the
summer to a somewhat brighter light they were slightly heliotropic; in
sunlight, according to De Vries, they are apheliotropic. Climbing plants
circumnutate much more widely than any other plants, yet they are not at
all heliotropic.

Although the stems of most seedling plants are strongly heliotropic, some
few are but slightly heliotropic, without our being able to assign any
reason. This is the case with the hypocotyl of Cassia tora, and we were
struck with the same fact with some other seedlings, for instance, those of
Reseda odorata. With respect to the degree of sensitiveness of the more
sensitive kinds, it was shown in the last chapter that seedlings of several
species, placed before a north-east window protected by several blinds, and
exposed in the rear to the diffused light of the room, moved with unerring
certainty towards the window, although
[page 455]
it was impossible to judge, excepting by the shadow cast by an upright
pencil on a white card, on which side most light entered, so that the
excess on one side must have been extremely small.

A pot with seedlings of Phalaris Canariensis, which had been raised in
darkness, was placed in a completely darkened room, at 12 feet from a very
small lamp. After 3 h. the cotyledons were doubtfully curved towards the
light, and after 7 h. 40 m. from the first exposure, they were all plainly,
though slightly, curved towards the lamp. Now, at this distance of 12 feet,
the light was so obscure that we could not see the seedlings themselves,
nor read the large Roman figures on the white face of a watch, nor see a
pencil line on paper, but could just distinguish a line made with Indian
ink. It is a more surprising fact that no visible shadow was cast by a
pencil held upright on a white card; the seedlings, therefore, were acted
on by a difference in the illumination of their two sides, which the human
eye could not distinguish. On another occasion even a less degree of light
acted, for some cotyledons of Phalaris became slightly curved towards the
same lamp at a distance of 20 feet; at this distance we could not see a
circular dot 2.29 mm. (.09 inch) in diameter made with Indian ink on white
paper, though we could just see a dot 3.56 mm. (.14 inch) in diameter; yet
a dot of the former size appears large when seen in the light.*

We next tried how small a beam of light would act; as this bears on light
serving as a guide to seedlings whilst they emerge through fissured or
encumbered ground. A pot with seedlings of Phalaris was covered

* Strasburger says ('Wirkung des Lichtes auf Schwärmsporen,' 1878, p. 52),
that the spores of Haematococcus moved to a light which only just sufficed
to allow middle-sized type to be read.
[page 456]

by a tin-vessel, having on one side a circular hole 1.23 mm. in diameter
(i.e. a little less than the 1/20th of an inch); and the box was placed in
front of a paraffin lamp and on another occasion in front of a window; and
both times the seedlings were manifestly bent after a few hours towards the
little hole.

A more severe trial was now made; little tubes of very thin glass, closed
at their upper ends and coated with black varnish, were slipped over the
cotyledons of Phalaris (which had germinated in darkness) and just fitted
them. Narrow stripes of the varnish had been previously scraped off one
side, through which alone light could enter; and their dimensions were
afterwards measured under the microscope. As a control experiment, similar
unvarnished and transparent tubes were tried, and they did not prevent the
cotyledons bending towards the light. Two cotyledons were placed before a
south-west window, one of which was illuminated by a stripe in the varnish,
only .004 inch (0.1 mm.) in breadth and .016 inch (0.4 mm.) in length; and
the other by a stripe .008 inch in breadth and .06 inch in length. The
seedlings were examined after an exposure of 7 h. 40 m., and were found to
be manifestly bowed towards the light. Some other cotyledons were at the
same time treated similarly, excepting that the little stripes were
directed not to the sky, but in such a manner that they received only the
diffused light from the room; and these cotyledons did not become at all
bowed. Seven other cotyledons were illuminated through narrow, but
comparatively long, cleared stripes in the varnish--namely, in breadth
between .01 and .026 inch, and in length between .15 and .3 inch; and these
all became bowed to the side, by which light entered through the stripes,
whether these were directed towards the sky or to one side of
[page 457]
the room. That light passing through a hole only .004 inch in breadth by
.016 in length, should induce curvature, seems to us a surprising fact.

Before we knew how extremely sensitive the cotyledons of Phalaris were to
light, we endeavoured to trace their circumnutation in darkness by the aid
of a small wax taper, held for a minute or two at each observation in
nearly the same position, a little on the left side in front of the
vertical glass on which the tracing was made. The seedlings were thus
observed seventeen times in the course of the day, at intervals of from
half to three-quarters of an hour; and late in the evening we were
surprised to find that all the 29 cotyledons were greatly curved and
pointed towards the vertical glass, a little to the left where the taper
had been held. The tracings showed that they had travelled in zigzag lines.
Thus, an exposure to a feeble light for a very short time at the above
specified intervals, sufficed to induce well-marked heliotropism. An
analogous case was observed with the hypocotyls of Solanum lycopersicum. We
at first attributed this result to the after-effects of the light on each
occasion; but since reading Wiesner's observations,* which will be referred
to in the last chapter, we cannot doubt that an intermittent light is more
efficacious than a continuous one, as plants are especially sensitive to
any contrast in its amount.

The cotyledons of Phalaris bend much more slowly towards a very obscure
light than towards a bright one. Thus, in the experiments with seedlings
placed in a dark room at 12 feet from a very small lamp, they were just
perceptibly and doubtfully curved towards it after 3 h., and only slightly,
yet certainly, after 4 h.

* 'Sitz. der k. Akad. der Wissensch.' (Vienna), Jan. 1880, p. 12.
[page 458]

After 8 h. 40 m. the chords of their arcs were deflected from the
perpendicular by an average angle of only 16o. Had the light been bright,
they would have become much more curved in between 1 and 2 h. Several
trials were made with seedlings placed at various distances from a small
lamp in a dark room; but we will give only one trial. Six pots were placed
at distances of 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20 feet from the lamp, before which
they were left for 4 h. As light decreases in a geometrical ratio, the
seedlings in the 2nd pot received 1/4th, those in the 3rd pot 1/16th, those
in the 4th 1/36th, those in the 5th 1/64th, and those in the 6th 1/100th of
the light received by the seedlings in the first or nearest pot. Therefore
it might have been expected that there would have been an immense
