APPARATUS FOR TESTING CHAMPAGNE BOTTLES AND CORKS.


Mr. J. Salleron has devised several apparatus which are destined to
render valuable service in the champagne industry. The apparently
simple operation of confining the carbonic acid due to fermentation in
a bottle in order to blow the cork from the latter with force at a
given moment is not always successful, notwithstanding the skill and
experience of the manipulator. How could it be otherwise?

Everything connected with the production of champagne wine was but
recently unknown and unexplained. The proportioning of the sugar
accurately dates, as it were, from but yesterday, and the measurement
of the absorbing power of wine for carbonic acid has but just entered
into practice, thanks to Mr. Salleron's absorptiometer. The real
strength of the bottles, and the laws of the elasticity of glass and
its variation with the temperature, are but little known. Finally, the
physical constitution of cork, its chemical composition, its
resistance to compression and the dissolving action of the wine, must
be taken into consideration. In fact, all the elements of the
difficult problem of the manufacture of sparkling wine show that there
is an urgent necessity of introducing scientific methods into this
industry, as without them work can now no longer be done.

No one has had a better opportunity to show how easy it is to convert
the juice of the grape into sparkling wine through a series of simple
operations whose details are known and accurately determined, so we
believe it our duty to recommend those of our readers who are
particularly interested in this subject to read Mr. Salleron's book on
sparkling wine. We shall confine ourselves in this article to a
description of two of the apparatus invented by the author for testing
the resistance of bottles and cork stoppers.

It is well, in the first place, to say that one of the important
elements in the treatment of sparkling wine is the normal pressure
that it is to produce in the bottles. After judicious deductions and
numerous experiments, Mr. Salleron has adopted for the normal pressure
of highly sparkling wines five atmospheres at the temperature of the
cellar, which does not exceed 10 degrees. But, in a defective cellar,
the bottles may be exposed to frost in winter and to a temperature of
25 deg. in summer, corresponding to a tension of ten atmospheres. It may
naturally be asked whether bottles will withstand such an ordeal. Mr.
Salleron has determined their resistance through the process by which
we estimate that of building materials, viz., by measuring the limit
of their elasticity, or, in other words, the pressure under which they
take on a new permanent volume. In fact, glass must be assimilated to
a perfectly elastic body; and bottles expand under the internal
pressure that they support. If their resistance is insufficient, they
continue to increase in measure as the pressure is further prolonged,
and at every increase in permanent capacity, their resistance
diminishes.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--MACHINE FOR TESTING BOTTLES.]

The apparatus shown in Fig. 1 is called an elasticimeter, and permits
of a preliminary testing of bottles. The bottle to be tested is put
into the receptacle, A B, which is kept full of water, and when it has
become full, its neck is played between the jaws of the clamp, _p_.
Upon turning the hand wheel, L, the bottle and the receptacle that
holds it are lifted, and the mouth of the bottle presses against a
rubber disk fixed under the support, C D. The pressure of the neck of
the bottle against this disk is such that the closing is absolutely
hermetical. The support, C D, contains an aperture which allows the
interior of the bottle to communicate with a glass tube, _a b_, which
thus forms a prolongation of the neck of the bottle. This tube is very
narrow and is divided into fiftieths of a cubic centimeter. A
microscope, _m_, fixed in front of the tube, magnifies the divisions,
and allows the position of the level of the water to be ascertained to
within about a millionth of a cubic centimeter.

A force and suction pump, P, sucks in air through the tube, _t_, and
compresses it through the tube, _t'_, in the copper tube, T, which
communicates with the glass tube, _a b_, after passing through the
pressure gauge, M. This pump, then, compresses the air in the bottle,
and the gauge accurately measures its pressure.

To make a test, after the bottle full of water has been fastened under
the support, C D, the cock, _s_, is opened and the liquid with which
the small reservoir, R, has been filled flows through an aperture above
the mouth of the bottle and rises in the tube, _a b_. When its level
reaches the division, O, the cock, _s_, is closed. The bottle and its
prolongation, _a b_, are now exactly full of water without any air
bubbles.

The pump is actuated, and, in measure as the pressure rises, the level
of the liquid in the tube, _a b_, is seen to descend. This descent
measures the expansion or flexion of the bottle as well as the
compression of the water itself. When the pressure is judged to be
sufficient, the button, _n_, is turned, and the air compressed by the
pump finding an exit, the needle of the pressure gauge will be seen to
redescend and the level of the tube, _a b_, to rise.

If the glass of the bottle has undergone no permanent deformation, the
level will rise exactly to the zero mark, and denote that the bottle
has supported the test without any modification of its structure. But
if, on the contrary, the level does not return to the zero mark, the
limit of the glass's elasticity has been extended, its molecules have
taken on a new state of equilibrium, and its resistance has
diminished, and, even if it has not broken, it is absolutely certain
that it has lost its former resistance and that it presents no
particular guarantee of strength.

The vessel, A B, which must be always full of water, is designed to
keep the bottle at a constant temperature during the course of the
experiment. This is an essential condition, since the bottle thus
filled with water constitutes a genuine thermometer, of which _a b_ is
the graduated tube. It is therefore necessary to avoid attributing a
variation in level due to an expansion of the water produced by a
change in temperature, to a deformation of the bottle.

The test, then, that can be made with bottles by means of the
elasticimeter consists in compressing them to a pressure of ten
atmospheres when filled with water at a temperature of 25 deg., and in
finding out whether, under such a stress, they change their volume
permanently. In order that the elasticimeter may not be complicated by
a special heating apparatus, it suffices to determine once for all
what the pressure is that, at a mean temperature of 15 deg., acts upon
bottles with the same energy as that of ten atmospheres at 25 deg..
Experiment has demonstrated that such stress corresponds to twelve
atmospheres in a space in which the temperature remains about 15 deg..

In addition, the elasticimeter is capable of giving other and no less
useful data. It permits of comparing the resistance of bottles and of
classifying them according to the degree of such resistance. After
numerous experiments, it has been found that first class bottles
easily support a pressure of twelve atmospheres without distortion,
while in those of an inferior quality the resistance is very variable.
The champagne wine industry should therefore use the former
exclusively.

Various precautions must be taken in the use of corks. The bottles
that lose their wine in consequence of the bad quality of their corks
are many in number, and it is not long since that they were the cause
of genuine disaster to the champagne trade.

Mr. Salleron has largely contributed to the improving of the quality
of corks found in the market. The physical and chemical composition of
cork bark is peculiarly favorable to the special use to which it is
applied; but the champagne wine industry requires of it an exaggerated
degree of resistance, inalterability, and elasticity. A 11/4 inch cork
must, under the action of a powerful machine, enter a 3/4 inch neck,
support the dissolving action of a liquid containing 12 per cent. of
alcohol compressed to at least five atmospheres, and, in a few years,
shoot out of the bottle and assume its pristine form and color. Out of
a hundred corks of good quality, not more than ten support such a
test.

In order to explain wherein resides the quality of cork, it is
necessary to refer to a chemical analysis of it. In cork bark there is
70 per cent. of suberine, which is soluble in alcohol and ether, and
is plastic, ductile, and malleable under the action of humid heat.
Mixed with suberine, cerine and resin give cork its insolubility and
inalterability. These substances are soluble in alcohol and ether, but
insoluble in water.

According to the origin of cork, the wax and resin exist in it in very
variable proportion. The more resinous kinds resist the dissolving
action of wine better than those that are but slightly resinous. The
latter soon become corroded and spoiled by wine. An attempt has often
been made, but without success, to improve poor corks by impregnating
them with the resinous principle that they lack.

Various other processes have been tried without success, and so it
finally became necessary simply to separate the good from the bad
corks by a practical and rapid operation. A simple examination does
not suffice. Mr. Bouche has found that corks immersed in water finally
became covered with brown spots, and, by analogy, in order to test
corks, he immersed them in water for a fortnight or a month. All those
that came out spotted were rejected. Under the prolonged action of
moisture, the suberine becomes soft, and, if it is not resinous
enough, the cells of the external layer of the cork burst, the water
enters, and the cork becomes spotted.

It was left to Mr. Salleron to render the method of testing practical.
He compresses the cork in a very strong reservoir filled with water
under a pressure of from four to five atmospheres. By this means, the
but slightly resinous cork is quickly dissolved, so that, after a few
hours' immersion, the bad corks come out spotted and channeled as if
they had been in the neck of a bottle for six months. On the contrary,
good corks resist the operation, and come out of the reservoir as
white and firm as they were when they were put into it.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--SALLERON'S APPARATUS FOR TESTING CORKS.]

Fig. 2 gives a perspective view of Mr. Salleron's apparatus for
testing corks. A reservoir, A B, of tinned copper, capable of holding
100 corks, is provided with a cover firmly held in place by a clamp.
Into the cover is screwed a pressure gauge, M, which measures the
internal pressure of the apparatus.

A pump, P, sucks water from a vessel through the tubulure, _t'_, and
forces it through the tubulure, _t_, into the reservoir full of corks.
After being submitted to a pressure of five atmospheres in this
apparatus for a few hours, the corks are verified and then sorted out.
In addition to the apparatus here illustrated, there is one of larger
dimensions for industrial applications. This differs from the other
only in the arrangement of its details, and will hold as many as
10,000 corks.--_Revue Industrielle._

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED BISCUIT MACHINE.


The accompanying illustration represents a combined biscuit cutting,
scrapping, and panning machine, specially designed for running at high
speeds, and so arranged as to allow of the relative movements of the
various parts being adjusted while in motion. The cutters or dies,
mounted on a cross head working in a vertical guide frame, are
operated from the main shaft by eccentrics and vertical connecting
rods, as shown. These rods are connected to the lower strap of the
eccentric by long guide bolts, on which intermediate spiral springs
are mounted, and by this means, although the dies are brought quickly
down to the dough, they are suffered to remain in contact therewith,
under a gradually increasing pressure, for a sufficient length of time
to insure the dough being effectually stamped and completely cut
through.

[Illustration: IMPROVED BISCUIT MACHINE.]

Further, the springs tend to counteract any tendency to vibration that
might be set up by the rapid reciprocation of the cross head, cutters,
and their attendant parts. Mounted also on the main shaft is one of a
pair of reversed cone drums. These, with their accompanying belt and
its adjusting gear, worked by a hand wheel and traversing screw, as
shown, serve to adjust the speed of the feed rollers, so as to suit
the different lengths of the intermediate travel or "skip" of the
dough-carrying web.

Provision is made for taking up the slack of this belt by mounting the
spindle of the outer coned drum in bearings adjustable along a
circular path struck from the axis of the lower feed roller as a
center, thus insuring a uniform engagement between the teeth of the
small pinion and those of the spur wheel with which the drum and
roller are respectively provided.

The webs for carrying forward the dough between the different
operations pass round rollers, which are each operated by an
adjustable silent clutch feed, in place of the usual ratchet and pawl
mechanism. Movement is given to each feed by the connecting links
shown, to each of which motion is in turn imparted by the bell crank
lever placed beside the eccentric. This lever is actuated by a crank
pin on the main shaft, working into a block sliding in a slot in the
shorter or horizontal arm of the lever, while a similar but adjustable
block, sliding in the vertical arm, serves to impart the motion of the
lever to the system of connecting links, the adjustable block allowing
of a longer or shorter stroke being given to the different feeds, as
desired.

The scraps are carried over the roller in rear of the cutters, and so
to a scrap pan, while the stamped biscuits pass by a lower web into
the pans. These pans are carried by two endless chains, provided with
pins, which take hold of the pans and carry them along in the proper
position. The roller over which these chains pass is operated by a
silent clutch, and in order to give an additional motion to the chains
when a pan is full, and it is desired to bring the next pan into
position, an additional clutch is caused to operate upon the roller.
This clutch is kept out of gear with its pulley by means of a
projection upon it bearing against a disk slightly greater in diameter
than the pulley, and provided with two notches, into which the
projection passes when the additional feed is required.

The makers, H. Edwards & Co., Liverpool, have run one of these
machines easily and smoothly at a hundred revolutions per minute, at
which speed, and when absorbing about 3.5 horse power, the output
would equal 4,000 small biscuits per minute.--_Industries._

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED CREAM SEPARATOR.


A hand separator of this type was exhibited at the Royal Show at
Newcastle by the Aylesbury Dairy Company, of 31 St. Petersburg Place,
Bayswater, England.

[Illustration: IMPROVED CREAM SEPARATOR. Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: IMPROVED CREAM SEPARATOR. Fig. 2.]

Fig. 1 is a perspective view of the machine, Fig. 2 being a vertical
section. The drums of these machines, which make 2,700 revolutions per
minute for the large and 4,000 for the small one, have a diameter of
27 in. and 151/2 in. respectively, and are capable of extracting the
cream from 220 and 115 gallons of milk per hour. These drums are
formed by hydraulic pressure from one piece of sheet steel. To avoid
the possibility of the machines being overdriven, which might happen
through the negligence of the attendant or through the governing gear
on the engine failing to act, an ingenious controlling apparatus is
fixed to the intermediate motion of the separator as shown in Fig. 3.
This apparatus consists of a pair of governor balls pivoted near the
center of the arms and attached to the main shaft of the intermediate
gear by means of a collar fixed on it. The main shaft is bored out
sufficiently deep to admit a steel rod, against which bear the three
ends of the governor arms. The steel rod presses against the
counterbalance, which is made exactly the right weight to withstand
the force tending to raise it, when the intermediate motion is running
at its designed speed. The forks between which the belt runs are also
provided with a balance weight. This brings them to the loose pulley,
unless they are fixed by means of the ratchet. Should the number of
revolutions of the intermediate increase beyond the correct amount,
the extra centrifugal force imparted to the governor balls enables
them to overcome the balance weight, and in raising this they raise
the arm. This arm striking against the ratchet detent releases the
balance weight, and the belt is at once brought on to the loose
pulley.

[Illustration: IMPROVED CREAM SEPARATOR. Fig. 3.]

The steel drum is fitted with an internal ring at the bottom (see Fig.
2), into which the milk flows, and from which it is delivered, by
three apertures, to the periphery of the drum, thus preventing the
milk from striking against the cone of the drum, and from mixing with
the cream which has already been separated. The upper part of the drum
is fitted with an annular flange, about 11/2 in. from the top, reaching
to within one-sixteenth of an inch of the periphery. After the
separation of the skim milk from the cream, the former passes behind
and above this flange through the aperture, B, and is removed by means
of the tube, D, furnished with a steel tip projecting from the cover
of the machine into the space between the top of the drum and the
annular flange, a similar tube, F, reaching below this flange,
removing the cream which collects there. The skim milk tube is
provided with a screw regulator, the function of which is to enable
cream of any desired consistency to be obtained, varying with the
distance between the skim milk and cream points from the center of the
drum. Another point about these tubes is their use as elevating tubes
for the skim, milk and cream, as, owing to the velocity at which the
drum is rotating, the products can be delivered by these tubes at a
height of 8 or 10 feet above the machine if required, thus enabling
scalding and cooling of either to be carried on while the separator is
at work, and saving hand labor.--_Iron._

       *       *       *       *       *




GAS FROM OIL.


At the twenty-fourth annual meeting of the Gas Institute, which was
recently held in Glasgow, Dr. Stevenson Macadam, F.R.S.E., lecturer on
chemistry, Edinburgh, submitted the first paper, which was on "Gas
from Oil."

He said that during the last seventeen years he had devoted much
attention to the photogenic or illuminating values of different
qualities of paraffin oils in various lamps, and to the production of
permanent illuminating gas from such oils. The earlier experiments
were directed to the employment of paraffin oils as oils, and the
results proved the great superiority of the paraffin oils as
illuminating agents over vegetable and animal oils, alike for
lighthouse and ordinary house service.

The later trials were mainly concerned with the breaking up of the
paraffin oils into permanent illuminating gas. Experiments were made
at low heats, medium heats, and high heats, which proved that,
according to the respective qualities of the paraffin oils employed in
the trials, there was more or less tendency at the lower heats to
distill oil instead of permanent gas, while at the high heats there
was a liability to decarbonize the oil and gas, and to obtain a thin
gas of comparatively small illuminating power. When, however, a good
cherry red heat was maintained, the oils split up in large proportion
into permanent gas of high illuminating quality, accompanied by little
tarry matter, and with only a slight amount of separated carbon or
deposited soot.

The best mode of splitting up the paraffin oils, and the special
arrangements of the retort or distilling apparatus, also formed, he
said, an extensive inquiry by itself. In one set of trials the oil was
distilled into gaseous vapor, and then passed through the retort. In
another set of experiments, the oil was run into or allowed to trickle
into the retorts, while both modes of introducing the oil were tried
in retorts charged with red hot coke and in retorts free from coke.

Ultimately, it was found that the best results were obtained by the
more simple arrangement of employing iron retorts at a good cherry red
heat, and running in the oil as a thin stream direct into the retort,
so that it quickly impinged upon the red hot metal, and without the
intervention of any coke or other matter in the retorts. The paraffin
oils employed in the investigations were principally: (1) Crude
paraffin oil, being the oil obtained direct from the destructive
distillation of shale in retorts; (2) green paraffin oil, which is
yielded by distilling or re-running the crude paraffin oil, and
removing the lighter or more inflammable portion by fractional
distillation; and (3) blue paraffin oil, which is obtained by
rectifying the twice run oil with sulphuric acid and soda, and
distilling off the paraffin spirit, burning oil, and intermediate oil,
and freezing out the solid paraffin as paraffin scale. The best
practical trials were obtained in Pintsch's apparatus and in Keith's
apparatus.

After describing both of these, Dr. Macadam went on to give in great
detail the results obtained in splitting up blue paraffin oil into gas
in each apparatus. He then said that these experimental results
demonstrated that Pintsch's apparatus yielded from the gallon of oil
in one case 90.70 cubic feet of gas of 62.50 candle power, and in the
second case 103.36 cubic feet of 59.15 candle gas, or an average of
97.03 cubic feet of 60.82 candle power gas.

In both cases, the firing of the retorts was moderate, though in the
second trial greater care was taken to secure uniformity of heat, and
the oil was run in more slowly, so that there was more thorough
splitting up of the oil into permanent gas. The gas obtained in the
two trials was of high quality, owing to its containing a large
percentage of heavy hydrocarbons, of which there were, respectively,
39.25 and 37.15 per cent., or an average of 38.2 per cent., while the
sulphureted hydrogen was nothing, and the carbonic acid a mere trace.
Besides testing the gas on the occasion of the actual trials, he had
also examined samples of the gas which he had taken from various
cylinders in which the gas had been stored for several months under a
pressure of ten atmospheres, and in all cases the gas was found to be
practically equal to the quantity mentioned, and hence of a permanent
character.

By using Keith's apparatus the results obtained were generally the
same, with the exception that an average of 0.27 per cent. of carbonic
acid gas and decided proportions of sulphureted hydrogen were found to
be present in the gas. Dr. Macadam devoted some remarks to the
consideration of the question as to how far the gas obtained from the
paraffin oil represented the light power of the oil itself, and then
he proceeded to say that, taking the crude paraffin oil at 2d. a
gallon, and with a specific gravity of 850 (water = 1,000), or 81/2 lb.
to the gallon, there were 264 gallons to the ton, at a cost of L2 4s.
per ton. The sperm light from the ton of oil as gas being 3,443 lb.,
he reckoned that fully 6 lb. of sperm light were obtained from a
pennyworth of the crude oil as gas.

Then, taking the blue paraffin oil at 4d. per gallon, and there being
255 gallons to the ton, it was found that the cost of one ton was L4
5s., and as the sperm light of a ton of that oil as gas was 5,150 lb.,
it was calculated that 5 lb. of sperm light were yielded in the gas
from a pennyworth of the blue oil. The very rich character of the oil
gas rendered it unsuitable for consumption at ordinary gas jets,
though it burned readily and satisfactorily at small burners not
larger than No. 1 jets.

In practical use it would be advisable to reduce the quality by
admixture with thin and feeble gas, or to employ the oil gas simply
for enriching inferior gases derived from the more common coals. On
the question of dilution, he said that he preferred to use carbonic
oxide and hydrogen, and most of the remainder of his paper was devoted
to an explanation of the best mode of preparing those gases (water
gases).

He concluded by saying: The employment of paraffin oil for gas making
has advantages in its favor, in the readiness of charging the retorts,
as the oil can be run in continuously for days at a time, and may be
discontinued and commenced again without opening, clearing out
residual products, recharging and reclosing the retorts. There is
necessarily, therefore, less labor and cost in working, and as the gas
is cleaner or freer from impurities, purifying plant and material will
be correspondingly less. Oil gas is now employed for lighthouse
service in the illumination of the lanterns on Ailsa Craig and as
motive power in the gas engines connected with the fog horns at
Langness and Ailsa Craig lighthouse stations. It is also used largely
in the lighting of railway carriages. Various populous places are now
introducing oil gas for house service, and he felt sure that the
system is one which ought to commend itself for its future development
to the careful consideration and practical skill of the members of the
Gas Institute.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MANUFACTURE OF SALT NEAR MIDDLESBROUGH.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Abstract of paper read before the Institution of
               Civil Engineers, May 17, 1887.]

By Sir LOWTHIAN BELL, Bart., F.R.S.


The geology of the Middlesbrough salt region was first referred to,
and it was stated that the development of the salt industry in that
