bromine water, and a white precipitate was obtained, consisting of
tribromophenol. An aqueous solution of the crystals immediately
coagulated albumen.

All these reactions show that the phenol occurs in the free state in
the cones of this plant. In the same manner I treated the acicular
leaves, and portions of the stem separately, both being previously cut
up into small pieces, and from both I obtained phenol.

I have ascertained the relative amount of phenol in each part of the
plant operated upon; by heating the stem with water at 80 deg. C., and
filtering, and repeating this operation until the aqueous filtrate
gave no violet color with ferric chloride and no white precipitate
with bromine water.

I found various quantities according to the age of the stem. The older
portions yielding as much as 0.1021 per cent, while the young portions
only gave 0.0654 per cent. The leaves yielding according to their age,
0.0936 and 0.0315 per cent.; and the cones also gave varying amounts,
according to their maturity, the amounts varying between 0.0774 and
0.0293.

Two methods were used in the quantitative estimation of the amount of
phenol. The first was the new volumetric method of M. Chandelon
(_Bulletin de la Societe Chemique de Paris_, July 20, 1882; and
_Deutsch-Americanishe Apotheker Zeitung_, vol. iii., No. 12, September
1, 1882), which I have found to be very satisfactory. The process
depends on the precipitation of phenol by a dilute aqueous solution of
bromine as tribromophenol. The second method was to extract, as
already staled, a known weight of each part of the plant with water,
until the last extract gives _no_ violet color with ferric chloride,
and no white precipitate with the bromine test (which is capable of
detecting in a solution the 1/60000 part of phenol). The aqueous
extract is at this point evaporated, then ether is added, and finally
the ethereal solution is allowed to evaporate. The residue (phenol) is
weighed directly, and from this the percentage can be ascertained. By
this method of extraction, the oil of turpentine, resins, etc.,
contained in _Pinus sylvestris_ do not pass into solution, because
they are insoluble in water, even when boiling; what passes into
solution besides phenol is a little tannin, which is practically
insoluble in ether.

From this investigation it will be seen that phenol exists in various
proportions in the free state in the leaves, stem, and cones of _Pinus
sylvestris_, and as this compound is a product in the distillation of
coal, and as geologists have to a certain extent direct evidence that
the flora of the Carboniferous epoch was essentially crytogamous, the
only phaenogamous plants which constituted any feature in "the coal
forests" being the coniferae, and as coal is the fossil remains of that
gigantic flora which contained phenol, I think my discovery of phenol
in the coniferae of the present day further supports, from a chemical
point of view, the views of geologists that the coniferae existed so
far back in the world's history as the Carboniferous age.

I think this discovery also supports the theory that the origin of
petroleum in nature is produced by moderate heat on coal or similar
matter of a vegetable origin. For we know from the researches of
Freund and Pebal (_Ann. Chem. Pharm._, cxv. 19), that petroleum
contains phenol and its homologues, and as I have found this organic
compound in the coniferae of to-day, it is probable that petroleum in
certain areas has been produced from the conifers and the flora
generally of some primaeval forests. It is stated by numerous chemists
that "petroleum almost always contains solid paraffin" and similar
hydrocarbons. Professors Schorlemmer and Thorpe have found heptane in
Pinus, which heptane yielded primary heptyl-alcohol, and
methyl-pentyl-carbinol, exactly as the heptane obtained from petroleum
does (_Annalen de Chemie_, ccxvii., 139, and clxxxviii., 249; and
_Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft_, viii., 1649); and,
further, petroleum contains a large number of hydrocarbons which are
found in coal. Again, Mendelejeff, Beilstein, and others (_Bulletin de
la Societe Chemique de Paris_, No. 1, July 5, 1883), have found
hydrocarbons of the--

             C_{n}H_{2n2+}, C_{n}H_{2n-6},

also hydrocarbons of the C_{n}H_{2n} series in the petroleum of Baku,
American petroleum containing similar hydrocarbons.

I think all these facts give very great weight to the theory that
petroleum is of organic origin.

On the other hand, Berthelot, from his synthetic production of
hydrocarbons, believes that the interior of the globe contains
alkaline metals in the _free_ state, which yield acetylides in the
presence of carbonic anhydride, which are decomposed into acetylene by
aqueous vapor. But it has been already proved that acetylene may be
polymerized, so as to produce aromatic carbides, or the derivatives of
marsh gas, by the absorption of hydrogen. Berthelot's view, therefore,
is too imaginative; for the presence of _free_ alkaline metals in the
earth's interior is an unproved and very improbable hypothesis.
Byasson states that petroleum is formed by the action of water,
carbonic anhydride, and sulphureted hydrogen upon incandescent iron.
Mendelejeff thinks it is formed by the action of aqueous vapor upon
carbides of iron; and in his article, "Petroleum, the Light of the
Poor" (in this month's--February--number of _Good Words_), Sir Lyon
Playfair, K.C.B., F.R.S., etc., holds opinions similar to those of
Mendelejeff.

Taking in consideration the facts that solid paraffin is found in
petroleum and is also found in coal, and from my own work that phenol
exists in _Pinus sylvestris_, and has been found by others in coal
which is produced from the decomposition of a flora containing
numerous gigantic coniferae allied to Pinus, and that petroleum
contains phenol, and each (i.e., petroleum and coal) contains a number
of hydrocarbons common to both, I am inclined to think that the
balance of evidence is in favor of the hypothesis that petroleum has
been produced in nature from a vegetable source in the interior of the
globe. Of course, there can be no practical or direct evidence as to
the origin of petroleum; therefore "theories are the only lights with
which we can penetrate the obscurity of the unknown, and they are to
be valued just as far as they illuminate our path."

In conclusion, I think that there is a connecting link between the old
pine and fir forest of bygone ages and the origin of petroleum in
nature.--_Chemical News._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCHOOL OF PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY OF PARIS.


Recently we paid a visit to the New Municipal School of Physics and
Chemistry that the city of Paris founded in 1882, and that is now in
operation in the large building of the old Rollin College. This
establishment is one of those that supply a long-felt want of our
time, and we are happy to make it known to our readers. The object for
which it was designed was, in the intention of its founders, to give
young people who have just graduated from the higher primary schools
special instruction which shall be at once scientific and practical,
and which shall fit them to become engineers or superintendents in
laboratories connected with chemical and physical industries. To reach
such a result it has been necessary to give the teaching an
essentially practical character, by permitting the pupils to proceed
of themselves in manipulations in well fitted laboratories. It is upon
this important point that we shall now more particularly dwell; but,
before making known the general mode of teaching, we wish to quote a
few passages from the school's official programme:

   "Many questions and problems, in physics as well as in chemistry,
   find their solution only with the aid of mathematics and
   mechanics. It therefore became necessary, through lectures
   bearing upon the useful branches of mathematics, to supplement
   the too limited ideas that pupils brought with them on entering
   the school. Mathematics and mechanics are therefore taught here
   at the same time with physics and chemistry, but they are merely
   regarded in the light of auxiliaries to the latter.

   "The studies extend over three years. Each of the three divisions
   (1st, 2d, and 3d years) includes thirty pupils.

   "During the three first semesters, pupils of the same grade
   attend lectures and go through manipulations in chemistry,
   physics, mathematics, and draughting in common.

   "At the end of the third semester they are divided into 10
   physical and 20 chemical students.

   "From this moment, although certain courses still remain wholly
   or partially common to the two categories of pupils (physical and
   chemical), the same is no longer the case with regard to the
   practical exercises, for the physical students thereafter
   manipulate only in the physical laboratories, and the chemical
   only in the chemical laboratories; moreover, the manipulations
   acquire a greater importance through the time that is devoted to
   them.

   "At each promotion the three first semesters are taken up with
   general and scientific studies. Technical applications are the
   subject of the lectures and exercises of the three last
   semesters. At the end of the third year certificates are given to
   those pupils who have undergone examination in a satisfactory
   manner, and diplomas to such as have particularly distinguished
   themselves."

When pupils have been received at the school, after passing the
necessary examination, their time of working is divided up between
lectures and questionings and different laboratory manipulations.

The course of lectures on general and applied physics comprises
hydrostatics and heat (Prof. Dommer), electricity and magnetism (Prof.
Hospitalier), and optics and acoustics (Prof. Baille). Lectures on
general chemistry are delivered by Profs. Schultzenberger and
Henninger, on analytical chemistry by Prof. Silva, on chemistry
applied to the industries by Prof. Henninger (for inorganic) and Prof.
Schultzenberger (for organic). The lectures on pure and applied
mathematics and mechanics are delivered by Profs. Levy and Roze.

[Illustration: GENERAL VIEW OF A LABORATORY AT THE PARIS SCHOOL OF
PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY.]

The pupils occupy themselves regularly every day, during half the time
spent at the school, with practical work in analytical and applied
chemistry and physics and general chemistry. This practical work is a
complement to the various lectures, and has reference to what has been
taught therein. Once or twice per week the pupils spend three hours in
a shop devoted to wood and metal working, and learn how to turn,
forge, file, adjust, etc.

The school's cabinets are now provided with the best instruments for
study, and are daily becoming richer therein. The chemical
laboratories are none the less remarkably organized. In the
accompanying cut we give a view of one of these--the one that is under
the direction of Mr. Schultzenberger, professor of chemistry and
director of the new school. Each pupil has his own place in front of a
large table provided with a stand whereon he may arrange all the
products that he has to employ. Beneath the work-table he has at his
disposal a closet in which to place his apparatus after he is through
using them. Each pupil has in front of him a water-faucet, which is
fixed to a vertical column and placed over a sink. Alongside of this
faucet there is a double gas burner, which may be connected with
furnaces and heating apparatus by means of rubber tubing. A special
hall, with draught and ventilation, is set apart for precipitations by
sulphureted hydrogen and the preparation of chlorine and other
ill-smelling and deleterious gases. The great amount of light and
space provided secure the best of conditions of hygiene to this fine
and vast laboratory, where young people have all the necessary
requisites for becoming true chemists.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




DUST-FREE SPACES.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Lecture to the Royal Dublin Society by Dr. Oliver J.
   Lodge, April 2, 1884.]


Within the last few years a singular interest has arisen in the
subject of dust, smoke, and fog, and several scientific researches
into the nature and properties of these phenomena have been recently
conducted. It so happened that at the time I received a request from
the secretary of this society to lecture here this afternoon I was in
the middle of a research connected with dust, which I had been
carrying on for some months in conjunction with Mr. J.W. Clark,
Demonstrator of Physics in University College, Liverpool, and which
had led us to some interesting results. It struck me that possibly
some sort of account of this investigation might not be unacceptable
to a learned body such as this, and accordingly I telegraphed off to
Mr. Moss the title of this afternoon's lecture. But now that the time
has come for me to approach the subject before you, I find myself
conscious of some misgivings, and the misgivings are founded upon this
ground: that the subject is not one that lends itself easily to
experimental demonstration before an audience. Many of the experiments
can only be made on a small scale, and require to be watched closely.
However, by help of diagrams and by not confining myself too closely
to our special investigation, but dealing somewhat with the wider
subject of dust in general, I may hope to render myself and my subject
intelligible if not very entertaining.

First of all, I draw no distinction between "dust" and "smoke." It
would be possible to draw such a distinction, but it would hardly be
in accordance with usage. Dust might be defined as smoke which had
settled, and the term smoke applied to solid particles still suspended
in the air. But at present the term "smoke" is applied to solid
particles produced by combustion only, and "dust" to particles owing
their floating existence to some other cause. This is evidently an
unessential distinction, and for the present I shall use either term
without distinction, meaning by dust or smoke, solid particles
floating in the air. Then "fog"; this differs from smoke only in the
fact that the particles are liquid instead of solid. And the three
terms dust, smoke, and fog, come to much the same thing, only that the
latter term is applied when the suspended particles are liquid. I do
not think, however, that we usually apply the term "fog" when the
liquid particles are pure water; we call it then mostly either mist or
cloud. The name "fog," at any rate in towns, carries with it the idea
of a hideous, greasy compound, consisting of smoke and mist and
sulphur and filth, as unlike the mists on a Highland mountain as a
country meadow is unlike a city slum. Nevertheless, the finest cloud
or mist that ever existed consists simply of little globules of water
suspended in air, and thus for our present purpose differs in no
important respect from fog, dust, and smoke. A cloud or mist is, in
fact, fine water-dust. Rain is coarse water-dust formed by the
aggregation of smaller globules, and varying in fineness from the
Scotch mist to the tropical deluge. It has often been asked how it is
that clouds and mists are able to float about when water is so much
heavier (800 times heavier) than air. The answer to this is easy. It
depends on the resistance or viscosity of fluids, and on the smallness
of the particles concerned. Bodies falling far through fluids acquire
a "terminal velocity," at which they are in stable equilibrium--their
weight being exactly equal to the resistance--and this terminal
velocity is greater for large particles than for small; consequently
we have all sorts of rain velocity, depending on the size of the
drops; and large particles of dust settle more quickly than small.
Cloud-spherules are falling therefore, but falling very slowly.

To recognize the presence of dust in air there are two principal
tests; the first is, the obvious one of looking at it with plenty of
light, the way one is accustomed to look for anything else; the other
is a method of Mr. John Aitken's, viz., to observe the condensation of
water vapor.

Take these in order. When a sunbeam enters a darkened room through a
chink, it is commonly said to be rendered visible by the motes or dust
particles dancing in it; but of course really it is not the motes
which make the sunbeam visible, but the sunbeam the motes. A dust
particle is illuminated like any other solid screen, and is able to
send a sufficient fraction of light to our eyes to render itself
visible. If there are no such particles in the beam--nothing but
clear, invisible air--then of course nothing is seen, and the beam
plunges on its way quite invisible to us unless we place our eyes in
its course. In other words, to be visible, light must enter the eye.
(A concentrated beam was passed through an empty tube, and then
ordinary air let in.)

The other test, that of Mr. Aitken, depends on the condensation of
steam. When a jet of steam finds itself in dusty air, it condenses
around each dust particle as a nucleus, and forms the white visible
cloud popularly called steam. In the absence of nuclei Mr. Aitken has
shown that the steam cannot condense until it is highly
supersaturated, and that when it does it condenses straight into
rain--that is, into large drops which fall. The condensation of steam
is a more delicate test for dust than is a beam of light. A curious
illustration of the action of nuclei in condensing moisture has just
occurred to me, in the experiment--well known to children--of writing
on a reasonably clean window-pane with, say, a blunt wooden point, and
then breathing on the glass; the condensation of the breath renders
the writing legible. No doubt the nuclei are partially wiped away by
the writing, and the moisture will condense into larger drops with
less light-scattering power along the written lines than over the
general surface of the pane where the nuclei are plentiful, and the
drops therefore numerous and minute. Mr. Aitken points out that if the
air were ever quite dustless, vapor could not condense, but the air
would gradually get into a horribly supersaturated condition, soaking
all our walls and clothes, dripping from every leaf, and penetrating
everywhere, instead of falling in an honest shower, against which
umbrellas and slate roofs are some protection. But let us understand
what sort of dust it is which is necessary for this condensing
process. It is not the dust and smoke of towns, it is not the dust of
a country road; all such particles as these are gross and large
compared with those which are able to act as condensers of moisture.
The fine dust of Mr. Aitken exists everywhere, even in the upper
regions of the atmosphere; many of its particles are of
ultra-microscopic fineness, one of them must exist in every raindrop,
nay, even in every spherule of a mist or cloud, but it is only
occasionally that one can find them with the microscope. It is to such
particles as these that we owe the blue of the sky, and yet they are
sufficiently gross and tangible to be capable of being filtered out of
the air by a packed mass of cotton-wool. Such dust as this, then, we
need never be afraid of being without. Without it there could be no
rain, and existence would be insupportable, perhaps impossible; but it
is not manufactured in towns; the sea makes it; trees and wind make
it; but the kind of dust made in towns rises only a few hundred yards
or so into the atmosphere, floating as a canopy or pall over those
unfortunate regions, and sinks and settles most of it as soon as the
air is quiet, but scarcely any of it ever rises into the upper regions
of the atmosphere at all.

Dust, then, being so universally prevalent, what do I mean by
dust-free spaces? How are such things possible? And where are they to
be found? In 1870 Dr. Tyndall was examining dusty air by means of a
beam of light in which a spirit-lamp happened to be burning, when he
noticed that from the flame there poured up torrents of apparently
thick black smoke. He could not think the flame was really smoky, but
to make sure he tried, first a Bunsen gas flame and then a hydrogen
