together over its back after the manner of butterflies. At the
left-hand corner is seen the head of the insect, magnified, showing
the long spiral tongue.

This is a curious structure, and one that will repay the trouble of
microscopic examination. In the figure the profile is seen, the large
compound eye at the side and the long curved tongue, so
elephantine-looking in form, though of minute size, is seen unrolled
as it is when about to be inserted into flowers to pump up the
honey-juice. This little piece of insect apparatus is a mass of
muscles and sensitive nerves comprising a machine of greater
complexity and of no less precision in its action than the modern
printing machine. When not in use, the tongue rolls into a spiral and
disappears under the head. A butterfly's tongue may readily be
unrolled by carefully inserting a pin within the first spiral and
gently drawing it out.--_The Gardeners' Chronicle._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BHOTAN CYPRESS.

(CUPRESSUS TORULOSA.)


This cypress, apart from its elegant growth, is interesting as being
the only species of Cupressus indigenous to India. It is a native of
the Himalayas in the Bhotan district, and it also occurs on the
borders of Chinese Tartary. It forms, therefore, a connecting link, as
it were, between the true cypresses of the extreme east and those that
are natives of Europe. It is singular to note that this genus of
conifers extends throughout the entire breadth of the northern
hemisphere, Cupressus funebris representing the extreme east in China,
and C. macrocarpa the extreme west on the Californian seacoast. The
northerly and southerly limits, it is interesting to mark, are, on the
contrary, singularly restricted, the most southerly being found in
Mexico; the most northerly (C. nutkaensis) in Nootka Sound, and the
subject of these remarks (C. torulosa) in Bhotan. The whole of the
regions intervening between these extreme lateral points have their
cypresses. The European species are C. lusitanica (the cedar of Goa),
which inhabits Spain and Portugal; C. sempervirens (the Roman
cypress), which is centered chiefly in the southeasterly parts of
Europe, extending into Asia Minor. Farther eastward C. torulosa is met
with, and the chain is extended eastward by C. funebris, also known as
C. pendula. The headquarters of the cypresses are undoubtedly in the
extreme west, for here may be found some four or five distinct
species, including the well-known C. Lawsoniana, probably the most
popular of all coniferae in gardens, C. Goveniana, C. Macnabiana, C.
macrocarpa, and C. nutkaensis (spelt C. nutkanus by the Californian
botanists). The eastern representative of the cypresses in the United
States of North America is C. thyoides, popularly known as the white
cedar. In Mexico three or four species occur, so that the genus in
round numbers only contains about a dozen species. The Californian
botanist Mr. Sereno Watson takes away Lawson's cypress from Cupressus
and puts it in the genus Chamaecyparis, the chief points of distinction
being the flattened two-ranked branchlets and the small globose cones
maturing the first year.

[Illustration: CONES OF CUPRESSUS TORULOSA (NATURAL SIZE).]

All the cypresses are undoubtedly valuable from a garden point of
view, but the various species vary in degree as regards their utility
as ornamental subjects. I should rank them in the following order in
point of merit: C. Lawsoniana, C. nutkaensis, C. macrocarpa, C.
sempervirens, C. thyoides, C. Macnabiana, and C. Goveniana; then would
follow C. torulosa, C. funebris, C. Knightiana, and other Mexican
species. These are placed last, not because they are less elegant than
the others, but on account of their tenderness, all being liable to
succumb to our damp and cold winters. The species which concerns us at
present, C. torulosa, is an old introduction, seeds of it having been
sent to this country by Wallich so long back as 1824, and previous to
this date it was found by Royle on the Himalayas, growing at
elevations of some 11,500 feet above sea level. Coming from such a
height, one would suppose it to be hardier than it really is, but its
tenderness may probably be accounted for by the wood not getting
thoroughly ripened during our summers. It is a very handsome tree,
said to reach from 20 feet to 125 feet in height in its native
habitat. It has a perfectly straight stem; the growth is pyramidal or
rather conical, and the old wood is of a warm purplish-brown. The
foliage is a glaucous gray-green, and the branches have a twisted and
tufted appearance.

There are several varieties of it which are, or have been, in
cultivation. Of these one of the best is corneyana, which Gordon
ranked as a distinct species. It was supposed to be Chinese, and was
introduced to cultivation by Messrs. Knight & Perry, the predecessors
of Messrs. Veitch at the Chelsea Nurseries. It differs from C.
torulosa proper, its habit being of low stature, and has slender
pendulous branches; hence, it has been known in gardens by the names
of C. gracilis, C. cernua, and C. pendula. Other varieties of C.
torulosa are those named in gardens and nurseries--viridis, a kind
devoid of the glaucous foliage of the original; majestica, a robust
variety; and nana, a very dwarf and compact-growing sort. There is
also a so-called variegated form, but it is not worthy of mention. The
synonyms of C. torulosa itself are C. cashmeriana, C. nepalensis, and
C. pendula. Having regard to the tenderness of this Bhotan cypress, it
should only be planted in the warmest localities, and in dry sheltered
positions; upland districts, too, provided they are sheltered, are
undoubtedly suitable for it, inasmuch as growth is retarded in spring,
and, therefore, the young shoots escape injury from late spring
frosts.--_W.G., in The Garden._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PITCHER PLANT.


The variety of the pitcher plant (_Sarracenia variolaris_) found in
North America is carnivorous, being a feeder on various animal
substances.

Mrs. Mary Treat, an American naturalist, made, a few years ago,
several experiments upon the plants of this species to be found in
Florida; and to the labors of this lady the writer has been indebted,
in some measure, in the preparation of this paper.

The _Sarracenia_ derives its name of "pitcher plant" from the fact of
its possessing the following curious characteristics: The median nerve
is prolonged beyond the leaves in the manner of a tendril, and
terminates in a species of cup or urn. This cup is ordinarily three or
four inches in depth, and one to one and a half inches in width. The
orifice of the cup is covered with a lid, which opens and shuts at
certain periods. At sunrise the cup is found filled with sweet, limpid
water, at which time the lid is down. In the course of the day the lid
opens, when nearly half the water is evaporated; but during the night
this loss is made up, and the next morning the cup is again quite
full, and the lid is shut.

About the middle of March the plants put forth their leaves, which are
from six to twelve inches long, hollow, and shaped something like a
trumpet, while the aperture of the apex is formed almost precisely in
the same manner as those of the plants previously described. A broad
wing extends along one side of the leaf, from the base to the opening
at the top; this wing is bound or edged with a purple cord, which
extends likewise around the cup. This cord secretes a sweet fluid, and
not only flying insects, but those also that crawl upon the ground,
are attracted by it to the plants. Ants, especially, are very fond of
this fluid, so that a line of aphides, extending from the base to the
summit of a leaf, may frequently be observed slowly advancing toward
the orifice of the cup, down which they disappear, never to return.
Flying insects of every kind are equally drawn to the plant; and
directly they taste the fluid, they act very curiously. After feeding
upon the secretions for two or three minutes they become quite stupid,
unsteady on their feet, and while trying to pass their legs over their
wings to clear them, they fall down.

It is of no use to liberate any of the smaller insects; every fly,
removed from the leaf upon which it had been feeding, returned
immediately it was at liberty to do so, and walked down the fatal cup
as though drawn to it by a species of irresistible fascination.

It is not alone that flies and other small insects are overpowered by
the fluid which exudes from the cord in question. Even large insects
succumb to it, although of course not so quickly. Mrs. Treat says: "A
large cockroach was feeding on the secretion of a fresh leaf, which
had caught but little or no prey. After feeding a short time the
insect went down the tube so tight that I could not dislodge it, even
when turning the leaf upside down and knocking it quite hard. It was
late in the evening when I observed it enter; the next morning I cut
the tube open; the cockroach was still alive, but it was covered with
a secretion produced from the inner surface of the tube, and its legs
fell off as I extricated it. From all appearance the terrible
_Sarracenia_ was eating its victim alive. And yet, perhaps, I should
not say 'terrible,' for the plant seems to supply its victims with a
Lethe-like draught before devouring them."

If only a few insects alight upon a leaf, no unpleasant smell is
perceptible during or after the process of digestion; but if a large
number of them be caught, which is commonly the case, a most offensive
odor emanates from the cup, although the putrid matter does not appear
to injure in any manner the inner surface of the tube, food, even in
this condition, being readily absorbed, and going to nourish the
plant. In fact, it would seem that the _Sarracenia_, like some
animals, can feed upon carrion and thrive upon it.

In instances in which experiments have been made with fresh, raw beef
or mutton, the meat has been covered in a few hours with the
secretions of the leaves, and the blood extracted from it. There is,
however, one difference between the digesting powers of the leaves
when exercised upon insects or upon meat. Even if the bodies of
insects have become putrid, the plant, as has already been stated, has
no difficulty in assimilating them; but as regards meat, it is only
when it is perfectly sweet that the secretions of the leaves will act
upon it.

The pitcher plant undoubtedly derives its principal nourishment from
the insects it eats. It, too--unlike most other carnivorous plants,
which, when the quantity of food with which they have to deal is in
excess of their powers of digestion, succumb to the effort and
die--appears to find it easy to devour any number of insects, small or
large, the operation being with it simply a question of time. Flies,
beetles, or even cockroaches, at the expiration of three or four days
at most, disappear, nothing being left of them save their wings and
other hard, parts of their bodies.

The _Sarracenia_ is, indeed, not only the most voracious of all known
species of carnivorous plants, but the least fastidious as to the
nature of the food upon which it feeds.--_W.C.M., Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




WHAT IS A PLANT?


Mr. Worsley-Benison has been discussing this question in a very
interesting way, and he says in conclusion that "_physiologically_ the
most distinctive feature of plant-life is the power to manufacture
protein from less complex bodies; that of animal-life, the absence of
such power." He finds that in form, in the presence of starch, of
chlorophyl, in power of locomotion, in the presence of circulatory
organs, of the body called nitrogen, in the functions of respiration
and sensation, there are no diagnostic characters. He finds, however,
"fairly constant and well-marked distinctions" in the presence of a
cellulose coat in the plant-cell, in digestion followed by absorption,
and in the power to manufacture protein.

The _morphological_ feature of plants is this cellulose coat; of
animals, its absence; the _physiological_ peculiarity of plants, this
_manufacturing power_; of animals, the want of it. But after all the
discussion he says: "To the question, _Is this an animal or a plant?_
we must often reply, _We do not know_."--_The Microscope._

       *       *       *       *       *




CAMELLIAS.


Next to the rose, no flower* is more beautiful or more useful than the
camellia. It may readily be so managed that its natural season of
blooming shall be from October to March, thus coming in at a time when
roses can hardly be had without forcing. In every quality, with the
single exception of scent, the camellia may be pronounced the equal of
the rose. It can be used in all combinations or for all purposes for
which roses can be employed. In form and color it is probably more
perfect, and fully as brilliant. It is equally or more durable, either
on the plant or as a cut flower. It is a little dearer to buy, and
perhaps slightly more difficult to cultivate; but like most plants the
camellia has crucial periods in its life, when it needs special
treatment. That given, it may be grown with the utmost ease; that
withheld, its culture becomes precarious, or a failure. The camellia
is so hardy that it will live in the open air in many parts of Great
Britain, and herein lies a danger to many cultivators. Because it is
quite or almost hardy, they keep it almost cool. This is all very well
if the cool treatment be not carried to extremes, and persisted in all
the year round. Camellias in a dormant state will live and thrive in
any temperature above the freezing point, and will take little or no
hurt if subjected to from 3 deg.-4 deg. below it, or a temperature of 27 deg.
Fahr.

   * Transcriber's Note: Original "flour".

They will also bloom freely in a temperature of 40 deg., though 45 deg. suits
them better. Hence, during the late summer and early autumn it is
hardly possible to keep camellias too cool either out of doors or in.
They are also particularly sensitive to heat just before the
flower-buds begin to swell in late autumn or winter; a sudden or
sensible rise of temperature at that stage sends the flower-buds off
in showers. This is what too often happens, in fact, to the camellias
of amateurs. No sooner do the buds begin to show then a natural
impatience seizes the possessor's of well-budded camellias to have the
flowers opened. More warmth, a closer atmosphere, is brought to bear
upon them, and down fall the buds in showers on stage or floor--the
chief cause of this slip between the buds and the open flowers being a
rise of temperature. A close or arid atmosphere often leads to the
same results. Camellias can hardly have too free a circulation of air
or too low a temperature. Another frequent cause of buds dropping
arises from either too little or too much water at the roots. Either a
paucity or excess of water at the roots should lead to identical
results. Most amateurs overwater their camellias during their
flowering stages. Seeing so many buds expanding, they naturally rush
to the conclusion that a good deal of water must be used to fill them
to bursting point. But the opening of camellia buds is less a
manufacture than a mere development, and the strain on the plant and
drain on the roots is far less during this stage than many suppose. Of
course the opposite extreme of over-dry roots must be provided
against, else this would also cause the plants to cast off their buds.

But our object now is less to point out how buds are to be developed
into fully expanded flowers than to show how they were to be formed in
plenty, and the plants preserved in robust health year after year. One
of the simplest and surest modes of reaching this desirable end is to
adopt a system of semi-tropical treatment for two months or so after
flowering. The moment or even before the late blooms fade, the plants
should be pruned if necessary. Few plants bear the knife better than
camellias, though it is folly to cut them unless they are too tall or
too large for their quarters or have grown out of form. As a rule
healthy camellias produce sufficient or even a redundancy of shoots
without cutting back; but should they need pruning, after flowering is
the best time to perform the operation.

During the breaking of the tender leaves and the growth of the young
shoots in their first stages, the plant should be shaded from direct
sunshine, unless, indeed, they are a long way from the glass, when the
diffusion and dispersion of the rays of light tone down or break their
scorching force; few young leaves and shoots are more tender and
easily burned than camellia, and scorching not only disfigures the
plants, but also hinders the formation of fine growths and the
development of flower-buds.

The atmosphere during the early season of growth may almost touch
saturation. It must not fail to be genial, and this geniality of the
air must be kept up by the surface-sprinkling of paths, floors,
stages, walls, and the plants themselves at least twice a day.

With the pots or border well drained it is hardly possible to
overwater the roots of camellias during their period of wood-making.
The temperature may range from 50 deg. to 65 deg. during most of the period.
As the flower-buds form, and become more conspicuous, the tropical
treatment may become less and less tropical, until the camellias are
subjected to the common treatment of greenhouse or conservatory plants
in summer. Even at this early stage it is wise to attend to the
thinning of the buds. Many varieties of camellias--notably that most
useful of all varieties, the double white--will often set and swell
five or ten times more buds than it ought to be allowed to carry.
Nothing is gained, but a good deal is lost, by allowing so many embryo
flower-buds to be formed or partially developed. It is in fact far
wiser to take off the majority of the excess at the earliest possible
point, so as to concentrate the strength of the plant into those that
remain.

As it is, however, often a point of great moment to have a succession
of camellia flowers for as long a period as possible on the same
plants, buds of all sizes should be selected to remain. Fortunately,
it is found in practice that the plants, unless overweighted with
blooms, do not cast off the smaller or later buds in their efforts to
open their earlier and larger ones. With the setting, thinning, and
partial swelling of the flower-buds the semi-tropical treatment of
camellias must close; continued longer, the result would be their
blooming out of season, or more probably their not blooming at all.

The best place for camellias from the time of setting their
flower-buds to their blooming season is a vexed question, which can
hardly be said to have been settled as yet. They may either be left in
a cool greenhouse, or placed in a shaded, sheltered position in the
open air. Some of the finest camellias ever seen have been placed in
the open air from June to October. These in some cases have been stood
behind south, and in others behind west walls. Those facing the east
in their summer quarters were, on the whole, the finest, many of them
being truly magnificent plants, not a few of them having been imported
direct from Florence at a time when camellias were far less grown in
England than now.

In all cases where camellias are placed in the open air in summer,
care will be taken to place the pots on worm proof bases, and to
shield the tops from direct sunshine from 10 to 4 o'clock. If these
two points are attended to, and also shelter from high winds, it
matters little where they stand. In all cases it is well to place
camellias under glass shelter early in October, less for fear of cold
than of saturating rains causing a sodden state of the soil in the
pots.

While adverting, however, to the safety and usefulness of placing
camellias in the open air in summer, it must not be inferred that this
is essential to the successful culture; it is, in fact, far otherwise,
as the majority of the finest camellias in the country are planted out
in conservatories with immovable roofs. Many such houses are, however,
treated to special semi-tropical treatment as has been described, and
are kept as cool and open as possible after the flower-buds are fairly
set, so that the cultural and climatic conditions approximate as
closely as possible to those here indicated.

Soil and seasons of potting may be described as vexed questions in
camellia culture. As to the first, some affect pure loam, others peat
only, yet more a half and half of both, with a liberal proportion of
gritty sand, or a little smashed charcoal or bruised bones as porous
or feeding agents, or both. Most growers prefer the mixture, and as
good camellias are grown in each of its constituents, it follows
without saying that they may also be well grown in various proportions
of both.

Under rather than over potting suits the plants best, and the best
time is doubtless just before they are about to start into fresh
growth, though many good cultivators elect to shift their plants in
the late summer or autumn, that is, soon after the growth is
finishing, and the flower-buds fairly and fully set for the next
season. From all which it is obvious that the camellia is not only
among the most useful and showy, but likewise among the most
accommodating of plants.

Under good cultivation it is also one of the cleanest, though when
scab gets on it, it is difficult to get rid of it. Mealy-bugs also
occasionally make a hurried visit to camellias when making their
growth, as well as aphides. But the leaves once formed and advanced to
semi-maturity are too hard and leathery for such insects, while they
will bear scale being rubbed off them with impunity. But really
well-grown camellias, as a rule, are wholly free from insect pests,
and their clean, dark, glossy leaves are only of secondary beauty to
their brilliant, exquisitely formed, and many sized flowers.--_D.T.,
The Gardeners' Chronicle._

       *       *       *       *       *




ARISAEMA FIMBRIATUM.

_Mast.; sp. nov._


[Illustration: ARISAEMA FIMBRIATUM: LEAF, SPATHE, AND FLORAL DETAILS.]

Some few years since we had occasion to figure some very remarkable
Himalayan species of this genus, in which the end of the spadix was
prolonged into a very long, thread-like appendage thrown over the
leaves of the plant or of its neighbors, and ultimately reaching the
ground, and thus, it is presumed, affording ants and other insects
means of access to the flowers, and consequent fertilization. These
species were grown by Mr. Elwes, and exhibited by him before the
Scientific Committee. The present species is of somewhat similar
character, but is, we believe, new alike to gardens and to science. We
met with it in the course of the autumn in the nursery of Messrs.
Sander, at St. Alban's; but learn that it has since passed into the
hands of Mr. W. Bull, of Chelsea. It was imported accidentally with
orchids, probably from the Philippine Islands. It belongs to Engler's
section, trisecta, having two stalked leaves, each deeply divided into
three ovate acute glabrous segments. The petioles are long, pale
purplish, rose-colored, sprinkled with small purplish spots. The
spathes are oblong acute or acuminate, convolute at the base,
brownish-purple, striped longitudinally with narrow whitish bands. The
spadix is cylindrical, slender, terminating in along, whip-like
extremity, much longer than the spathe. The flowers have the
arrangement and structure common to the genus, the females being
crowded at the base of the spadix, the males immediately above them,
and these passing gradually into fleshy incurved processes, which in
their turn pass gradually into long, slender, purplish threads,
covering the whole of the free end of the spadix.--_M.T.M., in The
Gardeness' Chronicle._

       *       *       *       *       *




STRIKING A LIGHT.


In the new edition of Mason's "Burma" we read that among other uses to
which the bamboo is applied, not the least useful is that of producing
