
This occurs in the effort of lines to shorten their paths, to lessen
their density, to pass to better media. Indeed, a close examination
will show that wherever power is expended in developing current in a
circuit, cutting lines of force, the energy expended is first employed
in stretching the lines, which thus receive the energy required to
permit them, in shortening, to cut the conductor and set up currents
in the electric circuit in accordance with the potential difference
developed in that circuit and its resistance.

I think we may also say, though I do not remember to have seen the
statement so put, that whenever electric potential is set up
inductively, as in self-induction, mutual induction, induction from
one circuit to another, and induction from magnets or magnetic field,
it is set up by the movement of lines of force laterally across the
body, mass or conductor in which the potential is developed, and that
whenever current is set up in a wire or an existing current prolonged,
or an existing current checked by induction, self-induction, or
induction from magnets, the action is a transfer of energy,
represented by strained lines of force shortening or lessening their
resistance, or lengthening and increasing the resistance in their
paths. The magnetic field is like an elastic spring--it can in one
condition represent stored energy--it can be strained and will store
energy--it can be made to relieve its strain and impart energy.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

Let us examine some known phenomena in this light. Take the case of a
simple wire, conveying current, say, in a line away from observer,
Fig. 1. There exists a free field of circular magnetism (so called),
shading off away from the wire, and which is represented by concentric
circles of increased diameter. The superior intensity or strength of
the lines near the wire may also be represented by their thickness.
This is often shown also by crowding the lines near the wire, though I
am disposed to regard Fig. 1 as more nearly expressing the condition,
unless we are to regard the lines as simply indicating a sort of
atmosphere of magnetic effect whose density becomes less as we proceed
outward from the wire, in which case either form of symbol suffices.
The direction of polarization of the lines may be indicated by an
arrow head pointing in a direction of right-handed rotation in the
path of the lines. This is the typical figure or expression for all
forms of simple magnetic circuit--the form of the lines, their length,
position, density, will depend on the shape of the conductor or
conductors (when more than one) and the materials surrounding or in
proximity to the wire or wires.

If the current traversing the conductor is constant, the magnetic
field around it is stable and static, unless other influences come in
to modify it. The cutting off of the current is followed by
instability of the field whereby it can and must produce dynamic
effects. I say _must_ because the field represents stored energy, and
in disappearing _must_ give out that energy. To throw light on this
part of the subject is one of the objects of the present paper.
Cutting off the current supply in the case assumed leaves the
developed magnetic lines or strains unsupported. They at once shorten
their paths or circuits, collapsing upon the conductor as it were, and
continuing this action, cut the section of the conductor, and
apparently disappear in magnetic closed circuits of infinitesimal
diameter but of great strength of polarization. It appears to me that
we must either be prepared to give up the idea of lines of force or
take the position that the magnetic circuits precipitate themselves in
shortening their circuits and disappearing upon and cut the conductor.
It was Hughes who put forward the idea that an iron bar in losing its
apparent magnetism really short-circuits the lines in itself as
innumerable strongly magnetized closed circuits among the molecules.
In becoming magnetic once more these short circuits are opened or
extended into the air by some source of energy applied to strain the
lines, such as a current in a conductor around the bar.

May not this idea be extended, then, to include the magnetic medium,
the ether itself? Does it contain intensely polarized closed circuits
of magnetism which are ready to be stretched or extended under certain
conditions by the application of energy, which energy is returned by
the collapse of the extended circuits? This is doubtless but a crude
expression of the real condition of things, for the lines are only
symbols for a condition of strain in a medium which cannot be
represented in thought, as we know nothing of its real nature. There
is one point in this connection which I must emphasize. The strained
lines, Fig. 1, are indications of stored energy in the ether, and the
lines _cannot_ disappear without giving out that energy. Ordinarily,
it makes its appearance as the extra current, and adds itself so as to
prolong the current which extended the lines when an attempt is made
to cut off such current. Were it conceivable that the current could be
cut off and the wire put on open circuit while the lines still
remained open or strained, the energy must still escape when the field
disappears. It would then produce such a high potential as to be able
to discharge from the ends of the conductor, and if the conductor were
of some section, part of the energy would be expended in setting up
local currents in it. The field could not disappear without an outlet
for the energy it represents. But we cannot cut off a current in a
wire so as to leave the wire on open circuit with the lines of the
magnetic circuit remaining around it without iron or steel or the like
in the magnetic circuit. We can approach that condition, however, by
breaking the circuit very quickly with a condenser of limited capacity
around the break. This is done in the Ruhmkorff coil primary; the
condenser forms a sort of blind alley for the extra current on its
beginning to flow out of the primary coil. But the condenser charges
and backs up and stops the discharge from the primary, even giving a
reverse current. The lines of magnetic force collapse, however, and
have their effect in the enormous potential set up in the secondary
coil.

Take away the secondary coil so as to stop that outlet, the energy
expends itself on the iron core and the primary coil. Take away the
iron core, and the energy of magnetization of the air or ether core
expends itself on the wire of the primary and, possibly, also on the
dielectric of the condenser to some extent. The extra current becomes
in this instance an oscillatory discharge of very high period back and
forth through the primary coil from the condenser, until the energy is
lost in the heat of C2 x R. This conversion is doubtless rendered
all the more rapid by uneven distribution of current and eddy current
set up in the wire of the coil.

The considerations just given concern the loss of field or the
shortening and apparent disappearance of the magnetic lines or
circuits, as giving rise to the self-induction or increased potential
on breaking. Where the energizing current is slowly cut off or
diminished the energy is gradually transferred to the wire in
producing elevation of potential during the decrease; and the collapse
and cutting of the wire by the collapsing circuits or lines is then
only more gradual.

Let the current be returned to the wire after disappearance of
magnetism, and the lines again seem to emanate from the wire and at
the same time cut it and produce a counter potential in it, which is
the index of the abstraction of energy from the circuit, and its
storing up in the form of elastically strained lines of magnetism
around the conductor. The effect is that of self-induction on making
or upon increase of current, the measure of the amount being the
energy stored in the magnetic circuits which have been extended or
opened up by the current. The greater the current and the shorter the
path for the lines developed around the axis of the conductor, the
greater the energy stored up. Hence, a circular section conductor has
the highest self-induction, a tube of same section less as its
diameter increases, a flat strip has less as its width increases and
thickness diminishes, a divided conductor much less than a single
conductor of same shape and section. Separating the strands of a
divided conductor increases the length of magnetic paths around it,
and so diminishes the self-induction. A striking instance of this
latter fact was developed in conveying very heavy alternating currents
of a very low potential a distance of about three feet by copper
conductors, the current being used in electric welding operations.

The conductors were built up of flat thin strips of copper for
flexibility. When the strips were allowed to lie closely together, the
short conductor showed an enormous self-induction, which cut down the
effective potential at its ends near the work. By spreading apart the
strips so as to lengthen a line around the conductor, the
self-induction could be easily made less than 35 per cent. of what it
had been before. The interweaving of the outgoing and return conductor
strands as one compound conductor gets rid almost entirely of the
self-inductive effects, because neither conductor has any free space
in which to develop strong magnetic forces, but is opposed in effect
everywhere by the opposite current in its neighbor.

Where a number of conductors are parallel, and have the same direction
of current, as in a coil or in a strand, it is evident that statically
the conductor may be considered as replaceable by a single conductor
with the same external dimensions and same total current in the area
occupied, the magnetic forces or lines surrounding them being of same
intensity. But with changing current strength the distribution of
current in the conductor has also a powerful effect on the energy
absorbed or given out in accordance with the magnetism produced. Hence
the self-induction of a strand, coil or conductor of the same section
varies with the rapidity of current changes, owing to the conduction
being uneven.

The uneven distribution of current, or its tendency to flow on the
outer parts of a conductor when the rate of variation or alternation
is made great, is in itself a consequence of the fact that less energy
is transferred into magnetism in this case than when the current flows
uniformly over the section, or is concentrated at the center. In other
words, when a uniform current traverses a conductor of the same
section, the circular magnetism, or surrounding magnetic lines, are to
be found not only outside the conductor, but also beneath its
exterior. Since in forming these lines on passage of current the
middle of section would be surrounded by more lines than any other
part of the conductor, the current tends to keep out of that part and
move nearer the exterior in greater amount. Hence, in rapidly
alternating currents the conductor section is practically lessened,
being restricted largely to the outer metal of the conductor. If the
round conductor, Fig. 2, were made of iron, the magnetism interior to
it and set up by a current in it would be very much greater, the
section of the conductor being filled with magnetic circuits or lines
around the center. The total magnetism, external and internal, would
be much greater in this case for a given current flow, and the energy
absorbed and given out in formation and loss of field or the
self-induction would be much increased. This could, however, be
greatly diminished by slitting the conductor radially or making it of
a number of separate wires out of lateral magnetic contact one with
the other, Fig. 3. In these cases the resistance of the interior
magnetic circuits would be increased, as there would be several breaks
in the continuity around the center of the conductor. The total
magnetism which could be set up by a current would be lessened, and
the self-induction, therefore, lessened.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

The moment we begin the bringing of iron into proximity with an
electric conductor conveying current, we provide a better medium for
the flow or development of magnetic lines or circuits. In other words,
the lines may then be longer, yet equally intense, or more lines may
be crowded into a section of this metal than in air or space. Figs.
4a, 4b, 4c show the effect brought about by bringing iron of
different forms near to the conductor.

[Illustration: Fig. 4a.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4b.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4c.]

It shows, in other words, the development of the ordinary
electro-magnet of the horseshoe form, and the concentration of the
lines in the better medium. The lines also tend to shorten and
diminish the resistance to their passage, so that attraction of the
iron to the conductor takes place, and if there is more than one piece
of iron, they tend to string themselves around the conductor in
magnetic contact with one another.

When copper bars of 1 inch diameter are traversed by currents of
40,000 to 60,000 amperes, as in welding them, the magnetic forces just
referred to become so enormous that very heavy masses of iron brought
up to the bar are firmly held, even though the current be of an
alternating character, changing direction many times a second.

[Illustration: Fig. 5]

[Illustration: Fig. 6]

When a conductor is surrounded by a cast iron ring, as in Fig. 5, the
current in such conductor has an excellent magnetic medium surrounding
it. A large amount of energy is then abstracted on the first impulse
of current, which goes to develop strong and dense magnetic lines
through the iron ring and across the gap in it. On taking off the
current the energy is returned as extra current, and its force is many
times what would be found with air alone surrounding the conductor. We
have then greatly increased the self-induction, the storing of energy
and opposition to current flow at the beginning, the giving back of
energy and assistance to the current flow on attempting to remove or
stop the current. Let us now complete the ring, by making it of iron,
endless, Fig. 6, with the conductor in the middle.

We now find that on passing current through the conductor it meets
with a very strong opposing effect or counter potential. The evolution
of magnetic lines, or the opening out of magnetic circuits, goes on at
a very rapid rate. Each line or magnetic circuit evolved, and cutting
the conductor, flies at once outward, and locates itself in the iron
ring. This ring can carry innumerable lines, and they do not crowd one
another. It permits the lines even to lengthen in reaching it, and
yet, on account of its low resistance to their passage, the
lengthening is equivalent to their having shortened in other media. We
will suppose the current not sufficient to exhaust this peculiar
capacity for lines which the iron has. Equilibrium is reached, the
conductor has opened up innumerable closed circuits, and caused them
to exist in the ring still closed; but in iron, not space or ether
merely. The current passing has continued its action and storage of
energy until to emit another line in view of the resistance now found
in the crowded iron ring is impossible.

Now let us cut off the current. We are surprised to find a very weak
extra current, a practical absence of self-induction on breaking, or,
at least, a giving out of energy in nowise comparable to that on
making. Let us put on the current as it was before. Another curious
result. But little self-induction now on making energy not absorbed.

Now cut off the current again. Same effect as before. Now let us put
on the current reversed in direction. At once we find a very strong
counter potential or opposing self-induction developed.

The ring had been polarized, or retained its magnetic energy, and we
are now taking out one set of lines and putting in reversely polarized
lines of force. This done, we break the reversed current without much
effect of self-induction. The ring remains polarized and inert until
an opposite flow of current be sent through. Iron is then a different
medium from the ether.

The ring once magnetized must, in losing its magnetism, permit a
closure of the lines by shortening. This involves their passage from
the iron across the space in the center of the ring, notwithstanding
its great resistance to the lines of force. As passage from iron to
air is equivalent to lengthening of the lines, it is readily seen that
such lengthening may oppose more effect than a slight shortening due
to leaving iron, for air or space may give in provoking a closure and
disappearance of the lines. Looked at from another standpoint, the
lines on the iron may actually require a small amount of initial
energy to dislodge them therefrom, so that after being dislodged they
may collapse and yield whatever energy they represent.

I must reserve for the future further consideration of the iron ring,
but in thinking upon this matter I am led to think that the production
of a magnetic line in an iron ring around a conductor may represent a
sort of wave of energy, an absorption of energy on the evolution of
the line from the conductor, and a slight giving out of energy on the
line reaching that position of proximity to the iron ring, that its
passage thereto may be said to be a shortening process or a lessening
of its resistance.

The magnetism in air, gases, and non-magnetic bodies, being assumed to
be that of the ether, this medium shows no such effects as those we
get with the ring. It does not become permanently polarized, as does
even soft iron under the condition of a closed ring. The iron
possesses coercive force, or magnetic rigidity, and a steel ring would
show more of it. The molecules of the iron or steel take a set. If we
were to cut the soft iron ring, or separate it in any way, this
introduction of resistance of air for ether in the magnetic circuit
would cause the lines to collapse and set up a current in the
conductor. The energy of the ring would have been restored to the
latter. The curious thing is that physically the polarized ring does
not present any different appearance or ordinary properties different
from those of a plain ring, and will not deflect a compass needle. Its
condition is discoverable, however, by the test of self-induction to
currents of different direction. As a practical consideration, we may
mention in this connection that a self-inductive coil for currents of
one direction must be constructed differently from one to be used with
alternating currents. The former must have in its magnetic circuit a
section of air or the like, or be an imperfectly closed circuit, as it
were. The latter should have as perfectly closed a magnetic circuit as
can be made. We see here also the futility of constructing a Ruhmkorff
core coil on the closed iron magnetic circuit plan, because the
currents in the primary are interrupted, not reversed.

The considerations just put forward in relation to the closed iron
ring, and its passive character under the condition of becoming
polarized, are more important than at first appears. It has been found
that the secondary current wave of a closed iron circuit induction
coil or transformer, whose primary circuit receives alternating
current, is lagged from its theoretical position of 90 degrees behind
the primary wave an additional 90 degrees, so that the phases of the
two currents are directly opposed; or the secondary current working
lamps only in its circuit is one half a wave length behind a primary,
instead of a quarter wave length, as might have been expected.

But when it is understood that the iron core polarized in one
direction by the primary impulse does not begin to lose its magnetism
when that impulse simply weakens, but waits until an actual reversal
of current has taken place, it will be seen that the secondary
current, which can only be produced when magnetic lines are leaving
the core and cutting the secondary coil, or when the lines are being
evolved and passing into the core from the primary coil, will have a
beginning at the moment the primary reverses, will continue during the
flow of that impulse, and will end at substantially the same time with
the primary impulse, provided the work of the secondary current is not
expended in overcoming self-induction, which would introduce a further
lag. Moreover, the direction of the secondary current will be opposite
to that of the primary, because the magnetic circuits which are opened
up by the primary current in magnetizing the core, or which are closed
or collapsed by it in demagnetizing the core, will always cut the
secondary coil in the direction proper for this result. Transformers
of the straight core type with very soft iron in the cores and not too
high rates of alternation should approximate more nearly the
theoretical relation of primary and secondary waves, because the
magnetic changes in the core are capable of taking place almost
simultaneously with the changes of strength of the primary current.
This fact also has other important practical and theoretical bearings.

Let us assume a plain iron core, Fig. 7, magnetized as indicated, so
that its poles, N, S, complete their magnetic circuits by what is
called free field or lines in space around it. Let a coil of wire be
wound thereon as indicated. Now assume that the magnetism is to be
lost or cease, either suddenly or slowly. An electric potential will
be set up in the coil, and if it has a circuit, work or energy will be
produced or given out in that circuit, and in any other inductively
related to it. Hence the magnetic field represents work or potential
energy. But to develop potential in the wire the lines must cut the
wire. This they can do by collapsing or closing on themselves. The bar
seems, therefore, to lose its magnetism by gaining it all, and in
doing so all the external lines of force moving inward cut the wire.
The magnetic circuits shorten and short-circuit themselves in the bar,
perhaps as innumerable molecular magnetic circuits interior to the
iron medium. To remagnetize the bar we may pass an electric current
through the coil. The small closed circuits are again distended, the
free field appears, and the lines moving outward cut across the wire
coil opposite to the former direction and produce a counter potential
in the wire, and consequent absorption of the energy represented in
the free field produced. As before studied, the magnetism cannot
disappear without giving out the energy it represents, even though the
wire coil be on open circuit, and therefore unable to discharge that
energy. The coil open-circuited is static, not dynamic. In such
assumed case the lines in closing cut the core and heat it. Let us,
however, laminate the core or subdivide it as far as possible, and we
appear to have cut off this escape for the energy. This is not really
so, however. We have simply increased the possible rate of speed of
closure, or movement of the lines, and so have increased for the
divided core the intensity of the actions of magnetic friction and
local currents in the core, the latter still receiving the energy of
the magnetic circuit. This reasoning is based on the possibility in
this case of cutting off the current in the magnetizing coil and
retaining the magnetic field. This is of itself probably impossible
with soft iron. That the core receives the energy when the coil cannot
is shown in the well known fact that in some dynamos with armatures of
bobbins on iron cores, the running of the armature coils on open
circuit gives rise to dangerous heating of the cores, and that under
normal work the heating is less. In the former case the core
accumulates the energy represented in the magnetic changes. In the
latter the external circuit of the machine and its wire coils take the
larger part of the energy which is expended in doing the work in the
circuit. In this case, also, the current in the coils causes a
retardation of the speed of change and extent of change of magnetism
in the iron cores, which keeps down the intensity of the magnetic
reaction. In fact, this retardation or lag and reduction of range of
magnetic change may in some machines be made so great by closing the
circuit of the armature coils themselves or short-circuiting them that
the total heat developed in the cores is much less than under normal
load.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

I wish now, in closing, to refer briefly to phenomena of moving lines
of force, and to the effects of speed of movement. In order to
generate a given potential in a length of conductor we have choice of
certain conditions. We can vary the strength of field and we can vary
the velocity. We can use a strong field and slow movement of
conductor, or we can use a weak field and rapid movement of the
conductor. But we find also that where the conductor has large section
it is liable to heat from eddy currents caused by one part of its
section being in a stronger field than another at the same time. One
part cuts the lines where they are dense and the other where they are
not dense, with the result of difference of potential and local
currents which waste energy in heat. We cannot make the conductor move
in a field of uniform density, because it must pass into and out of
the field. The conditions just stated are present in dynamos for heavy
current work, where the speed of cutting of lines is low and the
armature conductor large in section.

But we find that in a transformer secondary we can use very large
section of conductor, even (as in welding machines) 12 to 15 square
inches solid copper, without meeting appreciable difficulty from eddy
currents in it. The magnetic lines certainly cut the heavy conductor
and generate the heavy current and potential needed. What difference,
if any, exists? In the transformer the currents are generated by
magnetic field of very low density, in which the lines are moving
across the conductor with extreme rapidity. The velocity of emanation
of lines around the primary coil is probably near that of light, and
each line passes across the section secondary conductor in a
practically inappreciable time. There is no cause then for differences
of potential at different parts of the section heavy secondary. Then
to avoid eddy currents in large conductors and generate useful
currents in them, we may cause the conductor to be either moved into
and out of a low density field with very great speed, or better, we
must cause the lines of a very low or diffused field to traverse or
cut across the conductor with very high velocity.

It is a known fact that, in dynamos with large section armature
conductors, there are less eddy currents produced in the conductors
when they are provided with iron cores or wound upon iron cores than
when the conductors are made into flat bobbins moved in front of field
poles. Projections existing on the armature between which the
conductors are placed have a like effect, and enable us to employ
heavy bars or bundles of wire without much difficulty from local
currents. The reason is simple. In the armatures with coils without
iron in them, or without projections extending between the turns, the
conductor moves into and out of a very dense field at comparatively
low velocity, so that any differences of potential developed in the
parts of the section of conductor have full effect and abundant time
to act in setting up harmful local currents. In the cases in which
iron projects through the coil or conductor, the real action is that
the lines of the magnetic circuits move at high speeds across the
conductor, and the conductor is at all times in a field of very low
density. Figs. 8 and 9 will make this plain. In Fig. 8 we have shown a
smooth armature surface, having a heavy conductor laid thereon, and
which is at a just entering a dense field at the edge of the pole,
N, and at b leaving such field. It will be seen that when in such
position the conductor, if wide, is subjected to varying field
strength, and moves at a low speed for the generation of the working
potential as it passes through the field, thus giving rise to eddy
currents in the conductor.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

In Fig. 9 the conductors are set down between projections, in which
case both armature and field poles are laminated or subdivided. As
each projection leaves the edge of field pole, N, the lines which it
had concentrated on and through it snap backward at an enormous speed,
and cross the gap to the next succeeding projection on the armature,
