		c. No term or provision of this License shall be deemed waived
		and no breach consented to unless such waiver or consent shall be
		in writing and signed by the party to be charged with such waiver
		or consent.

		d. This License constitutes the entire agreement between the
		parties with respect to the Work licensed here. There are no
		understandings, agreements or representations with respect to the
		Work not specified here. Licensor shall not be bound by any
		additional provisions that may appear in any communication from
		You. This License may not be modified without the mutual written
		agreement of the Licensor and You.

###

Shadow of the Mothaship
=======================

It's the untethering of my parents' house that's on my plate today. The flying
of a kite on a windy Toronto Hallowe'en day and the suspension of worry for a
shiny moment.

And sail surface isn't even a problemette when it comes to my parents' home --
the thing is a three-storey bat whose narrow wings contain the trolleycar-shaped
bedrooms and storages. Mum and Dad built it themselves while I tottered in the
driveway, sucking a filthy shred of blanket, and as I contemplate it today with
hands on hips from the front yard, I am there on that day:

Dad is nailgunning strips of plywood into a frame, Mum stands where I am now,
hands on her hips (and I take my hands from my hips hastily, shove them deep in
pockets). She squints and shouts directions. Then they both grab rolls of scrim
and stapleguns and stretch it loosely across the frames, and fast-bond pipes and
prefab fixtures into place. Mum harnesses up the big tanks of foam and aims the
blower at the scrim, giving it five fat coats, then she drops the blower and she
and Dad grab spatulas and tease zillions of curlicues and baroque stuccoes from
the surface, painting it with catsup, chutney, good whiskey and bad wine, a
massive canvas covered by centimetres until they declare it ready and Mum
switches tanks, loads up with fix-bath and mists it with the salty spray. Ten
minutes later, and the house is hard and they get to work unloading the U-Haul
in the drive.

And now I'm twenty-two again, and I will untether that house and fly it in the
stiff breeze that ruffles my hair affectionately.

#

Firstly and most foremost, I need to wait for the man. I hate to wait. But today
it's waiting and harsh and dull, dull, dull.

So I wait for the man, Stude the Dude and the gentle clip-clop of Tilly's hooves
on the traction-nubbed foam of my Chestnut Ave.

My nose is pressed against the window in the bat's crotch, fingers dug into the
hump of fatty foam that runs around its perimeter, fog patches covering the rime
of ground-in filth that I've allowed to accumulate on my parents' spotless
windows.

Where the frick is Stude?

#

The man has cometh. Clop-clip, clip-clop, Stude the Dude, as long as a dangling
booger, and his clapped-out nag Tilly, and the big foam cart with its stacks of
crates and barrels and boxes, ready to do the deal.

"Maxes!" he says, and I *know* I'm getting taken today -- he looks genuinely
glad to see me.

"Stude, nice day, how's it?" I say, as cas and cool as I can, which isn't, very.

"Fine day! Straight up fine day to be alive and awaiting judgment!" He
power-chugs from the perpetual coffee thermos at his side.

"Fine day," I echo.

"Fine, fine day." Like he's not in any hurry to get down to the deal, and I know
it's a contest, and the first one to wheel gets taken.

I snort and go "Yuh-huh." It's almost cheating, since I should've had something
else nice to say, but Stude gives me a conversational Get-Out-Of-Jail-Free.

"Good night to tricky treat."

I concede defeat. "I need some stuff, Stude."

Give it to him, he doesn't gloat. Just hauls again from Mr Coffee and pooches
his lips and nods.

"Need, uh, spool of monofilament, three klicks, safety insulated. Four litres of
fix bath. Litre, litre and a half of solvent."

"Yeah, okay. Got a permit for the solvent?"

"If I had a permit, Stude, I'd go and buy it at the fricken store. Don't pull my
dick."

"Just askin'. Whyfor the solvent? Anything illegal?"

"Just a project, Stude. Nothing to worry."

"What kinda project?"

"Art project. Fun-fricken-tastic. You'll love it."

"'Cause you know, they tag the shit with buckyballs now, one molecule in a
million with a serial number and a checksum. You do something stupid, I get
chopped."

I hadn't known. Didn't matter, my parents' house was legally mine, while they
were up confabbing with their alien buds on the mothaship. "No worries."

"That'll be, uh, sixty-eight cents."

"Thirty."

"Sixty, firm."

"Fifty-four."

"Fifty-eight."

"Take it in trade?"

"Fricken Maxes! Tradesies? You're wastin' my time, lookin' for bootleg solvent,
looking for trade and no cash? Get fucked, Maxes."

He starts to haw-up Tilly and I go, "Wait-wait-wait, I got some good stuff.
Everything must go, moving sale, you know?"

He looks really pissed and I know it hard now, I'm gonna get *taken*. I hand him
up my bag, and he does a fast-paw through the junk. "What's this?" he asks.

"Old video game. Atari. Shoot up the space aliens. Really, really antisocial.
Needs a display, but I don't got it anymore." I'd sold it the month before on a
bored day, and used the eight cents to buy good seats behind home plate at the
Skydome and thus killed an entire afternoon before Judgment Day.

There are some of the artyfarty "freestyle" kitchen utensils Mum used to sell
for real cash until Dad founded his Process for Lasting Happiness and she found
herself able to pursue "real art." There are paper books and pictures and
assorted other crap.

Stude clucks and shakes his head. "If I just gave you the monofil and the
fix-bath for this shit, it'd be a favour. Look, I can *get* real money for
solvent. I *pay* real money for solvent. This just don't cut it."

"I'll get more, just hang a sec."

He haws-up Tilly but reigns her in slow, and I dash back to my place and fill a
duffel with anything I lay hands to, and run out, dragging it behind me,
catching the cart before it turns the corner. "Here, here, take this too."

Stude dumps it out in front of him and kicks at the pile. "This is just crap,
Maxes. There's lots of it, sure, but it's still crap."

"I need it, Stude, I really need some solvent. You already *got* all my good
stuff."

He shakes his head, sad, and says, "Go ask Tilly."

"Ask?"

"Tilly. Ask her."

Stude likes to humiliate you a little before he does you a favour. The word is
*capricious*, he told me once.

So I go to his smelly old horse and whisper in her hairy ear and hold my breath
as I put my ear next to the rotten jumbo-chiclets she uses for teeth. "She says
you should do it," I say. "And she says you're an asshole for making me ask her.
She says horses can't talk."

"Yeah, okay," and he tosses me the goods.

#

With stage one blessedly behind me, I'm ready for stage two. I take the nozzle
of the solvent aerosol and run a drizzle along the fatty roll of the windowsills
and then pop them out as the fix bath runs away and the windows fly free and
