stresses of considerable magnitude in the metal of the projectiles, and
it is highly probable that the manufacture of many articles would have
approached nearer to perfection had more attention been bestowed upon
the study of the internal stresses which they were liable to. Having
thus explained the nature and importance of the subject, I will proceed
to describe the experiments which I have made with a view to its
illustration.--_London Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *




ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Delivered before the Society of Arts, London,
   November 28, 1887. From the _Journal_ of the Society.]

BY H.H. STATHAM.


LECTURE I.

Judging from the nature of the correspondence on architecture and the
duty of architects which is frequently seen in the columns of the daily
papers, the _Times_ especially, it would seem that the popular notion of
architecture now is that it is a study mainly of things connected with
sanitary engineering--of the best forms of drain pipes and intercepting
traps. This is indeed a very important part of sound building, and it is
one that has been very much neglected, and has been, in fact, in a
comparatively primitive state until very recent times; and therefore it
is not surprising that there should be a reaction in regard to it, and
that newspapers which follow every movement of public opinion, and try
to keep pace with it, should speak as if the drain pipe were the true
foundation of architecture. I have a great respect for the drain pipe,
and wish to see it as well laid and "intercepted" as possible; but I
think, for all that, that there is something in architecture higher than
sanitary engineering. I wish to consider it in these lectures as what I
think it essentially is, what it has evidently been in the eyes of all
those of past days who have produced what we now regard as great
architectural monuments, namely, as an intellectual art, the object of
which is to so treat the buildings which we are obliged to raise for
shelter and convenience as to render them objects of interest and
beauty, and not mere utilitarian floors, walls, and roofs to shelter a
race who care nothing for beauty, and who only want to have their
physical comfort provided for.

Architecture, then, from the point of view from which I am asking you to
regard it--and the only point of view in which it is worth the serious
regard of thoughtful people--is the art of erecting expressive and
beautiful buildings. I say expressive _and_ beautiful, and I put
expressive first, because it is the characteristic which we can at least
realize even when we cannot realize what can fairly be called beauty,
and it is the characteristic which comes first in the order of things. A
building may be expressive and thereby have interest, without rising
into beauty; but it can never be, architecturally speaking, beautiful
unless it has expression. And what do we mean by expression in a
building? That brings us to the very pith of the matter.

We know pretty well what we mean when we say that a painted or
sculptured figure is expressive. We mean that, while correctly
representing the structure of the human figure, it also conveys to our
minds a distinct idea of a special emotion or sentiment, such as human
beings are capable of feeling and expressing by looks and actions.
Expression in this sense a building cannot be said to have. It is
incapable of emotion, and it has no mobility of surface or feature. Yet
I think we shall see that it is capable of expression in more senses
than one. It may, in the first place, express or reflect the emotion of
those who designed it, or it may express the facts of its own internal
structure and arrangement. The former, however, can only, I think, be
said to be realized in the case of architecture of the highest class,
and when taken collectively as a typical style. For instance, we can all
pretty well agree that the mediaeval cathedral expresses an emotion of
aspiration on the part of its builders. The age that built the
cathedrals longed to soar in some way, and this was the way then open to
it, and it sent up its soul in spreading vaults, and in pinnacles and
spires. So also we can never look at Greek architecture without seeing
in it the reflection of a nature refined, precise, and critical; loving
grace and finish, but content to live with the graces and the muses
without any aspirations that spurned this earth. We can hardly go
further than this in attributing emotional expression to architecture.
But in a more restricted sense of the word _expression_, a building may
express very definitely its main constructive facts, its plan and
arrangement, to a certain extent even its purpose, so far at least that
we may be able to identify the class of structure to which it belongs.
It not only may, but it ought to do this, unless the architecture is to
be a mere ornamental screen for concealing the prosaic facts of the
structure. There is a good deal of architecture in the world which is in
fact of this kind--an ornamental screen unconnected with the
constructional arrangement of the building. Nor is such architecture to
be entirely scouted. It may be a very charming piece of scenery in
itself, and you may even make a very good theoretical defense for it,
from a certain point of view. But on the whole, architecture on that
principle becomes uninteresting. You very soon tire of it. It is a mask
rather than a countenance, and tends to the production of a dull
uniformity of conventional design.

For we must remember that architecture, although a form of artistic
expression, is not, like painting and sculpture, unfettered by practical
considerations. It is an art inextricably bound up with structural
conditions and practical requirements. A building is erected first for
convenience and shelter; secondly only for appearance, except in the
case of such works as monuments, triumphal arches, etc., which represent
architectural effect pure and simple, uncontrolled by practical
requirements. With such exceptions, therefore, a building ought to
express in its external design its internal planning and arrangement; in
other words, the architectural design should arise out of the plan and
disposition of the interior, or be carried on concurrently with it, not
designed as a separate problem. Then a design is dependent on structural
conditions also, and if these are not observed, the building does not
stand, and hence it is obvious that the architectural design must
express these structural conditions. It must not appear to stand or be
constructed in a way in which it could not stand (like the modern shops
which are supposed to stand on sheets of plate glass), and its whole
exterior appearance ought to be in accordance with, and convey the idea
of, the manner and principle on which it is constructed. The most
important portions of the interior must be shown as such externally by
the greater elaboration and emphasis of their architectural treatment.
If the general arrangement of the plan is symmetrical, on either side of
a center (which, however, it cannot often be except in the largest type
of monumental or public buildings), the architectural treatment must be
symmetrical. If the building is necessarily arranged, in accordance with
the requirements of the plan, unsymmetrically, the architectural
treatment must follow suit, and the same principle must be carried out
through all the details.

Now this dependence of architectural design upon plan and construction
is one of the conditions which is often overlooked by amateurs in
forming a judgment upon architectural design; and the overlooking of
this is one reason of the uncertainty of opinion about architecture as
compared with such arts as sculpture and painting. Few people know or
care much about the structure and planning of buildings except those
whose business it is to care about this; and consequently they do not
realize what it is which they should look for in the architectural
design. They like it or do not like it, and they regard this as what is
called a mere question of taste, which, according to the proverb, is not
to be disputed about. In fact, however, the good or bad taste of an
architectural design, say, if you like, its correctness or
incorrectness, is to a considerable extent a matter of logical
reasoning, of which you must accurately know the premises before you can
form a just conclusion. But there is another reason for this prevalent
uncertainty and vagueness of opinion, arising out of the very nature of
architectural art itself, as compared with the imitative arts. A
painting of a figure on a landscape is primarily a direct imitation of
the physical facts of nature. I do not for a moment say it is only that,
for there is far more involved in painting than the imitation of nature;
but the immediate reference to nature does give a standard of comparison
which to a certain extent every eye can appreciate. But architecture is
not an art which imitates natural forms at all, except as minor
decorations, and it then does so, or should do so, only in a
conventionalized manner, for reasons which we shall consider later on.
Architecture is, like music, a metaphysical art. It deals with the
abstract qualities of proportion, balance of form, and direction of
line, but without any imitation of the concrete facts of nature. The
comparison between architecture and music is an exercise of the fancy
which may indeed be pushed too far, but there is really a definite
similarity between them which it is useful to notice. For instance, the
regular rhythm, or succession of accentuated points in equal times,
which plays so important a part in musical form, is discernible in
architecture as a rhythm in space. We may treat a cottage type of
design, no doubt, with a playful irregularity, especially if this
follows and is suggested by an irregularity, of plan. But in
architecture on a grand scale, whether it be in a Greek colonnade or a
Gothic arcade, we cannot tolerate irregularity of spacing except where
some constructive necessity affords an obvious and higher reason for it.
Then, again, we find the unwritten law running throughout all
architecture that a progress of line in one direction requires to be
stopped in a marked and distinct manner when it has run its course, and
we find a similarly felt necessity in regard to musical form. The
repetition so common at the close of a piece of music of the same chord
several times in succession is exactly analogous to the repetition of
cross lines at the necking of a Doric column to stop the vertical lines
of the fluting, or to the strongly marked horizontal lines of a cornice
which form the termination of the height or upward progress of an
architectural design. The analogy is here very close. A less close
analogy may also be felt between an architectural and a musical
composition regarded as a whole. A fugue of Bach's is really a built-up
structure of tones (as Browning has so finely put it in his poem, "Abt
Vogler"), in accordance with certain ideas of relation and proportion,
just as a temple or a cathedral is a built-up structure of lines and
spaces in accordance with ideas of relation and proportion. Both appeal
to the same sense of proportion and construction in the brain; the one
through the ear, the other through the eye. Then, in regard to
architecture again, we have further limiting conditions arising not only
out of the principle of construction employed, but out of the physical
properties of the very material we employ. A treatment that is suitable
and expressive for a stone construction is quite unsuitable for a timber
construction. Details which are effective and permanent in marble are
ineffective and perishable in stone, and so; on and the outcome of all
this is that all architectural design has to be judged, not by any easy
and ready reference to exterior physical nature, with which it has
nothing to do, but by a process of logical reasoning as to the relation
of the design to the practical conditions, first, which are its basis,
and as to the relation of the parts to each other. Of course beyond all
this there is in architecture, as in music, something which defies
analysis, which appeals to our sense of delight we know not how or why,
and probably we do not want to know; the charm might be dissolved if we
did. But up to this point architectural design and expression are based
on reasoning from certain premises. The design is good or bad as it
recognizes or ignores the logic of the case, and the criticism of it
must rest on a similar basis. It is a matter of thought in both cases,
and without thought it can neither be designed nor appreciated to any
purpose, and this is the leading idea which I wish to urge and to
illustrate in these lectures.

You may say: May not a design satisfy all these logical conditions, and
yet be cold and uninteresting, and give one no pleasure? Certainly it
may. Indeed, we referred just now to that last element of beauty which
is beyond analysis. But, if we cannot analyze the result, I rather think
we can express what it is which the designer must evince, beyond clear
reasoning, to give the highest interest to his architecture. He must
have taken an interest in it himself. That seems a little thing to say,
but much lies in it. As Matthew Arnold has said of poetry:

    "What poets feel not, when they make
      A pleasure in creating,
    The world, in its turn, will not take
      Pleasure in contemplating."

The truth runs through all art. There are, alas, so many people who do
not seem to have the faculty of taking pleasure, and there is so much
architecture about our streets which it is impossible to suppose any one
took "pleasure in creating." When a feature is put into a design, not
because the designer liked it, but because it is the usual thing and it
saves trouble, it always proclaims that melancholy truth. But where
something is designed because the designer liked doing it, and was
trying to please his own fancy instead of copying what a hundred other
men have done before, it will go hard but he will give some pleasure to
the spectator. It is from this blessed faculty that a design becomes
inspired with what is best described as "character." It is not the same
thing as style. I have something to say in my next lecture as to what I
think _style_ means, but it is certain that a building may have _style_
and yet want _character_, and it may have a good deal of _character_ and
yet be faulty or contradictory in _style_. We cannot define "character,"
but when we feel that it is present we may rely upon it that it is
because the designer took interest and pleasure in his work, was not
doing it merely scholastically--in short, he put something of his own
character into it, which means that he had some to put.

[Illustration: Figs. 1 through 3]

Now, coming back to the axiom before mentioned, that architectural
design should express and emphasize the practical requirements and
physical conditions of the building, let us look a little more in detail
into the manner in which this may be done. We will take, to begin with,
the very simplest structure we can possibly build--a plain wall (Fig.
1).[2] Here there is no expression at all; only stones piled one on
another, with sufficient care in coursing and jointing to give stability
to the structure. It is better for the wall, constructively, however,
that it should have a wider base, to give it more solidity of
foundation, and that the coping should project beyond the face of the
wall, in order to throw the rain off, and these two requirements may be
treated so as to give architectural expression to our work (Fig. 2). It
now consists of three distinct portions--a plinth, or base, a
superficies of wall, and a coping. We will mark the thickening at the
base by a moulding, which will give a few horizontal lines (at B), and
the coping in the same way. The moulding of the coping must also be so
designed as to have a hollow throating, which will act as a drip, to
keep the rain from running round the under side of the coping and down
the wall. We may then break up the superficies by inserting a band of
single ornament in one course of this portion of the wall--not half way,
for to divide any portion of a building into mere "halves" has usually a
weak and monotonous effect, but about two thirds of the distance from
the base line; and this band of ornament not only breaks up the plain
surface a little, but also, by carrying another horizontal line along
the wall, emphasizes its horizontality. Always emphasize that which is
the essential characteristic of your structure. A wall of this kind is
essentially a long horizontal boundary. Emphasize its length and
horizontality.

   [Footnote 2: The dark shaded portion in this and the next two
   diagrams show the "section" of the wall as seen if we cut it
   through and look at it endwise.]

If we are millionaires, and can afford to spend a great deal on a wall,
we may not only (Fig. 3) carry further the treatment of the coping and
base, by giving them ornamental adjuncts as well as mouldings, but we
might treat the whole wall superficies as a space for surface carving,
not mechanically repeated, but with continual variation of every
portion, so as to render our wall a matter of interest and beauty while
retaining all its usefulness as a boundary, observing that such surface
ornament should be designed so as to fulfill a double object: 1, to give
general relief to the surface of the wall; 2, to afford matter of
interest to the eye on close inspection and in detail.

That is the double function of nearly all architectural ornament. It is,
in the first place, to aid the general expression and balance of the
building, and give point and emphasis where needed; and, in the second
place, to furnish something to the eye for study on its own account when
viewed more closely.

[Illustration: Figs. 4 through 9]

We will take another typical and simple erection, a stone pillar to
support the ends of two lintels or beams. This may be simply a long
squared piece set on end (Fig. 4), and will perform its constructive
functions perfectly well in that form; but it is not only absolutely
expressionless, but is in one sense clumsy and inconvenient, as taking
up more space than need be, presenting an unwieldy-looking mass when
viewed at an angle, and shutting out a good deal of light (if that
happen to be a matter of practical consequence in the case). Cutting off
the angles (Fig. 5) does not weaken it much, and renders it much less
unwieldy-looking, besides giving it a certain degree of verticality of
expression, and rendering it more convenient as taking up less room and
obstructing less light. But though the column is quite strong enough,
the octagonal top does not make so good a seat or bearing for the ends
of the lintels. We will therefore put a flat square stone on the top of
it (Fig. 6), which will serve as a bed for the lintels to rest on
securely. But the angles of this bed plate, where they project beyond
the face of the column, appear rather weak, and are so actually to some
extent--a double defect, for it is not enough in architecture that a
thing should be strong enough, it is necessary that it should appear so,
architecture having to do with expression as well as with fact. We will,
therefore, strengthen this projecting angle, and correct the abruptness
of transition between the column and the bed plate, by brackets (Fig. 7)
projecting from the alternate faces of the column to the angles of the
bed plates. As this rather emphasizes four planes of the octagon column
at the expense of the other four, we will bind the whole together just
under the brackets by a thin band of ornament constituting a necking,
and thus we have something like a capital developed, a definitely
designed finish to our column, expressive of its purpose. This treatment
of the upper end, however, would make the lower end rising abruptly from
the ground seem very bare. We will accordingly emphasize the base of the
column, just as we emphasized the base of the wall, by a projecting
moulding, not only giving expression to this connection of the column
with the ground, but also giving it the appearance, and to some extent
the reality, of greater stability, by giving it a wider and more
spreading base to rest on. We have here still left the lines of one
column vertically parallel, and there is no constructive reason why they
should not remain so. There is, however, a general impression to the eye
both of greater stability and more grace arising from a slight
diminution upward. It is difficult to account for this on any
metaphysical principle, but the fact has been felt by most nations which
have used a columnar architecture, and we will accept it and diminute
(so to speak) our column (Fig. 8). We have here taken a further step by
treating the shaft of the column in two heights, keeping the lower
portion octagonal and reducing the upper portion to a circle, and we now
find it easier to treat the capital so as to have a direct and complete
connection with the column, the capital being here merely a spreading
out of the column into a bracket form all round, running it into the
square of the bed plate.[3] The spreading portion is emphasized by
surface ornament, and the necking is again emphasized, this time more
decisively, by a moulding, forming a series of parallel rings round the
column. If we wish to give our column an expression of more grace and
elegance, we can further reduce the thickness of it (Fig. 9), and give
more spread to the capital, always taking care to be sure that the
strength of the column is not reduced below what the weight which it has
to carry requires. In this case a bracket is shown above the capital,
projecting longitudinally only (in the direction of the lintel bearing),
a method of giving a larger bearing surface for the ends of the lintels,
shortening their actual bearing[4] (in other words, widening the space
which can be bridged between column and column) and giving a workmanlike
appearance of stability to the construction at this point. The idea of
the division of the column into two sections, suggested in Fig. 8, is
kept up in Fig. 9 by treating the lower portion up to the same height
with incised decorative carving. The dotted lines on each side in Fig. 9
give the outline of the original square column as shown in Fig. 4. The
finished column was within that block; it is the business of the
architectural designer to get it out.[5]

   [Footnote 3: This is the feature called "abacus" (i.e., "tile")
   in Greek architecture, but I am here considering it apart from
   any special style or nomenclature.]

   [Footnote 4: "Bearing," in building language, is used in a double
   sense, for the distance between the points of support, and the
   extent to which the beam rests on the walls. Thus a beam which
   extends 20 feet between the points of support is a beam of 20
   feet bearing. If the beam is 22 feet long, so that 1 foot rests
   on the walls at each end, it has "1 foot bearing on the wall."]

   [Footnote 5: None of the forms of column sketched here have any
   existence in reality. They are purposely kept apart from
   imitation of accepted forms to get rid of the idea that
   architecture consists in the acceptance of any particular form
   sanctioned by precedent.]

Let us see if we can apply the same kind of process of evolving
expression in regard to a building. We will take again the very simplest
form of building (Fig. 10), a square house with a door in the center and
uniform rows of windows. There cannot be said to be any architectural
expression in this. There is no base or plinth at all, no treatment of
the wall. The slight projection at the eaves is only what is necessary
to keep the rain from running down the walls, and facilitate the
emptying of the gutters, and the even spacing of the windows is
essential for constructive reasons, to keep the masses of wall over each
other, and keep the whole in a state of equally balanced pressure. The
first thing we should do in endeavoring to give some expression to the
building would be to give it a base or plinth (Fig. 11), and to mark
that and the cornice a little more decidedly by mouldings and a line of
paneling at the plinth.

[Illustration: Figs. 10 and 11]

The house being obviously in three stories, we should give it some echo
externally of this division into horizontal stages by horizontal
mouldings, or what are called in architectural phraseology "string
courses," not necessarily exactly at the floor levels, but so as to
convey the idea of horizontal division; observing here, as in the case
of the wall and column, that we should take care not to divide the
height into equal parts, which is very expressionless. In this case we
will keep the lower string close down on the ground floor windows, and
keep these rather low, thus showing that the ground floor apartments are
not the most important; while the fact that the first floor ones are so
is conversely made apparent by keeping these windows rather higher,
putting a double string course over them, and a slight extra depth of
moulding, forming a kind of cornice over each.

The space left between these and the roof, in which the attic windows
are placed, is treated with a series of mullions and panelings, into
which the attic windows are worked, as part of the series of openings;
this gives a little richness of effect to the top story, and a
continuity of treatment, which binds the whole series of windows
together. To have treated the whole of the walls and windows in this way
would have been merely throwing away labor; what little effect it has
consists in the "character" given by the contrast of this top story
treatment with the plain wall surfaces below.

The last thing is to emphasize the door, as the principal opening in the
walls, and quite distinct in use and meaning from the other openings, by
giving it a little architectural frame or setting, which may be done in
many ways, but in this case is done by the old fashioned device (not
very logical certainly) of putting a little entablature over it, and a
column on either side; there is, however, this to be said for it, that
the projecting tablature forms a semi-porch, protecting those at the
door somewhat from rain; it must be carried in some way, and columns are
the readiest and most seemly manner of doing it, and they also form,
practically, something of a weather screen; the bases on which they
stand also form a framework or inclosing wall for the steps, which are
thus made part of the architectural design, instead of standing out as
an eyesore, as on Fig. 10. We have now given the house a little general
expression, but it still is vague in its design as far as regards the
distribution of the interior; we do not know whether the first floor,
for instance, is one large room, or two or more rooms, or how they are
divided; and the little house is very square and prim in effect.

Let us try grouping the windows a little, and at the same time breaking
up the flat surface of the front wall (Fig. 12). Here, as before, we
have divided the building by a horizontal string, but only by one main
one on the first floor level, keeping the same contrast, however,
between a richer portion above and a plainer portion below; we have
divided the building vertically, also, by two projecting bays finishing
in gables, thus breaking also the skyline of the roof, and giving it a
little picturesqueness, and we have grouped the windows, instead of
