that, in ten years' time, there would not be a welded tire made; that
is one of the few prophecies that, being made before the event, have
been fulfilled. I may perhaps be permitted to mention, that at the
same time I laid before the section plans and suggestions for the
making of the cylindrical parts of boilers equally without seam, or
even welding. This is rarely done at the present time, but I am sure
that, in twenty years' time, such a thing as a longitudinal seam of
rivets in a boiler will be unknown. There is no reason why the
successive rings of boiler shells should not be made weldless, as
tires are now made weldless.


MOTORS.

The next subject I intend to deal with is that of motors. In 1831, we
had the steam-engine, the water-wheel, the windmill, horse-power,
manual power, and Stirling's hot air engines. Gas engines, indeed,
were proposed in 1824, but were not brought to the really practical
stage. We had then tide mills; indeed, we have had them until quite
lately, and it may be that some still exist; they were sources of
economy in our fuel, and their abandonment is to me a matter of
regret. I remember tide mills on the coast between Brighton and
Newhaven, another between Greenwich and Woolwich, another at
Northfleet, and in many other places. Indeed, such mills were used
pretty extensively; they were generally erected at the mouth of a
stream, and in that way the river bed made the reservoir, and even
when they were erected in other situations, those were of a kind
suitable for the purpose, that is, lowlying lands were selected, and
were embanked to form reservoirs. In 1881, windmills and water-wheels
are much the same, but the turbines are greatly improved, and by means
of turbines we are enabled to make available the pressure derived from
heads of water which formerly could not be used at all, or if used,
involved the erection of enormous water-wheels, such as those at
Glasgow and in the Isle of Man, wheels of some eighty feet in
diameter. But now, by means of a small turbine, an excellent effect is
produced from high heads of water. The same effect is obtained from
the water-engines which our president has employed with such great
success. In addition to these motors, we have the gas-engine, which,
within the last few years only, has become a really useful working and
economical machine. With respect to horse-power motors, we have not
only the old horse engines, but we have a new application, as it seems
to me, of the work of the horse as a motor. I allude to those cases
where the horse drawing a reaping or thrashing machine, not only pulls
it forward as he might pull a cart, but causes its machinery to
revolve, so as to perform the desired kind of work. This species of
horse-engine, though known, was but little used in 1831. With respect
to hot-air engines there have been many attempts to improve them, and
some hot-air engines are working, and are working with considerable
success; but the amount of power they develop in relation to their
size is small, and I am inclined to doubt whether it can be much
increased.


TRANSMISSION OF POWER.

I now come to the subject of the transmission of power. I do not mean
transmission in the ordinary sense by means of shafting, gearing, or
belting, but I mean transmission over long distances. In 1831, we had
for this purpose flat rods, as they were called, rods transmitting
power from pumping engines for a considerable distance to the pits
where the pumps were placed, and we had also the pneumatic, the
exhaustion system--the invention of John Hague, a Yorkshire-man, my
old master, to whom I was apprenticed--which mode of transmission was
then used to a very considerable extent. The recollection of it, I
find, however, has nearly died out, and I am glad to have this
opportunity of reviving it. But in 1881, we have, for the transmission
of power, first of all, quick moving ropes, and there is not, so far
as I know a better instance of this system than that at Schaffhausen.
Any one who has ever, in recent years, gone a mile or two above the
falls at Schaffhausen, must have seen there--in a house, on the bank
of the Rhine, opposite to that on which the town is situated--large
turbines driven by the river, which is slightly dammed up for the
purpose. These work quick-going ropes, carried on pulleys, erected at
intervals along the river bank, for the whole length of the town; and
power is delivered from them to shafting below the streets, and from
it into any house where it is required for manufacturing purposes.
Then we have the compressed air transmission of power, which is very
largely used for underground engines, and for the working of rock
drills in mines and tunnels.


COMPRESSED AIR LOCOMOTIVES.

We have also compressed air in a portable form, and it is now employed
with great success in driving tram-cars. I had occasion last January
to visit Nantes, where, for eighteen months, tram-cars had been driven
by compressed air, carried on the cars themselves, coupled with an
extremely ingenious arrangement for overcoming the difficulties
commonly attendant on the use of compressed air engines. This consists
in the provision of a cylindrical vessel half filled with hot water
and half with steam, at a pressure of eighty pounds on the square
inch. The compressed air, on its way from the reservoir to the engine,
passes through the water and steam, becoming thereby heated and
moistened, and in that way all the danger of forming ice in the
cylinders was prevented, and the parts were susceptible of good
lubrication. These cars, which start every ten minutes from each end,
make a journey of 33/4 miles, and have proved to be a commercial and an
engineering success. I believe, moreover, that they are capable of
very considerable improvement.


HYDRAULIC TRANSMISSION OF POWER.

Then there is, although not much used, the transmitting of power by
means of long steam pipes. There is also the transmission
hydraulically. This may be carried out in an intermittent manner, so
as to replace the reciprocating flat rods of old days; that is to say,
if two pipes containing water are laid down, and if the pressure in
those pipes at the one end be alternated, there will be produced an
alternating and a reciprocative effect at the other, to give motion to
pumps or other machinery. There is also that thoroughly well known
mode of transmission, hydraulically, for which the engineering world
owes so much to our president. We have, by Sir William Armstrong's
system, coupled with his accumulator, the means of transmitting
hydraulically the power of a central motor to any place requiring it,
and by the means of the principal accumulator, or if need be by that
aided by local accumulators, a comparatively small engine is enabled
to meet very heavy demands made upon it for a short time. I think I am
right in saying that, at the ordinary pressure which Sir William
Armstrong uses in practice, viz., 700 lb. to the square inch, one foot
a second of motion along an inch pipe would deliver at the rate to
produce one-horse power. Therefore, a ten-inch pipe, with the water
traveling at no greater pace than three feet in a second, would
deliver 300 horse-power. This 300 horse-power would no doubt be
somewhat reduced by the loss in the hydraulic engine, which would
utilize the water. But the total energy received would be equivalent
to producing 300 horse-power. Such a transmission would be effected
with an exceedingly small loss infliction in transit. I believe I am
right in saying that a 10 inch pipe a mile long would not involve much
more than about 14 or 15 lb. differential pressure to propel the
water through it at the rate of three feet in a second. If that be so,
then, with 700 lb. to the inch, the loss under such circumstances
would be only two per cent. in transmission. There is no doubt that
this transmission of power hydraulically has been of the greatest
possible use. It has enabled work to be done which could not be done
before. Enormous weights are raised with facility wherever required,
as by the aid of power hydraulically transmitted, it is perfectly easy
for one man to manage the heaviest cranes. Moreover, as I have said in
other places, the system which we owe to Sir William Armstrong has
gone far to elevate the human race, and it has done so in this manner.
So long as it is competent for a man to earn a living by mere
unintelligent exercise of his muscles, he is very likely to do it. You
may see in the old London docks the crane-heads covered by structures
that look like paddle-boxes. If you go to them, there is, I am glad to
say, nothing now to fill them up; but when the British Association
first met, these paddle-boxes covered large tread-wheels, in which men
trod, so as to raise a weight. Now, although I know that in fact there
is nothing more objectionable in a man turning a wheel by treading
inside of it than there is if he turn it round by a winch-handle, yet
somehow it strikes one more as being merely the work of an animal, a
turnspit, or a squirrel, or, indeed, as the task imposed on the
criminal. But, nevertheless, in this way there were a large number of
persons getting their living by the mere exercise of their muscles,
but, as might be expected, a very poor living, derived as it was from
unintelligent labor. That work is no longer possible, and is not so,
for the powerful reason that it does not pay. Those persons,
therefore, who would now have been thus occupied, are compelled to
elevate themselves, and to become competent to earn their living in a
manner which is more worthy of an intelligent human being. It is on
these grounds that I say we owe very much the elevation of the working
classes, especially of the class below the artisan, to this invention
of our distinguished president.


ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION OF POWER.

In addition to the modes of transmission I have already mentioned,
there is the transmission of power by means of gas. I think that there
is a very large future indeed for gas engines. I do not know whether
this may be the place to state it, but I believe the way in which we
shall utilize our fuel hereafter will, in all probability, not be by
the way of the steam-engine. Sir William Armstrong alluded to this
probability in his address, and I entirely agree, if he will allow me
to say so, that such a change in the production of power from fuel
appears to be impending, if not in the immediate future, at all events
in a time not very far remote; and however much the Mechanical Section
of the British Association may to-day contemplate with regret, even
the mere distant prospect of the steam-engine being a thing of the
past, I very much doubt whether those who meet here fifty years hence
will then speak of it as anything more than a curiosity to be found in
a museum. With respect to the transmission of power electrically, I
won't venture to touch upon that; but will content myself by reminding
you that while Sir William Armstrong did say that there were
comparatively small streams which could be utilized, he did not inform
you of that which he himself had done in this direction; let me say
that Sir William Armstrong thus utilized a fall of water, situated
about a mile from his house, to work a turbine, which drives a dynamo
machine, generating electricity, for the illumination of the house.
When I was last at Crag Side, that illumination was being effected by
the arc light, but since then, as Sir William Armstrong has been good
enough to write to me, he has replaced the arc light by the
incandescent lamp (a form of electrical lighting far more applicable
than the arc light to domestic purposes), and with the greatest
possible success. Thus, in Sir William Armstrong's own case, a small
stream is made to afford light in a dwelling a mile away. Certainly
nothing could have seemed more improbable fifty years ago than that
the light of a house should be derived from a fall of water without
the employment of any kind or description of fuel.

The next subject upon which I propose to touch is that of


THE MANUFACTURE OF IRON AND STEEL.

In 1831, Neilson's hot blast specification had been published for two
and a half years only. The Butterly Company had tried the hot blast
for the first time in the November preceding the meeting of the
British Association. The heating of the blast was coming very slowly
into use, and the temperature attained when it was employed was only
some 600 degrees. The ordinary blast furnace of those days was 35 to
40 feet high, and about 12 feet diameter at the boshes, and turned out
about 60 tons a week. It used about 21/2 tons of coal per ton of iron,
and no attempt was made to utilize the waste gases, whether escaping
in the form of gas or in the form of flame, the country being
illuminated for miles around at night by these fires. The furnaces
were also open at the hearth, and continuous fire poured out along
with the slag.

In 1881, blast furnaces are from 90 ft. to 100 ft. high, and 25 ft. in
diameter at the boshes; they turn out from 500 to 800 tons a week. The
tops and also the hearths are closed, and the blast--thanks to the use
of Mr. E.A. Cowper's stoves--is at 1,200 degrees. The manufacture of
iron has also now enlisted in its service the chemist as well as the
engineer, and among those who have done much for the improvement of
the blast furnaces, to no one is greater praise due than to Mr. Isaac
Lowthian Bell, who has brought the manufacture of iron to the position
of a highly scientific operation. In the production of wrought iron by
the puddling process, and in the subsequent mill operations, there is
no very considerable change, except in the magnitude of the machines
employed, and, in the greater rapidity with which they now run. In
saying this, I am not forgetting the various "mechanical puddlers"
which have been put to work, nor the attempts that have been made by
the use of some of them to make wrought iron direct from the ore; but
neither the "mechanical puddler" nor the "direct process" has yet come
into general use; and I desire to be taken as speaking of that which
is the ordinary process pursued at the present in puddled iron
manufactures. In 1831, a few hundredweights was the limit of weight of
a plate, while in 1881, there may readily be obtained, for
boiler-making purposes, plates of at least four times the weight of
those that were made in 1831. I may, perhaps, be allowed to say that
there is an extremely interesting blue-book of the year 1818,
containing the report of a parliamentary committee which sat on boiler
explosions, and I recommend any mechanical engineer who is interested
in the history of the subject to read that book; he will find it there
stated that in the North of England there was a species of engines
called locomotives, the boilers of which were made of wrought iron,
beaten, not rolled, because the rolled plate was not considered fit;
it was added that if made of beaten iron the boiler would last at
least a year.

In 1831, thirteen years later, the dimensions of rolled plates were no
doubt raised; but few then would have supposed it possible there
should be rolled such plates as are now produced for boiler purposes,
and still fewer would have believed that in the year 1881 we should
make, for warlike purposes, rolled plates 22 inches in thickness and
30 tons in weight. I have said there is very little alteration in the
process of making wrought iron by puddling, and I do not think there
is likely to be much further, if any, improvement in this process,
because I believe that, with certain exceptions, the manufacture of
iron by puddling is a doomed industry. I ventured to say, in a lecture
I delivered at the Royal Institution three years ago on "The Future of
Steel," that I believed puddled iron, except for the mere hand wrought
forge purposes of the country blacksmith, and for such like purposes,
would soon become a thing of the past. Mr. Harrison, the engineer of
the North-Eastern Railway, told me that about eighteen months ago the
North-Eastern Railway applied for tenders for rails in any quantities
between 2,000 and 10,000 tons, and they issued alternative
specifications for iron and for steel. They received about ten
tenders. Some did not care to tender for iron at all; but when they
did tender alternatively, the price quoted for the iron was greater
than for the steel. I have no doubt whatever that, in a short time, it
will be practically impossible to procure iron made by the puddling
process, of dimensions fit for many of the purposes for which a few
years ago it alone was used.

With respect to steel, in 1831 the process in use was that of
cementation, producing blistered steel, which was either piled and
welded to make shear steel, or was broken into small pieces, melted in
pots, and run into an ingot weighing only some 50 lb. or 60 lb. At
that time steel was dealt in by the pound; nobody thought of steel in
tons. In 1881, we are all aware that, by Sir Henry Bessemer's
well-known discovery, carried out by him with such persistent vigor,
cast iron is, by the blowing process, converted into steel, and that
of Dr. Siemens' equally well-known process (now that, owing to his
invention of the regenerative furnace, it is possible to obtain the
necessary high temperature), steel is made upon the open hearth. We
are, moreover, aware that, by both of these processes, steel is
produced in quantities of many tons at a single operation, with the
result that as instanced in the case of the North-Eastern rails, steel
is a cheaper material than the wrought iron made by the puddling
process. One cannot pass away from the steel manufacture without
alluding to Sir Joseph Whitworth's process of putting a pressure on
the steel while in a tried state. By this means, the cavities which
are frequently to be found in the ingot of a large size are, while the
steel is fluid, rendered considerably smaller, and the steel is
thereby rendered much more sound. In conclusion of my observations on
the subject of iron and steel manufacture, I wish to call attention to
the invention of Messrs. Thomas & Gilchrist, by which ores of iron,
containing impurities that unfitted them to be used in the manufacture
of steel, are now freed from these impurities, and are thus brought
into use for steel-making purposes.


BRIDGES.

In the year 1831, bridges of cast iron existed; but no attempt had
been made to employ wrought iron in girder bridges, although Telford
had employed it in the Menai Suspension Bridge; but in 1881, the
introduction of railways, and the improvement in iron manufactures,
have demanded, and have rendered possible the execution of such
bridges as the tubular one, spanning the Menai Straits, in span of 400
feet, and the Saltash, over the Tamar, with spans of 435 feet; while
recent great improvements in the manufacture of steel have rendered
possible the contemplated construction of the Forth Bridge, where
there are to be spans of 1,700 feet, or one-third of a mile in length.
Mr. Barlow, one of the engineers of this bridge, has told me that
there will be used upwards of 2,000 more tons of material in the Forth
Bridge, to resist the wind pressure, than would have been needed if no
wind had to be taken into account, and if the question of the simple
weight to be carried had alone to be considered. With respect to the
foundation of bridges, that ingenious man, Lord Cochrane, patented a
mode of sinking foundations, even before the first meeting of the
British Association, viz., as far back, I believe, as 1825 or 1826;
and the improvements which he then invented are almost universally in
use in bridge construction at the present day. Cylinders sunk by the
aid of compressed air, airlocks to obtain access to the cylinder, and,
in fact, every means that I know of as having been used in the modern
sinking of cylinder foundations, were described by Lord Cochrane
(afterwards Earl of Dundonald) in that specification.

The next subject I propose to touch on is that of


MACHINE TOOLS.

In 1831, the mention of lathes, drilling machines, and screwing
machines brings me very nearly to the end of the list of the machine
tools used by turners and fitters, and at that time many lathes were
without slide rests. The boiler-maker had then his punching-press and
shearing machine; the smith, leaving on one side his forges and their
bellows, had nothing but hand tools, and the limit of these was a huge
hammer, with two handles, requiring two men to work it. In anchor
manufacture, it is true, a mechanical drop-hammer, known as a
Hercules, was employed, while in iron works, the Helve and the Tilt
hammer were in use. For ordinary smith's work, however, there were, as
has been said, practically no machine tools at all.

This paucity or absence in some trades, as we have seen, of machine
tools, involved the need of very considerable skill on the part of the
workman. It required the smith to be a man not only of great muscular
power, but to be possessed of an accurate eye and a correct judgment,
in order to produce the forgings which were demanded of him, and to
make the sound work that was needed, especially when that soundness
was required in shafts, and in other pieces which, in those days, were
looked upon as of magnitude; which, indeed, they were, relatively to
the tools which could be brought to operate upon them. The
boiler-maker in his work had to trust almost entirely to the eye for
correctness of form and for regularity of punching, while all parts of
engines and machines which could not be dealt with in the lathe, in
the drilling, or in the screwing machine, had to be prepared by the
use of the chisel and the file.

At the present day, the turning and fitting shops are furnished not
only with the slide lathe, self acting in both directions, and
screw-cutting, the drilling-machine, and the screwing machine, but
with planing machines competent to plane horizontally, vertically, or
at an angle; shaping machines, rapidly reciprocating, and dealing with
almost any form of work; nut shaping machines, slot drilling
machines, and slotting machines, while the drills have become multiple
and radial; and the accuracy of the work is insured by testing on
large surface plates, and by the employment of Whitworth internal and
external standard gauges.

The boiler maker's tools now comprise the steam, compressed air,
hydraulic or other mechanical riveter, rolls for the bending of plates
while cold into the needed cylindrical or conical forms, multiple
drills for the drilling of rivet holes, planing machines to plane the
edges of the plates, ingenious apparatus for flanging them, thereby
dispensing with one row of rivets out of two, and roller expanders for
expanding the tubes in locomotive and in marine boilers; while the
punching press, where still used, is improved so as to make the holes
for seams of rivets in a perfect line, and with absolute accuracy of
pitch.

With respect to the smith's shop, all large pieces of work are now
manipulated under heavy Nasmyth or other steam hammers; while smaller
pieces of work are commonly prepared either in forging machines or
under rapidly moving hammers, and when needed in sufficient numbers
are made in dies. And applicable to all the three industries of the
fitting shop, the boiler shop, and the smith's shop, and also to that
other industry carried on in the foundry, are the traveling and swing
cranes, commonly worked by shafting, or by quick moving ropes for the
travelers, and by hydraulic power or by steam engines for the swing
cranes. It may safely be said, that without the aid of these
implements, it would be impossible to handle the weights that are met
with in machinery of the present day.

I now come to one class of machine which, humble and small as it is,
has probably had a greater effect upon industry and upon domestic life
than almost any other. I mean


THE SEWING MACHINE.

In 1831, there was no means of making a seam except by the laborious
process of the hand needle. In 1846, Eldred Walker patented a machine
for parsing the basting thread through the gores of umbrellas, a
machine that was very ingenious and very simple, but was utterly
unlike the present sewing machine, with its eye-pointed needle, using
sometimes two threads (the second being put in by a shuttle or by
another needle), and making stitches at twenty-fold the rapidity with
which the most expert needlewoman could work. By means of the sewing
machine not only are all textile fabrics operated upon, but even the
thickest leather is dealt with, and as a _tour de force_, but as a
matter of fact, sheet-iron plates themselves have been pierced, and
have been united by a seam no boilermaker ever contemplated, the
piercing and the seam being produced by a Blake sewing machine. I
believe all in this section will agree that the use of the sewing
machine has been unattended by loss to those who earn their living by
the needle; in fact, it would not be too much to say that there has
been a positive improvement in their wages.

The next matter I have to touch upon is


