honey-dipped piece of corn bread, and glanced up at the sky. That was
a queer bird; he'd never seen a bird with a wing action like that.
Then he realized that the object was not a bird at all.

His father was staring at it, too.

"Murray! That's ... that's like the old stories from the time of the
wars!"

But Murray was already racing across the parade ground toward the
Aitch-Cue House, where the big iron ring hung by its chain from a
gallows-like post, with the hammer beside it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The stockaded village grew larger, details became plainer, as the
helicopter came slanting down and began spiraling around it. It was a
fairly big place, some forty or fifty acres in a rough parallelogram,
surrounded by a wall of varicolored stone and brick and concrete
rubble from old ruins, topped with a palisade of pointed poles. There
was a small jetty projecting out into the river, to which six or eight
boats of different sorts were tied; a gate opened onto this from the
wall. Inside the stockade, there were close to a hundred buildings,
ranging from small cabins to a structure with a belfry, which seemed
to have been a church, partly ruined in the war of two centuries ago
and later rebuilt. A stream came down from the woods, across the
cultivated land around the fortified village; there was a rough flume
which carried the water from a dam close to the edge of the forest and
provided a fall to turn a mill wheel.

"Look; strip-farming," Loudons pointed. "See the alternate strips of
grass and plowed ground. Those people understand soil conservation.
They have horses, too."

As he spoke, three riders left the village at a gallop, through a gate
on the far side. They separated, and the people in the fields, who had
all started for the village, turned and began hurrying toward the
woods. Two of the riders headed for a pasture in which cattle had been
grazing, and started herding them, also, into the woods. For a while,
there was a scurrying of little figures in the village below, and then
not a moving thing was in sight.

"There's good organization," Loudons said. "Everybody seems to know
what to do, and how to get it done promptly. And look how neat the
whole place is. Policed up. I'll bet anything we'll find that they
have a military organization, or a military tradition at least. We'll
have to find out; you can't understand a people till you understand
their background and their social organization."

"Humph. Let me have a look at their artifacts; that'll tell what kind
of people they are," Altamont said, swinging his glasses back and
forth over the enclosure. "Water-power mill, water-power
sawmill--building on the left side of the water wheel; see the pile of
fresh lumber beside it. Blacksmith shop, and from that chimney I'd say
a small foundry, too. Wonder what that little building out on the tip
of the island is; it has a water wheel. Undershot wheel, and it looks
as though it could be raised or lowered. But the building's too small
for a grist mill. Now, I wonder--"

[Illustration: ]

"Monty, I think we ought to land right in the middle of the enclosure,
on that open plaza thing, in front of that building that looks like a
reconditioned church. That's probably the Royal Palace, or the
Pentagon, or the Kremlin, or whatever."

Altamont started to object, paused, and then nodded. "I think you're
right, Jim. From the way they scattered, and got their livestock into
the woods, they probably expect us to bomb them. We have to get
inside; that's the quickest way to do it." He thought for a moment.
"We'd better be armed, when we go out. Pistols, auto-carbines, and a
few of those concussion-grenades in case we have to break up a
concerted attack. I'll get them."

The plaza and the houses and cabins around it, and the
two-hundred-year-old church, were silent and, apparently, lifeless as
they set the helicopter down. Once Loudons caught a movement inside
the door of a house, and saw a metallic glint. Altamont pointed up at
the belfry.

"There's a gun up there," he said. "Looks like about a four-pounder.
Brass. I knew that smith-shop was also a foundry. See that little curl
of smoke? That's the gunner's slow-match. I'd thought maybe that thing
on the island was a powder mill. That would be where they'd put it.
Probably extract their niter from the dung of their horses and cows.
Sulfur probably from coal-mine drainage. Jim, this is really
something!"

"I hope they don't cut loose on us with that thing," Loudons said,
looking apprehensively at the brass-rimmed black muzzle that was
covering them from the belfry. "I wonder if we ought to--Oh-oh, here
they come!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Three or four young men stepped out of the wide door of the old
church. They wore fringed buckskin trousers and buckskin shirts and
odd caps of deerskin with visors to shade their eyes and similar beaks
behind to protect the neck. They had powder horns and bullet pouches
slung over their shoulders, and long rifles in their hands. They
stepped aside as soon as they were out; carefully avoiding any gesture
of menace, they stood watching the helicopter which had landed among
them.

Three other men followed them out; they, too, wore buckskins, and the
odd double-visored caps. One had a close-cropped white beard, and on
the shoulders of his buckskin shirt he wore the single silver bars of
a first lieutenant of the vanished United States Army. He had a pistol
on his belt; it had the saw-handle grip of an automatic, but it was a
flintlock, as were the rifles of the young men who stood watchfully on
either side of the two middle-aged men who accompanied him. The whole
party advanced toward the helicopter.

"All right; come on, Monty." Loudons opened the door and let down the
steps. Picking up an auto-carbine, he slung it and stepped out of the
helicopter, Altamont behind him. They advanced to meet the party from
the old church, halting when they were about twenty feet apart.

"I must apologize, lieutenant, for dropping in on you so
unceremoniously." He stopped, wondering if the man with the white
beard understood a word of what he was saying.

"The natural way to come in, when you travel in the air," the old man
replied. "At least, you came in openly. I can promise you a better
reception than you got at that city to the west of us a couple of days
ago."

"Now how did you know we'd had trouble at Cincinnati
day-before-yesterday?" Loudons demanded.

The old man's eyes sparkled with childlike pleasure. "That surprises
you, my dear sir? In a moment, I daresay you'll be amazed at the
simplicity of it. You have a nasty rip in the left leg of your
trousers, and the cloth around it is stained with blood. Through the
rip, I perceive a bandage. Obviously, you have suffered a recent
wound. I further observe that the side of your flying machine bears
recent scratches, as though from the spears or throwing-hatchets of
the Scowrers. Evidently they attacked you as you were leaving it; it
is fortunate that these cannibal devils are too stupid and too anxious
for human flesh to exercise patience."

"Well, that explains how you knew we'd been recently attacked,"
Loudons told him. "But how did you guess that it had been to the west
of here, in a ruined city?"

"I never guess," the oldster with the silver bar and the
keystone-shaped red patch on his left shoulder replied. "It is a
shocking habit--destructive to the logical faculty. What seems strange
to you is only so because you do not follow my train of thought. For
example, the wheels and their framework under your flying machine are
splashed with mud which seems to be predominantly brick-dust, mixed
with plaster. Obviously, you landed recently in a dead city, either
during or after a rain. There was a rain here yesterday evening, the
wind being from the west. Obviously, you followed behind the rain as
it came up the river. And now that I look at your boots, I see traces
of the same sort of mud, around the soles and in front of the heels.
But this is heartless of us, keeping you standing here on a wounded
leg, sir. Come in, and let our medic look at it."

"Well, thank you, lieutenant," Loudons replied. "But don't bother your
medic; I've attended to the wound myself, and it wasn't serious to
begin with."

"You are a doctor?" the white-bearded man asked.

"Of sorts. A sort of general scientist. My name is Loudons. My friend,
Mr. Altamont, here, is a scientist, also."

There was an immediate reaction; all three of the elders of the
village, and the young riflemen who had accompanied them, exchanged
