planning to move in on the Hulgun kingdoms. Well, what would be
smarter than to get Kurchuk's army smashed in advance?"

"How did the defeat occur?" Verkan Vall asked. "Any suspicion of
treachery?"

"Nothing you could put your finger on, except that the Jumduns seemed
to have pretty good intelligence about Kurchuk's invasion route and
battle plans. It could have been nothing worse than stupid tactics on
Kurchuk's part. See, these Hulguns, and particularly the Zurb
Hulguns, are spearmen. They fight in a fairly thin line, with
heavy-armed infantry in front and light infantry with throwing-spears
behind. The nobles fight in light chariots, usually at the center of
the line, and that's where they were at this Battle of Jorm. Kurchuk
himself was at the center, with his Chuldun archers massed around him.

"The Jumduns use a lot of cavalry, with long swords and lances, and a
lot of big chariots with two javelin men and a driver. Well, instead
of ramming into Kurchuk's center, where he had his archers, they hit
the extreme left and folded it up, and then swung around behind and
hit the right from the rear. All the Chuldun archers did was stand
fast around the king and shoot anybody who came close to them: they
were left pretty much alone. But the Hulgun spearmen were cut to
pieces. The battle ended with Kurchuk and his nobles and his archers
making a fighting retreat, while the Jumdun cavalry were chasing the
spearmen every which way and cutting them down or lancing them as they
ran.

"Well, whether it was Labdurg's treachery or Kurchuk's stupidity, in
either case, it was natural for the archers to come off easiest and
the Hulgun spearmen to pay the butcher's bill. But try and tell these
knuckle-heads anything like that! Muz-Azin protected the Chulduns, and
Yat-Zar let the Hulguns down, and that was all there was to it. The
Zurb temple started losing worshipers, particularly the families of
the men who didn't make it back from Jorm.

"If that had been all there'd been to it, though, it still wouldn't
have hurt the mining operations, and we could have got by. But what
really tore it was when the rabbits started to die." Stranor Sleth
picked up a cigar from his desk and bit the end, spitting it out
disgustedly. "Tularemia, of course," he said, touching his lighter to
the tip. "When that hit, they started going over to Muz-Azin in
droves, not only at Zurb but all over the Six Kingdoms. You ought to
have seen the house we had for Sunset Sacrifice, this evening! About
two hundred, and we used to get two thousand. It used to be all two
men could do to lift the offering box at the door, afterward, and all
the money we took in tonight I could put in one pocket!" The high
priest used language that would have been considered unclerical even
among the Hulguns.

Verkan Vall nodded. Even without the quickie hypno-mech he had taken
for this sector, he knew that the rabbit was domesticated among the
Proto-Aryan Hulguns and was their chief meat animal. Hulgun rabbits
were even a minor import on the First Level, and could be had at all
the better restaurants in cities like Dhergabar. He mentioned that.

"That's not the worst of it," Stranor Sleth told him. "See, the
rabbit's sacred to Yat-Zar. Not taboo; just sacred. They have to use
a specially consecrated knife to kill them--consecrating rabbit knives
has always been an item of temple revenue--and they must say a special
prayer before eating them. We could have got around the rest of it,
even the Battle of Jorm--punishment by Yat-Zar for the sin of
apostasy--but Yat-Zar just wouldn't make rabbits sick. Yat-Zar thinks
too well of rabbits to do that, and it'd not been any use claiming he
would. So there you are."

"Well, I take the attitude that this situation is the result of your
incompetence," Brannad Klav began, in a bullyragging tone. "You're not
only the high priest of this temple, you're the acknowledged head of
the religion in all the Hulgun kingdoms. You should have had more hold
on the people than to allow anything like this to happen."

"Hold on the people!" Stranor Sleth fairly howled, appealing to Verkan
Vall. "What does he think a religion is, on this sector, anyhow? You
think these savages dreamed up that six-armed monstrosity, up there,
to express their yearning for higher things, or to symbolize their
moral ethos, or as a philosophical escape-hatch from the dilemma of
causation? They never even heard of such matters. On this sector, gods
are strictly utilitarian. As long as they take care of their
worshipers, they get their sacrifices: when they can't put out, they
have to get out. How do you suppose these Chulduns, living in the
Caucasus Mountains, got the idea of a god like a crocodile, anyhow?
Why, they got it from Homran traders, people from down in the Nile
Valley. They had a god, once, something basically like a billy goat,
but he let them get licked in a couple of battles, so out he went.
Why, all the deities on this sector have hyphenated names, because
they're combinations of several deities, worshiped in one person. Do
you know anything about the history of this sector?" he asked the
Paratime Police officer.

"Well, it develops from an alternate probability of what we call the
Nilo-Mesopotamian Basic sector-group," Verkan Vall said. "On most
Nilo-Mesopotamian sectors, like the Macedonian Empire Sector, or the
Alexandrian-Roman or Alexandrian-Punic or Indo-Turanian or
Europo-American, there was an Aryan invasion of Eastern Europe and
Asia Minor about four thousand elapsed years ago. On this sector, the
ancestors of the Aryans came in about fifteen centuries earlier, as
neolithic savages, about the time that the Sumerian and Egyptian
civilizations were first developing, and overran all southeast Europe,
Asia Minor and the Nile Valley. They developed to the bronze-age
culture of the civilizations they overthrew, and then, more slowly, to
an iron-age culture. About two thousand years ago, they were using
hardened steel and building large stone cities, just as they do now.
At that time, they reached cultural stasis. But as for their religious
beliefs, you've described them quite accurately. A god is only
worshiped as long as the people think him powerful enough to aid and
protect them; when they lose that confidence, he is discarded and the
god of some neighboring people is adopted instead." He turned to
Brannad Klav. "Didn't Stranor report this situation to you when it
first developed?" he asked. "I know he did; he speaks of receiving
shipments of grain by conveyer for temple distribution. Then why
didn't you report it to Paratime Police? That's what we have a
Paratime Police Force for."

"Well, yes, of course, but I had enough confidence in Stranor Sleth to
think that he could handle the situation himself. I didn't know he'd
gone slack--"

"Look, I can't make weather, even if my parishioners think I can,"
Stranor Sleth defended himself. "And I can't make a great military
genius out of a blockhead like Kurchuk. And I can't immunize all the
rabbits on this time-line against tularemia, even if I'd had any
reason to expect a tularemia epidemic, which I hadn't because the
disease is unknown on this sector; this is the only outbreak of it
anybody's ever heard of on any Proto-Aryan time-line."

"No, but I'll tell you what you could have done," Verkan Vall told
him. "When this Kurchuk started to apostatize, you could have gone to
him at the head of a procession of priests, all paratimers and all
armed with energy-weapons, and pointed out his spiritual duty to him,
and if he gave you any back talk, you could have pulled out that
needler and rayed him down and then cried, 'Behold the vengeance of
Yat-Zar upon the wicked king!' I'll bet any sum at any odds that his
successor would have thought twice about going over to Muz-Azin, and
none of these other kings would have even thought once about it."

"Ha, that's what I wanted to do!" Stranor Sleth exclaimed. "And who
stopped me? I'll give you just one guess."

"Well, it seems there was slackness here, but it wasn't Stranor Sleth
who was slack," Verkan Vall commented.

"Well! I must say; I never thought I'd hear an officer of the Paratime
Police criticizing me for trying to operate inside the Paratime
Transposition Code!" Brannad Klav exclaimed.

Verkan Vall, sitting on the edge of Stranor Sleth's desk, aimed his
cigarette at Brannad Klav like a blaster.

"Now, look," he began. "There is one, and only one, inflexible law
regarding outtime activities. The secret of paratime transposition
must be kept inviolate, and any activity tending to endanger it is
prohibited. That's why we don't allow the transposition of any object
of extraterrestrial origin to any time-line on which space travel has
not been developed. Such an object may be preserved, and then, after
the local population begin exploring the planet from whence it came,
there will be dangerous speculations and theories as to how it
arrived on Terra at such an early date. I came within inches,
literally, of getting myself killed, not long ago, cleaning up the
result of a violation of that regulation. For the same reason, we
don't allow the export, to outtime natives, of manufactured goods too
far in advance of their local culture. That's why, for instance, you
people have to hand-finish all those big Yat-Zar idols, to remove
traces of machine work. One of those things may be around, a few
thousand years from now, when these people develop a mechanical
civilization. But as far as raying down this Kurchuk is concerned,
these Hulguns are completely nonscientific. They wouldn't have the
least idea what happened. They'd believe that Yat-Zar struck him dead,
as gods on this plane of culture are supposed to do, and if any of
them noticed the needler at all, they'd think it was just a holy
amulet of some kind."

[Illustration:]
