
The years 1836-'7-'8 witnessed, on my part, several extraordinary and
fruitless efforts to get before the public the theory, of whose truth
and importance I was then fully convinced. In 1839, Dr. C. Smith, then
of Troy, an able medical lecturer, became a convert to the theory; and
showed me, in post mortem dissections, the organs of respiration and
circulation. At the close of that year, having carefully corrected and
made out copies of my manuscript theory, which I had before written, I
sent two to Paris--one to the two brothers, Drs. Edwards, members of the
French Institute, and one to my friend, Madame Belloc. I also sent one
to Edinburgh, to Dr. Abercrombie. Dr. Milne Edwards soon after wrote a
book, in which he made it a point to show that animals could live
several minutes without breathing; and Dr. Frederic Edwards wrote me a
short letter of objections to my theory, and adherence to that of
Harvey. This letter was copied and answered in my work published in
1846.

About this time, Dr. Aikin, of Baltimore, wrote to me on the subject;
and showed, by calculations, that the mere gradual expansion of the
water of the blood was not sufficient, of itself, to produce a current
as rapid as that of the blood was proved to be, even on the lowest
estimate of its velocity. This did not shake my faith in the great fact
that circulation was created by respiration. It must be so; for in life,
such respiration as produces heat is the invariable antecedent of
circulation, and nothing else is. There was something, then, which
remained to be discovered. Again, I placed before me the conditions of
the great problem, and set myself intently to its study; and I soon
found what I thus sought, and then discerned for the first time that the
blood moves, as does the railroad car, by steam. John Bell, my favorite
author, had shown that the lungs work _in vacuo_. A great proportion of
the blood is water, which, in a vacuum, springs into vapor at 67 deg., and
the temperature of the blood in the lungs is 101 deg.. Its expansion, then,
was not merely the gradual increase of bulk by transmitted heat, but
also that of instantaneous expansion, by the vaporization of so much of
it as is needed; and what expanded water could not do, steam certainly
could. At once, a throng of proofs came to my mind. The most apparent of
these was the vapor _expired_ breathing. I recollected how, in former
times, the stage horses, driven rapidly into my native village of a
winter morning, had clouds of vapor wreathing upward from their
nostrils, while the icicles of condensation were hanging below. The
nurse, who stands over the dying, holds a mirror before the mouth and
nose, and considers that life is only extinct when vapor ceases to be
formed. Then came to mind the solution of that great mystery of
physiology, why the arteries are empty at death, which so long hindered
the discovery finally made by Harvey.

In the state in which chemistry was, even as late as the time of John
Bell, the chemical power of the heat produced by respiration at the
lungs could not have been understood.


SECTION II.

Publication of the Theory, in 1846, in "A treatise on the Motive Powers
    which produce the Circulation of the Blood." Its Reception: Critique
    in the New York "Journal of Medicine," September, 1846. My Reply, in
    the same Journal, March, 1847.

TO DR. MARCY.--In the years immediately succeeding 1840, (in which year,
as you will recollect, I had the honor to receive your countenance and
advice respecting my theory,) I was almost exclusively devoted to the
revision and enlargement of my historical works; but early is 1846,
having determined on making the tour of the United States, I resolved
first to prepare my theory for the press. In the introduction, I
remarked, "The house of clay in which the mind dwells must receive a
portion of its care; and that which I have bestowed on mine has
proceeded on a belief in the truth of the theory herein advocated, as
undoubting as that in the laws of gravitation; and when any new fact, or
any remark of an author, relating to my theory came under my
observation, I noted it down and laid it by with its kindred. About to
set out on a long journey, and aware that my field of vision had thus
enlarged, I felt it my duty to put together the principal of my remarks,
that I might so leave the subject, that, in case anything should prevent
my return, it would be in a form equal to the present slate in which the
theory exists in my own mind."

The time I had spent in devotion to this theory, the many rebuffs I had
met in seeking to promulgate it--sometimes, unhappily, affecting my
social life--had made painful the duty of publishing it. My historical
works had been received with favor; but I believed that, in publishing
this, it would be charged against me that I chose a subject unsuited to
my sex. I therefore said, in my preface, "This is not so much a subject
which I chose, as one which chooses me; and if the Father of Lights has
been pleased to reveal to me from the book of his physical truth a
sentence before unread, is it for me to suppose that it is for my
individual benefit? or is it for you, my reader, to turn away your ear
from hearing this truth, and charge its great Author with having
ill-chosen his instrument to communicate it?"

As I passed southward on my journey, I left, March, 1846, my
manuscript in the hands of Wiley & Putnam, in N. York:[4] to be
published at my expense. During the six months in which I was absent
on my travels, my book was published; and the publishers sent copies,
as directed by me, to many of my personal friends, and to several
physicians. They sent other copies, which procured notices, some of
which were favorable, particularly one from the _London Critic_, and
others, the reverse. As few copies of the book sold, I was not
remunerated for the cost of publication. The copies sent to physicians
were mostly unacknowledged--received in cold, if not contemptuous,
silence. But my family physician, the worthy and learned Dr. Robbins,
to whom I dedicated the work, ever upheld me. He answered my questions,
gave me instructions, and showed me post-mortem dissections; and to
those who asked him if he believed in my theory, he wisely replied,
"Mrs. Willard is right as far as she goes." He knew that I made no
pretensions to understand the vast variety of medical subjects not
connected with the circulation, and that I never doubted his skill or
disputed his prescriptions. An honest man, and a skilful physician, he
deserved and had my unfailing confidence. And if, by reason of what I
knew, I had prolonged my life, he had the longer kept a good and
faithful patient. Lady-friends, to whom I had sent my work, had
sometimes referred it to their medical advisers; and thus Dr. Hiester,
an eminent physician of Reading, Pa., became a believer. And in the same
way, the eminent Dr. Cartwright, then of Natchez, and President of the
State Medical Association of Mississippi, came to a knowledge of those
principles, which, as we shall hereafter show, he so remarkably
elucidated.

In September, 1846, the _New York Journal of Medicine_, then edited by
Dr. Charles A. Lee, contained a review or critique on my work, which, if
the history of the theory shall hereafter become a matter of special
interest, may, with my reply, contained in the March number of 1847,
furnish any examiner with the full state of the question at that period.

The learned reviewer showed himself acquainted with the subject as it
then stood, and with its history in the past. He held that the heart's
action, "the contractile power of the cardiac walls," is the main spring
or _primum mobile_, from which the circulating force proceeds,
notwithstanding the great discrepancies as to what that force is; and
while he objected to my theory, that it did not show any distinct
measure of force, he said that, while Borelli estimated the contractive
power of the heart at 180,000 pounds, Keill stated it at five ounces,
Sir Charles Bell at 51 pounds, Carpenter at 511/2, and Hales at 50. He
abandoned, however, Harvey's idea that the heart was the only organ of
