
"Atom City express leaving on Track Four!"

A metallic voice boomed over the station loud-speaker, as last-minute
passengers boarded the long line of gleaming white monorail cars,
hanging from a single overhead steel rail. In the open doorway of one
of the end cars, a conductor lifted his arm, then paused and waited
patiently as three Space Cadets raced down the stairs and along the
platform in a headlong dash for the train. They piled inside, almost one
on top of the other.

"Thanks for waiting, sir," gasped Tom Corbett.

"Not at all, Cadet," said the conductor. "I couldn't let you waste your
leave waiting for another train."

The elderly man flipped a switch in the narrow vestibule and the door
closed with a soft hiss of air. He inserted a light key into a near-by
socket and twisted it gently, completing a circuit that flashed the "go"
light in the engineer's cab. Almost immediately, the monorail train
eased forward, suspended on the overhead rail. By the time the last
building of Space Academy flashed past, the train was rolling along at
full speed on its dash across the plains to Atom City.

The ride to the great metropolis of the North American continent was
filled with excitement and anticipation for the three members of the
_Polaris_ crew. The cars were crowded with cadets on leave, and while
there was a lot of joking and horseplay, the few civilian passengers
were impressed with the gentlemanly bearing of the young spacemen. Tom
and Roger finally settled down to read the latest magazines supplied by
the monorail company. But Astro headed for the dining car where he
attracted a great deal of attention by his order of a dozen eggs,
followed by two orders of waffles and a full quart of milk. Finally,
when the dining-car steward called a halt, because it was closing time,
Astro made his way back to Tom and Roger with a plastic bag of French
fried potatoes, and the three boys sat, munching them happily. The
countryside flashed by in a blur of summer color as the train roared on
at a speed of two hundred miles an hour.

A few hours and four bags of potatoes later, Astro yawned and stretched
his enormous arms, nearly poking Roger in the eye.

"Hey, ya big ape!" growled Roger. "Watch the eye!"

"You'd never miss it, Manning," said Astro. "Just use your radar."

"Never mind, I like this eye just the way it is."

"We're almost there," called Tom. He pointed out the crystal window and
they could see the high peaks of the Rocky Mountain range looming ahead.
"We cut through the new tunnel in those mountains and we'll be in Atom
City in ten minutes!"

There was a bustle of activity around them as other cadets roused
themselves and collected their gear. Once again conversation became
animated and excited as the train neared its destination. Flashing into
the tunnel, the line of cars began to slow down, rocking gently.

"We'd better go right out to the spaceport," said Tom, pulling his gear
out of the recessed rack under his seat. "Our ship blasts off for Venus
in less than a half-hour."

"Boy, it'll be a pleasure to ride a spaceship without having to
astrogate," said Roger. "I'll just sit back and take it easy. Hope there
are some good-looking space dolls aboard."

Tom turned to Astro. "You know, Astro," he said seriously, "it's a good
thing we're along to take care of this Romeo. If he were alone, he'd
wind up in another kind of hunt."

"I'd like to see how Manning's tactics work on a female dasypus
novemcinctur maximus," said Astro with a sly grin.

"A female what?" yelled Roger.

"A giant armadillo, Roger," Tom explained, laughing. "Very big and very
mean when they don't like you. Don't forget, everything on Venus grows
big because of the lighter gravity."

"Yeah," drawled Roger, looking at Astro. "Big and dumb!"

"What was that again?" bellowed the giant Venusian, reaching for the
flip cadet. The next moment, Roger was struggling futilely, feet kicking
wildly as Astro held him at arm's length six inches off the floor. The
cadets in the car roared with laughter.

"Atom City!" a voice over the intercar communicator boomed and the boys
looked out the window to see the towering buildings of Atom City slowly
slide by. The train had scarcely reached a full stop when the three
cadets piled out of the door, raced up the slidestairs, and jumped into
a jet cab. Fifteen minutes later they marched up to one of the many
ticket counters of the Atom City Interplanetary Spaceport.

"Reservations for Cadets Corbett, Manning, and Astro on the _Venus
Lark_, please," announced Tom.

The girl behind the counter ran her finger down a passenger manifest,
nodded, and then suddenly frowned. She turned back to Tom and said, "I'm
sorry, Cadet, but your reservations have been pre-empted by a priority
listing."

"Priority!" roared Roger. "But I made those reservations two weeks ago.
If there was a change, why didn't you tell us before?"

"I'm sorry, sir," said the girl patiently, "but according to the
manifest, the priority call just came in a few hours ago. Someone
contacted Space Academy, but you had already left."

"Well, is there another ship for Venusport today?"

"Yes," she replied and picked up another manifest. Glancing at it
quickly, she shook her head. "There are no open reservations," she said.
"I'm afraid the next flight for Venusport with open reservations isn't
for four days."

"Blast my jets!" growled Roger disgustedly. "Four days!" He sat down on
his gear and scowled. Astro leaned against the desk and stared gloomily
at the floor. At that moment a young man with a thin face and a strained
intense look pushed Tom to one side with a curt "Excuse me!" and stepped
up to the desk.

"You're holding three reservations on the _Venus Lark_," he spoke
quickly. "Priority number four-seven-six, S.D."

Tom, Roger, and Astro looked at him closely. They saw him nervously pay
for his tickets and then walk away quickly without another look at the
ticket girl.

"Were those our seats, miss?" asked Tom. The girl nodded.

The three cadets stared after the young man who had bumped them off
their ship.

"The symbol S.D. on the priority stands for Solar Delegate," said Roger.
"Maybe he's a messenger."

The young man was joined by two other men also dressed in Venusian
clothing, and after a few words, they all turned and stepped onto the
slidewalk rolling out to the giant passenger ship preparing to blast
off.

"This is the most rocket-blasting bit of luck in the universe!" growled
Roger. "Four days!"

"Cheer up, Roger," said Tom. "We can spend the four days in Atom City.
Maybe Liddy Tamal is here. We can follow Captain Strong's suggestion."

"Even she doesn't make four days delay sound exciting," interrupted
Roger. "Come on. We might as well go back to town or we won't even get a
room."

He picked up his gear and walked back to the jet cab-stand. Astro and
Tom followed the blond-haired cadet glumly.

The stand was empty, but a jet cab was just pulling up to the platform
with a passenger. As the boys walked over to wait at the door, it opened
and a familiar figure in a black-and-gold uniform stepped out.

"Captain Strong!"

[Illustration]

"Corbett!" exclaimed Strong. "What are you doing here? I thought you
were aboard the _Venus Lark_."

"We were bumped out of our reservation by an S.D. priority," said Astro.

"And we can't get out of here for another four days," added Roger
glumly.

Strong sympathized. "That's rough, Astro." He looked at the three dour
faces and then said, "Would you consider getting a free ride to Venus?"

The three cadets looked up hopefully.

"Major Connel's taking the _Polaris_ to Venus to complete some work with
Professor Higgleston in the Venus lab," explained Strong. "If you can
get back to the Academy before he blasts off, he might give you a ride."

"No, thanks!" said Roger. "I'd rather sit here."

"Wait a minute, Roger," said Tom. "We're on leave, remember? And it's
only a short hop to Venus."

"Yeah, hotshot," added Astro. "We'll get to Venus faster than the _Venus
Lark_, and save money besides."

"O.K.," said Roger. "I guess I can take him for a little while."

Strong suppressed a smile. Roger's reluctance to go with Connel was well
founded. Any cadet within hailing distance of the hard-bitten spaceman
was likely to wind up with a bookful of demerits.

"Are you on an assignment, sir?" asked Tom.

"Vacation," said Strong. "Four weeks of fishing at Commander Walters'
cabin at Sweet Water Lakes."

"If you pass through New Chicago," said Tom, "you would be welcome to
stop in at my house. Mom and Dad would be mighty happy to meet you. And
I think Billy, my kid brother, would flip a rocket."

"Thank you, Tom. I might do that if I have time." He looked at his
watch. "You three had better hurry. I'd advise taking a jetcopter back
to the Academy. You might not make it if you wait for a monorail."

"We'll do that, sir," said Tom.

The three boys threw their gear into the waiting cab and piled in.
Strong watched them roar away, frowning in thought. An S.D. priority,
the highest priority in space, was used only by special couriers on
important missions for one of the delegates. He shrugged it off.
"Getting to be as suspicious as an old space hen," he said to himself.
"Fishing is what I need. A good fight with a trout instead of a space
conspiracy!"




CHAPTER 3


"Blast off--minus--five--four--three--two--one--_zero_!"

As the main drive rockets blasted into life, Tom fell back in his seat
before the control panel of the _Polaris_ and felt the growing thrust as
the giant ship lifted off the ground, accelerating rapidly. He kept his
eyes on the teleceiver screen and saw Space Academy fall away behind
them. On the power deck Astro lay strapped in his acceleration cushion,
his outstretched hand on the emergency booster rocket switch should the
main rockets fail before the ship could reach the free fall of space. On
the radar bridge Roger watched the far-flung stars become brighter as
the rocket ship hurtled through the dulling layers of the atmosphere.

As soon as the ship reached weightless space, Tom flipped on the gravity
generators and put the _Polaris_ on her course to Venus. Almost
immediately the intercom began to blast.

"Now hear this!" Major Connel's voice roared. "Corbett, Manning, and
Astro! I don't want any of your space-blasted nonsense on this trip! Get
this ship to Venusport in the shortest possible time without burning out
the pump bearings. And, Manning--!"

"Yes, sir," replied the blond-haired cadet.

"If I so much as hear one wisecrack between you and that overgrown
rocket jockey, Astro, I'll log both of you twenty-five demerits!"

"I understand, sir," acknowledged Roger lazily. "I rather appreciate
your relieving me of the necessity of speaking to that space ape!"

Listening to their voices on the control deck, Tom grinned and waited
expectantly. He wasn't disappointed.

"Ape!" came a bull-like roar from the power deck. "Why, you skinny
moth-eaten piece of space junk--"

"Cadet Astro!"

"Yes, sir?" Astro was suddenly meek.

"If you say one more word, I'll bury you in demerits!"

"But, sir--"

"No _buts_!" roared Connel. "And you, Manning--!"

"Yes, sir?" chimed in Roger innocently.

"Keep your mouth shut!"

"Very well, sir," said Roger.

"Corbett?"

"Yes, sir?"

"I'm putting you in charge of monitoring the intercom. If those two
space idiots start jabbering again, call me. That's an order! I'll be in
my quarters working." Connel switched off abruptly.

"You hear that, fellows?" said Tom. "Knock it off."

"O.K., Tom," replied Roger, "just keep him out of my sight."

"That goes for me, too," added Astro. "Ape! Just wait till I--"

"Astro!" Tom interrupted sharply.

"O.K., O.K.," groaned the big cadet.

Glancing over the panel once more and satisfying himself that the ship
was functioning smoothly, Tom sighed and settled back in his seat,
enjoying the temporary peace and solitude. It had been a tough year,
filled with intensive study in the quest for an officer's commission in
the Solar Guard. Space Academy was the finest school in the world, but
it was also the toughest. The young cadet shook his head, remembering a
six-weeks' grind he, Roger, and Astro had gone through on a nuclear
project. Knowing how to operate an atomic rocket motor was one thing,
but understanding what went on inside the reactant pile was something
else entirely. Never had the three cadets worked harder, or more closely
together. But Astro's thorough, practical knowledge of basic nucleonics,
combined with Roger's native wizardry at higher mathematics, and his own
understanding of the theory, had enabled them to pull through with a
grade of seventy-two, the highest average ever made by a cadet unit not
specializing in physics.

As the ship rocketed smoothly through the airless void of space toward
the misty planet of Venus, Tom made another quick but thorough check of
the panel, and then returned to his reflections on the past term. It had
been particularly difficult since they had missed many valuable hours of
classroom work and study because of their adventure on the new colony of
Roald (as described in _The Space Pioneers_), but they had come through
somehow. He shook his head wondering how they had made it. Forty-two
units had washed out during the term. Instead of getting easier, the
courses of study were getting more difficult all the time, and in his
speech on the parade grounds, Commander Walters had promised--

"Emergency!"

Roger's voice over the intercom brought Tom out of his reverie sharply.

"All hands," continued the cadet on the radar bridge hurriedly, "secure
your stations and get to the jet-boat deck on the double! Emergency!"

As the sharp clang of the emergency alarm rang out, Tom did not stop to
question Roger's sudden order. Neutralizing all controls, he leaped for
the hatch leading below. Taking the ladder four steps at a time, Tom saw
Major Connel tear out of his quarters. The elder spaceman dived for the
ladder himself, not stopping to ask questions. He was automatic in his
reliance on the judgment of others. The few seconds spent in talk could
mean the difference between life and death in space where you seldom got
a second chance.

Tom and Connel arrived on the jet-boat deck to find Astro already
preparing the small space craft for launching. As they struggled into
space suits, Roger appeared. In answer to their questioning looks, he
explained laconically, "Unidentifiable object attached to ship on fin
parallel to steering vanes. Thought we'd better go outside first and
examine later."

Connel nodded his mute agreement, and thirty seconds later the tiny jet
boat was blasting out of the escape lock into space.

Circling around the ship to the stern, the jet boat, under Major
Connel's sure touch, stopped fifty feet from the still glowing, exhaust
tubes. He and the three cadets stared out at a small metallic boxlike
object attached to the underside of the stabilizer fin.

"What do you suppose it is?" asked Astro.

"I don't know," replied Roger, "but it sure doesn't belong there. That's
why I rang the emergency on you."

"You were absolutely right, Manning," asserted Connel. "If it's
harmless, we can always get back aboard and nothing's been lost except a
little time." He rose from the pilot's seat and stepped toward the
hatch. "Come with me, Corbett. We'll have a look. And bring the
radiation counter along."

"Aye, aye, sir!"

Tom reached into a near-by locker, and pulling out a small, rectangular
box with a round hornlike grid in its face, plunged out of the hatch
with Major Connel and blasted across the fifty-foot gap to the
stabilizer fin of the _Polaris_.

Connel gestured toward the object on the fin. "See if she's hot,
Corbett."

The young cadet pressed a small button on the counter and turned the
horn toward the mysterious box. Immediately the needle on the dial above
