and the spirit of the assembly rose high.

Next the workings of the electrical ship were explained, and it was
announced that after the meeting had adjourned an exhibition of the
flying powers of the ship would be given in the open air.

These experiments, together with the accompanying explanations, added
to what had already been disseminated through the public press, were
quite sufficient to convince all the representatives who had assembled
in Washington that the problem of how to conquer the Martians had
been solved. The means were plainly at hand. It only remained to apply
them. For this purpose, as the President had pointed out, it would be
necessary to raise a very large sum of money.

"How much will be needed?" asked one of the English representatives.

"At least ten thousand millions of dollars," replied the President.

"It would be safer," said a Senator from the Pacific Coast, "to make it
twenty-five thousand millions."

"I suggest," said the King of Italy, "that the nations be called in
alphabetical order, and that the representatives of each name a sum
which it is ready and able to contribute."

"We want the cash or its equivalent," shouted the Pacific Coast Senator.

"I shall not follow the alphabet strictly," said the President, "but shall
begin with the larger nations first. Perhaps, under the circumstances,
it is proper that the United States should lead the way. Mr. Secretary,"
he continued, turning to the Secretary of the Treasury, "how much can
we stand?"


An Enormous Sum.

"At least a thousand millions," replied the Secretary of the Treasury.

A roar of applause that shook the room burst from the assembly. Even
some of the monarchs threw up their hats. The Emperor Tsait'ten smiled
from ear to ear. One of the Roko Tuis, or native chiefs, from Fiji,
sprang up and brandished a war club.

The President then proceeded to call the other nations, beginning with
Austria-Hungary and ending with Zanzibar, whose Sultan, Hamoud bin
Mahomed, had come to the congress in the escort of Queen Victoria. Each
contributed liberally.

Germany coming in alphabetical order just before Great Britain, had named,
through its Chancellor, the sum of $500,000,000, but when the First Lord
of the British Treasury, not wishing to be behind the United States,
named double that sum as the contribution of the British Empire, the
Emperor William looked displeased. He spoke a word in the ear of the
Chancellor, who immediately raised his hand.


A Thousand Million Dollars.

"We will give a thousand million dollars," said the Chancellor.

Queen Victoria seemed surprised, though not displeased. The First Lord
of the Treasury met her eye, and then, rising in his place, said:

"Make it fifteen hundred million for Great Britain."

Emperor William consulted again with his Chancellor, but evidently
concluded not to increase his bid.

But, at any rate, the fund had benefited to the amount of a thousand
millions by this little outburst of imperial rivalry.

The greatest surprise of all, however, came when the King of Siam was
called upon for his contribution. He had not been given a foremost place
in the Congress, but when the name of his country was pronounced he rose
by his chair, dressed in a gorgeous specimen of the peculiar attire of
his country, then slowly pushed his way to the front, stepped up to the
President's desk and deposited upon it a small box.

"This is our contribution," he said, in broken English.

The cover was lifted, and there darted, shimmering in the half gloom of
the Chamber, a burst of iridescence from the box.


The Long Lost Treasure.

"My friends of the Western world," continued the King of Siam, "will be
interested in seeing this gem. Only once before has the eye of a European
been blessed with the sight of it. Your books will tell you that in the
seventeenth century a traveler, Tavernier, saw in India an unmatched
diamond which afterward disappeared like a meteor, and was thought to
have been lost from the earth. You all know the name of that diamond and
its history. It is the Great Mogul, and it lies before you. How it came
into my possession I shall not explain. At any rate, it is honestly mine,
and I freely contribute it here to aid in protecting my native planet
against those enemies who appear determined to destroy it."

When the excitement which the appearance of this long lost treasure, that
had been the subject of so many romances and of such long and fruitless
search, had subsided, the President continued calling the list, until
he had completed it.

Upon taking the sum of the contributions (the Great Mogul was reckoned
at three millions) it was found to be still one thousand millions short
of the required amount.

The Secretary of the Treasury was instantly on his feet.

"Mr. President," he said, "I think we can stand that addition. Let it
be added to the contribution of the United States of America."

When the cheers that greeted the conclusion of the business were over,
the President announced that the next affair of the Congress was to
select a director who should have entire charge of the preparations for
the war. It was the universal sentiment that no man could be so well
suited for this post as Mr. Edison himself. He was accordingly selected
by the unanimous and enthusiastic choice of the great assembly.

"How long a time do you require to put everything in readiness?" asked
the President.

"Give me carte blanche," replied Mr. Edison, "and I believe I can have
a hundred electric ships and three thousand disintegrators ready within
six months."

A tremendous cheer greeted this announcement.

"Your powers are unlimited," said the President, "draw on the fund for
as much money as you need," whereupon the Treasurer of the United States
was made the disbursing officer of the fund, and the meeting adjourned.

Not less than 5,000,000 people had assembled at Washington from all
parts of the world. Every one of this immense multitude had been able to
listen to the speeches and the cheers in the Senate chamber, although
not personally present there. Wires had been run all over the city,
and hundreds of improved telephonic receivers provided, so that every
one could hear. Even those who were unable to visit Washington, people
living in Baltimore, New York, Boston, and as far away as New Orleans,
St. Louis and Chicago, had also listened to the proceedings with the aid
of these receivers. Upon the whole, probably not less than 50,000,000
people had heard the deliberations of the great congress of the nations.


The Excitement in Washington.

The telegraph and the cable had sent the news across the oceans to all
the capitols of the earth. The exultation was so great that the people
seemed mad with joy.

The promised exhibition of the electrical ship took place the next
day. Enormous multitudes witnessed the experiment, and there was a
struggle for places in the car. Even Queen Victoria, accompanied by
the Prince of Wales, ventured to take a ride in it, and they enjoyed it
so much that Mr. Edison prolonged the journey as far as Boston and the
Bunker Hill monument.

Most of the other monarchs also took a high ride, but when the turn of
the Emperor of China came he repeated a fable which he said had come
down from the time of Confucius:


A Chinese Legend.

"Once upon a time there was a Chinaman living in the valley of the
Hoang-Ho River, who was accustomed frequently to lie on his back, gazing
at, and envying, the birds that he saw flying away in the sky. One day he
saw a black speck which rapidly grew larger and larger, until as it got
near he perceived that it was an enormous bird, which overshadowed the
earth with its wings. It was the elephant of birds, the roc. 'Come with
me,' said the roc, 'and I will show you the wonders of the kingdom of the
birds.' The man caught hold of its claw and nestled among its feathers,
and they rapidly rose high in the air, and sailed away to the Kuen-Lun
Mountains. Here, as they passed near the top of the peaks, another roc
made its appearance. The wings of the two great birds brushed together,
and immediately they fell to fighting. In the midst of the melee the
man lost his hold and tumbled into the top of a tree, where his pigtail
caught on a branch, and he remained suspended. There the unfortunate man
hung helpless, until a rat, which had its home in the rocks at the foot
of the tree, took compassion upon him, and, climbing up, gnawed off the
branch. As the man slowly and painfully wended his weary way homeward,
he said: 'This teaches me that creatures to whom nature has given neither
feathers nor wings should leave the kingdom of the birds to those who
are fitted to inhabit it.'"

Having told this story, Tsait'ien turned his back on the electrical ship.


The Grand Ball.

After the exhibition was finished, and amid the fresh outburst of
enthusiasm that followed, it was suggested that a proper way to wind up
the Congress and give suitable expression to the festive mood which now
possessed mankind would be to have a grand ball. This suggestion met
with immediate and universal approval.

But for so gigantic an affair it was, of course, necessary to make special
preparations. A convenient place was selected on the Virginia side of the
Potomac; a space of ten acres was carefully levelled and covered with a
polished floor, rows of columns one hundred feet apart were run across
it in every direction, and these were decorated with electric lights,
displaying every color of the spectrum.


Unsurpassed Fireworks.

Above this immense space, rising in the centre to a height of more than
a thousand feet, was anchored a vast number of balloons, all aglow
with lights, and forming a tremendous dome, in which brilliant lamps
were arranged in such a manner as to exhibit, in an endless succession
of combinations, all the national colors, ensigns and insignia of the
various countries represented at the Congress. Blazing eagles, lions,
unicorns, dragons and other imaginary creatures that the different nations
had chosen for their symbols appeared to hover high above the dancers,
shedding a brilliant light upon the scene.

Circles of magnificent thrones were placed upon the floor in convenient
locations for seeing. A thousand bands of music played, and tens of
thousands of couples, gayly dressed and flashing with gems, whirled
together upon the polished floor.


Queen Victoria Dances.

The Queen of England led the dance, on the arm of the President of the
United States.

The Prince of Wales led forth the fair daughter of the President,
universally admired as the most beautiful woman upon the great ballroom
floor.

The Emperor William, in his military dress, danced with the beauteous
Princess Masaco, the daughter of the Mikado, who wore for the occasion
the ancient costume of the women of her country, sparkling with jewels,
and glowing with quaint combinations of color like a gorgeous butterfly.

The Chinese Emperor, with his pigtail flying high as he spun, danced
with the Empress of Russia.

The King of Siam essayed a waltz with the Queen Ranavalona, of Madagascar,
while the Sultan of Turkey basked in the smiles of a Chicago heiress to
a hundred millions.

The Czar choose for his partner a dark-eyed beauty from Peru, but
King Malietoa, of Samoa, was suspicious of civilized charmers and,
avoiding all of their allurements, expressed his joy and gave vent to
his enthusiasm in a pas seul. In this he was quickly joined by a band
of Sioux Indian chiefs, whose whoops and yells so startled the leader of
a German band on their part of the floor that he dropped his baton and,
followed by the musicians, took to his heels.

This incident amused the good-natured Emperor of China more than anything
else that had occurred.

"Make muchee noisee," he said, indicating the fleeing musicians with
his thumb. "Allee same muchee flaid noisee," and then his round face
dimpled into another laugh.

The scene from the outside was even more imposing than that which greeted
the eye within the brilliantly lighted enclosure. Far away in the night,
rising high among the stars, the vast dome of illuminated balloons
seemed like some supernatural creation, too grand and glorious to have
been constructed by the inhabitants of the earth.

All around it, and from some of the balloons themselves, rose jets
and fountains of fire, ceaselessly playing, and blotting out the
constellations of the heavens by their splendor.


The Prince of Wales's Toast.

The dance was followed by a grand banquet, at which the Prince of Wales
proposed a toast to Mr. Edison:

"It gives me much pleasure," he said, "to offer, in the name of the
nations of the Old World, this tribute of our admiration for, and our
confidence in, the genius of the New World. Perhaps on such an occasion
as this, when all racial differences and prejudices ought to be, and are,
buried and forgotten, I should not recall anything that might revive
them; yet I cannot refrain from expressing my happiness in knowing that
the champion who is to achieve the salvation of the earth has come forth
from the bosom of the Anglo-Saxon race."

Several of the great potentates looked grave upon hearing the Prince of
Wales's words, and the Czar and the Kaiser exchanged glances; but there
was no interruption to the cheers that followed. Mr. Edison, whose modesty
and dislike to display and to speechmaking were well known, simply said:

"I think we have got the machine that can whip them. But we ought not
to be wasting any time. Probably they are not dancing on Mars, but are
getting ready to make us dance."


Haste to Embark.

These words instantly turned the current of feeling in the vast
assembly. There was no longer any disposition to expend time in vain
boastings and rejoicings. Everywhere the cry now became, "Let us make
haste! Let us get ready at once! Who knows but the Martians have already
embarked, and are now on their way to destroy us?"

Under the impulse of this new feeling, which, it must be admitted,
was very largely inspired by terror, the vast ballroom was quickly
deserted. The lights were suddenly put out in the great dome of balloons,
for someone had whispered:

"Suppose they should see that from Mars? Would they not guess what we
were about, and redouble their preparations to finish us?"

Upon the suggestion of the President of the United States, an executive
committee, representing all the principal nations, was appointed, and
without delay a meeting of this committee was assembled at the White
House. Mr. Edison was summoned before it, and asked to sketch briefly
the plan upon which he proposed to work.


Thousands of Men for Mars.

I need not enter into the details of what was done at this meeting. Let it
suffice to say that when it broke up, in the small hours of the morning,
it had been unanimously resolved that as many thousands of men as
Mr. Edison might require should be immediately placed at his disposal;
that as far as possible all the great manufacturing establishments
of the country should be instantly transformed into factories where
electrical ships and disintegrators could be built, and upon the
suggestion of Professor Sylvanus P. Thompson, the celebrated English
electrical expert, seconded by Lord Kelvin, it was resolved that all
the leading men of science in the world should place their services at
the disposal of Mr. Edison in any capacity in which, in his judgment,
they might be useful to him.

The members of this committee were disposed to congratulate one another
on the good work which they had so promptly accomplished, when at the
moment of their adjournment, a telegraphic dispatch was handed to the
President from Professor George E. Hale, the director of the great Yerkes
Observatory, in Wisconsin. The telegram read:


What's Happening on Mars?

"Professor Barnard, watching Mars to-night with the forty-inch telescope,
saw a sudden outburst of reddish light, which we think indicates that
something has been shot from the planet. Spectroscopic observations of
this moving light indicated that it was coming earthward, while visible,
at the rate of not less than one hundred miles a second."

Hardly had the excitement caused by the reading of this dispatch subsided,
when others of a similar import came from the Lick Observatory, in
California; from the branch of the Harvard Observatory at Arequipa,
in Peru, and from the Royal Observatory, at Potsdam.

When the telegram from this last-named place was read the Emperor William
turned to his Chancellor and said:

"I want to go home. If I am to die I prefer to leave my bones among those
of my Imperial ancestors, and not in this vulgar country, where no king
has ever ruled. I don't like this atmosphere. It makes me feel limp."

And now, whipped on by the lash of alternate hope and fear, the earth
sprang to its work of preparation.




Chapter IV.


It is not necessary for me to describe the manner in which Mr. Edison
performed his tremendous task. He was as good as his word, and within six
months from the first stroke of the hammer, a hundred electrical ships,
each provided with a full battery of disintegrators, were floating in
the air above the harbor and the partially rebuilt city of New York.

It was a wonderful scene. The polished sides of the huge floating cars
sparkled in the sunlight, and, as they slowly rose and fell, and swung
this way and that, upon the tides of the air, as if held by invisible
cables, the brilliant pennons streaming from their peaks waved up and
down like the wings of an assemblage of gigantic humming birds.

Not knowing whether the atmosphere of Mars would prove suitable to be
breathed by inhabitants of the earth, Mr. Edison had made provision, by
means of an abundance of glass-protected openings, to permit the inmates
of the electrical ships to survey their surroundings without quitting the
interior. It was possible by properly selecting the rate of undulation,
to pass the vibratory impulse from the disintegrators through the glass
windows of a car, without damage to the glass itself. The windows were so
arranged that the disintegrators could sweep around the car on all sides,
and could also be directed above or below, as necessity might dictate.

To overcome the destructive forces employed by the Martians no
satisfactory plan had yet been devised, because there was no means to
experiment with them. The production of those forces was still the secret
of our enemies. But Mr. Edison had no doubt that if we could not resist
their effects we might at least be able to avoid them by the rapidity of
our motions. As he pointed out, the war machines which the Martians had
employed in their invasion of the earth, were really very awkward and
unmanageable affairs. Mr. Edison's electrical ships, on the other hand,
were marvels of speed and of manageability. They could dart about, turn,
reverse their course, rise, fall, with the quickness and ease of a fish
in the water. Mr. Edison calculated that even if mysterious bolts should
fall upon our ships we could diminish their power to cause injury by
our rapid evolutions.

We might be deceived in our expectations, and might have overestimated
our powers, but at any rate we must take our chances and try.


Watching the Martians.

A multitude, exceeding even that which had assembled during the great
congress at Washington, now thronged New York and its neighborhood
to witness the mustering and the departure of the ships bound for
Mars. Nothing further had been heard of the mysterious phenomenon
reported from the observatories six months before, and which at the time
was believed to indicate the departure of another expedition from Mars
for the invasion of the earth. If the Martians had set out to attack
us they had evidently gone astray; or, perhaps, it was some other world
that they were aiming at this time.

The expedition had, of course, profoundly stirred the interest of the
scientific world, and representatives of every branch of science,
from all the civilized nations, urged their claims to places in
the ships. Mr. Edison was compelled, from lack of room, to refuse
transportation to more than one in a thousand of those who now, on the
