
57. Fastening by a loop. This can be tied or untied without loosening
the loop itself. It is made by following, towards the longer loop, the
direction as numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and is terminated by the loop, 6,
7, 6, finally passing it over the head of the post, A. This knot holds
itself, the turns being in opposite directions. To untie it, we slack
the turns of the cable sufficiently to again pass the loop, 6, 7, 6,
over the post, A, and turn the ends in the contrary direction to that
in which they were made (as 5, 4, 3, 2, 1).

58. Iron "shell," in two views.

59 and 60. "Wedding" knots; a b, eyelets; c d, the join; e, the
fastening.

61. Lark's-head fastening to running knot.

62. A round turn; the cord, a, is passed through the bight of the
cord, b, over the button, c, where it is secured by an ordinary knot.

63. Belaying-pin splice. The cord, b, "stops" the pin, e, its end
being spliced upon itself, and "served" with yarn; this rope, with its
pin, is passed through the spliced eye, f of the line, g.

64. Round button.

65. Joint by a spherical shell, each loop, a and b, being made by ties
and splices, and surrounding the shell, c.

66. Belaying-pin, shown separately, before being stoppered.

67. Fastening to shears.

68. Square mooring. When the cable is round the post, A, and the
piece, c, without being crossed, it lays in the section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, and the end is fastened by tying.

69. Wooden shell in section.

70. Crossed fastening. The turns of the cable, passing in front of the
post, B, are crossed at the back of C, in the direction 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, the end, 8, being secured to the cable.

71. Wooden shell.

72. Double-chain fastening.

73. Lashing for "ram" block, or "dead-eye." The ram blocks, a and b,
are strapped by the cords, e, which hold them; the small lanyards,
d, pass through the holes to make the connection, and as they are
tightened give the requisite tension to the cordage; the ends are
fastened to the main rope. Usually one of these dead-eyes is held by
an iron strap to the point where it is required to fix and strain the
cordage, which is ordinarily a shroud.

74. Chain fastening.

  1'. Simple band, showing the upper side.

  2'. The same, showing the under side and the knot.

  3'. Tie, with crossed ends, commenced; a turn is taken under the
  strands, to hold the ends of the cord.

  4'. The same, completed.

  5'. Bend with crossed strands, commenced, the one end being looped
  over the other.

  6'. The same, completed.

  7'. Necklace tie, seen on the upper side.

  8'. The same, seen underneath. The greater the strain on the cords,
  the tighter the knot becomes.

  9' and 10' are similar splices to 7' and 8' with slight
  modifications.

  11' shows the commencement of 13', the legs in elevation; 12' being
  a front view. An ordinary band, made by several turns of a small
  rope, is lapped round them and hauled taut, and then interlaced at
  the ends. This done, the legs are shifted into the shape of a St.
  Andrew's cross. Thus the lashing is tightened, and, for further
  security, we pass the line several times over the tie and between
  the spars, knotting the ends.

  13'. Portuguese knot. This is a lashing for shear legs, and must be
  tight enough to prevent the spars slipping on each other; the
  crossing of the two legs gives a means of securing the knot.

  14'. For binding timbers; a, knot commenced. Take several turns
  round the timbers, and fasten the ends by passing them under the
  turns; b, knot completed. The end of a round stick, m n, termed a
  packing stick, should be passed under the knob, the cord being slack
  enough to allow of this. By turning the stick, the turns can be
  tightened to any extent; when tight, we fasten the longer arm of the
  lever to some fixed point, by a rope, p q, so that it cannot fly
  back. Care must be taken not to turn the stick too far, or the rope
  may be broken. As the timber dries and shrinks, the lever may be
  used to make all taut again.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HARTFORD STEAM BOILER INSPECTION AND INSURANCE COMPANY.


The Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Company makes the
following report of its inspections in January, 1871:

During the month, there were 522 visits of inspection made, and 1,030
boilers examined--853 externally and 363 internally, while 106
have been tested by hydraulic pressure. Number of defects in all
discovered, 431, of which 163 were regarded as dangerous. These
defects were as follows: Furnaces out of shape, 24--3 dangerous;
fractures, 47--25 dangerous; burned plates, 29--14 dangerous;
blistered plates, 54--10 dangerous; cases of sediment and deposit,
97--18 dangerous; cases of incrustation and scale, 70--24 dangerous.
To show how little attention is paid to the internal condition of
boilers by incompetent engineers, we copy the following from a letter
of one of our inspectors:

"In one tubular boiler I found sediment in the back end, eight inches
deep, and extending forward more than four feet. It seemed to be an
accumulation of fine scale cemented together, so that it was necessary
to break it up with a hammer and chisel before it could be removed.
The engineer said _he had cleaned the boilers only three days before_,
and objected to my making another examination. This is one of the
many cases we find, where the proprietor trusts everything about his
boilers to his engineer, supposing him to be reliable."

With such accumulation of sediment and deposit, is it any wonder that
sheets are burned? A careful engineer will understand, if the feed
water be impure, that he must blow down two or three inches every day,
or oftener, that the sediment may be removed as it accumulates, and
then an internal examination once in two weeks, or once a month, will
insure a clean boiler.

Cases of external corrosion, 26--10 dangerous; cases of internal
corrosion, 17--5 dangerous; cases of internal grooving, 28--11
dangerous; water gages out of order, 50; blow-out apparatus out of
order, 15--7 dangerous; safety valves overloaded, 40--12 dangerous;
pressure gages out of order, 54--6 dangerous, varying from -15 to
+8 pounds. (We have found several gages entirely ruined from being
frozen). Boilers without gages, 4; cases of deficiency of water,
5--1 dangerous; broken braces and stays, 31--7 dangerous; boilers
condemned, 2--both dangerous.

Two engineers were found drunk on duty, and promptly discharged. There
were 9 serious explosions during the month, by which 99 persons were
killed, and 6 wounded. Eighty-seven of the killed were passengers on
the ill-fated steamer _H.R. Arthur_, on the Mississippi River. Many
were drowned, and some burned, but the origin of the calamity was the
bad quality of the boilers, which a careless management was unable
to detect. The upper and fore part of the boat was blown away by the
exploded boilers, and, to add to the horror, what remained took fire.

None of these exploded boilers were under the care of this company.

       *       *       *       *       *


Five ore-roasting furnaces are in full blast in Nevada.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED COMPOUND SPIRAL CAR SPRING FOR RAILWAY CARRIAGES.


Our engravings illustrate an improved compound car-spring, which
appears to possess all the requisites of a first-class spring,
combining in its construction extreme simplicity with great strength,
and a feature whereby the power of the spring increases with increase
of the load, and _vice versa_, so that its flexibility remains nearly
constant for all loads.

Fig. 1 is a perspective view of this spring, with a portion of the
side of the case broken out to show the interior arrangement of the
spiral springs. Fig. 2 is a section of the compressing plate. Fig. 3
is a plan view, showing the arrangement of the tubes which enclose the
springs.

[Illustration: POTT'S' SPIRAL CAR SPRING FOR RAILWAY CARRIAGES.
_Fig. 1       Fig. 2        Fig. 3_]

The case is cast in two pieces. Its vertical wall is cast in a single
piece, and has at the top a flange or bead extending inwardly, against
which the compressing plate abuts when the spring is not compressed,
as shown in Fig. 2. A bottom plate completes the case.

The spiral components of the spring are inclosed in tubes, as shown in
Figs. 1 and 3. It is not deemed essential that these tubes should be
seamless, or that their edges, brought together in bending, should be
soldered, brazed, or welded. They act merely as guides to compel the
component springs to expand or contract in vertical lines, and need
only be strong enough for that purpose.

The compressing plate is formed with concentric steps or ledges,
as shown in Fig. 2, so that with light loads, only a portion of the
component spirals act. With a heavier load a new series of spirals is
brought into action, and so on, till the spring is loaded to its full
capacity. This feature is novel, and as important as novel, as it
gives the spring a far more easy and flexible carriage, with light
loads, than would be the case if all the spirals were permitted to
act.

In putting the spring together, the vertical part of the case is
inverted. The compressing plate is then placed within the case,
resting upon the inner flange of the case above described. The tubes
with their inclosed springs are then arranged in position, as shown in
the plan view, Fig. 3. The bottom plate of the case is then placed in
position, and held to its place by lugs and rivets, as shown in Fig.
1; the spring is then ready for use.

The employment of tubes in the manner described, enables springs of
the greatest practical length to be used, without the sectional or
division plates met with in other spiral car springs. A greater
and easier movement is therefore obtained. These springs can, it
is claimed, compete in price with any spring in market, and are
guaranteed by the manufacturers. Patented through the Scientific
American Patent Agency, December 27, 1870, by Albert Potts, whom
address for further information, No. 490 North Third street,
Philadelphia, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *


PORTABLE WRITING AND COPYING CASE.

This device is the invention of A. G. Buzby, of Philadelphia, Pa. It
is a combined writing and copying case. Besides the usual recesses
or chambers for pen, ink, paper, etc., it is provided with a book of
copying paper, in which copies of important letters may be made, by
damping the letters in the usual way, and pressing them between the
leaves of the copying book; or the transfer paper may be used, so that
the letter will be copied as it is written, if preferred.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




HOW WALKING STICKS ARE MADE.


Sticks are manufactured both from large timber of from two to six
feet girth, and from small underwood of about the thickness of a man's
thumb. The timber, which is chiefly beech, is first sawed into battens
of about three feet in length and as many inches in width; and
from each of these battens two square sticks, with square heads are
afterwards cut in opposite directions, so that the middle portion
is waste wood. The corners of each are afterwards rounded off by a
planing process called "trapping," and the square head is reduced, by
a small saw, to a curve or rectangular bend, so as to form a handle.
When the sticks are brought in this way to the exact size and pattern,
they are polished with great care, are finely varnished, and packed
in boxes or bundles for the market. Many sawn sticks, however, are
supplied with bone and horn handles, which are fastened on with glue;
and then of course there is less wood waste, as a larger number of
them may be cut from one batten.

A very different process takes place in the manufacture of sticks
from small underwood, in which there is no sawing required. The rough
unfashioned sticks, which are generally of hazel, ash, oak and thorn,
are cut with a bill in the same way as kidney bean sticks, and are
brought to the factory in large bavins or bundles, piled on a timber
tug. There must of course, be some little care in their selection, yet
it is evident that the woodmen are not very particular on this score,
for they have in general an ungainly appearance; and many are so
crooked and rough, that no drover or country boy would think it worth
while to polish the like of them with his knife. Having arrived at
this place, however, their numerous excrescences are soon pruned away,
and their ugliness converted into elegance. When sufficiently seasoned
and fit for working, they are first laid to soak in wet sand, and
rendered more tough and pliable; a workman then takes them one by one,
and securing them with an iron stock, bends them skillfully this way
and that, so as to bring out their natural crooks, and render them at
last all straight even rods. If they are not required to be knotted,
they next go to the "trapper," who puts them through a kind of
circular plane, which takes off knots, and renders them uniformly
smooth and round. The most important process of all is that of giving
them their elegantly curved handles, for which purpose they are passed
over to the "crooker." Every child knows that if we bend a tough stick
moderately when the pressure is discontinued, it will soon fly back,
more or less, to its former position; and if we bend it very much,
it will break. Now the crooker professes to accomplish the miracle of
bending a stick as it might be an iron wire, so that it shall neither
break nor "backen." To prevent the breaking, the wood is rendered
pliant by further soaking in wet sand; and a flexible band of metal
is clamped down firmly to that portion of the stick that will form the
outside of the curve; the top end is then fitted into a grooved iron
shoulder which determines the size of the crook, the other end being
brought round so as to point in the opposite direction; the metal
band during this process binding with increasing tightness against the
stretching fibers of the wood, so that they cannot snap or give way
under the strain. The crook having been made, the next thing is to fix
it, or remove from the fibers the reaction of elasticity, which would
otherwise, on the cessation of the bending force, cause it to backen
more or less, and undo the work. In the old process of crooking by
steam, as timber bending is effected, the stick was merely left till
it was cold to acquire a permanent set; but in the new process, a more
permanent set is given by turning the handle about briskly over a jet
of gas. The sticks being now fashioned, it only remains to polish
and stain or varnish them; and they are sometimes scorched or
burned brown, and carved with foliage, animal heads and other
devices.--_Chambers' Journal_.

       *       *       *       *       *


FLOWERING OF THE VICTORIA REGIA IN THE OPEN AIR.--Joseph Mager, Esq.,
has succeeded in flowering the Victoria lily, in his pond in England.
The pond is perfectly open, but the water is heated by hot water pipes
coming from a boiler near the pond, carefully concealed. The seeds
of the Victoria were planted in May last, and the first flower was
produced Sept. 10th. Afterwards seven other flowers opened. The plant
has eight leaves, of which the largest is five feet two inches in
diameter. Mr. Mager has also succeeded in flowering a large number of
other tropical lilies in his pond.

       *       *       *       *       *


JUTE, a material largely used in combination with hemp, for making
cordage, sacking, mats, and carpets, is produced in India to the
extent of 300,000 tuns per annum. The scarcity of fuel prevents its
manufacture on the spot, except by the rudest and most primitive
