can't do a thing for you."

"We heard about your argument with the Lobby. News reaches Mars. But
these are mighty sick people, Doc."

Feldman shook his head. "Better take me back. I'm not allowed to
practice medicine. The charge would be first-degree murder if anything
happened."

Lou leaned forward. "Shall I talk to him, Jake?"

The old man grimaced. "Time enough. Let him see what we got first."

Sand howled against the windshield and the tractor bumped and surged
along. Feldman took another of the weeds and tried to estimate their
course. But he had no idea where they were when the tractor finally
stopped. There was a village of small huts that seemed to be merely
entrances to living quarters dug under the surface. They led him into
one and through a tunnel into a large room filled with simple cots and
the unhappy sounds of sick people.

Two women were disconsolately trying to attend to the half-dozen
sick--four children and two adults. Their faces brightened as they saw
Jake, then fell. "Eb and Tilda died," they reported.

Feldman looked at the two figures under the sheets and whistled. The
same black specks he had seen on the face of Billings covered the skins
of the two old people who had died.

"Funny," Jake said slowly. "They didn't quite act like the others and
they sure died mighty fast. Darn it, I had it figured for that stuff in
the book. Infantile paralysis. How about it, Doc? Sort of like a cold,
stiff sore neck."

It was clearly polio--one of the diseases that could attack Mars-normal
flesh. Feldman nodded at the symptoms, staring at the sick kids. He
shrugged, finally. "There's a cure for it, but I don't have the serum.
Neither do you, or you wouldn't have brought me here. I couldn't help if
I wanted to."

"That old book didn't list a cure," Jake told him. "But it said the kids
didn't have to be crippled. There was something about a Kenny treatment.
Doc, does the stuff really cripple for life?"

Feldman saw one of the boys flinch. He dropped his eyes, remembering the
Lobby's efficient spy service on Earth and wondering what it was like
here. But he knew the outcome.

"Damn you, Jake!"

Jake chuckled. "Thought you would. We sure appreciate it. Just tell us
what to do, Doc."

Feldman began writing down his requirements, trying to remember the
details of the treatment. Exercise, hot compresses, massage. It was
coming back to him. He'd have to do it himself, of course, to get the
feel of it. He couldn't explain it well enough. But he couldn't turn his
back on the kids, either.

"Maybe I can help," he said doubtfully as he moved toward a cot.

"No, Doc." Jake's voice wasn't amused any longer, and he held the
younger man back. "You're doing us a favor, and I'll be darned if I'll
let you stick your neck out too far. You can't treat 'em yourself. Mars
is tougher than Earth. You should live under Space Lobby _and_ Medical
Lobby here a while. Oh, maybe they don't mind a few fools like me being
herb doctors, but they'd sure hate to have a man who can do real
medicine outside their hands. You let me do it, or get in the tractor
and I'll have Lou drive you back. Once you start in here, there'll be no
stopping. Believe me."

Feldman looked at him, seeing the colonials around him for the first
time as people. It had been a long time since he'd been treated as a
fellow human by anyone.

Jake was right, he knew. Once he put his hand to the bandage, eventually
there'd be no turning back from the scalpel. These people needed medical
help too desperately. Eventually, the news would spread, and the Lobby
police would come for him. Chris couldn't afford to shield him. In fact,
he was sure now that she'd hunt him night and day.

"Don't be a fool, Jake," he ordered brusquely. He handed his list to one
of the women. "You'll have to learn to do what I do," he told the people
there. "You'll have to work like fools for weeks. But there won't be
many crippled children. I can promise that much!"

He blinked sharply at the sudden hope in their eyes. But his mind went
on wondering how long it would be before the inevitable would catch up
with him. With luck, maybe a few months. But he hadn't been blessed with
any superabundance of luck. It would probably be less time than he
thought.




V

Surgery


Doc Feldman's luck was better than he had expected. For an Earth year,
he was a doctor again, moving about from village to village as he was
needed and doing what he could.

The village had been isolated during the early colonization when Mars
made a feeble attempt to break free of Space Lobby. Their supplies had
been cut off and they had been forced to do for themselves. Now they
were largely self-sufficient. They grew native plants and extracted
hormones in crude little chemical plants. The hormones were traded to
the big chemical plants for a pittance to buy what had to come from
Earth. Other jury-rigged affairs synthesized much of their food. But
mostly they learned to get along on what Mars provided.

Doc Feldman learned from them. Money was no longer part of his life. He
ate with whatever family needed him and slipped into the life around
him.

He was learning Martian medicine and finding that his Earth courses were
mostly useless. No wonder the villagers distrusted Lobby doctors. Doc
had his own little laboratory where he had managed to start making
Mars-normal penicillin--a primitive antibiotic, but better than nothing.

Jake had come to remind him that it was his first anniversary, and now
they were smoking bracky together.

"Sheer luck, Jake," Doc repeated. "You Martians are tough. But some day
someone is going to die under my care, with the little equipment I have.
Then--"

Jake nodded slowly. "Maybe, Doc. And maybe some day Mars will break free
of the Lobbies. You'd better pray for that."

"I've been--" Doc stopped, realizing what he'd started to say. The old
man chuckled.

"You've been talking rebellion for months, Doc. I hear rumors. Whenever
you get mad, you want us to secede. But you don't really mean it yet.
You can't picture any government but the one you're used to."

Doc grinned. Jake had a point, but it was not as strong as it would have
been a few months before. The towns under the Lobby were cheap
imitations of Earth, but here, divorced to a large extent from the
lobbies, the villages were making Mars their own. Their ways might be
strange; but they worked.

Jake shifted his body in the weak sunlight. "Newton village forgot to
report a death on time. I hear Ryan is sweating them out, trying to
prove it was your fault."

There was no evidence against him yet, Doc was sure. But Chris was out
to prove something, and to get a reputation as a top-flight
administrator. It must have hurt when they shipped her here as head of
the lesser hemisphere of Mars. She'd expected to use Feldman as a front
while she became the actual ruler of the whole Lobby. Now she wanted to
strike back.

"She's using blackmail," he said, and some of his old bitterness was in
his voice. "Anyone taking treatment from an herb doctor in this section
is cut off from Medical Lobby service. Damn it, Jake, that could mean
letting people die!"

"Yeah." Jake sighed softly. "It could mean letting people begin to
think about getting rid of the Lobby, too. Well, I gotta help harvest
the bracky. Take it easy on operating for a while, will you, Doc?"

"All right, Jake. But stop keeping the serious cases a secret. Two men
died last month because you wouldn't call me for surgery. I've broken
all my oaths already. It doesn't matter anymore."

"It matters, boy. We've been lucky, but some day one case will go to the
hospital and they'll find your former work. Then they'll really be after
you. The less you do the better."

Doc watched Jake slump off, then turned down into the little root cellar
and back toward the room concealed behind it, where his crude laboratory
lay. For the moment, he was free to work on the mystery of the black
spots.

He kept running into them--always on the body of someone who died of
something that seemed like a normal disease. Without a microscope, he
was almost helpless, but he had taken specimens and tried to culture
them. Some of his cultures had grown, though they might be nothing but
unknown Martian fungi or bacteria. Mars was dry and almost devoid of
air, but plants and a few smaller insects had survived and adapted. It
wasn't by any means lifeless.

Without a microscope, he could do little but depend on his files of
cases. But today there was new evidence. A villager had filched an Earth
_Medical Journal_ from the tractor driven by Chris Ryan and forwarded it
to him. He found the black specks mentioned in a single paragraph, under
skin diseases. Investigation of the diet was being made, since all cases
were among people eating synthetics.

There was another article on aberrant cases--a few strange little
misbehaviors in classical syndromes. He studied that, wondering. It had
to be the same thing. Diet didn't account for the fact that the specks
appeared only when the patient was near death.

Nor did it account for the hard lump at the base of the neck which he
found in every case he could check. That might be coincidence, but he
doubted it.

Whatever it was, it aggravated any other disease the patient had and
made seemingly simple diseases turn out to be completely and rapidly
fatal. Once syphilis had been called "The Great Imitator". This gave
promise of being worse.

He shook his head, cursing his lack of equipment. Each month more people
were dying with these specks--and he was helpless.

The concealed door broke open suddenly and a boy thrust his head in.
"Doc, there's a man here from Einstein. Says his wife's dying."

The man was already coming into the room.

"She's powerful sick, Doc. Had a bellyache, fever, began throwing up.
Pains under her belly, like she's had before. But this time it's awful."

Doc shot a few questions at him, frowning at what he heard. Then he
began packing the few things that might help. There should be no
appendicitis on Mars. The bugs responsible for that shouldn't have
adapted to Mars-normal. But more and more infections found ways to cross
the border. Gangrene had been able to get by without change, it seemed.
So far, none of the contagious infections except polio and the common
cold had made the jump.

This sounded like an advanced case, perhaps already involving
peritonitis.

So far, he'd been lucky with penicillin, but each time he used it with
grave doubts of its action on the Mars-adapted patients. If the appendix
had burst, however, it was the only possible treatment.

He riffled through his stores; There was ether enough, fortunately. The
villagers had made that for him out of Martian plants, using their
complicated fermentation processes. He yelled for Jake, and the boy
brought the old man back a moment later.

"Jake, I'll need more of that narcotic stuff. I don't want the woman
writhing and tearing her stitches after the ether wears off."

"Can't get it, Doc." Jake's eyes seemed to cloud as he said it.
"Distilling plant broke down. Doc, I don't like this case. That woman's
been to the hospital three times. I hear she just got out recently. This
might be a plant, or they figure they can't help her."

"They're afraid to try anything on Mars-normal flesh. They can't be
proved wrong if they do nothing." Doc finished packing his bag and got
ready to go out. "Jake, either I'm a doctor or I'm not. I can't worry
when a woman may be dying."

For a second, Jake's expression was stubborn. Then the little crow's
feet around his eyes deepened and the dry chuckle was back in his voice.
"Right, Dr. Feldman." He flipped up his thumb and went off at a
shuffling run toward the tractor. Lou and the man from Einstein followed
Doc into the machine.

It was a silent ride, except for Doc's questions about the sick woman.
Her husband, George Lynn, was evasive and probably ignorant. He admitted
that Harriet had been to the dispensary and small infirmary that
Southport called a hospital.

It was the only place in the entire Southern hemisphere where an
operation could be performed legally. Most cases had to go to
Northport, but Chris had been trying to expand. Apparently, she was
determined to make Southport into another major center before she was
called back to Earth.

Doc wondered why the villagers went there. They had no medical insurance
with the Lobby; they couldn't afford it. Most villagers didn't have the
cash, either. They were forced to mortgage their future work and that of
their families to the drug plants that were run by the Lobby.

"And they just turned your wife away?" Doc asked. He couldn't quite
believe that of Chris.

"Well, I dunno. She wouldn't talk much. Twice she went and they gave her
something. Cost every cent I could borrow. Then this last time, they
kept her a couple days before they let me come and get her. But now
she's a lot worse."

Jake spun about, suddenly tense. "How'd you pay them last time, George?"

"Why, they didn't ask. I told her she could put up six months from me
and the kids, but nobody said nothing about it. Just gave her back to
me." He frowned slowly, his dull voice uncertain. "They told me they'd
done all they could, not to bring her back. That's why she was so strong
on getting Doc."

"I don't like it," Jake said flatly. "It stinks. They always charge.
George, did they suggest she get in touch with Doc here?"

"Maybe they did, maybe not. Harriet did all the talking with them. I
just do what she tells me, and she said to get Doc."

Jake swore. "It smells like a trap. Are you sure she's sick, George?"

"I felt her head and she sure had a fever." George Lynn was torn
between his loyalties. "You know me, Doc. You fixed me up that time I
had the red pip. I wouldn't pull nothing on you."

Doc had a feeling that Jake was probably right, but he vetoed the
suggestion that they stop to look for spies. He had no time for that. If
the woman was really sick, he had to get to her at once, and even that
might be too late.

He remembered the woman, sickly from other treatment. He'd been forced
to remove her inflamed tonsils a few months before. She'd whined and
complained because he couldn't spend all his time attending her. She was
a nag, a shrew, and a totally selfish woman. But that was her husband's
worry, not his.

He dashed into the little house when they reached Einstein, and his
first glance confirmed what George Lynn had said. The woman was sick,
all right. She was running a high fever. Much too high.

She began whining and protesting at his having taken so long, but the
pain soon forced her to stop.

"There may still be a chance," Doc told her husband brusquely. He threw
the cleanest sheet onto a table and shoved it under the single light.
"Keep out of the way--in the other room, if you can all pile in there.
This isn't exactly aseptic, anyhow. You can boil a lot of water, if you
want to help."

It would give them something to do and he could use the water to clean
up. There was no time to wait for it, however. He had to sterilize with
alcohol and carbolic acid, and hope. He bent over the woman, ripping her
thin gown across to make room for the operation.

Then he swore.

Across her abdomen was the unhealed wound of a previous operation.
They'd worked on her at Southport. They must have removed the appendix
and then been shocked by the signs of infection. They weren't supposed
to release a sick patient, but there was an easy out for them; they
could remove her from the danger of spreading an unknown infection. Some
doctors must have doped her up on sedatives and painkillers and sent her
home, knowing that she would call him. For that matter, they might have
noticed her unrecorded tonsillectomy and considered her fair bait.

He grabbed the ether and slapped a cone over her nose. She tried to
protest; she never cooperated in anything. But the fumes of the ether he
dipped onto the packing of the cone soon overcame that.

It was peritonitis, of course. The only thing to do was to go in and
scrape and clean as best he could. It was a rotten job to have to do,
and he should have had help. But he gritted his teeth and began. He
couldn't trust anyone else to hold the instruments, even.

He cleaned the infection as best he could, knowing there was almost no
chance. He used all the penicillin he dared. Then he began sewing up the
incision. It was all he could do, except for dressing the wound with a
sterile bandage. He reached for one, and stopped.

While he'd been working, the woman had died, far more quietly than she
had ever lived.

It was probably the only gracious act of her life. But it was damning to
Doc. They couldn't hide her death, and any investigation would show that
someone had worked on her. To the Lobby, he would be the one who had
murdered her.

Jake was waiting in the tractor. He took one look at Doc's face and made
no inquiries.

They were more than a mile away when Jake pointed back. Small in the
distance, but distinct against the sands, a gray Medical Corps tractor
was coming. Either they'd had a spy in the village or they'd guessed the
rate of her infection very closely. They must have hoped to catch Doc in
the act, and they'd barely missed.

It wouldn't matter. Their pictures and what testimony they could force
from the village should be enough to hang Doc.




VI

Research


There had been a council the night following the death of Harriet Lynn.
Somehow the word had spread through the villages and the chiefs had
assembled in Jake's village. But they had brought no solution, and in
the long run had been forced to accept Doc's decision.

"I'm not going to retire and hide," he'd told them, surprised at his own
decision, but grimly determined. "You need me and I need you. I'll move
every day in hopes the Lobby police won't find me, but I won't quit."

Now he was packing the things he most needed and getting ready to move.
The small bottles in which he was trying to grow his cultures would need
warmth. He shoved them into an inner pocket, and began surveying what
must be left.

He was heading for his tractor when another battered machine drove up.
It had a girl of about fourteen, with tears streaming down her face. She
held out a pleading hand, and her voice was scared. "It's--it's mama!"

"Where?"

"Leibnitz."

Leibnitz was near enough. Doc started his tractor, motioning for the
girl to lead the way. The little dwelling she led him to was at the edge
of the village, looking more poverty-stricken than most.

Chris Ryan, and three of the Medical Lobby police were inside, waiting.
The girl's mother was tied to the bed, with a collection of medical
instruments laid out, but apparently the threat had been enough. No
actual injury had been inflicted. Probably none had been intended
seriously.

"I knew you'd answer that kind of call," Chris said coldly.

He grinned sickly. They'd wasted no time. "I hear it's more than you'll
do, Chris. Congratulations! My patient died. You're lucky."

"She was certainly dead when my men took her picture. The print shows
the death grimace clearly."

"Pretty. Frame it and keep it to comfort you when you feel lonely," he
snapped.

She struck him across the mouth with the handle of her gun. Then she
twisted out through the door quickly, heading for the tractor that had
been camouflaged to look like those used by the villagers. The three
police led him behind her.

A shout went up, and people began to rush onto the village street. But
they were too late. By the time they reached Southport, Doc could see a
trail of battered tractors behind, but there was nothing more the people
could do. Chris had her evidence and her prisoner.

       *       *       *       *       *

Judge Ben Wilson might have been Jake's brother. He was older and
grayer, but the same expression lay on his face. He must have been the
family black sheep, since his father had been president of Space Lobby.
Instead of inheriting the position, Wilson had remained on Mars, safely
out of the family's way.

He dropped the paper he was reading to frown at Chris. "This the
fellow?"

She began formal charges, but he cut them off. "Your lawyer already had
all that drawn up. I've been expecting you, Doctor. Doctor! Hnnf! You'd
do a lot better home somewhere raising a flock of babies. Well, young
fellow--so you're Feldman. Okay, your trial comes up day after tomorrow.
Be a shame to lock you in Southport jail, a man of your importance.
We'll just keep you here in the pending-trial room. It's a lot more
comfortable."

Chris had been boiling slowly, and now she seemed to blow her safety
valve. "Judge Wilson, your methods are your own business in local
affairs. But this involves Earth Medical Lobby. I demand--"

"Tch, _tch_!" The judge stared at her reprovingly. "Young woman, you
don't demand anything. This is Mars. If Space Lobby can stand me, I
guess our friends over at Medical will have to. Or should I hold trial
right now and find Feldman innocent for lack of evidence?"

"You wouldn't!" Chris cried. Then her face sobered suddenly. "I
apologize. Medical is pleased to leave things in your hands, of course."

Wilson smiled. "Court's closed for today. Doc, I'll show you your cell.
It's right next to my study, so I'm heading there anyhow."

He began shucking his robe while Chris went out with the police, her
voice sharp and continual.

The cell was both reasonably escape-proof and comfortable, Doc saw, and
he tried to thank the judge.

But the old man waved it aside. "Forget it. I just like to see that
little termagant taken down. But don't count on my being soft. My
methods may be a bit unusual--I always did like the courtroom scenes in
the old books by that fellow Smith--but Space Lobby never had any
reason to reverse my decisions. Anything you need?"

"Sure," Doc told him, grinning in spite of his bitterness. "A good
biology lab and an electron microscope."

"Umm. How about a good optical mike and some stains? Just got them in on
the last shipment. Figure they were meant for you anyhow, since Jake
Mullens asked me to order them."
