Glory be, I thought; I finally got that apprentice.

"Why, sure," I said. "You tow the hamper; I'll carry this." I got out
what looked like a big camera case and slung it over my shoulder. "But
you'll have to take me out on the _Javelin_, sometime, and let me
shoot a monster."

He said it was a deal, and we shook on it. Then I had another idea.

"Bish, suppose you come with us, too," I said. "After all, Tom and I
are just a couple of kids. If you're with us, it'll look a lot more
big-paperish."

That didn't seem to please Tom too much. Bish shook his head, though,
and Tom brightened.

"I'm dreadfully sorry, Walt," Bish said. "But I'm going aboard,
myself, to see a friend who is en route through to Odin. A Dr. Watson;
I have not seen him for years."

I'd caught that name, too, when we'd gotten the passenger list. Dr.
John Watson. Now, I know that all sorts of people call themselves
Doctor, and Watson and John aren't too improbable a combination, but
I'd read _Sherlock Holmes_ long ago, and the name had caught my
attention. And this was the first, to my knowledge, that Bish Ware had
ever admitted to any off-planet connections.

We started over to the gate. Hallstock and Ravick were ahead of us. So
was Sigurd Ngozori, the president of the Fidelity & Trust, carrying a
heavy briefcase and accompanied by a character with a submachine gun,
and Adolf Lautier and Professor Hartzenbosch. There were a couple of
spaceport cops at the gate, in olive-green uniforms that looked as
though they had been sprayed on, and steel helmets. I wished we had a
city police force like that. They were Odin Dock & Shipyard Company
men, all former Federation Regular Army or Colonial Constabulary. The
spaceport wasn't part of Port Sandor, or even Fenris; the Odin Dock &
Shipyard Company was the government there, and it was run honestly and
efficiently.

They knew me, and when they saw Tom towing my hamper they cracked a
few jokes about the new _Times_ cub reporter and waved us through. I
thought they might give Bish an argument, but they just nodded and let
him pass, too. We all went out onto the bridge, and across the pit to
the equator of the two-thousand-foot globular ship.

We went into the main lounge, and the captain introduced us to Mr.
Glenn Murell. He was fairly tall, with light gray hair, prematurely
so, I thought, and a pleasant, noncommittal face. I'd have pegged him
for a businessman. Well, I suppose authoring is a business, if that
was his business. He shook hands with us, and said:

"Aren't you rather young to be a newsman?"

I started to burn on that. I get it all the time, and it burns me all the
time, but worst of all on the job. Maybe I am only going-on-eighteen, but
I'm doing a man's work, and I'm doing it competently.

"Well, they grow up young on Fenris, Mr. Murell," Captain Marshak
earned my gratitude by putting in. "Either that or they don't live to
grow up."

Murell unhooked his memophone and repeated the captain's remark into
it. Opening line for one of his chapters. Then he wanted to know if
I'd been born on Fenris. I saw I was going to have to get firm with
Mr. Murell, right away. The time to stop that sort of thing is as soon
as it starts.

"Who," I wanted to know, "is interviewing whom? You'll have at least
five hundred hours till the next possible ship out of here; I only
have two and a half to my next deadline. You want coverage, don't you?
The more publicity you get, the easier your own job's going to be."

Then I introduced Tom, carefully giving the impression that while I
handled all ordinary assignments, I needed help to give him the full
VIP treatment. We went over to a quiet corner and sat down, and the
interview started.

The camera case I was carrying was a snare and a deceit. Everybody
knows that reporters use recorders in interviews, but it never pays to
be too obtrusive about them, or the subject gets recorder-conscious
and stiffens up. What I had was better than a recorder; it was a
recording radio. Like the audiovisuals, it not only transmitted in to
the _Times_, but made a recording as insurance against transmission
failure. I reached into a slit on the side and snapped on the switch
while I was fumbling with a pencil and notebook with the other hand,
and started by asking him what had decided him to do a book about
Fenris.

After that, I fed a question every now and then to keep him running,
and only listened to every third word. The radio was doing a better
job than I possibly could have. At the same time, I was watching Steve
Ravick, Morton Hallstock and Leo Belsher at one side of the room, and
Bish Ware at the other. Bish was within ear-straining range. Out of
the corner of my eye, I saw another man, younger in appearance and
looking like an Army officer in civvies, approach him.

"My dear Bishop!" this man said in greeting.

As far as I knew, that nickname had originated on Fenris. I made a
mental note of that.

"How are you?" Bish replied, grasping the other's hand. "You have been
in Afghanistan, I perceive."

That did it. I told you I was an old _Sherlock Holmes_ reader; I
recognized that line. This meeting was prearranged, neither of them
had ever met before, and they needed a recognition code. Then I
returned to Murell, and decided to wonder about Bish Ware and "Dr.
Watson" later.

It wasn't long before I was noticing a few odd things about Murell,
too, which confirmed my original suspicions of him. He didn't have the
firm name of his alleged publishers right, he didn't know what a
literary agent was and, after claiming to have been a newsman, he
consistently used the expression "news service." I know, everybody
says that--everybody but newsmen. They always call a news service a
"paper," especially when talking to other newsmen.

Of course, there isn't any paper connected with it, except the pad the
editor doodles on. What gets to the public is photoprint, out of a
teleprinter. As small as our circulation is, we have four or five
hundred of them in Port Sandor and around among the small settlements
in the archipelago, and even on the mainland. Most of them are in bars
and cafes and cigar stores and places like that, operated by a coin in
a slot and leased by the proprietor, and some of the big hunter-ships
like Joe Kivelson's _Javelin_ and Nip Spazoni's _Bulldog_ have them.

But long ago, back in the First Centuries, Pre-Atomic and Atomic Era,
they were actually printed on paper, and the copies distributed and
sold. They used printing presses as heavy as a spaceship's engines.
That's why we still call ourselves the Press. Some of the old papers
on Terra, like _La Prensa_ in Buenos Aires, and the Melbourne _Times_,
which used to be the London _Times_ when there was still a London,
were printed that way originally.

Finally I got through with my interview, and then shot about fifteen
minutes of audiovisual, which would be cut to five for the 'cast. By
this time Bish and "Dr. Watson" had disappeared, I supposed to the
ship's bar, and Ravick and his accomplices had gotten through with
their conspiracy to defraud the hunters. I turned Murell over to Tom,
and went over to where they were standing together. I'd put away my
pencil and pad long ago with Murell; now I got them out ostentatiously
as I approached.

"Good day, gentlemen," I greeted them. "I'm representing the Port
Sandor _Times_."

"Oh, run along, sonny; we haven't time to bother with you," Hallstock
said.

"But I want to get a story from Mr. Belsher," I began.

"Well, come back in five or six years, when you're dry behind the
ears, and you can get it," Ravick told me.

"Our readers aren't interested in the condition of my ears," I said
sweetly. "They want to read about the price of tallow-wax. What's this
about another price cut? To thirty-five centisols a pound, I
understand."

"Oh, Steve, the young man's from the news service, and his father will
publish whatever he brings home," Belsher argued. "We'd better give
him something." He turned to me. "I don't know how this got out, but
it's quite true," he said. He had a long face, like a horse's. At
least, he looked like pictures of horses I'd seen. As he spoke, he
pulled it even longer and became as doleful as an undertaker at a
ten-thousand-sol funeral.

"The price has gone down, again. Somebody has developed a synthetic
substitute. Of course, it isn't anywhere near as good as real Fenris
tallow-wax, but try and tell the public that. So Kapstaad Chemical is
being undersold, and the only way they can stay in business is cut the
price they have to pay for wax...."

It went on like that, and this time I had real trouble keeping my
anger down. In the first place, I was pretty sure there was no
substitute for Fenris tallow-wax, good, bad or indifferent. In the
second place, it isn't sold to the gullible public, it's sold to
equipment manufacturers who have their own test engineers and who have
to keep their products up to legal safety standards. He didn't know
this balderdash of his was going straight to the _Times_ as fast as he
spouted it; he thought I was taking it down in shorthand. I knew
exactly what Dad would do with it. He'd put it on telecast in
Belsher's own voice.

Maybe the monster-hunters would start looking around for a rope, then.

When I got through listening to him, I went over and got a short
audiovisual of Captain Marshak of the _Peenemuende_ for the 'cast, and
then I rejoined Tom and Murell.

"Mr. Murell says he's staying with you at the _Times_," Tom said. He
seemed almost as disappointed as Professor Hartzenbosch. I wondered,
for an incredulous moment, if Tom had been trying to kidnap Murell
away from me. "He wants to go out on the _Javelin_ with us for a
monster-hunt."

"Well, that's swell!" I said. "You can pay off on that promise to take
me monster-hunting, too. Right now, Mr. Murell is my big story." I
reached into the front pocket of my "camera" case for the handphone,
to shift to two-way. "I'll call the _Times_ and have somebody come up
with a car to get us and Mr. Murell's luggage."

"Oh, I have a car. Jeep, that is," Tom said. "It's down on the Bottom
Level. We can use that."

Funny place to leave a car. And I was sure that he and Murell had come
to some kind of an understanding, while I was being lied to by
Belsher. I didn't get it. There was just too much going on around me
that I didn't get, and me, I'm supposed to be the razor-sharp newshawk
who gets everything.




3

BOTTOM LEVEL


It didn't take long to get Murell's luggage assembled. There was
surprisingly little of it, and nothing that looked like photographic
or recording equipment. When he returned from a final gathering-up in
his stateroom, I noticed that he was bulging under his jacket, too, on
the left side at the waist. About enough for an 8.5-mm pocket
automatic. Evidently he had been briefed on the law-and-order
situation in Port Sandor.

Normally, we'd have gone off onto the Main City Level, but Tom's jeep
was down on the Bottom Level, and he made no suggestion that we go off
and wait for him to bring it up. I didn't suggest it, either. After
all, it was his jeep, and he wasn't our hired pilot. Besides, I was
beginning to get curious. An abnormally large bump of curiosity is
part of every newsman's basic equipment.

We borrowed a small handling-lifter and one of the spaceport
roustabouts to tow it for us, loaded Murell's luggage and my things
onto it, and started down to the bottomside cargo hatches, from which
the ship was discharging. There was no cargo at all to go aboard,
except mail and things like Adolf Lautier's old film and music tapes.
Our only export is tallow-wax, and it all goes to Terra. It would be
picked up by the Cape _Canaveral_ when she got in from Odin five
hundred hours from now. But except for a few luxury items from Odin,
everything we import comes from Terra, and the _Peenemuende_ had
started discharging that already. We rode down on a contragravity skid
loaded with ammunition. I saw Murell looking curiously at the square
cases, marked TERRAN FEDERATION ARMED FORCES, and 50-MM, MK. 608,
ANTIVEHICLE AND ANTIPERSONNEL, 25 ROUNDS, and OVERAGE. PRACTICE ONLY.
NOT TO BE ISSUED FOR SERVICE, and INSPECTED AND CONDEMNED. The hunters
bought that stuff through the Co-op. It cost half as much as new ammo,
but that didn't help them any. The difference stopped with Steve
Ravick. Murell didn't comment, and neither did Tom or I.

We got off at the bottom of the pit, a thousand feet below the
promenade from which I had come aboard, and stopped for a moment.
Murell was looking about the great amphitheater in amazement.

"I knew this spaceport would be big when I found out that the ship
landed directly on the planet," he said, "but I never expected
anything like this. And this serves a population of twenty thousand?"

"Twenty-four thousand, seven hundred and eight, if the man who got
pounded in a barroom fight around 1330 hasn't died yet," I said. "But
you have to remember that this place was built close to a hundred
years ago, when the population was ten times that much." I'd gotten my
story from him; now it was his turn to interview me. "You know
something about the history of Fenris, I suppose?"

"Yes. There are ample sources for it on Terra, up to the collapse of
the Fenris Company," he said. "Too much isn't known about what's been
happening here since, which is why I decided to do this book."

"Well, there were several cities built, over on the mainland," I told
him. "They're all abandoned now. The first one was a conventional
city, the buildings all on the surface. After one day-and-night cycle,
they found that it was uninhabitable. It was left unfinished. Then
they started digging in. The Chartered Fenris Company shipped in huge
quantities of mining and earth-moving equipment--that put the company
in the red more than anything else--and they began making
burrow-cities, like the ones built in the Northern Hemisphere of Terra
during the Third and Fourth World Wars, or like the cities on Luna and
Mercury Twilight Zone and Titan. There are a lot of valuable mineral
deposits over on the mainland; maybe in another century our
grandchildren will start working them again.

"But about six years before the Fenris Company went to pieces, they
decided to concentrate in one city, here in the archipelago. The sea
water stays cooler in the daytime and doesn't lose heat so rapidly in
the nighttime. So they built Port Sandor, here on Oakleaf Island."

"And for convenience in monster-hunting?"

I shook my head. "No. The Jarvis's sea-monster wasn't discovered until
after the city was built, and it was years after the company had gone
bankrupt before anybody found out about what tallow-wax was good
for."

I started telling him about the native life-forms of Fenris. Because
of the surface temperature extremes, the marine life is the most
highly developed. The land animals are active during the periods after
sunset and after sunrise; when it begins getting colder or hotter,
they burrow, or crawl into caves and crevices among the rocks, and go
into suspended animation. I found that he'd read up on that, and not
too much of his information was incorrect.

He seemed to think, though, that Port Sandor had also been mined out
below the surface. I set him right on that.

"You saw what it looked like when you were coming down," I said. "Just
a flat plateau, with a few shaft-head domes here and there, and the
landing pit of the spaceport. Well, originally it was a valley,
between two low hills. The city was built in the valley, level by
level, and then the tops of the hills were dug off and bulldozed down
on top of it. We have a lot of film at the public library of the
construction of the city, step by step. As far as I know, there are no
copies anywhere off-planet."

He should have gotten excited about that, and wanted to see them.
Instead, he was watching the cargo come off--food-stuffs, now--and
wanted to know if we had to import everything we needed.

"Oh, no. We're going in on the Bottom Level, which is mainly storage,
but we have hydroponic farms for our vegetables and carniculture
plants for meat on the Second and Third Levels. That's counting down
from the Main City Level. We make our own lumber, out of reeds
harvested in the swamps after sunrise and converted to pulpwood, and
we get some good hardwood from the native trees which only grow in
four periods of two hundred hours a year. We only use that for
furniture, gunstocks, that sort of thing. And there are a couple of
mining camps and smelters on the mainland; they employ about a
thousand of our people. But every millisol that's spent on this planet
is gotten from the sale of tallow-wax, at second or third hand if not
directly."

That seemed to interest him more. Maybe his book, if he was really
writing one, was going to be an economic study of Fenris. Or maybe his
racket, whatever it was, would be based on something connected with
our local production. I went on telling him about our hydroponic
farms, and the carniculture plant where any kind of animal tissue we
wanted was grown--Terran pork and beef and poultry, Freyan _zhoumy_
meat, Zarathustran veldtbeest.... He knew, already, that none of the
native life-forms, animal or vegetable, were edible by Terrans.

"You can get all the _pate de foie gras_ you want here," I said. "We
have a chunk of goose liver about fifty feet in diameter growing in
one of our vats."

By this time, we'd gotten across the bottom of the pit, Murell's
luggage and my equipment being towed after us, and had entered the
Bottom Level. It was cool and pleasant here, lighted from the ceiling
fifty feet overhead, among the great column bases, two hundred feet
square and two hundred yards apart, that supported the upper city and
the thick roof of rock and earth that insulated it. The area we were
