them that there were going to be changes. Great and frightening changes
was what she said."

"She didn't specify?"

"No. Just that: great and frightening changes. But the only change of
that kind I can think of would be ... well, something happening to you."

Snooks, having eaten three wafers, was trying to lick his ear. He pushed
the little dog back into his lap and pummeled him gently with his left
hand.

"You mustn't let mediums' gabble worry you, son. These psi-mediums have
real powers, but they can't turn them off and on like a water tap. When
they don't get anything, they don't like to admit it, and they invent
things. Always generalities like that; never anything specific."

"I know all that." The boy seemed offended, as though somebody were
explaining that his mother hadn't really found him out in the rose
garden. "But they talked about it to some of their friends, and it seems
that other mediums are saying the same thing. Father, do you remember
when the Haval Valley reactor blew up? All over Odin, the mediums had
been talking about a terrible accident, for a month before that
happened."

"I remember that." Harv Dorflay believed that somebody had been falsely
informed that the emperor would visit the plant that day. "These great
and frightening changes will probably turn out to be a new fad in
abstract sculpture. Any change frightens most people."

They talked more about mediums, and then about aircars and aircar
racing, and about the Emperor's Cup race that was to be flown in a
month. The communications screen began flashing and buzzing, and after
he had silenced it with the busy-button for the third time, Rodrik said
that it was time for him to go, came around to gather up Snooks, and
went out, saying that he'd be home in time for the banquet. The screen
began to flash again as he went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Prince Ganzay, the Prime Minister. He looked as though he had a
persistent low-level toothache, but that was his ordinary expression.

"Sorry to bother Your Majesty. It's about these chiefs-of-state. Count
Gadvan, the Chamberlain, appealed to me, and I feel I should ask your
advice. It's the matter of precedence."

"Well, we have a fixed rule on that. Which one arrived first?"

"Why, the Adityan, but it seems King Ranulf insists that he's entitled
to precedence, or, rather, his Lord Marshal does. This Lord Koreff
insists that his king is not going to yield precedence to a commoner."

[Illustration]

"Then he can go home to Durendal!" He felt himself growing angry--all
the little angers of the morning were focusing on one spot. He forced
the harshness out of his voice. "At a court function, somebody has to go
first, and our rule is order of arrival at the Palace. That rule was
established to avoid violating the principle of equality to all
civilized peoples and all planetary governments. We're not going to set
it aside for the King of Durendal, or anybody else."

Prince Ganzay nodded. Some of the toothache expression had gone out of
his face, now that he had been relieved of the decision.

"Of course, Your Majesty." He brightened a little. "Do you think we
might compromise? Alternate the precedence, I mean?"

"Only if this First Citizen Yaggo consents. If he does, it would be a
good idea."

"I'll talk to him, sir." The toothache expression came back. "Another
thing, Your Majesty. They've both been invited to attend the Plenary
Session, this afternoon."

"Well, no trouble there; they can enter by different doors and sit in
visitors' boxes at opposite ends of the hall."

"Well, sir, I wasn't thinking of precedence. But this is to be an
Elective Session--new Ministers to replace Prince Havaly, of Defense,
deceased, and Count Frask, of Science and Technology, elevated to the
Bench. There seems to be some difference of opinion among some of the
Ministers and Counselors. It's very possible that the Session may
degenerate into an outright controversy."

"Horrible," Paul said seriously. "I think, though, that our
distinguished guests will see that the Empire can survive difference of
opinion, and even outright controversy. But if you think it might have a
bad effect, why not postpone the election?"

"Well--It's been postponed three times, already, sir."

"Postpone it permanently. Advertise for bids on two robot Ministers,
Defense, and Science and Technology. If they're a success, we can set up
a project to design a robot emperor."

The Prime Minister's face actually twitched and blanched at the
blasphemy. "Your Majesty is joking," he said, as though he wanted to be
reassured on the point.

"Unfortunately, I am. If my job could be robotized, maybe I could take
my wife and my son and our little dog and go fishing for a while."

But, of course, he couldn't. There were only two alternatives: the
Empire or Galactic anarchy. The galaxy was too big to hold general
elections, and there had to be a supreme ruler, and a positive and
automatic--which meant hereditary--means of succession.

"Whose opinion seems to differ from whose, and about what?" he asked.

"Well, Count Duklass and Count Tammsan want to have the Ministry of
Science and Technology abolished, and its functions and personnel
distributed. Count Duklass means to take over the technological sections
under Economics, and Count Tammsan will take over the science part under
Education. The proposal is going to be introduced at this Session by
Count Guilfred, the Minister of Health and Sanity. He hopes to get some
of the bio-and psycho-science sections for his own Ministry."

"That's right. Duklass gets the hide, Tammsan gets the head and horns,
and everybody who hunts with them gets a cut of the meat. That's good
sound law of the chase. I'm not in favor of it, myself. Prince Ganzay,
at this session, I wish you'd get Captain-General Dorflay nominated for
the Bench. I feel that it is about time to honor him with elevation."

"General Dorflay? But why, Your Majesty?"

"Great galaxy, do you have to ask? Why, because the man's a raving
lunatic. He oughtn't even to be trusted with a sidearm, let alone five
companies of armed soldiers. Do you know what he told me this morning?"

"That somebody is training a Nidhog swamp-crawler to crawl up the
Octagon Tower and bite you at breakfast, I suppose. But hasn't that been
going on for quite a while, sir?"

"It was a gimmick in one of the cooking robots, but that's aside from
the question. He's finally named the master mind behind all these
nightmares of his, and who do you think it is? Yorn Travann!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prime Minister's face grew graver than usual. Well, it was something
to look grave about; some of these days----

"Your Majesty, I couldn't possibly agree more about the general's mental
condition, but I really should say that, crazy or not, he is not alone
in his suspicions of Prince Travann. If sharing them makes me a lunatic,
too, so be it, but share them I do."

Paul felt his eyebrows lift in surprise. "That's quite too much and too
little, Prince Ganzay," he said.

"With your permission, I'll elaborate. Don't think that I suspect Prince
Travann of any childish pranks with elevators or viewscreens or
cooking-robots," the Prime Minister hastened to disclaim, "but I
definitely do suspect him of treasonous ambitions. I suppose Your
Majesty knows that he is the first Minister of Security in centuries who
has assumed personal control of both the planetary and municipal police,
instead of delegating his _ex officio_ powers.

"Your Majesty may not know, however, of some of the peculiar uses he has
been making of those authorities. Does Your Majesty know that he has
recruited the Security Guard up to at least ten times the strength
needed to meet any conceivable peace-maintenance problem on this planet,
and that he has been piling up huge quantities of heavy combat
equipment--guns up to 200-millimeter, heavy contragravity, even
gun-cutters and bomb-and-rocket boats? And does Your Majesty know that
most of this armament is massed within fifteen minutes' flight-time of
this Palace? Or that Prince Travann has at his disposal from two and a
half to three times, in men and firepower, the combined strength of the
Planetary Militia and the Imperial Army on this planet?"

"I know. It has my approval. He's trying to salvage some of the young
nonworkers through exposing them to military discipline. A good many of
them, I believe, have gone off-planet on their discharge from the SG and
hired as mercenaries, which is a far better profession than vote
selling."

"Quite a plausible explanation: Prince Travann is nothing if not
plausible," the Prime Minister agreed. "And does Your Majesty know that,
because of repeated demands for support from the Ministry of Security,
the Imperial Navy has been scattered all over the Empire, and that there
is not a naval craft bigger than a scout-boat within fifteen hundred
light-years of Odin?"

That was absolutely true. Paul could only nod agreement. Prince Ganzay
continued:

"He has been doing some peculiar things as Police Chief of Asgard, too.
For instance, there are two powerful nonworkers' voting-bloc bosses, Big
Moogie Blisko and Zikko the Nose--I assure Your Majesty that I am not
inventing these names; that's what the persons are actually called--who
have been enjoying the favor and support of Prince Travann. On a number
of occasions, their smaller rivals, leaders of less important gangs,
have been arrested, often on trumped-up charges, and held incommunicado
until either Moogie or Zikko could move into their territories and annex
their nonworker followers. These two bloc-bosses are subsidized,
respectively, by the Steel and Shipbuilding Cartels and by the Reaction
Products and Chemical Cartels, but actually, they are controlled by
Prince Travann. They, in turn, control between them about seventy per
cent of the nonworkers in Asgard."

"And you think this adds up to a plot against the Throne?"

"A plot to seize the Throne, Your Majesty."

"Oh, come, Prince Ganzay! You're talking like Dorflay!"

"Hear me out, Your Majesty. His Imperial Highness is fourteen years old;
it will be eleven years before he will be legally able to assume the
powers of emperor. In the dreadful event of your immediate death, it
would mean a regency for that long. Of course, your Ministers and
Counselors would be the ones to name the Regent, but I know how they
would vote with Security Guard bayonets at their throats. And regency
might not be the limit of Prince Travann's ambitions."

"In your own words, quite plausible, Prince Ganzay. It rests, however,
on a very questionable foundation. The assumption that Prince Travann is
stupid enough to want the Throne."

He had to terminate the conversation himself and blank the screen.
Viktor Ganzay was still staring at him in shocked incredulity when his
image vanished. Viktor Ganzay could not imagine anybody not wanting the
Throne, not even the man who had to sit on it.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat, for a while, looking at the darkened screen, a little worried.
Viktor Ganzay had a much better intelligence service than he had
believed. He wondered how much Ganzay had found out that he hadn't
mentioned. Then he went back to the reports. He had gotten down to the
Ministry of Fine Arts when the communications screen began calling
attention to itself again.

When he flipped the switch, a woman smiled out of it at him. Her blond
hair was rumpled, and she wore a dressing gown; her smile brightened as
his face appeared in her screen.

