chair and picked up his drink again.

"Yes. They'll need something better than these thatched huts when the
storms start, and working on them will keep them out of mischief.
Standard megaton-kilometer field shelters, earth and log construction. I
think they'll be adequate for anything that happens at periastron."

Anything designed to resist the heat, blast and radiation effects of a
megaton thermonuclear bomb at a kilometer ought to stand up under what
was coming. At least, the periastron effects; there was another angle to
it.

"The Native Welfare Commission isn't going to take kindly to that.
That's supposed to be their job."

"Then why the devil haven't they done it?" Gonzales demanded angrily.
"I've viewed every native village in this area by screen, and I haven't
seen one that's equipped with anything better than those log
storage-bins against the stockades."

"There was a project to provide shelters for the periastron storms set
up ten years ago. They spent one year arguing about how the natives
survived storms prior to the Terrans' arrival here. According to the
older natives, they got into those log storage-houses you were
mentioning; only about one out of three in any village survived. I could
have told them that. Did tell them, repeatedly, on the air. Then, after
they decided that shelters were needed, they spent another year hassling
over who would be responsible for designing them. Your predecessor here,
General Nokami, offered the services of his engineer officers. He was
frostily informed that this was a humanitarian and not a military
project."


Ramon Gonzales began swearing, then apologized for the interruption.
"Then what?" he asked.

"Apology unnecessary. Then they did get a shelter designed, and started
teaching some of the students at the native schools how to build them,
and then the meteorologists told them it was no good. It was a dugout
shelter; the weathermen said there'd be rainfall measured in meters
instead of inches and anybody who got caught in one of those dugouts
would be drowned like a rat."

"Ha, I thought of that one." Gonzales said. "My shelters are going to be
mounded up eight feet above the ground."

"What did they do then?" Foxx Travis wanted to know.

"There the matter rested. As far as I know, nothing has been done on it
since."

"And you think, with a disgraceful record of non-accomplishment like
that, that they'll protest General Gonzales' action on purely
jurisdictional grounds?" Travis demanded.

"Not jurisdictional grounds, Foxx. The general's going at this the wrong
way. He actually knows what has to be done and how to do it, and he's
going right ahead and doing it, without holding a dozen conferences and
round-table discussions and giving everybody a fair and equal chance to
foul things up for him. You know as well as I do that that's
undemocratic. And what's worse, he's making the natives build them
themselves, whether they want to or not, and that's forced labor. That
reminds me; has anybody started raising the devil about those Kwanns
from Qualpha's and Darshat's you brought here and Paul put to work?"

Gonzales looked at Travis and then said: "Not with me. Not yet, anyhow."

"They've been at General Maith," Travis said shortly. After a moment,
he added: "General Maith supports General Gonzales completely; that's
for publication. I'm authorized to say so. What else was there to do?
They'd burned their villages and all their food stores. They had to be
placed somewhere. And why in the name of reason should they sit around
in the shade eating Government native-type rations while Paul Sanders
has fifty to a hundred thousand sols' worth of crystals dying on him?"

"Yes; that's another thing they'll scream about. Paul's making a profit
out of it."

"Of course he's making a profit," Gonzales said. "Why else is he running
a plantation? If planters didn't make profits, who'd grow biocrystals?"

"The Colonial Government. The same way they built those storm-shelters.
But that would be in the public interest, and if the Kwanns weren't
public-spirited enough to do the work, they'd be made to--at about half
what planters like Sanders are paying them now. But don't you realize
that profit is sordid and dishonest and selfish? Not at all like drawing
a salary-cum-expense-account from the Government."

"You're right, it isn't," Gonzales agreed. "People like Paul Sanders
have ability. If they don't, they don't stay in business. You have
ability and people who don't never forgive you for it. Your very
existence is a constant reproach to them."

"That's right. And they can't admit your ability without admitting their
own inferiority, so it isn't ability at all. It's just dirty underhanded
trickery and selfish ruthlessness." He thought for a moment. "How did
Government House find out about these Kwanns here?"

"The Welfare Commission had people out while I was still setting up
headquarters," Gonzales said. "That was about oh-seven-hundred."

"This isn't for publication?" Travis asked. "Well, they know, but they
can't prove, that our given reason for moving in here in force is false.
Of course, we can't change our story now; that's why the
situation-progress map that was prepared for publication is incorrect as
to the earlier phases. They do not know that it was you who gave us our
first warning; they ascribe that to Sanders. And they are claiming that
there never was any swarming; according to them, Sanders' natives are
striking for better pay and conditions, and Sanders got General Maith to
use troops to break the strike. I wish we could give you credit for
putting us onto this, but it's too late now."

He nodded. The story was that a battalion of infantry had been sent in
to rescue a small detail under attack by natives, and that more troops
had been sent in to re-enforce them, until the whole of Gonzales'
brigade had been committed.

"That wasted an hour, at the start," Gonzales said. "We lost two native
villages burned, and about two dozen casualties, because we couldn't get
our full strength in soon enough."

"You'd have lost more than that if Maith had told the governor general
the truth and requested orders to act. There'd be a hundred villages and
a dozen plantations and trading posts burning, now, and Lord knows how
many dead, and the governor general would still be arguing about whether
he was justified in ordering troop-action." He mentioned several other
occasions when something like that had happened. "You can't tell that
kind of people the truth. They won't believe it. It doesn't agree with
their preconceptions."


Foxx Travis nodded. "I take it we are still talking for nonpublication?"
When Miles nodded, he continued: "This whole situation is baffling,
Miles. It seems that the government here knew all about the weather
conditions they could expect at periastron, and had made plans for them.
Some of them excellent plans, too, but all based on the presumption that
the natives would co-operate or at least not obstruct. You see what the
situation actually is. It should be obvious to everybody that the
behavior of these natives is nullifying everything the civil government
is trying to do to ensure the survival of the Terran colonists, the
production of Terran-type food without which we would all starve, the
biocrystal plantations without which the Colony would perish, and even
the natives themselves. Yet the Civil Government will not act to stop
these native frenzies and swarmings which endanger everything and
everybody here, and when the Army attempts to act, we must use every
sort of shabby subterfuge and deceit or the Civil Government will
prevent us. What ails these people?"

"You have the whole history of the Colony against you, Foxx," he said.
"You know, there never was any Chartered Kwannon Company set up to
exploit the resources of the planet. At first, nobody realized that there
were any resources worth exploiting. This planet was just a scientific
curiosity; it was and is still the only planet of a binary system with a
native population of sapient beings. The first people who came here were
scientists, mostly sociographers and para-anthropologists. And most of
them came from the University of Adelaide."

Travis nodded. Adelaide had a Federation-wide reputation for left-wing
neo-Marxist "liberalism."

"Well, that established the political and social orientation of the
Colonial Government, right at the start, when study of the natives was
the only business of the Colony. You know how these ideological cliques
form in a government--or any other organization. Subordinates are always
chosen for their agreement with the views of their superiors, and the
extremists always get to the top and shove the moderates under or out.
Well, the Native Affairs Administration became the tail that wagged the
Government dog, and the Native Welfare Commission is the big muscle in
the tail."

His parents hadn't been of the left-wing Adelaide clique. His mother
had been a biochemist; his father a roving news correspondent who had
drifted into trading with the natives and made a fortune in keffa-gum
before the chemists on Terra had found out how to synthesize hopkinsine.

"When the biocrystals were discovered and the plantations started, the
Government attitude was set. Biocrystal culture is just sordid money
grubbing. The real business of the Colony is to promote the betterment
of the natives, as defined in University of Adelaide terms. That's to
say, convert them into ersatz Terrans. You know why General Maith
ordered these shoonoon rounded up?"

Travis made a face. "Governor general Kovac insisted on it; General
Maith thought that a few minor concessions would help him on his main
objective, which was keeping a swarming from starting out here."

"Yes. The Commissioner of Native Welfare wanted that done, mainly at the
urging of the Director of Economic, Educational and Technical
Assistance. The EETA crowd don't like shoonoon. They have been trying,
ever since their agency was set up, to undermine and destroy their
influence with the natives. This looked like a good chance to get rid of
some of them."

Travis nodded. "Yes. And as soon as the disturbances in Bluelake
started, the Constabulary started rounding them up there, too, and at
the evacuee cantonments. They got about fifty of them, mostly from the
cantonments east of the city--the natives brought in from the flooded
tidewater area. They just dumped the lot of them onto us. We have them
penned up in a lorry-hangar on the military reservation now." He turned
to Gonzales. "How many do you think you'll gather up out here, general?"
he asked.

"I'd say about a hundred and fifty, when we have them all."

Travis groaned. "We can't keep all of them in that hangar, and we don't
have anywhere else--"

Sometimes a new idea sneaked up on Miles, rubbing against him and
purring like a cat. Sometimes one hit him like a sledgehammer. This one
just seemed to grow inside him.

"Foxx, you know I have the top three floors of the Suzikami Building;
about five hundred hours ago, I leased the fourth and fifth floors,
directly below. I haven't done anything with them, yet; they're just as
they were when Trans-Space Imports moved out. There are ample water,
light, power, air-conditioning and toilet facilities, and they can be
sealed off completely from the rest of the building. If General Maith's
agreeable, I'll take his shoonoon off his hands."

"What in blazes will you do with them?"

"Try a little experiment in psychological warfare. At minimum, we may
get a little better insight into why these natives think the Last Hot
Time is coming. At best, we may be able to stop the whole thing and get
them quieted down again."

"Even the minimum's worth trying for," Travis said. "What do you have in
mind, Miles? I mean, what procedure?"

"Well, I'm not quite sure, yet." That was a lie; he was very sure. He
didn't think it was quite time to be specific, though. "I'll have to
size up my material a little, before I decide on what to do with it.
Whatever happens, it won't hurt the shoonoon, and it won't make any more
trouble than arresting them has made already. I'm sure we can learn
something from them, at least."

Travis nodded. "General Maith is very much impressed with your grasp of
native psychology," he said. "What happened out here this morning was
exactly as you predicted. Whatever my recommendation's worth, you have
it. Can you trust your native driver to take your car back to Bluelake
alone?"

"Yes, of course."
