enhanced by the appearance of a healthy young shabrack. This is only
the second time that a shabrack tapir has been born in captivity in
Europe, and as the other one, which was born in the Zoological Garden
at Hamburg, did not live many days, but few knew of its existence;
consequently, little or nothing is known of the care and development
of the young of this species, although they are so numerous in their
native lands. Farther India, Southwestern China and the neighboring
large islands, where they also do well in captivity. The tapir was not
known until the beginning of this century, and even now it is a great
rarity in the European animal market, and as the greatest care is
required to keep it alive for any length of time in captivity, it is
seldom seen in zoological gardens; therefore, the fact that the
shabrack tapirs in the Breslau garden have not only lived, but their
number has increased, is so much more remarkable.

[Illustration: SHABRACK TAPIR WITH YOUNG ONE (FIVE DAYS OLD) IN THE
BRESLAU ZOOLOGICAL GARDEN. FROM DRAWING BY ERICH SUCKOW.]

Our engraving shows that the five days old tapir resembles its mother
in form, although its marking is quite different. Its spots and
stripes are very similar to those of the young of the American tapir,
several of which have been born in captivity in Europe. They shade
from yellow to brown on black or very dark brown ground, and the spots
on the legs take a whitish tone. This little one's fur is longer on
the body than on the head and extremities, and is soft and thick, but
has not the peculiar glossiness of the full grown animal. Its iris is
a beautiful blue violet, while that of the old one is dark violet, and
its little hoofs are reddish brown, while those of the mother are horn
gray. When standing, the new comer measures about two feet in
length and one foot two inches in height, having gained about one
inch in height in five days. Its fine condition is doubtless due
partly to the great care given it and partly to the healthy
constitution of the mother, and it is the pet of its keepers and
of the public.--Illustrirte Zeitung.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INFLUENCE OF SCENERY UPON THE CHARACTER OF MAN.


The effect of scenery upon the mind of man has often been noticed and
much has been written about it. Illustrations of this are generally
drawn from the historic lands and from the ancient people of the East.
The civilized races, such as the Greeks, Romans and other nations who
formerly dwelt on the coast of the Mediterranean, are taken as
examples. The Greeks are said to have owed their peculiar character
and their taste for art to the varied and beautiful scenery which
surrounded them. Their mythology and poetry are full of allusions to
the scenes of nature. Mountains and springs, rivers and seas all come
in as the background of the picture which represents their character
and history. The same is true of the Romans, Egyptians, Phenicians,
Syrians, Hebrews, the ancient Trojans and Carthaginians. Each one of
these nations seems to have been affected by scenery. They were all,
with the exception of the Carthaginians, confined within the limits of
a narrow territory, and remained long enough in it to have partaken
fully of the effect of their surroundings.

The Romans were warlike at the beginning, and bore the air of
conquerors, but their taste for art and literature resembled that of
the Greeks. The Egyptians were sensuous and luxurious people. Their
character bore the stamp of the river Nile with its periodical
overflow, its rich soil and mild climate. The type of their religion
was drawn from the gods who inhabited the same river valley. The
Phenicians were a maritime people; they were the first navigators who
reached the great seas. Their gods resembled those of the Assyrians
and Chaldeans, but their character resembled the seas over which they
roved; they did not originate, but they transported the products and
inventions of the ancient world.

The Hebrews had a national character which seemed to have been
narrowed down to a small compass by their isolation and by their
history, but their religion was as grand as the mountains of the
desert, and their poetry as beautiful as the scenery along the river
Jordan, which ran as a great artery through their land. It was a holy
land which gave impress to the Holy Book. The effect of scenery upon
human character is also illustrated in the case of the ancient
inhabitants of America. This land was isolated from the rest of the
world for many centuries--perhaps for thousands of years. It is
supposed that up to the time of the discovery the tribes were
permanent in their seats.

Each tribe had its own habitat, its own customs, its own mythology and
its own history. The effect of scenery must be considered, if we are
to understand the peculiarities which mark the different tribes. Some
imagine that the Indians are all alike, that they are all cruel
savages, all given to drunkenness and degradation and only waiting
their opportunity to wreak their vengeance upon helpless women and
children. Those who know them, however, are impressed with the great
variety which is manifest among them, and are especially convinced
that much of this comes from the scenery amid which they have lived.
The Eastern tribes may have had considerable sameness, yet the
Algonquins, who were the prairie Indians, and the Iroquois, who dwelt
in the forest and amid the lakes of New York, differed from one
another in almost every respect, and the Sioux and Dakotas, who were
also prairie Indians, differed from both of these. They were great
warriors and great hunters, but had a system of religion which
differed from that of any other tribe.

The Sioux were cradled amid the mountains of the East, and bear the
same stamp of their native scenery. They resemble the Iroquois in many
respects. The same is true of the Cherokees, who were allied to the
Iroquois in race and language. They were always mountain Indians; but
the Southern tribes were very different from either. They were a
people who were well advanced in civilization so far as the term can
be applied to the aborigines. Their skulls are without angles and
differ greatly from the keel-shaped skulls. They were dolichocephalic
rather than kumbocephalic. They resemble the Polynesians, while the
northern tribes resembled the Mongolians. Whatever their original home
was, their adopted habitat was in accord with their tastes and
character. It did not change them but rather made their traits more
permanent and stable.

The tribes of the northwest coast were seafarers; they inhabited the
forest and worshiped the animals which were peculiar to the forest and
took as their totems the eagle, wolf and raven, but they drew their
subsistence in great part from the sea. They worshiped the animals of
the seas, such as the shark, the whale and the sculpin. Their skill
and courage as navigators have never been equaled. Taking their
families and the few articles of commerce gathered from the forest
they entered the symmetrical and beautifully carved canoes and
breasted the storms and waves of the great sea near which they lived.
There was a wildness in the waves which just suited them. The sea
brought out the best traits and developed the heroic character. They
were the "sea kings" of the Northwest. They were great navigators and
great hero worshipers.

The tribes of the interior, the Pueblos, the Zunis, differed from all
other tribes. They were surrounded by wild tribes, such as the
Apaches, Comanches and Navajoes. Whatever their origin, they had
remained long enough in this territory to be affected by the scenery
and surroundings. They were mild, luxurious, given over to religious
ceremonies, made much of mythology and had many secret societies. They
built their terraced houses, taking the cliffs and mesas as their
patterns, and made them so similar to the rock and cliffs that it was
difficult to recognize them at a distance. They did not mould the
mountains into villages as the Mayas did, but they made their houses
to conform to the mountains, and took the mountain gods and their
nature divinities as chief objects of worship.

The contrast between the ancient tribes of this region and the wild
tribes which intruded upon them was very great. The Navajoes were a
mountain people and drew their religion from the mountains. They
borrowed many myths and customs from the ancient Pueblos, and like
them, settled down to an agricultural life; but their sand paintings
and their ceremonies reveal a taste for art and a poetical imagination
which are very remarkable. The lone Indian who places his wigwam in
the midst of the mountains seems to be always a stranger. The scenery
has no effect upon him. It makes his spirit sad and his music
plaintive, for he breathes out his spirit in his music. He never has
had and never will have the character which some of his ancestors
cultivated amid the wild scenes. His race is doomed; his fate is
sealed. He can never catch up with the progress of the time.

The railroad is bound to take the place of the Indian trail; the
miners' cabin must supplant the Indian wigwam. Great cities will rise
near where ancient villages stood, but the savage fails to appreciate
the thought or the character of the people who have supplanted him.
The wigwam amid the mountains is a symbol of what he is, but the
locomotive at its side is an emblem of progress and of promise to
those who will use their opportunities. The mountains are in the
background--they suggest the possibilities which are before the
settler. They interpose barriers, but the barriers themselves are
fraught with good influences. Freedom has always dwelt among the
mountains. Reverence for the Almighty has also prevailed. The leveling
process must cease and man become more elevated in his thoughts as he
rises to the altitude of these great heights.--The American
Antiquarian.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NOVEL WAY OF RIDING A BICYCLE.


"Artists" of the variety stage and the circus are always trying to
find something new, for the same old trapeze performances, trials of
strength, performances of rope dancers, etc., have been presented so
many times that anyone who invents an entirely new trick is sure of
making a large amount of money out of it; the more wild and dangerous
it is, the better. Anything that naturally stands on its feet but can
be made to stand on its head will be well received in the latter
attitude by the public. Some such thought as this must have been in
the mind of the man who conceived the idea of riding a bicycle on the
ceiling instead of on the floor. The "trick" originated with the Swiss
acrobat Di Batta, who, being too old to undertake such a performance
himself, trained two of his pupils to do it, and they appeared with
their wheel in Busch Circus in Berlin. The wheel, of course, ran on a
track from which it was suspended in such a way that it could not
fall, and the man who operated it used the handle bar as he would the
cross bar of the trapeze. One would think that the position of the
rider was sufficiently dangerous to satisfy any public, but the
inventor of the trick sought to make it appear more wonderful by
having the rider carry between his teeth a little trapeze from the
crosspiece of which another man hung.

[Illustration: BICYCLIST RIDING FROM THE CEILING OF A CIRCUS.]

Different colored lights were thrown on the performers as they rode
around the ceiling, and at the end of the performance first one and
then the other dropped into the safety net which had been placed about
sixty feet below them. We are indebted to the Illustrirte Zeitung for
the cut and article.

       *       *       *       *       *




REQUIREMENTS OF PALESTINE EXPLORER.


Lieut.-Col. Conder says that the requirements for exploration demand a
knowledge not only of Syrian antiquities, but of those of neighboring
nations. It is necessary to understand the scripts and languages in
use, and to study the original records as well as the art and
architecture of various ages and countries. Much of our information
is derived from Egyptian and Assyrian records of conquest, as well as
from the monuments of Palestine itself. As regards scripts, the
earliest alphabetical texts date only from about 900 B. C., but
previous to this period we have to deal with the cuneiform, the
Egyptian, the Hittite and the Cypriote characters.

The explorer must know the history of the cuneiform from 2700 B. C.
down to the Greek and Roman age, and the changes which occurred in the
forms of some 550 characters originally hieroglyphics, but finally
reduced to a rude alphabet by the Persians, and used not only in
Babylonia and Assyria, but also as early as 1500 B. C. in Asia Minor,
Syria, Armenia, Palestine and even by special scribes in Egypt. He
should also be able to read the various Egyptian scripts--the 400
hieroglyphics of the monuments, the hieratic, or running hand of the
papyri, and the later demotic.

The Hittite characters are quite distinct, and number at least 130
characters, used in Syria and Asia Minor from 1500 B. C. or earlier
down to about 700 B. C. The study of these characters is in its
infancy. The syllabary of Cyprus was a character derived from these
Hittite hieroglyphics, and used by the Greeks about 300 B. C. It
includes some fifty characters, and was probably the original system
whence the Phenician alphabet was derived. As regards alphabets, the
explorer must study the early Phenician and the Hebrew, Samaritan and
Moabite, with the later Aramean branch of this alphabet, whence square
Hebrew is derived. He must also know the Ionian alphabet, whence Greek
and Roman characters arose, and the early Arab scripts--Palmyrene,
Nabathean and Sabean, whence are derived the Syriac, Cufic, Arabic and
Himyaritic alphabets.

As regards languages, the scholars of the last century had to deal
only with Hebrew, Aramaic, Syriac, Coptic and Greek, but as the result
of exploration we now deal with the ancient Egyptian whence Coptic is
derived, and with various languages in cuneiform script, including the
Akkadian (resembling pure Turkish) and the allied dialects of Susa,
Media, Armenia and of the Hittites; the Assyrian, the earliest and
most elaborate of Semitic languages; and Aryan tongues, such as the
Persian, the Vannic and the Lycian.

The art and architecture of Western Asia also furnish much information
as to religious ideas, customs, dress and history, including inscribed
seals and amulets, early coins and gems. The explorer must also study
the remains of Greek, Roman, Arab and Crusader periods, in order to
distinguish these from the earlier remains of the Canaanites,
Phenicians, Hebrews, Egyptians and Assyrians, as well as the art of
the Jews and Gnostics about the Christian era, and the later pagan
structures down to the fourth century A.D.--Nature.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NEUTRAL USE OF CABLES.


Eleven submarine cables traverse the Atlantic between 60 and 40
degrees north latitude. Nine of these connect the Canadian provinces
and the United States with the territory of Great Britain; two (one
American, the other Anglo-American) connect France. Of these, seven
are largely owned, operated or controlled by American capital, while
all the others are under English control and management. There is but
one direct submarine cable connecting the territory of the United
States with the continent of Europe, and that is the cable owned and
operated by the Compagnie Francais Cables Telegraphiques, whose
termini are Brest, France, and Cape Cod, on the coast of
Massachusetts.

All these cables between 60 and 40 degrees north latitude, which unite
the United States with Europe, except the French cable, are under
American or English control, and have their termini in the territory
of Great Britain or the United States. In the event of war between
these countries, unless restrained by conventional act, all these
cables might be cut or subjected to exclusive censorship on the part
of each of the belligerent states. Across the South Atlantic there are
three cables, one American and two English, whose termini are
Pernambuco, Brazil, and St. Louis, Africa, and near Lisbon, Portugal,
with connecting English lines to England, one directly traversing the
high seas between Lisbon and English territory and one touching at
Vigo, Spain, at which point a German cable company has recently made a
connection. The multiplication under English control of submarine
cables has been the consistent policy of Great Britain, and to-day her
cable communications connect the home government with all her colonies
and with every strategic point, thus giving her exceptional advantages
for commercial as well as for political purposes.

The schedule blanks of rates of the English companies contain the
following provisions: "The dispatches of the imperial government shall
have priority when demanded. The cable must not, at any station,
employ foreigners, and the lines must not pass through any office or
be subject to the control of any foreign government. In the event of
war, the government (of Great Britain) may occupy all the stations on
English territory or under the protection of Great Britain, and it may
use the cable by means of its own employes."

It is not a pleasing reflection that in the actual situation the
United States is at a great and embarrassing disadvantage. Meanwhile
it would seem to be the policy of the United States to overcome this
disadvantage by the multiplication of submarine cables under American
or other than English competing foreign ownership and control.

Although somewhat indeterminate, the policy of the United States in
respect to the landing of foreign submarine cables, so far, at least,
as the executive branch of the government is concerned, appears to be
based chiefly upon considerations that shall guard against
consolidation or amalgamation with other cable lines, while insisting
upon reciprocal accommodations for American corporations and companies
in foreign territory. The authority of the executive branch of the
government to grant permission is exercised only in the absence of
legislation by Congress regulating the subject, and concessions of the
privileges heretofore have been subject to such further action by
Congress in the matter as it may at any time take. Several bills are
now pending in Congress relating to the landing of foreign submarine
telegraph cables within the United States, and regulating the
establishment of submarine telegraphic cable lines or systems in the
United States. As this article is going to press, it is reported that
the President has refused permission to a foreign cable company to
renew a cable terminus within the territory of the United States, and
that the question raised as to the power of the federal government to
deny admission to the cable will be referred to the Attorney-General
for an opinion. Meanwhile, the executive branch of the government
holds to the doctrine that, in the absence of legislation by Congress,
control of the landing and operation of foreign cables rests with the
President. The question of the landing of foreign cables received some
consideration from the late Attorney-General, in connection with an
injunction suit brought by the United States against certain
corporations engaged in placing on the coast of New York a cable
having foreign connection. And he suggested for the consideration of
Congress whether it would not be wise to give authority to some
executive officer to grant or withhold consent to the entry of such
foreign enterprises into this country on such terms and conditions as
may be fixed by law.

The principal and most important submarine cables traversing or
connecting the great oceans are owned and operated by private
corporations or companies. They are in number 310, and their length in
nautical miles is 139,754. The length of cables owned or operated by
state governments is, in nautical miles, 18,132.

The policies of states, the movements of fleets and armies, and the
regulation of the markets of the commercial world, depend upon
devices, communications and orders that are habitually transmitted
through the agency of submarine cables. In this view, the first aim is
to safeguard from wanton destruction the delicate and expensive
mechanism of these cables; the second is to restrain within the
narrowest limits practicable interruptions in the operation of cables,
even in the midst of hostilities; and the third is to encourage the
establishment and extension of submarine cables owned and operated by
American capital. All these ends may be advanced by the agreement of
the powers to neutralize absolutely the submarine cable systems of
the world. To do this will be a step in the direction of extending
international jurisdiction, which is to be a controlling feature of
the new periodical about to be established at Berlin, and to be
printed in German, French and English, under the name of "Kosmodike."
--Alexander Porter Morse in The Albany Law Journal.

       *       *       *       *       *




PARK MAKING.


Those who make public parks are apt to attempt too much and to injure
not only the beauty, but the practical value of their creations by
loading them with unnecessary and costly details. From the time when
landscape gardening was first practiced as a fine art to the present
day, park makers have been ambitious to change the face of nature--to
dig lakes where lakes did not exist and to fill up lakes where they
did exist, to cut down natural hills and to raise artificial ones, to
plant in one place and to clear in another, and generally to spend
money in construction entirely out of proportion to the value of the
results obtained.

The best art is simple in its expression, and the highest form of art
in gardening is perhaps that which, taking advantage of such natural
conditions as it finds, makes the best of them with the smallest
expenditure of labor and money. Simplicity of design means not only
economy of construction, but, what is of even more importance, economy
of maintenance. The importance of making it possible to keep a great
park in good condition without excessive annual expenditures for
maintenance is a simple business proposition which would not seem to
require much demonstration. Yet park makers, with their unnecessary
walks and drives; with their expensive buildings which are always
getting out of repair; their ponds, in which there is rarely water
enough to keep them fresh; their brooks, which are frequently dry;
their elaborate planting schemes, often ill suited to the positions
where they are wanted, make parks expensive to construct and
impossible to maintain in good condition, especially in this country,
where the cost of labor is heavy and there is difficulty in obtaining
under existing municipal methods skilled and faithful gardeners to
keep anything like an elaborate garden in good condition. The most
superficial examination of any of our large urban parks will show that
wherever elaborate construction and planting have been attempted they
have failed from subsequent neglect to produce the effects expected
from them, and that broad, quiet, pastoral and sylvan features are the
only permanent and really valuable ones we can hope to attain in our
great city parks.
