
"No," said the Russian.  "There is no threat of contagion or epidemic.
It is not a disease we are dealing with but a bodily reaction to impure
atmosphere.  We are safe so long as we retain the breathing gear, and
probably without it for short periods, though we will not take that
chance."

"And if the survivors are mad and beyond healing, as you suggest?  What
do we do then?"

"That is the purpose of this expedition---to determine."

"Do the others know?"  The Czech made a gesture with his head and left
shoulder, taking in the other shuttle but implying all the remaining
Coalition forces.

"They know what their equipment has told them, and will be briefed by
the rest of us as soon as we know ourselves.  Lieutenant Brunner, if
you are unwell perhaps you should remain behind."

"His wife may be down there, you idiot."

...  "I am sorry, Brunner, I did not know.  Please don't think me
cruel.  It is not the first time such a thing has happened, and we may
have a very difficult decision to make.  Democratic German
representation will also be needed---"

"Why didn't the domes protect them?" he said in a savage whisper.

"I believe they were meant to.  Apparently they were breached.  That is
all I can say now.  Please outfit yourselves accordingly and come to
the first landing vessel when you are ready."


*


The two landing craft emerged from the whiteness of the Soviet vessel
into the blackness of Space, then shortly again into the curved
daylight of the desolate planet, reflecting back in a brown haze of
impure atmosphere its yellow sun.

The domes drew nearer---six humps of clearish white spread unevenly
across the flat desert floor, standing up from it like supported
blisters of the planet itself.

But the blisters had been pierced.  Fissure-holes and cracks, some
larger, some smaller, were spread across them.  The land too, upon
closer inspection, was pocked with craters, and littered with ugly
shapes of pocked and polished iron.

"Meteors," muttered a voice.  Brunner turned to see Second Lieutenant
Shellenback seated behind him, head hunched and eyes close, chewing
mournfully at his hands, remembered vaguely that he was not the only
German to have come looking for family.  The faces of the Czech flyers
were grave as well.  Yes---he was not alone in his plight.  Yet there
was little comfort in the fact.

"Why weren't the domes protected?" came an angry voice.  But even as
his mind registered the sound, Brunner saw the huge black tower that
stood amidst the growing bubbles, the meteor-repulse cannon at the top
of it.  Stoltzyn, who stood near the front of the windowed fuselage
like a stewardess, responded.

"They were, but insufficiently.  The Alliance must have assumed that
the meteors that speckle the surface had arrived singly or in small
groups, which is not the case.  Apparently they knew very little about
the planet before choosing it as a prison site, since it is also prone
to violent earthquakes."  He went on to explain some phenomenon that
occurred there every twelve years, something to do with the planet's
duel orb, coming into line and affecting the magnetic field.....

But it hardly mattered.  Nothing mattered.  His wife was dead and a
strange voice inside him told him he was glad.  This slow awakening of
all the wrong sentiments was too painful so he shut it off, closing his
eyes and waiting sickly for the ship to land.

There was a slight delay while the craft relayed back exact
measurements, and waited for the Leningrad to punch a safe and adequate
hole in the final dome.  For some reason it bore only smallish cracks
in one or two places near the bottom.  Then the ship passed through and
set down in the midst of a courtyard or wide street.

Then the ship passed through and set down in the midst of a courtyard
or wide street.  Brunner opened his eyes.  Stoltzyn was standing before
them as before, giving final instructions as the Soviet crew members
examined the breathing gear of the others.  Brunner shook off the
private who leaned over him, but the man persisted until the facemask
was tested and in place.  Just as the hatch was opened Stoltzyn
remembered something and began to explain what the plastic pouches set
at the chin were for.  But this seemed to upset one of the Czechs
because he pushed him aside and sprang down the steps.

Brunner was one of the last to exit, feeling numb and at the same time
torn to pieces.  Clearing the final step he became aware that here and
there in the street suited men---they must be of the landing
party---were doubled over on their knees, holding their stomachs.  He
supposed this did not surprise him except that among those kneeling and
right in front of him was the Soviet chief scientist, who had torn
aside the mask and kept repeating to no one in particular,

"How could this happen?"

The East German raised his eyes to look around them.  Yes, there were
many corpses, quite hideous.  Most were facing downward with spines
that looked like dinosaurs, but there were those who faced upwards as
well.  It was all gruesome enough, the skulls and chests swollen and
distorted, the skin stretched thin and pink to accommodate, or
punctured outright by bony growths, all mottled, discolored, in various
stages of decomposition.  Eyes mashed and half hidden.  Horrible.

But Brunner felt in that moment that nothing could hurt him because he
was already dead.  Sunk this deep into the nightmare without waking why
should he care?  The thought came dully that his mind and heart were
like the flesh and organs of the diseased:  crushed and cut by flat or
jagged bone, until they simply surrendered and died.

"The peace that surpasseth all understanding."

But the black humor of despair could not last.  Movement on a side
street---was there a sound as well?---drew his eyes from the dead and
back to the living.  The dead had not been able to rouse any feeling of
true pity inside him.  At least their suffering was over.  But to see
the twisted and bulging figures walk in flesh.....

Two bodies stood there that had not yet surrendered.  One of them must
at one time have been a woman:  long dark hair straggled from the dried
blood of a knotted forehead---


LONG DARK HAIR.  Like a thunderclap the reason for his journey came
back to him.  Where was his wife?  Was Ara here?  Dear God!  Dear God!
She had often worn such a coverall.

He started toward the street between the buildings.  But the female
gave an almost-shriek and the two pogoshuffled pitifully away.

He felt something grasp his arm.  He turned in fear and involuntary
loathing, but it was only the nurse (the one he did not wish to think
about).  She was crying and shaking like a leaf.  She was not what
narrow men might call pretty. . .but to see her there with her hair and
eyes and skin unblemished was like water at a last dying need.  A
breath of the free air beyond that place came back to him, and with it,
like a sob, a final desperate hope of courage and the need to act.

He remembered they were wearing masks; how would they.....  But seeing
the hoop at her ear brought it back.  He embraced her quickly and said
through the microphone.  "I am searching for my wife.  Will you help
me?"

She nodded rapidly and clung to his arm.  They began to move.  Some
member of the party called to them but they walked slowly down the
street toward a large square, where a whitestone marble building at the
farther end was built like the Parthenon Library at Athena.  Why it had
been built and by whom (by the Alliance, to show their humane and
considerate treatment of the prisoners) he did not know or care.  If it
was also a library then perhaps there would be records.  It was a
feeble thought, but it drew him on because he had no other.

As his heart pounded unbearably he heard the same prayer repeated over
and over inside him.  DEAR GOD FORGIVE ME I KNOW I AM SELFISH BUT
PLEASE DEAR GOOD PLEASE IF I MEAN ANYTHING TO YOU DON'T LET HER BE
HERE.  I WILL DO ANYTHING JUST DON'T LET HER BE HERE.  Then almost
against his will the post script, BUT IF SHE IS HERE MAY SHE PLEASE
PLEASE PLEASE NOT HAVE BEEN TORTURED AND AT LEAST BE DEAD NOW.

"No, no!"  Almost he started to run, but the weight at his arm checked
him fiercely.  The girl stood still with terror in her eyes, and
pointed to a figure at the top of the marble steps.

An old man with graying hair, not so horrible as the rest but still
dreadful to look upon, stood by another who lay sprawled at his feet on
the steps.  Something red stood out clearly against the marble and
Brunner saw that it was blood, coming from an open wound in the
prostrate man.  There was blood also on the knife the old man clutched
awkwardly in his left hand.  If the two had still been human, the scene
might have been tragic---something from the epics of Homer.  But as it
was it was ghastly and brutal, the afterglow of a vicious reptilian
death struggle.  The standing man's jaw was torn to one side, exposing
teeth the size of walnuts.

The woman would have fled, but Brunner watched the old man intently.
He saw the weapon in the hand of the other as well---it had not been
outright murder.  And also the man did not run, but returned his gaze
with troubled curiosity.  At last some form of recognition seemed to
come over him, because with a twisting gesture of the right arm which
he could not lower, he beckoned them towards him.

"Come on," he said to the nurse.

She shook her head.  "Make him drop the knife."

"All right."  He lowered his mask.  "My friend. . .we mean you no harm.
 As a gesture that you don't either, will you drop the knife?"  The
other looked puzzled.  "Will you please drop the knife?"

At this he seemed to understand.  He shook the arm with the knife in
it, but would not let it go.        "Why doesn't he drop it?"

Brunner advance slowly.  "He can't.  The bones have fused around it."

She came reluctantly behind and they made a semi-circle past the body,
and stood at a small distance from him on the unshaded portion of the
terrace.

"I would like to check your records," said the German slowly, pointing
to the entrance.  But at this the other's manner seemed to grow
hostile.  Brunner took a step toward the high door, and then was
certain.  The old man tried to cut them off, waving the arm with the
knife.  A terrible conflict of doubt seemed to be taking place inside
him, as if in his ravaged mind he could not seize upon the memory he
sought.  Brunner walked slowly back into the sunlight.  Something had
to be done.

"Stay here," he said to the nurse.  "I've got to talk to him."

"NO!  Be careful."

He approached slowly, and the creature did not draw away.  He drew very
close.  Then for all the pain it cost him, and the torment of his soul,
Brunner put a hand on his shoulder, and looked him full in the face.
He was certain.  The old man wished them no harm, but was trying
desperately to remember some last purpose he clung to.

"My friend," he said gently, cursing himself again for his weakness and
tears.  "I am trying to find my wife.....  I have to know if she was
here.  May I please go inside and check your records?"

His words were only half understood; the greater impact was made by the
passion in his tearing eyes.  A cloud seemed to lift from the old man's
mind, and in some last pool of consciousness he remembered.  He was a
librarian.  Guarding to the last the books and documents entrusted.....
 In case anyone came. . .to search for proofs.....  Of the Holocaust.
A gleam of something enduring and undefeatable came into his
half-buried eye.  This man was not deformed.

He raised his head and arms above the elbow in a gesture almost of
triumph, and his throat made a sobbing sound.....  As Brunner stepped
back the man made a pushing motion with the forefinger of his right
hand, then moved the head forward as if to study the place he had
fingered.  He repeated the gesture, then turned to face the doors.

"What's he saying?"  The nurse.

"There's a computer terminal inside."  Again Brunner felt his heart
pump wildly.  He took the girl's hand and started for the door, yet
again the old man cut them off.

But there was no longer fear of War in his eyes; he only had one more
thing he wished to communicate.  He tapped his hip with the knife-arm,
pointed to Brunner, then shook his forearm back toward his chest.

Now it was Olaf who didn't understand.  The woman pointed at the
pellet-pistol, forgotten, at his hip.

"I think.  He wants you to shoot him."  Again the movements of
confirmation.  Though this time, if it were possible to interpret such
gestures, he moved the limbs more slowly, with great sadness.

Brunner unclasped the pistol, and with a shaking hand, pointed it at
his chest.  "Is this what you want?"  The same gesture.

The one unbroken eye remained in sunlight, filled with tears that could
not escape the well of tortured flesh around it.  A low gurgling noise
sounded in his throat.  Brunner closed his eyes and shot.

The body fell partially across the entrance, so that they were obliged
to move it.  "This one at least, we bury."  The words resounded with
the hollowness of hell.  They pushed past the right-hand door, and went
inside.

After a time of searching for light and the terminal, Brunner at last
sat before the fingerboard and smallish screen, trying to summon forth
what was wanted, praying to the point of distraction for his wife, and
for himself.  He had asked the nurse to be alone for a time and she
consented, was off looking elsewhere for any hard-copy documents that
might be useful.

The man knew enough about computers to read the instruction codes and
key out the information wanted, but the terminal kept fighting him.
Several times he had entered, OCCUPATIONAL RECORDS OF RELOCATED
PERSONNEL, sub-heading, DEMOCRATIC GERMAN, NON-MILITARY.  But each time
he did so the screen would read 'Pending', then flash one line at a
time, at a reading pace, a dialogue from the Nuremburg Trials of
1945-46, and lock up at any attempt to clear it.  He tried to bypass,
used different keywords, but always the result was the same:  he got
the dialogues, or nothing at all.  Close to frenzy he threw off the
chair and paced wildly back and forth.

"I know all about the Holocaust and the Nuremburg trials!  They have
been required reading at the Academy for two hundred years!"  He
gradually calmed himself, if such words may be used, realizing there
was nothing else for it.  He set right the chair and keyed in the
initial combination, only wishing that he could strap himself in place,
denied all movement and all choice.  The screen began again its silent
dissertation, waiting after each six lines for him to verbally
acknowledge.

Olaf Brunner read the following, trying to suppress the gasoline in his
veins, the endless ache of his affliction, and the unnatural swelling
of the diaphragm that made it difficult to remain still and digest the
excrement before him.



COL. AMEN:  You speak English pretty well.

VON RIBBENTROP:  I spoke it well in the past and I think I speak it
passably well today.

Col. Amen:  Almost as well as you speak German?

VON RIBBENTROP:  No, I would not say that, but in the past I spoke it
nearly as well as German, although I have naturally forgotten a great
deal in the course of the years and now it is more difficult for me.

COL. AMEN:  Do you know what is meant by a 'yes man' in English?

VON RIBBENTROP:  A 'yes man'---per se.  A man who says yes even when he
himself.....  It is somewhat difficult to define.  In any case I do not
know what you mean by it in English.  In German I should define him as
a man who obeys orders and is obedient and loyal.

COL AMEN:  As a matter of fact, you were a 'yes man' for Hitler, isn't
that correct?

VON RIBBENTROP:  I was always loyal to Hitler, carried through his
orders, differed frequently in opinion from him, repeatedly tendered my
resignation.  But when Hitler gave an order, I always carried out his
instructions in accordance with the principles of our authoritarian
state.



        At the conclusion of this there was a pause, then the following.



VON RIBBENTROP:  Without ever taking any steps or doing anything myself
in the SS, yes, that is correct.

SIR DAVID MAXWELL-FYFE:  Just look.  It is a document.....GB-294.  The
correspondence is 744B.  That is your application with all the
particulars.  I just want to ask you one or two things about it.  You
asked to join, did you not, the 'Totemkopf', the Death's-Head division
of the SS?

VON RIBBENTROP:  No, that cannot be true.

SIR DAVID MAXWELL-FYFE:  Don't you remember getting a special
Death's-Head ring and dagger from Hitler for your services?  Don't you?

VON RIBBENTROP:  No, I do not remember.  I never belonged to a
Death's-Head Division.

SIR DAVID MAXWELL-FYFE:  And the ring, too.  Here is a letter dated the
5 November 1935, to the Personnel Office of the Reichsfurher-SS:  "In
reply to your question, I have to inform you that Brigadefurher von
Ribbentrop's ring size is 17....."  Do you remember getting that?

VON RIBBENTROP:  .....I do not remember precisely.  No doubt it is true.




And that was all.  The screen then showed an old and dusting black and
white photograph, with letters in white across the bottom:


A MOTHER AND CHILD EXECUTED IN THE UKRAINE


The computer waited for him to acknowledge, but the young East German
stood mute.  Twenty times that day he had thought he could be brought
no lower.  And yet the picture froze his heart.

The woman, dark-haired and young, stood clutching her child in the
attitude of a protective Madonna.  But for the field, the German
soldier, and the mother and child, there was nothing to be seen.  A
moment frozen in time.  The soldier, legs spread and planted in perfect
firing form, without the slightest sign of hesitation, had aimed his
rifle and fired at her head.  He must have fired because the woman's
bare feet were lifted an inch or two above the ground.  The woman still
shielded the tiny child.....  Apparently he had opted not to try to
kill them both with a single bullet, though it might have been done
with a shot through her back.  This way was surer.

Brunner looked closer.  Was there a hint of doubt in the soldier's
face?  No.  He had only closed his eyes in reflex to the gun's recoil.
Equivocation, splitting hairs.  It didn't matter in the least.  The
terror and death of the innocents were the same.

He began to feel sick again, and his task was not yet completed.
"Acknowledge," he said, almost swooning.  The terminal read clearly:


DEMOCRATIC GERMAN NON-MILITARY PERSONNEL

