"It is Surtur."

"Once again, who is Surtur?"

Maskull clutched his arm and pressed him to silence. A strange radiance
was in the air, in the direction of the drumming. It increased in
intensity and gradually occupied the whole scene. Things were no longer
seen by Thire's light, but by this new light. It cast no shadows.

Corpang's nostrils swelled, and he held himself more proudly. "What fire
is that?"

"It is Muspel-light."

They both glanced instinctively at the three statues. In the strange
glow they had undergone a change. The face of each figure was clothed in
the sordid and horrible Crystalman mask.

Corpang cried out and put his hand over his eyes. "What can this mean?"
he asked a minute later.

"It must mean that life is wrong, and the creator of life too, whether
he is one person or three."

Corpang looked again, like a man trying to accustom himself to a
shocking sight. "Dare we believe this?"

"You must," replied Maskull. "You have always served the highest, and
you must continue to do so. It has simply turned out that Thire is not
the highest."

Corpang's face became swollen with a kind of coarse anger. "Life is
clearly false--I have been seeking Thire for a lifetime, and now I
find--this."

"You have nothing to reproach yourself with. Crystalman has had eternity
to practice his cunning in, so it's no wonder if a man can't see
straight, even with the best intentions. What have you decided to do?"

"The drumming seems to be moving away. Will you follow it, Maskull?"

"Yes."

"But where will it take us?"

"Perhaps out of Threal altogether."

"It sounds to me more real than reality," said Corpang. "Tell me, who is
Surtur?"

"Surtur's world, or Muspel, we are told, is the original of which this
world is a distorted copy. Crystalman is life, but Surtur is other than
life."

"How do you know this?"

"It has sprung together somehow--from inspiration, from experience, from
conversation with the wise men of your planet. Every hour it grows truer
for me and takes a more definite shape."

Corpang stood up squarely, facing the three Figures with a harsh,
energetic countenance, stamped all over with resolution. "I believe
you, Maskull. No better proof is required than that. Thire is not the
highest; he is even in a certain sense the lowest. Nothing but the
thoroughly false and base could stoop to such deceits.... I am coming
with you--but don't play the traitor. These signs may be for you, and
not for me at all, and if you leave me--"

"I make no promises. I don't ask you to come with me. If you prefer to
stay in your little world, or if you have any doubts about it, you had
better not come."

"Don't talk like that. I shall never forget your service to me... Let us
make haste, or we shall lose the sound."

Corpang started off more eagerly than Maskull. They walked fast in the
direction of the drumming. For upward of two miles the path went along
the ledge without any change of level. The mysterious radiance gradually
departed, and was replaced by the normal light of Threal. The rhythmical
beats continued, but a very long way ahead--neither was able to diminish
the distance.

"What kind of man are you?" Corpang suddenly broke out.

"In what respect?"

"How do you come to be on such terms with the Invisible? How is it
that I've never had this experience before I met you, in spite of my
never-ending prayers and mortifications? In what way are you superior to
me?"

"To hear voices perhaps can't be made a profession," replied Maskull.
"I have a simple and unoccupied mind--that may be why I sometimes hear
things that up to the present you have not been able to."

Corpang darkened, and kept silent; and then Maskull saw through to his
pride.

The ledge presently began to rise. They were high above the platform
on the opposite side of the gulf. The road then curved sharply to
the right, and they passed over the abyss and the other ledge as by a
bridge, coming out upon the top of the opposite cliffs. A new line of
precipices immediately confronted them. They followed the drumming along
the base of these heights, but as they were passing the mouth of a
large cave the sound came from its recesses, and they turned their steps
inward.

"This leads to the outer world," remarked Corpang. "I've occasionally
been there by this passage."

"Then that's where it is taking us, no doubt. I confess I shan't be
sorry to see sunlight once more."

"Can you find time to think of sunlight?" asked Corpang with a rough
smile.

"I love the sun, and perhaps I'm rather lacking in the spirit of a
zealot."

"Yet, for all that, you may get there before me."

"Don't be bitter," said Maskull. "I'll tell you another thing. Muspel
can't be willed, for the simple reason that Muspel does not concern the
will. To will is a property of this world."

"Then what is your journey for?"

"It's one thing to walk to a destination, and to linger over the walk,
and quite another to run there at top speed."

"Perhaps I'm not so easily deceived as you think," said Corpang with
another smile.

The light persisted in the cave. The path narrowed and became a steep
ascent. Then the angle became one of forty-five degrees, and they had
to climb. The tunnel grew so confined that Maskull was reminded of the
confined dreams of his childhood.

Not long afterward, daylight appeared. They hastened to complete the
last stage. Maskull rushed out first into the world of colours and,
all dirty and bleeding from numerous scratches, stood blinking on a
hillside, bathed in the brilliant late-afternoon sunshine. Corpang
followed closely at his heels, He was obliged to shield his eyes with
his hands for a few minutes, so unaccustomed was he to Branchspell's
blinding rays.

"The drum beats have stopped!" he exclaimed suddenly.

"You can't expect music all the time," answered Maskull dryly. "We
mustn't be luxurious."

"But now we have no guide. We're no better off than before."

"Well, Tormance is a big place. But I have an infallible rule, Corpang.
As I come from the south, I always go due north."

"That will take us to Lichstorm."

Maskull gazed at the fantastically piled rocks all around them. "I saw
these rocks from Matterplay. The mountains look as far off now as they
did them, and there's not much of the day left. How far is Lichstorm
from here?"

Corpang looked away to the distant range. "I don't know, but unless a
miracle happens we shan't get there tonight."

"I have a feeling," said Maskull, "that we shall not only get there
tonight, but that tonight will be the most important in my life."

And he sat down passively to rest.



Chapter 18. HAUNTE

While Maskull sat, Corpang walked restlessly to and fro, swinging his
arms. He had lost his staff. His face was inflamed with suppressed
impatience, which accentuated its natural coarseness. At last he stopped
short in front of Maskull and looked down at him. "What do you intend to
do?"

Maskull glanced up and idly waved his hand toward the distant mountains.
"Since we can't walk, we must wait."

"For what?"

"I don't know... How's this, though? Those peaks have changed colour,
from red to green."

"Yes, the lich wind is travelling this way."

"The lich wind?"

"It's the atmosphere of Lichstorm. It always clings to the mountains,
but when the wind blows from the north it comes as far as Threal."

"It's a sort of fog, then?"

"A peculiar sort, for they say it excites the sexual passions."

"So we are to have lovemaking," said Maskull, laughing.

"Perhaps you won't find it so joyous," replied Corpang a little grimly.

"But tell me--these peaks, how do they preserve their balance?"

Corpang gazed at the distant, overhanging summits, which were fast
fading into obscurity.

"Passion keeps them from falling."

Maskull laughed again; he was feeling a strange disturbance of spirit.
"What, the love of rock for rock?"

"It is comical, but true."

"We'll take a closer peep at them presently. Beyond the mountains is
Barey, is it not?"

"Yes."

"And then the Ocean. But what is the name of that Ocean?"

"That is told only to those who die beside it."

"Is the secret so precious, Corpang?"

Branchspell was nearing the horizon in the west; there were more than
two hours of daylight remaining. The air all around them became murky.
It was a thin mist, neither damp nor cold. The Lichstorm Range now
appeared only as a blur on the sky. The air was electric and tingling,
and was exciting in its effect. Maskull felt a sort of emotional
inflammation, as though a very slight external cause would serve to
overturn his self-control. Corpang stood silent with a mouth like iron.

Maskull kept looking toward a high pile of rocks in the vicinity.

"That seems to me a good watchtower. Perhaps we shall see something from
the top."

Without waiting for his companion's opinion, he began to scramble up the
tower, and in a few minutes was standing on the summit. Corpang joined
him.

From their viewpoint they saw the whole countryside sloping down to
the sea, which appeared as a mere flash of far-off, glittering
water. Leaving all that, however, Maskull's eyes immediately fastened
themselves on a small, boat-shaped object, about two miles away, which
was travelling rapidly toward them, suspended only a few feet in the
air.

"What do you make of that?" he asked in a tone of astonishment.

Corpang shook his head and said nothing.

Within two minutes the flying object, whatever it was, had diminished
the distance between them by one half. It resembled a boat more and
more, but its flight was erratic, rather than smooth; its nose was
continually jerking upward and downward, and from side to side. Maskull
now made out a man sitting in the stern, and what looked like a large
dead animal lying amidships. As the aerial craft drew nearer, he
observed a thick, blue haze underneath it, and a similar haze behind,
but the front, facing them, was clear.

"Here must be what we are waiting for, Corpang. But what on earth
carries it?"

He stroked his beard contemplatively, and then, fearing that they had
not been seen, stepped onto the highest rock, bellowed loudly, and made
wild motions with his arm. The flying-boat, which was only a few hundred
yards distant, slightly altered its course, now heading toward them in a
way that left no doubt that the steersman had detected their presence.

The boat slackened speed until it was travelling no faster than a
walking man, but the irregularity of its movements continued. It was
shaped rather queerly. About twenty feet long, its straight sides
tapered off from a flat bow, four feet broad, to a sharp-angled stern.
The flat bottom was not above ten feet from the ground. It was undecked,
and carried only one living occupant; the other object they had
distinguished was really the carcass of an animal, of about the size
of a large sheep. The blue haze trailing behind the boat appeared to
emanate from the glittering point of a short upright pole fastened in
the stem. When the craft was within a few feet of them, and they were
looking down at it in wonder from above, the man removed this pole and
covered the brightly shining tip with a cap. The forward motion then
ceased altogether, and the boat began to drift hither and thither,
but still it remained suspended in the air, while the haze underneath
persisted. Finally the broad side came gently up against the pile of
rocks on which they were standing. The steersman jumped ashore and
immediately clambered up to meet them.

Maskull offered him a hand, but he refused it disdainfully. He was a
young man, of middle height. He wore a close-fitting fur garment. His
limbs were quite ordinary, but his trunk was disproportionately long,
and he had the biggest and deepest chest that Maskull had ever seen in
a man. His hairless face was sharp, pointed, and ugly, with protruding
teeth, and a spiteful, grinning expression. His eyes and brows sloped
upward. On his forehead was an organ which looked as though it had been
mutilated--it was a mere disagreeable stump of flesh. His hair was short
and thin. Maskull could not name the colour of his skin, but it seemed
to stand in the same relation to jale as green to red.

Once up, the stranger stood for a minute or two, scrutinising the two
companions through half-closed lids, all the time smiling insolently.
Maskull was all eagerness to exchange words, but did not care to be the
first to speak. Corpang stood moodily, a little in the background.

"What men are you?" demanded the aerial navigator at last. His voice was
extremely loud, and possessed a most unpleasant timbre. It sounded to
Maskull like a large volume of air trying to force its way through a
narrow orifice.

"I am Maskull; my friend is Corpang. He comes from Threal, but where I
come from, don't ask."

"I am Haunte, from Sarclash."

"Where may that be?"

"Half an hour ago I could have shown it to you, but now it has got too
murky. It is a mountain in Lichstorm."

"Are you returning there now?"

"Yes."

"And how long will it take to get there in that boat?"

"Two--three hours."

"Will it accommodate us too?"

"What, are you for Lichstorm as well? What can you want there?"

"To see the sights," responded Maskull with twinkling eyes. "But first
of all, to dine. I can't remember having eaten all day. You seem to have
been hunting to some purpose, so we won't lack for food."

Haunte eyed him quizzically. "You certainly don't lack impudence.
However, I'm a man of that sort myself, and it is the sort I prefer.
Your friend, now, would probably rather starve than ask a meal of a
stranger. He looks to me just like a bewildered toad dragged up out of a
dark hole."

Maskull took Corpang's arm, and constrained him to silence.

"Where have you been hunting, Haunte?"

"Matterplay. I had the worst luck--I speared one wold horse, and there
it lies."

"What is Lichstorm like?"

"There are men there, and there are women there, but there are no
men-women, as with you."

"What do you call men-women?"

"Persons of mixed sex, like yourself. In Lichstorm the sexes are pure."

"I have always regarded myself as a man."

"Very likely you have; but the test is, do you hate and fear women?"

"Why, do you?"

Haunte grinned and showed his teeth. "Things are different in
Lichstorm.... So you want to see the sights?"

"I confess I am curious to see your women, for example, after what you
say."

"Then I'll introduce you to Sullenbode."

He paused a moment after making this remark, and then suddenly uttered a
great, bass laugh, so that his chest shook.

"Let us share the joke," said Maskull.

"Oh, you'll understand it later."

"If you play pranks with me, I won't stand on ceremony with you."

Haunte laughed again. "I won't be the one to play pranks. Sullenbode
will be deeply obliged to me. If I don't visit her myself as often as
she would like, I'm always glad to serve her in other ways.... Well, you
shall have your boat ride."

Maskull rubbed his nose doubtfully. "If the sexes hate one another in
your land, is it because passion is weaker, or stronger?"

"In other parts of the world there is soft passion, but in Lichstorm
there is hard passion."

"But what do you call hard passion?"

"Where men are called to women by pain, and not pleasure."

"I intend to understand, before I've finished."

"Yes," answered Haunte, with a taunting look, "it would be a pity to let
the chance slip, since you're going to Lichstorm."

It was now Corpang's turn to take Maskull by the arm. "This journey will
end badly."

"Why so?"

"Your goal was Muspel a short while ago; now it is women."

"Let me alone," said Maskull. "Give luck a slack rein. What brought this
boat here?"

"What is this talk about Muspel?" demanded Haunte.

Corpang caught his shoulder roughly, and stared straight into his eyes.
"What do you know?"

"Not much, but something, perhaps. Ask me at supper. Now it is high time
