them, two by two, the yoke upon their necks. There were not many men.
Almost all lay with their throats cut under the ruins of the thatch of
Gao beside my father, brave Sonni-Azkia. Once again Gao had been razed
by a band of Awellimiden, who had come to massacre the French on their
gunboat.

"The Tuareg hurried us, hurried us, for they were afraid of being
pursued. We traveled thus for ten days; and, as the millet and hemp
disappeared, the march became more frightful. Finally, near Isakeryen,
in the country of Kidal, the Tuareg sold us to a caravan of Trarzan
Moors who were going from Bamrouk to Rhat. At first, because they went
more slowly, it seemed good fortune. But, before long, the desert was
an expanse of rough pebbles, and the women began to fall. As for the
men, the last of them had died far back under the blows of the stick
for having refused to go farther.

"I still had the strength to keep going, and even as far in the lead
as possible, so as not to hear the cries of my little playmates. Each
time one of them fell by the way, unable to rise again, they saw one
of the drivers descend from his camel and drag her into the bushes a
little way to cut her throat. But one day, I heard a cry that made me
turn around. It was my mother. She was kneeling, holding out her poor
arms to me. In an instant I was beside her. But a great Moor, dressed
in white, separated us. A red moroccan case hung around his neck from
a black chaplet. He drew a cutlass from it. I can still see the blue
steel on the brown skin. Another horrible cry. An instant later,
driven by a club, I was trotting ahead, swallowing my little tears,
trying to regain my place in the caravan.

"Near the wells of Asiou, the Moors were attacked by a party of Tuareg
of Kel-Tazeholet, serfs of the great tribe of Kel-Rhela, which rules
over Ahaggar. They, in their turn, were massacred to the last man.
That is how I was brought here, and offered as homage to Antinea, who
was pleased with me and ever since has been kind to me. That is why it
is no slave who soothes your fever to-day with stories that you do not
even listen to, but the last descendant of the great Sonrhai Emperors,
of Sonni-Ali, the destroyer of men and of countries, of Mohammed
Azkia, who made the pilgrimage to Mecca, taking with him fifteen
hundred cavaliers and three hundred thousand _mithkal_ of gold in the
days when our power stretched without rival from Chad to Touat and to
the western sea, and when Gao raised her cupola, sister of the sky,
above the other cities, higher above her rival cupolas than is the
tamarisk above the humble plants of sorghum."




XVI

THE SILVER HAMMER

    _Je ne m'en defends plus et je ne veux qu' aller
    Reconnaitre la place ou je dois l'immoler_.
                                      (Andromaque.)


It was this sort of a night when what I am going to tell you now
happened. Toward five o'clock the sky clouded over and a sense of the
coming storm trembled in the stifling air.

I shall always remember it. It was the fifth of January, 1897.

King Hiram and Gale lay heavily on the matting of my room. Leaning on
my elbows beside Tanit-Zerga in the rock-hewn window, I spied the
advance tremors of lightning.

One by one they rose, streaking the now total darkness with their
bluish stripes. But no burst of thunder followed. The storm did not
attain the peaks of Ahaggar. It passed without breaking, leaving us in
our gloomy bath of sweat.

"I am going to bed," said Tanit-Zerga.

I have said that her room was above mine. Its bay window was some
thirty feet above that before which I lay.

She took Gale in her arms. But King Hiram would have none of it.
Digging his four paws into the matting, he whined in anger and
uneasiness.

"Leave him," I finally said to Tanit-Zerga. "For once he may sleep
here."

So it was that this little beast incurred his large share of
responsibility in the events which followed.

Left alone, I became lost in my reflections. The night was black. The
whole mountain was shrouded in silence.

It took the louder and louder growls of the leopard to rouse me from
my meditation.

King Hiram was braced against the door, digging at it with his drawn
claws. He, who had refused to follow Tanit-Zerga a while ago, now
wanted to go out. He was determined to go out.

"Be still," I said to him. "Enough of that. Lie down!"

I tried to pull him away from the door.

I succeeded only in getting a staggering blow from his paw.

Then I sat down on the divan.

My quiet was short. "Be honest with yourself," I said. "Since Morhange
abandoned you, since the day when you saw Antinea, you have had only
one idea. What good is it to beguile yourself with the stories of
Tanit-Zerga, charming as they are? This leopard is a pretext, perhaps
a guide. Oh, you know that mysterious things are going to happen
tonight. How have you been able to keep from doing anything as long as
this?"

Immediately I made a resolve.

"If I open the door," I thought, "King Hiram will leap down the
corridor and I shall have great difficulty in following him. I must
find some other way."

The shade of the window was worked by means of a small cord. I pulled
it down. Then I tied it into a firm leash which I fastened to the
metal collar of the leopard.

I half opened the door.

"There, now you can go. But quietly, quietly."

I had all the trouble in the world to curb the ardor of King Hiram who
dragged me along the shadowy labyrinth of corridors. It was shortly
before nine o'clock, and the rose-colored night lights were almost
burned out in the niches. Now and then, we passed one which was
casting its last flickers. What a labyrinth! I realized that from here
on I would not recognize the way to her room. I could only follow the
leopard.

At first furious, he gradually became used to towing me. He strained
ahead, belly to the ground, with snuffs of joy.

Nothing is more like one black corridor than another black corridor.
Doubt seized me. Suppose I should suddenly find myself in the baccarat
room! But that was unjust to King Hiram. Barred too long from the dear
presence, the good beast was taking me exactly where I wanted him to
take me.

Suddenly, at a turn, the darkness ahead lifted. A rose window, faintly
glimmering red and green, appeared before us.

The leopard stopped with a low growl before the door in which the rose
window was cut.

I recognized it as the door through which the white Targa had led me
the day after my arrival, when I had been set upon by King Hiram, when
I had found myself in the presence of Antinea.

"We are much better friends to-day," I said, flattering him so that he
would not give a dangerously loud growl.

I tried to open the door. The light, coming through the window, fell
upon the floor, green and red.

A simple latch, which I turned. I shortened the leash to have better
control of King Hiram who was getting nervous.

The great room where I had seen Antinea for the first time was
completely dark. But the garden on which it gave shone under a
clouded moon, in a sky weighted down with the storm which did not
break. Not a breath of air. The lake gleamed like a sheet of pewter.

I seated myself on a cushion, holding the leopard firmly between my
knees. He was purring with impatience. I was thinking. Not about my
goal. For a long time that had been fixed. But about the means.

Then, I seemed to hear a distant murmur, a faint sound of voices.

King Hiram growled louder, struggled. I gave him a little more leash.
He began to rub along the dark walls on the sides whence the voices
seemed to come. I followed him, stumbling as quietly as I could among
the scattered cushions.

My eyes, become accustomed to the darkness, could see the pyramid of
cushions on which Antinea had first appeared to me.

Suddenly I stumbled. The leopard had stopped. I realized that I had
stepped on his tail. Brave beast, he did not make a sound.

Groping along the wall, I felt a second door. Quietly, very quietly, I
opened it as I had opened the preceding one. The leopard whimpered
feebly.

"King Hiram," I murmured, "be quiet."

And I put my arms about his powerful neck.

I felt his warm wet tongue on my hands. His flanks quivered. He shook
with happiness.

In front of us, lighted in the center, another room opened up. In the
middle six men were squatting on the matting, playing dice and
drinking coffee from tiny copper coffee cups with long stems.

They were the white Tuareg.

A lamp, hung from the ceiling, threw a circle of light over them.
Everything outside that circle was in deep shadow.

The black faces, the copper cups, the white robes, the moving light
and shadow, made a strange etching.

They played with a reserved dignity, announcing the throws in raucous
voices.

Then, slowly, very slowly, I slipped the leash from the collar of the
impatient little beast.

"Go, boy."

He leapt with a sharp yelp.

And what I had foreseen happened.

The first bound of King Hiram carried him into the midst of the white
Tuareg, sowing confusion in the bodyguard. Another leap carried him
into the shadow again. I made out vaguely the shaded opening of
another corridor on the side of the room opposite where I was
standing.

"There!" I thought.

The confusion in the room was indescribable, but noiseless. One
realized the restraint which nearness to a great presence imposed upon
the exasperated guards. The stakes and the dice-boxes had rolled in
one direction, the copper cups, in the other.

Two of the Tuareg, doubled up with pain, were rubbing their ribs with
low oaths.

I need not say that I profited by this silent confusion to glide into
the room. I was now flattened against the wall of the second corridor,
down which King Hiram had just disappeared.

At that moment a clear gong echoed in the silence. The trembling which
seized the Tuareg assured me that I had chosen the right way.

One of the six men got up. He passed me and I fell in behind him. I
was perfectly calm. My least movement was perfectly calculated.

"All that I risk here now," I said to myself, "is being led back
politely to my room."

The Targa lifted a curtain. I followed on his heels into the chamber
of Antinea.

The room was huge and at once well lighted and very dark. While the
right half, where Antinea was, gleamed under shaded lamps, the left
was dim.

Those who have penetrated into a Mussulman home know what a _guignol_
is, a kind of square niche in the wall, four feet from the floor, its
opening covered by a curtain. One mounts to it by wooden steps. I
noticed such a _guignol_ at my left. I crept into it. My pulses beat
in the shadow. But I was calm, quite calm.

There I could see and hear everything.

I was in Antinea's chamber. There was nothing singular about the room,
except the great luxury of the hangings. The ceiling was in shadow,
but multicolored lanterns cast a vague and gentle light over gleaming
stuffs and furs.

Antinea was stretched out on a lion's skin, smoking. A little silver
tray and pitcher lay beside her. King Hiram was flattened out at her
feet, licking them madly.

The Targa slave stood rigid before her, one hand on his heart, the
other on his forehead, saluting.

Antinea spoke in a hard voice, without looking at the man.

"Why did you let the leopard pass? I told you that I wanted to be
alone."

"He knocked us over, mistress," said the Targa humbly.

"The doors were not closed, then?"

The slave did not answer.

"Shall I take him away?" he asked.

And his eyes, fastened upon King Hiram who stared at him maliciously,
expressed well enough his desire for a negative reply.

"Let him stay since he is here," said Antinea.

She tapped nervously on the little silver tray.

"What is the captain doing?" she asked.

"He dined a while ago and seemed to enjoy his food," the Targa
answered.

"Has he said nothing?"

"Yes, he asked to see his companion, the other officer."

Antinea tapped the little tray still more rapidly.
