
*The Inner Coat, or Retina.*--This is a delicate membrane containing the
expanded termination of the optic nerve. It rests upon the choroid coat
and spreads over about two thirds of the back surface of the eyeball.
Although not more than one fiftieth of an inch in thickness, it presents a
very complex structure, essentially nervous, and is made up of several
distinct layers. Of chief importance in the outer layer are the cells
which are acted upon directly by the light and are named, from their
shape, the _rods_ and _cones_. In contact with these, but occupying a
separate layer, are the ends of small afferent nerve cells. These in turn
communicate with nerve cells in a third layer, known as the ganglion
cells, that send their fibers into the optic nerve (Fig. 160).

In the center of the retina is a slight oval depression having a faint
yellowish color, and called, on that account, the _yellow spot_. This is
the part of the retina which is most sensitive to light. Directly over the
place of entrance of the optic nerve is a small area from which the rods
and cones are absent and which, therefore, is not sensitive to light. This
is called the _blind spot_. (See Practical Work.)

*The Crystalline Lens.*--Immediately back of the iris and touching it is a
transparent, rounded body, called the crystalline lens. This is about one
fourth of an inch thick and one third of an inch through its long
diameter, and is more curved on the back than on the front surface. It is
inclosed in a thin sheath, called the _membranous capsule_, which connects
with a divided sheath from the sides of the eyeball, called the
_suspensory ligament_ (Fig. 159). Both the lens and the capsule are highly
elastic.

*Chambers and "Humors" of the Eyeball.*--The crystalline lens together with
the suspensory ligament and the ciliary processes form a partition across
the eyeball. This divides the eye space into two separate compartments,
which are filled with the so-called "humors" of the eye. The front cavity
of the eyeball, which is again divided in part by the iris, is filled with
the _aqueous_ humor. This is a clear, lymph-like liquid which contains an
occasional white corpuscle. It has a feeble motion and is slowly added to
and withdrawn from the eye. It is supplied mainly by the blood vessels in
the ciliary processes and finds a place of exit through a small lymph duct
at the edge of the cornea (Fig. 159).

The back portion of the eyeball is filled with a soft, transparent,
jelly-like substance, called the _vitreous_ humor. It is in contact with
the surface of the retina at the back and with the attachments of the lens
in front, being surrounded by a thin covering of its own, called the
_hyaloid membrane_. The aqueous and vitreous humors aid in keeping the
eyeball in shape and also in focusing.

*How we see Objects.*--To see an object at least four things must happen:

1. Light must pass from the object into the eye. Objects cannot be seen
where there is no light or where, for some reason, it is kept from
entering the eye.

2. The light from the object must be focused (made to form an image) on
the retina. In forming the image, an area of the retina is stimulated
which corresponds to _the form of the object_.

3. Impulses must pass from the retina to the brain, stimulating it to
produce the sensations.

4. The sensations must be so interpreted by the mind as to give an
impression of the object.

*Focusing Power of the Eyeball.*--The eyeball is essentially a device for
focusing light. All of its transparent portions are directly concerned in
this work, and the portions that are not transparent serve to protect and
operate these parts and hold them in place. Of chief importance are the
crystalline lens and the cornea. Both of these are lenses. The cornea with
its inclosed liquid is a plano-convex lens, while the crystalline lens is
double convex.(123) Because of the great difference in density between the
air on the outside and the aqueous humor within, the cornea is the more
powerful of the two. The crystalline lens, however, performs a special
work in focusing which is of great importance. The iris also aids in
focusing since it, through the pupil, regulates the amount of light
entering the back chamber of the eyeball and causes it to fall in the
center of the crystalline lens, the part which focuses most accurately.

                                [Fig. 161]


 Fig. 161--*Diagram showing changes in shape of crystalline lens* to adapt
                      it to near and distant vision.


*Accommodation.*--A difficulty in focusing arises from the fact that the
degree of divergence of the light waves entering the eye from different
objects, varies according to their distance. Since the waves from any
given point on an object pass out in straight lines in all directions, the
waves that enter the eye from distant objects are at a different angle
from those that enter from near objects. In reality waves from distant
objects are practically parallel, while those from very near objects
diverge to a considerable degree. To adjust the eye to different distances
requires some change in the focusing parts that corresponds to the
differences in the divergence of the light. This change, called
_accommodation_, occurs in the crystalline lens.(124) In the process of
accommodation, changes occur in the shape of the crystalline lens, as
follows:

1. In looking from a distant to a near object, the lens becomes more
convex, _i.e._, rounder and thicker (Fig. 161). This change is necessary
because the greater divergence of the light from the near objects requires
a greater converging power on the part of the lens.(125)

2. In looking from near to distant objects, the lens becomes flatter and
thinner (Fig. 161). This change is necessary because the less divergent
waves from the distant objects require less converging power on the part
of the lens.

The method employed in changing the shape of the lens is difficult to
determine and different theories have been advanced to account for it. The
following, proposed by Helmholtz, is the theory most generally accepted:

The lens is held in place back of the pupil by the suspensory ligament.
This is attached at its inner margin to the membranous capsule, and at its
outer margin to the sides of the eyeball, and entirely surrounds the lens.
It is drawn perfectly tight so that the sides of the eyeball exert a
continuous tension, or pull, on the membranous capsule, which, in its
turn, exerts pressure on the sides of the lens, tending to flatten it.
This arrangement brings the elastic force of the eyeball into opposition
to the elastic force of the lens. The ciliary muscle plays between these
opposing forces in the following manner:

_To thicken the lens_, the ciliary muscle contracts, pulling forward the
suspensory ligament and releasing its tension on the membranous capsule.
This enables the lens to thicken on account of its own elastic force. _To
flatten the lens_, the ciliary muscle relaxes, the elastic force of the
eyeball resumes its tension on the suspensory ligament, and the membranous
capsule resumes its pressure on the sides of the lens. This pressure,
overcoming the elastic force of the lens, flattens it.

*Movements of the Eyeballs.*--In order that the light may enter the
eyeballs to the best advantage, they must be moved in various directions.
These movements are brought about through the action of six small muscles
attached to each eyeball. Four of these, named, from their positions, the
superior, inferior, internal, and external recti muscles, are attached at
one end to the sides of the eyeball and at the other end to the back of
the orbit (Fig. 162). These, in the order named, turn the eyes upward,
downward, inward, and outward. The other two, the superior and inferior
oblique muscles, aid in certain movements of the recti muscles and, in
addition, serve to rotate the eyes slightly. The movements of the eyeballs
are similar to those of ball and socket joints.

                                [Fig. 162]


                 Fig. 162--*Exterior muscles of eyeball.*


*Binocular Vision.*--In addition to directing the eyeballs so that light
may enter them to the best advantage from different objects, the muscles
also enable two eyes to be used as one. Whenever the eyes are directed
toward the same object, an image of this object is formed on the retina of
each. Double vision is prevented only by having the images fall on
corresponding places in the two eyes. This is accomplished by the muscles.
In each act of seeing, it becomes the task of the superior and inferior
recti muscles to keep the eyes in the same plane, and of the external and
internal recti muscles to give just the right amount of convergence. If
slight pressure is exerted against one of the eyes, the action of the
muscles is interfered with and, as a consequence, one sees double. The
advantages of two eyes over one in seeing lie in the greater distinctness
and broader range of vision and in the greater correctness of judgments of
distance.

*Visual Sensations.*--The visual sensations include those of _color_ and
those of a _general sensibility to light_. Proof of the existence of these
types of sensation is found in color blindness, a defect which renders the
individual unable to distinguish certain colors when he is still able to
see objects. Color sensations are the results of light waves of different
lengths acting on the retina. While the method by which waves of one
length produce one kind of sensation and those of another length a
different sensation is not understood, the cones appear to be the portions
of the retina acted on to produce the color. On the other hand, the rods
are sensitive to all wave lengths and give general sensibility to light.

*Visual Perceptions.*--"Seeing" is very largely the mental interpretation
of the primary sensations and the conditions under which they occur. For
example, our ability to see objects in their natural positions when their
images are inverted on the retina is explained by the fact that we are not
conscious of the retinal image, but of the mind's interpretation of it
through experience. Experience has also taught us to locate objects in the
direction toward which it is necessary to turn the eyes in order to see
them. In other words, we see objects in the direction from which the light
enters the eyes. That the object is not always in that direction is shown
by the image in the mirror. The apparent size and form of objects are
inferences, and they are based in part upon the size and form of the area
of the retina stimulated. We judge of distance by the effort required to
converge the eyes upon the objects, by the amount of divergence of the
waves entering the pupil, and also by the apparent size of the object.

*The Lachrymal Apparatus.*--Seeing requires that the light penetrate to the
retina. For this reason all the structures in front of the retina are
transparent. One of these structures, the cornea, on account of its
exposure to the air, is liable to become dry, like the skin, and to lose
its transparency. To preserve the transparency of the cornea, and also to
lubricate the eyelids and aid in the removal of foreign bodies, a
secretion, called _tears_, is constantly supplied.

                                [Fig. 163]


  Fig. 163--*Diagram of irrigating system of the eye.* After wetting the
      eyeball the tears may also moisten the air entering the lungs.


The lachrymal, or tear, glands are situated at the upper and outer margins
of the orbits. They have the general structure of the salivary glands and
discharge their liquid by small ducts beneath the upper lids. From here
the tears spread over the surfaces of the eyeballs and find their way in
each eye to two small canals whose openings may be seen on the edges of
the lids near the inner corner (Fig. 163). These canals unite to form the
_nasal duct_, which conveys the tears to the nasal cavity on the same side
of the nose. When by evaporation the eyeball becomes too dry, the lids
close reflexively and spread a fresh layer of tears over the surface. Any
excess is passed into the nostrils, where it aids in moistening the air
entering the lungs.



HYGIENE OF THE EYE


*Defects in Focusing.*--The delicacy and complexity of the sense organs of
sight render them liable to a number of imperfections, or defects, the
most frequent and important being those of focusing. Such defects not only
result in the imperfect vision of objects, but they throw an extra strain
upon the nervous system and may render the process of seeing exceedingly
painful.

A normal eye is able, when relaxed, to focus light accurately from objects
which are twenty feet or more away and to accommodate itself to objects as
near as five inches. An eye is said to be _myopic_, or _short-sighted_,
when it is unable to focus light waves from distant objects, but can only
distinguish the objects which are near at hand. In such an eye the ball is
too long for the converging power of the lenses, and the image is formed
in front of the retina (_C_, Fig. 164).

                                [Fig. 164]


 Fig. 164--*Diagrams illustrating long-sightedness and short-sightedness*,
  and method of remedying these defects by lenses. _A._ Normal eye. _B._
                Long-sighted eye. _C._ Short-sighted eye.


A _long-sighted_, or _hypermetropic_, eye is one which can focus light
from distant objects, but not from near objects. In such an eye the ball
is too short for the converging power of the lenses and the image tends to
form back of the retina (_B_, Fig. 164). These defects in focusing are
remedied by wearing glasses with lenses so shaped as to counteract them.
Short-sightedness is corrected by concave lenses and long-sightedness by
convex lenses, as shown in diagrams above.

_Astigmatism_ is another defect in the focusing power of the eye. In
astigmatism the parts of the eye fail to form the image in the same plane,
so that all portions of the object do not appear equally distinct. Certain
parts of it are indistinct, or blurred. The cause is found in some
difference in curvature of the surfaces of the cornea or crystalline lens.
It is corrected by lenses so ground as to correct the particular defects
present in a given eye.

Whenever defects in focusing are present, particularly in astigmatism,
extra work is thrown on the ciliary muscle as well as the muscles that
move the eyeballs. The result is frequently to induce a condition, known
as _muscle weakness_, which renders it difficult to use the eyes. Even
after the defect in focusing has been remedied, the muscles recover slowly
and must be used with care. For this reason glasses should be fitted by a
competent oculist(126) as soon as a defect is known to exist. When one is
unduly nervous, or suffers from headache, the eyes should be examined for
defects in focusing (page 326).

*Eye Strain and Disease.*--The extra work thrown upon the nervous system
through seeing with defective eyes, especially in reading and other close
work, is now recognized as an important cause of disease. Through the tax
made upon the nervous system by the eyes, there may be left an
insufficient amount of nervous energy for the proper running of the vital
processes. As a result there is a decline of the health. Ample proof that
eye strain interferes with the vital processes and causes ill health, is
found in the improvements that result when, by means of glasses, this is
relieved.

*The Eyes of School Children.*--School children often suffer from defects
of vision which render close work burdensome, and cause headache, general
nervousness, and disease. Furthermore, the visual defects may be unknown
both to themselves and to their parents. Pupils showing indications of
eye-strain should be examined by an oculist, and fitted with glasses
should defects be discovered.(127) The precaution, adopted by many
schools, of having the eyes of all children examined by a competent
physician employed for the purpose, is most excellent and worthy of
imitation.

*Reading Glasses.*--Many people whose eyes are weak, because slightly
defective, find great relief in the use of special glasses for reading and
other close work. By using such glasses they may postpone the time when
they are compelled to wear glasses constantly. It is in the close work
that the extra strain comes upon the eyes, and if this is relieved, one
can much better withstand the work of distant vision. The reading glasses
should be fitted by a competent oculist, and used only for the purpose for
which they are intended.

*General Precautions in the Use of the Eyes.*--If proper care is exercised
in the use of the eyes, many of their common ailments and defects may be
avoided. Any one, whether his eyes are weak or strong, will do well to
observe the following precautions:

1. Never read in light that is very intense or very dim. 2. When the eyes
hurt from reading, stop using them. 3. Never hold a book so that the
smooth page reflects light into the eyes. The best way is to sit or stand
so that the light passes over the shoulder to the book. 4. Never study by
a lamp that is not shaded. 5. Practice cleanliness in the care of the
eyes. Avoid rubbing the eyes with the fingers unless sure the fingers are
clean.

If the eyes are weak, use them less and avoid, if possible, reading by
artificial light. Weak eyes are sometimes benefited by bathing them in
warm water, or with water containing enough salt to make them smart
slightly. Boracic acid dissolved in water (40 grains to 4 ounces of
distilled water) is also highly recommended as a wash for weak eyes.

                                [Fig. 165]


       Fig. 165--*Method of procedure in lifting the eyelid* (Pyle).


*Removal of Foreign Bodies from the Eyes.*--Foreign bodies embedded in the
eyeball should be removed by the oculist or physician. Small particles of
dust or cinder may be removed without the aid of the physician, by
exercising proper care. First let the tears, if possible, wash the
offending substance to the corner of the eye, or edge of the lid, where it
can be removed with a soft cloth. If it sticks to the ball or the under
surface of the lid, it will be necessary to find where it is located, and
then dislodge it from its position. Begin by examining the lower lid. Pull
it down sufficiently to expose the inner surface, and, if the foreign
substance be there, wipe it off with the hem of a clean handkerchief. If
it is not under the lower lid, it will be necessary to fold back the upper
lid. "The patient is told to look down, the edge of the lid and the lashes
are seized with the forefinger and thumb of the right hand (Fig. 165), and
the lid is drawn at first downward and forward away from the globe; then
upward and backward over the point of the thumb or forefinger of the left
hand, which is held stationary on the lid, and acts as a fulcrum."(128)
The foreign body is now removed in the same manner as from the lower lid.
A large lens may be used to good advantage in finding the irritating
substance.

*Strong Chemicals in the Eyes.*--Students in the laboratory frequently,
through accident, get strong chemicals, as acids and bases, in the eyes.
The first thing to do in such cases is quickly and thoroughly to _flood
the eyes with water_. Any of the chemical which remains may then be
counteracted by the proper reagent, care being taken to use a very dilute
solution. To counteract an acid, use sodium bicarbonate (cooking soda),
and for bases use a very dilute solution of acetic acid (vinegar). To
guard against getting the counteractive agent too strong for the inflamed
eye, it should first be tried on an eye that has not been injured.

*Summary.*--The nervous impulses that cause the sensation of sight are
started by light waves falling upon a sensitized nervous surface, called
the retina. By means of refractive agents, forming a part of the eyeball
in front of the retina, light from different objects is focused and made
to form images of the objects upon the surface. In this way the light is
made to stimulate a portion of the retina corresponding to the form of the
object. This, _the image method of stimulation_, enables the mind to
recognize objects and to locate them in their various positions. While the
greater portion of the eyeball is concerned in the focusing of light, the
crystalline lens, operated by the ciliary muscle, serves as the special
instrument of accommodation. Muscles attached to the eyeballs turn them in
different directions, and so adjust them with reference to each other that
double vision is avoided.

*Exercises.*--1. Under what conditions are light waves reflected,
refracted, and absorbed?

2. Why does the body not need a light-producing apparatus, corresponding
to the larynx in the production of sound?

3. How is the light from a candle made to form an image?

4. What different things must happen in order that one may see an object?

5. Make a sectional drawing of the eyeball, locating and naming all the
parts.

6. Of what parts are the outer, middle, and inner coats of the eyeball
made up?

7. What portions of the eyeball reflect light? What absorb light? What
transmit light? What refract light?

8. Show how the iris, the crystalline lens, the retina, the ciliary
muscle, and the cornea aid in seeing.

9. Trace a wave of light from a visible object to the retina.

10. Why does not the inverted image on the retina cause us to see objects
upside down?

11. What change occurs in the shape of the crystalline lens when we look
from distant to near objects? From near to distant objects? Why are these
changes necessary? How are they brought about?

12. How does the method of adjustment, or accommodation, of the eyeball
differ from that of a telescope or a photographer's camera?

13. With two eyes how are we kept from seeing double?

14. What different purposes are served by the tears. Trace them from the
lachrymal glands to the nostrils.

15. Show how the proper lenses remedy short- and long-sightedness.

16. Describe the conjunctiva and give its functions. Why should it be so
sensitive?

17. How may eye strain cause disease in parts of the body remote from the
eyes?

18. How does "image stimulation" differ from light stimulation in general?



PRACTICAL WORK


*To illustrate Simple Properties of Light.*--1. Heat an iron or platinum
wire in a clear gas flame. Observe that when a high temperature is reached
it gives out light or becomes luminous.

2. Cover one hand with a white and the other with a black piece of cloth,
and hold both for a short time in the direct rays of the sun. Note and
account for the difference in temperature which is felt.

3. Stand a book or a block of wood by the side of an empty pan in the
sunlight, so that the end of the shadow falls on the bottom of the pan.
Mark the place where the shadow terminates and fill the pan with water.
Account for the shadow's becoming shorter.

4. Place a coin in the center of an empty pan and let the members of the
class stand where the coin is barely out of sight over the edges of the
pan. Fill the pan with water and account for the coin's coming into view.
Show by a drawing how light, in passing from the water into the air, is so
bent as to enter the eye.

5. With a convex lens, in a darkened room, focus the light from a candle
flame so that it falls on a white screen and forms an image of the candle.
Observe that the image is inverted. In a well-lighted room focus the light
from a window upon a white screen. Show that, as the distance from the
window to the screen is changed, the position of the lens must also be
changed. (Accommodation.)

6. Hold a piece of cardboard, about eight inches square and having a
smooth, round hole an eighth of an inch in diameter in the center, in
front of a lighted candle in a darkened room. Back of the opening place a
muslin or paper screen (Fig. 157). Observe that a dim image is formed.
Account for the fact that it is inverted. Hold a lens between the
cardboard and the screen so that the light passes through it also. The
image should now appear smaller and more distinct.

                                [Fig. 166]


        Fig. 166--*Diagram* for proving presence of the blind spot.


*To prove the Presence of the Blind Spot.*--Close the left eye and with the
right gaze steadily at the spot on the left side of this page (Fig. 166).
Then starting with the book a foot or more from the face, move it slowly
toward the eye. A place will be found where the spot on the right entirely
disappears. On bringing it nearer, however, it is again seen. As the book
is moved forward or backward, the position of the image of this spot
changes on the retina. When the spot cannot be seen, it is because the
image falls on the blind spot.

*Dissection of the Eyeball.*--Procure from the butcher two or three
eyeballs obtained from cattle. After separating the fat, connective
tissue, and muscle, place them in a shallow vessel and cover with water.
Insert the blade of a pair of sharp scissors at the junction of the
sclerotic rotic coat with the cornea and cut from this point nearly around
the entire circumference of the eyeball, passing near the optic nerve.
Spread open in the water and identify the different parts from the
description in the text. Open the second eyeball in water by cutting away
the cornea. Examine the parts in front of the lens.

                                [Fig. 167]


             Fig. 167--*Model* for demonstrating the eyeball.


*To illustrate Accommodation.*--Paste together the ends of a strip of stiff
writing paper (two by five inches) making a ring a little less than three
inches in diameter. This is to represent the crystalline lens. Now paste a
piece of thin paper (two by seven inches) upon a second strip of the same
size, leaving an open place in the middle for the insertion of the paper
lens. A flexible piece of cardboard (three by twelve inches) is now bent
into the form of a half circle and to its ends are fastened the strips of
paper containing the ring. Make a small hole in each of the four corners
of the bent cardboard. Through these holes pass two loops of thread, or
fine string, in opposite directions, letting the ends hang loose from the
cardboard.

When everything is in position, the tension from the cardboard flattens
the paper lens, while pulling the strings releases this tension and
permits the lens to become more rounded. With this simple device the
changes in the curvature of the lens for near and distant vision are
easily shown.




CHAPTER XXIII - THE GENERAL PROBLEM OF KEEPING WELL


    "To cure was the voice of the Past: to prevent is the divine
    whispering of To-day."


As stated in the introduction to our study, the fundamental law of hygiene
is the law of harmony: _Habits of living must harmonize with the plan of
the body._ Having acquainted ourselves with the plan of the body, we may
now review briefly those conditions that help or hinder its various
activities. The hygiene already presented in connection with the study of
the various organs may be condensed into general rules, or laws, as
follows:

1. Of exercise: Exercise daily the important groups of muscles.

2. Of form: Preserve the natural form of the body.

3. Of energy: Observe regular periods of rest and exercise and avoid
exhaustion.

4. Of nutriment: Eat moderately of a well-cooked and well-balanced diet
and drink freely of pure water.

5. Of respiration: Breathe freely and deeply of pure air and spend a part
of each day out of doors.

6. Of nervous poise: Suppress wasteful and useless forms of nervous
activity, avoid nervous strain, and practice cheerfulness.

7. Of cleanliness: Keep the body and its immediate surroundings clean.

8. Of restraint: Abstain from the unnecessary use of drugs as well as from
the practice of any form of activity known to be harmful to the body.
