he was flushed now with drink, and Anita added:

"Grantline knows the territory near his camp very well. But he is
equipped only for short range fighting."

I took it up. "It's like this, Potan: if he could get you to land
unsuspectingly near his cavern--"

I pictured how Grantline might have figured on a sudden surprise
attack upon the ship. It was his only chance to catch it unprepared.

We were all three in friendly, intimate mood now. Potan said, "We'll
land down there right enough! But I need a few hours for my
assembling."

"He will not dare advance," I said.

Anita put in, smiling, "He knows by now that we have unmasked his
lure. Haljan and I, joining you--that silenced him. His light went out
very promptly, didn't it?"

She flashed me a side gaze. Were we acting convincingly? But if Miko
started up his signals again, they might so quickly betray us!
Anita's thoughts were upon that, for she added:

"Grantline will not dare show his light! If he does, _Set_ Potan, we
can blast him from here with a ray. Can't we?"

"Yes," Potan agreed. "If he comes within ten miles, I have one
powerful enough. We are assembling it now."

"And we have thirty men?" Anita persisted. "When we sail down to
attack him, it should not be difficult to kill all the Grantline
party."

"By heaven, Haljan, this girl of yours is small, but very
bloodthirsty!"

"And I'm glad Miko is dead," Anita added.

I explained, "That accursed Miko murdered her brother."

Acting! And never once did we dare relax. If only Miko's signals would
hold off and give us time!

       *       *       *       *       *

We may have talked for half an hour. We were in a small steel-lined
cubby, located in the forward deck of the ship. The dome was over it.
I could see from where I sat at the table that there was a forward
observatory tower under the dome quite near here. The ship was laid
out in rather similar fashion to the _Planetara_, though considerably
smaller.

Potan had dismissed his men from the cubby so as to be alone with us.
Out on the deck I could see them dragging apparatus about, bringing
the mechanisms of giant projectors up from below and beginning to
assemble them. Occasionally some of the men would come to our cubby
windows to peer in curiously.

My mind was roaming as I talked. For all my manner of casualness, I
knew that haste was necessary. Whatever Anita and I were to do must be
quickly done.

But to win this fellow's utter confidence first was necessary, so that
we might have the freedom of the ship, might move about unnoticed,
unwatched.

I was horribly tense inside. Through the dome windows across the deck
from the cubby, the rocks of the Lunar landscape were visible. I could
see the brink of this ledge upon which the ship lay, the descending
crags down the precipitous wall of Archimedes to the Earthlit plains
far below. Miko, Moa, and a few of the _Planetara's_ crew were down
there somewhere.

Anita and I had a fairly definite plan. We were now in Potan's
confidence; this interview at an end, I felt that our status among the
brigands would be established. We would be free to move about the
ship, join in its activities. It ought to be possible to locate the
signal room, get friendly with the operator there.

Perhaps we could find a secret opportunity to flash a signal to Earth.
This ship, I was confident, would have the power for a long range
signal, if not of too sustained a length. It would be a desperate
thing to attempt, but our whole procedure was desperate! Anita could
lure the duty man from the signal room, I might send a single flash or
two that would reach the Earth. Just a distress signal, signed
"Grantline." If I could do that and not get caught!

Anita was engaging Potan in talking of his plans. The brigand leader
was boasting of them: of his well equipped ship, the daring of his
men. And questioning her about the size of the treasure. My thoughts
were free to roam.

While we were making friends with this brigand, the longest range
electronic projector was being assembled. Miko then could flash his
signal and be damned to him! I would be on the deck with that
projector. Its operator and I would turn it upon Miko--one flash of it
and he and his little band would be wiped out.

But there was our escape to be thought of. We could not remain very
long with these brigands. We could tell them that the Grantline camp
was on the Mare Imbrium. It would delay them for a time, but our lie
would soon be discovered. We must escape from them, get away and back
to Grantline. With Miko dead, a distress signal to Earth, and Potan in
ignorance of Grantline's location, the treasure would be safe until
help arrived from Earth.

"By the infernal, little Anita, you look like a dove, but you're a
tigress! A comrade after my own heart--bloodthirsty as a
fire-worshipper!"

Her laugh rang out to mingle with his. "Oh no, _Set_ Potan! I am
treasure-thirsty."

"We'll get the treasure. Never fear, little Anita."

"With you to lead us, I'm sure we will."

A man entered the cubby. Potan looked frowningly around. "What is it,
Argle?"

The fellow answered in Martian, leered at Anita and withdrew.

Potan stood up. I noticed that he was unsteady with the drink.

"They want me with the work at the projectors."

"Go ahead," I said.

He nodded. We were comrades now. "Amuse yourself, Haljan. Or come out
on deck if you wish. I will tell my men you are one of us."

"And tell them to keep their hands off Miss Prince."

He stared at me. "I had not thought of that: a woman among so many
men!"

His own gaze at Anita was as offensive as any of his men could have
given. He said, "Have no fear, little tigress."

Anita laughed. "I'm afraid of nothing."

But when he had lurched from the cabin, she touched me. Smiled with
her mannish swagger, for fear we were still observed, and murmured:

"Oh Gregg, I am afraid!"

We stayed in the cubby a few moments, whispering and planning.

"You think the signal room is in the tower, Gregg? This tower outside
our window here?"

"Yes, I think so."

"Shall we go out and see?"

"Yes. Keep near me always."

"Oh Gregg, I will!"

We deposited our Erentz suits carefully in a corner of the cubby. We
might need them so suddenly! Then we swaggered out to join the
brigands working on the deck.




XXX


The deck glowed lurid in the queer blue-greenish glare of Martian
electro-fuse lights. It was in a bustle of ordered activity. Some
twenty of the crew were scattered about, working in little groups.
Apparatus was being brought up from below to be assembled. There was a
pile of Erentz suits and helmets, of Martian pattern, but still very
similar to those with which Grantline's expedition was equipped. There
were giant projectors of several kinds, some familiar to me, others of
a fashion I had never seen before. It seemed there were six or eight
of them, still dismantled, with a litter of their attendant batteries
and coils and tube amplifiers.

They were to be mounted here on the deck, I surmised; I saw in the
dome side one or two of them already rolled into position.

Anita and I stood outside Potan's cubby, gazing around us curiously.
The men looked at us but none of them spoke.

"Let's watch from here a moment," I whispered. She nodded, standing
with her hand on my arm. I felt that we were very small, here in the
midst of these seven foot Martian men. I was all in white, the costume
used in the warm interior of Grantline's camp. Bareheaded, white silk
_Planetara_ uniform jacket, broad belt and tight-laced trousers. Anita
was a slim black figure beside me, somber as Hamlet, with her pale
boyish face and wavy black hair.

The gravity being maintained here on the ship we had found to be
stronger than that of the Moon and rather more like Mars.

"There are the heat rays, Gregg."

A pile of them was visible down the deck length. And I saw caskets of
fragile glass globes, bombs of different styles, hand projectors of
the paralyzing ray; search beams of several varieties; the Benson
curve light, and a few side arms of ancient Earth design--swords and
dirks, and small bullet projectors.

There seemed to be some mining equipment also. Far along the deck,
beyond the central cabin in the open space of the stern, steel rails
were stacked; half a dozen tiny-wheeled ore carts; a tiny motor engine
for hauling them and what looked as though it might be the dismembered
sections of an ore chute.

The whole deck was presently strewn with this mass of equipment.

Potan moved about, directing the different groups of workers. The news
had spread that we knew the location of the treasure. The brigands
were jubilant. In a few hours the ship's armament would be ready, and
it would advance.

I saw many glances cast out the dome side windows toward the distant
plains of the Mare Imbrium. The brigands believed that the Grantline
camp lay in that direction.

Anita whispered, "Which is their giant electronic projector, Gregg?"

I could see it amidships of the deck. It was already in place. Potan
was there now, superintending the men who were connecting it. The most
powerful weapon on the ship. It had, Potan said, an effective range of
some ten miles. I wondered what it would do to a Grantline building!
The Erentz double walls would withstand it for a time, I was sure. But
it would blast an Erentz fabric suit, no doubt of that. Like a
lightning bolt, it would kill--its flashing free stream of electrons
shocking the heart, bringing instant death.

I whispered, "We must smash that before we leave! But first turn it on
Miko, if he signals now."

I was tensely watchful for that signal. The electronic projector
obviously was not ready. But when it was connected, I must be near it,
to persuade its duty man to fire it on Miko. With this done we would
have more time to plan our other tasks. I did not think Potan would be
ready for his attack before another time of sleep here in the ship's
routine. Things would be quieter then; I would watch my chance to send
a signal to Earth, and then we would escape.

With my thoughts roving, we had been standing quietly at the cubby
door for about fifteen minutes. My hand in my side pouch clutched the
little bullet projector. The brigands had taken it from me and given
it to Potan. He had placed it on the settle with my Erentz suit; and
when we gained his confidence he had forgotten it and left it there. I
had it now, and the feel of its cool sleek handle gave me a measure of
comfort. Things could go wrong so easily. But if they did, I was
determined to sell my life as dearly as possible. And a vague thought
was in my mind: I must not use the last bullet. That would be for
Anita.

"That electronic projector is remote controlled. Look, Anita, that's
the signal room over us. The giant projector will be aimed and fired
from up there."

A thirty foot skeleton tower stood on the deck near us, with a spiral
ladder leading up to a small, square, steel cubby at the top. Through
the cubby window I could see instrument panels. A single Martian was
up there; he had called down to Potan concerning the electronic
projector.

The roof of this little tower room was close under the dome--a space
of no more than four feet. A pressure lock exit in the dome was up
there, with a few steps leading up to it from the roof of the tower
signal room.

We could escape that way, perhaps. In the event of dire necessity it
might be possible. But only as a desperate resort, for it would put us
on the top of the glassite dome, with a sheer hundred feet or more
down its sleek bulging exterior side, and down the outside bulge of
the ship's hull, to the rocks below. There might be a spider ladder
outside leading downward, but I saw no evidence of it. If Anita and I
were forced to escape that way, I wondered how we could manage a
hundred foot jump to the rocks, and land safely. Even with the slight
gravity of the Moon, it would be a dangerous fall.

"You are Gregg Haljan?"

I stared as one of the brigands, coming up behind, addressed me.

"Yes."

"Commander Potan tells me you were chief navigator of the
_Planetara_?"

"Yes."

"You shall pilot us when we advance upon the Grantline camp. I am
control-commander here--Brotow, my name."

He smiled. A giant fellow, but spindly. He spoke good English. He
seemed anxious to be friendly.

"We are glad to have you and George Prince's sister with us." He shot
Anita an admiring glance. "I will show you our controls, Haljan."

"All right," I said. "Whatever I can do to help...."

"But not now. It will be some hours before we are ready."

I nodded, and he wandered away. Anita whispered: "Did he mean that
signal room up in the tower? Oh Gregg, maybe it's only the control
room."

"Suppose we go up and see? Miko's signals might start any minute."

And the electronic projector seemed about ready. It was time for me to
act. But a reluctant instinct was upon me. Our Erentz suits were close
behind us in Potan's cubby. I hated to leave them. If anything
happened, and we had to make a sudden dash, there would be no time to
garb ourselves in the suits. To adjust the helmets would be bad
enough.

I whispered swiftly, "We must get into our suits--find some pretext."
I drew her back through the cubby doorway where we would be more
secluded.

"Anita, listen. I've been a fool not to plan our escape more
carefully. We're in too great a danger here!"

Suddenly it seemed to me that we were in desperate plight! Was it
premonition?

"Anita, listen: if anything happens and we have to make a dash--"

"Up through that dome lock, Gregg? It's a manual control; you can see
the levers."

"Yes. It's a manual. But once up there how would we get down?"

She was far calmer than I. "There may be an outside ladder, Gregg."

"I don't think so. I haven't seen it."

