the barrel of the rifle in a tiny spiral; spraying the entire city with
death and destruction! As they looked, the first of the shells reached
the ground, just as Dunark ceased firing for lack of ammunition. They
saw the palace disappear as if by magic, being instantly blotted out in
a cloud of dust--a cloud which, with a spiral motion of dizzying
rapidity, increased in size until it obscured the entire city.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having attained sufficient altitude to be safe from any possible pursuit
and out of range of even the heaviest guns, Seaton stopped the vessel
and went out into the main compartment to consult with the other
members of the group, about their next move.

"It sure does feel good to get a breath of cool air, folks," he said, as
he drew with relief a deep breath of the air, which, at that great
elevation, was of an icy temperature and very thin. He glanced at the
little group of Kondalians as he spoke, then leaped back to the
instrument board with an apology on his lips--they were gasping for
breath and shivering with the cold. He switched on the heating coils and
dropped the Skylark rapidly in a long descent toward the ocean.

"If that is the temperature you enjoy, I understand at last why you wear
clothes," said the Kofedix, as soon as he could talk.

"Do not your planes fly up into the regions of low temperature?" asked
Crane.

"Only occasionally, and all high-flying vessels are enclosed and heated
to our normal temperature. We have heavy wraps, but we dislike to wear
them so intensely that we never subject ourselves to any cold."

"Well, there's no accounting for tastes," returned Seaton, "but I can't
hand your climate a thing. It's hotter even than Washington in August;
'and that,' as the poet feelingly remarked, 'is going some!'

"But there's no reason for sitting here in the dark," he continued, as
he switched on the powerful daylight lamps which lighted the vessel with
the nearest approach to sunlight possible to produce. As soon as the
lights were on, Dorothy looked intently at the strange women.

"Now we can see what color they really are," she explained to her lover
in a low voice. "Why, they aren't so very different from what they were
before, except that the colors are much softer and more pleasing. They
really are beautiful, in spite of being green. Don't you think so,
Dick?"

"They're a handsome bunch, all right," he agreed, and they were. Their
skins were a light, soft green, tanned to an olive shade by their many
fervent suns. Their teeth were a brilliant and shining grass-green.
Their eyes and their long, thick hair were a glossy black.

The Kondalians looked at the Earthly visitors and at each other, and the
women uttered exclamations of horror.

"What a frightful light?" exclaimed Sitar. "Please shut it off. I would
rather be in total darkness than look like this!"

"What's the matter, Sitar?" asked the puzzled Dorothy as Seaton turned
off the lights. "You look perfectly stunning in this light."

"They see things differently than we do," explained Seaton. "Their optic
nerves react differently than ours do. While we look all right to them,
and they look all right to us, in both kinds of light, they look just as
different to themselves under our daylight lamps as we do to ourselves
in their green light. Is that explanation clear?"

"It's clear enough as far as it goes, but what do they look like to
themselves?"

"That's too deep for me--I can't explain it, any better than you can.
Take the Osnomian color 'mlap,' for instance. Can you describe it?"

"It's a kind of greenish orange--but it seems as though it ought not to
look like that color either."

"That's it, exactly. From the knowledge you received from the educator,
it should be a brilliant purple. That is due to the difference in the
optic nerves, which explains why we see things so differently from the
way the Osnomians do. Perhaps they can describe the way they look to
each other in our white light."

"Can you, Sitar?" asked Dorothy.

"One word describes it--'horrible.'" replied the Kondalian princess, and
her husband added:

"The colors are distorted and unrecognizable, just as your colors are to
your eyes in our light."

"Well, now that the color question is answered, let's get going. I
pretty nearly asked you the way, Dunark--forgot that I know it as well
as you do."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Skylark set off at as high an altitude as the Osnomians could stand.
As they neared the ocean several great Mardonalian battleships, warned
of the escape, sought to intercept them; but the Skylark hopped over
them easily, out of range of their heaviest guns, and flew onward at
such speed that pursuit was not even attempted. The ocean was quickly
crossed. Soon the space-car came to rest over a great city, and Seaton
pointed out the palace; which, with its landing dock nearby, was very
similar to that of Nalboon, in the capital city of Mardonale.

Crane drew Seaton to one side.

"Do you think it is safe to trust these Kondalians, any more than it was
the others? How would it be to stay in the Lark instead of going into
the palace?"

"Yes, Mart, this bunch can be trusted. Dunark has a lot of darn queer
ideas, but he's square as a die. He's our friend, and will get us the
copper. We have no choice now, anyway, look at the bar. We haven't an
ounce of copper left--we're down to the plating in spots. Besides, we
couldn't go anywhere if we had a ton of copper, because the old bus is a
wreck. She won't hold air--you could throw a cat out through the shell
in any direction. She'll have to have a lot of work done on her before
we can think of leaving. As to staying in her, that wouldn't help us a
bit. Steel is as soft as wood to these folks--their shells would go
through her as though she were made of mush. They are made of metal that
is harder than diamond and tougher than rubber, and when they strike
they bore in like drill-bits. If they are out to get us they'll do it
anyway, whether we're here or there, so we may as well be guests. But
there's no danger, Mart. You know I swapped brains with him, and I know
him as well as I know myself. He's a good, square man--one of our kind
of folks."

Convinced, Crane nodded his head and the Skylark dropped toward the
dock. While they were still high in air, Dunark took an instrument from
his belt and rapidly manipulated a small lever. The others felt the air
vibrate--a peculiar, pulsating wave, which, to the surprise of the
Earthly visitors, they could read without difficulty. It was a message
from the Kofedix to the entire city, telling of the escape of his party
and giving the news that he was accompanied by two great Karfedo from
another world. Then the pulsations became unintelligible, and all knew
that he had tuned his instrument away from the "general" key into the
individual key of some one person.

"I just let my father, the Karfedix, know that we are coming," he
explained, as the vibrations ceased.

From the city beneath them hundreds of great guns roared forth a
welcome, banners and streamers hung from every possible point, and the
air became tinted and perfumed with a bewildering variety of colors and
scents and quivered with the rush of messages of welcome. The Skylark
was soon surrounded by a majestic fleet of giant warships, who escorted
her with impressive ceremony to the landing dock, while around them
flitted great numbers of other aircraft. The tiny one-man helicopters
darted hither and thither, apparently always in imminent danger of
colliding with some of their larger neighbors, but always escaping as
though by a miracle. Beautiful pleasure-planes soared and dipped and
wheeled like giant gulls; and, cleaving their stately way through the
numberless lesser craft; immense multiplane passenger liners partially
supported by helicopter screws turned aside from their scheduled courses
to pay homage to the Kofedix of Kondal.

As the Skylark approached the top of the dock, all the escorting vessels
dropped away and Crane saw that instead of the brilliant assemblage he
had expected to see upon the landing-place there was only a small group
of persons, as completely unadorned as were those in the car. In answer
to his look of surprise, the Kofedix said, with deep feeling:

"My father, mother, and the rest of the family. They know that we, as
escaped captives, would be without harness or trappings, and are meeting
us in the same state."

       *       *       *       *       *

Seaton brought the vessel to the dock near the little group, and the
Earthly visitors remained inside their vessel while the rulers of Kondal
welcomed the sons and daughters they had given up for dead.

After the affecting reunion, which was very similar to an earthly one
under similar circumstances, the Kofedix led his father up to the
Skylark and his guests stepped down upon the dock.

"Friends," Dunark began, "I have told you of my father, Roban, the
Karfedix of Kondal. Father, it is a great honor to present to you those
who rescued us from Mardonale--Seaton, Karfedix of Knowledge; Crane,
Karfedix of Wealth; Miss Vaneman; and Miss Spencer. Karfedix DuQuesne,"
waving his hand toward him, "is a lesser Karfedix of Knowledge, captive
to the others."

"The Kofedix Dunark exaggerates our services," deprecated Seaton, "and
doesn't mention the fact that he saved all our lives. But for him we all
should have been killed."

The Karfedix, disregarding Seaton's remark, acknowledged the
indebtedness of Kondal in heartfelt accents before he led them back to
the other party and made the introductions. As all walked toward the
elevators, the emperor turned to his son with a puzzled expression.

"I know from your message, Dunark, that our guests are from a distant
solar system, and I can understand your accident with the educator, but
I cannot understand the titles of these men. Knowledge and wealth are
not ruled over. Are you sure that you have translated their titles
correctly?"

"As correctly as I can--we have no words in our language to express the
meaning. Their government is a most peculiar one, the rulers all being
chosen by the people of the whole nation...."

"Extraordinary!" interjected the older man. "How, then, can anything be
accomplished?"

"I do not understand the thing myself, it is so utterly unheard-of. But
they have no royalty, as we understand the term. In America, their
country, every man is equal.

"That is," he hastened to correct himself, "they are not all equal,
either, as they have two classes which would rank with royalty--those
who have attained to great heights of knowledge and those who have
amassed great wealth. This explanation is entirely inadequate and does
not give the right idea of their positions, but it is as close as I can
come to the truth in our language."

"I am surprised that you should be carrying a prisoner with you,
Karfedo," said Roban, addressing Seaton and Crane. "You will, of course,
be at perfect liberty to put him to death in any way that pleases you,
just as though you were in your own kingdoms. But perchance you are
saving him so that his death will crown your home-coming?"

The Kofedix spoke in answer while Seaton, usually so quick to speak, was
groping for words.

"No, father, he is not to be put to death. That is another peculiar
custom of the Earth-men; they consider it dishonorable to harm a
captive, or even an unarmed enemy. For that reason we must treat the
Karfedix DuQuesne with every courtesy due his rank, but at the same time
he is to be allowed to do only such things as may be permitted by Seaton
and Crane."

"Yet they do not seem to be a weak race," mused the older man.

"They are a mighty race, far advanced in evolution," replied his son.
"It is not weakness, but a peculiar moral code. We have many things to
learn from them, and but few to give them in return. Their visit will
mean much to Kondal."

       *       *       *       *       *

During this conversation they had descended to the ground and had
reached the palace, after traversing grounds even more sumptuous and
splendid than those surrounding the palace of Nalboon. Inside the palace
walls the Kofedix himself led the guests to their rooms, accompanied by
the major-domo and an escort of guards. He explained to them that the
rooms were all inter-communicating, each having a completely equipped
bathroom.

"Complete except for cold water, you mean," said Seaton with a smile.

"There is cold water," rejoined the other, leading him into the bathroom
and releasing a ten-inch stream of lukewarm water into the small
swimming pool, built of polished metal, which forms part of every
Kondalian bathroom. "But I am forgetting that you like extreme cold. We
will install refrigerating machines at once."

"Don't do it--thanks just the same. We won't be here long enough to make
it worth while."

Dunark smilingly replied that he would make his guests as comfortable as
he could, and after informing them that in one kam he would return and
escort them in to koprat, took his leave. Scarcely had the guests
freshened themselves when he was back, but he was no longer the Dunark
they had known. He now wore a metal-and-leather harness which was one
blaze of precious gems, and a leather belt hung with jeweled weapons
replaced the familiar hollow girdle of metal. His right arm, between the
wrist and the elbow, was almost covered by six bracelets of a
transparent metal, deep cobalt-blue in color, each set with an
incredibly brilliant stone of the same shade. On his left wrist he wore
an Osnomian chronometer. This was an instrument resembling the odometer
of an automobile, whose numerous revolving segments revealed a large and
constantly increasing number--the date and time of the Osnomian day,
expressed in a decimal number of the karkamo of Kondalian history.

"Greetings, oh guests from Earth! I feel more like myself, now that I am
again in my trappings and have my weapons at my side. Will you accompany
me to koprat, or are you not hungry?" as he attached the peculiar
timepieces to the wrists of the guests, with bracelets of the deep-blue
metal.

"We accept with thanks," replied Dorothy promptly. "We're starving to
death, as usual."

As they walked toward the dining hall, Dunark noticed that Dorothy's
eyes strayed toward his bracelets, and he answered her unasked question:

"These are our wedding rings. Man and wife exchange bracelets as part of
the ceremony."

"Then you can tell whether a man is married or not, and how many wives
he has, simply by looking at his arm? We should have something like that
on Earth, Dick--then married men wouldn't find it so easy to pose as
bachelors!"

Roban met them at the door of the great dining hall. He also was in full
panoply, and Dorothy counted ten of the heavy bracelets upon his right
arm as he led them to places near his own. The room was a replica of the
other Osnomian dining hall they had seen and the women were decorated
with the same barbaric splendor of scintillating gems.

After the meal, which was a happy one, taking the nature of a
celebration in honor of the return of the captives, DuQuesne went
directly to his room while the others spent the time until the zero hour
in strolling about the splendid grounds, always escorted by many guards.
Returning to the room occupied by the two girls, the couples separated,
each girl accompanying her lover to the door of his room.

Margaret was ill at ease, though trying hard to appear completely
self-possessed.

"What is the matter, sweetheart Peggy?" asked Crane, solicitously.

"I didn't know that you...." she broke off and continued with a rush:
"What did the Kofedix mean just now, when he called you the Karfedix of
Wealth?"

"Well, you see, I happen to have some money...." he began.

"Then you are the great M. Reynolds Crane?" she interrupted, in
consternation.

"Leave off 'the great,'" he said, then, noting her expression, he took
her in his arms and laughed slightly.

"Is that all that was bothering you? What does a little money amount to
between you and me?"

"Nothing--but I'm awfully glad that I didn't know it before," she
replied, as she returned his caress with fervor. "That is, it means
nothing if you are perfectly sure I'm not...."

Crane, the imperturbable, broke a life-long rule and interrupted her.

"Do not say that, dear. You know as well as I do that between you and me
there never have been, are not now, and never shall be, any doubts or
any questions."

       *       *       *       *       *

"If I could have a real cold bath now, I'd feel fine," remarked Seaton,
standing in his own door with Dorothy by his side. "I'm no blooming
Englishman but in weather as hot as this I sure would like to dive into
a good cold tank. How do you feel after all this excitement, Dottie? Up
