he was busily talking to himself, or rather to his other self.

"Well, now, Sir Kenneth," he said. "Let's pull all the facts together
and see what happens."

"Indeed, Mr. Malone," said Sir Kenneth Malone, "it is time that we
did. Proceed, Sirrah. I shall attend."

* * * * *

"Let's start from the beginning," Malone said. "We know there's
confusion in all parts of the country, in all parts of the world, I
guess. And we know that confusion is being caused by carefully timed
accidents and errors. We also know that these errors appear to be
accompanied by violent bursts of psionic static--violent energy. And
we know, further, that on three specific occasions, these bursts of
energy were immediately followed by a reversal of policy in the mind
of the person on the receiving end."

"You mean," Sir Kenneth put in, "that they changed their minds."

"Correct," Malone said. "I refer, of course, to the firm of Brubitsch,
Borbitsch and Garbitsch, Spying Done Cheap."

"Indeed," Sir Kenneth said. "Then the operators of this force,
whatever it may be, have some interest in allowing these spies to
confess?"

"Maybe," Malone said. "Let's leave that for later. To get back to the
beginning of all this: it seems to me to follow that the accidents and
errors which have caused all the confusion through the United States
and Russia are caused by somebody's mind being changed at exactly the
right moment. A man does something just a little differently than he
decided to--or else he forgets to do it at all."

"Correct," Sir Kenneth said. "And you feel, Mr. Malone, that a
telepathic command is the cause of this confusion?"

"A series of them," Malone said. "But we also know, from Dr. O'Connor,
that it takes a great deal of psychic energy to perform this
particular trick--more than a person can normally afford to expend."

"Marry, now," Sir Kenneth exclaimed, "such a statement does not seem
to have reason in it. Changing the mind of a man seems a small thing
in comparison to teleportation, or psychokinesis, or levitation. And
yet it takes more power than any of these?"

Malone thought for a second. "Sure it does," he said. "I'd say it was
a matter of resistance. Moving an inanimate object is pretty simple--
comparatively, anyhow--because inert matter has no mental resistance."

"And moving yourself?" Sir Kenneth said.

"There is some resistance there, probably," Malone said. "But you'll
remember that part of the Fueyo training system for teleportation
involved overcoming your own mental resistance to the idea."

"True," Sir Kenneth said. "Quite true. Then let us say that it
requires enormous power to effect these changes. What is our next
step, Mr. Malone?"

"Next, Sir Kenneth," Malone said, "We have to do a little supposing.
This project must be handled by a fairly large group, since no
individual can work it. This large group has to be telepathic, and not
only for the precise timing O'Connor specified."

"There is another reason?" Sir Kenneth said.

"There is," Malone said. "They've also got to know exactly when to
make their victim change his mind. Right?"

"Absolutely," said Sir Kenneth. "Now, Sirrah, where does all this
leave us? We have had the orderly presentation of the case; where,
Sirrah, is your summation?"

"Coming up," Malone said. "We've got to look for a widespread
organization of telepaths, with enough mental discipline to hold a
mental shield that Her Majesty can't crack, and can't even recognize
the existence of. We thought she'd found all the telepaths. She said
so, and she obviously thought so. But she didn't. These are strong,
trained--and sane."

"Aha," said Sir Kenneth.

"Her Majesty," Malone said, "found us only the crazy telepaths, the
weak ones, the nuts."

"Fine," said Sir Kenneth. "And this, Mr. Malone, leaves us with only
one question. Her Majesty--may God bless her--stated that she first
spotted these flashes of telepathic static by listening in on our
minds."

"Our mind," Malone said. "I hope."

"Very well," Sir Kenneth said. "This means that some force is being
directed in this way, toward us. And how do we know that all the
deduction, all the careful case-building we have done, hasn't been
influenced by this group? That might mean, of course, that we are
miles, or even light-years, from the solution."

Malone said: "Yeep." The sound was echoed by Sir Kenneth, and the two
halves of the coruscating mind of Kenneth J. Malone were once more
one.

_Your Majesty,_ the minds thought, _I'd like to talk to you._

Nothing happened. Evidently, Her Majesty was temporarily out of mental
contact with him.

"Hell," Malone said. "Not to mention od's blood." He flipped on the
visiphone and dialed Yucca Flats.

The figure that appeared on the screen was that of a tall,
solidly-built man with a red face and the uniform of a Beefeater. This
Tower Warder had the British royal crest embroidered on his chest, and
the letters: "E. R."

"Good evening, Sir Kenneth," he said politely.

Malone had sometimes wondered what it would be like to be on the
Queen's permanent, personal staff. Evidently, it soaked in so
thoroughly that one began to stay in character all the time. The
little old lady's delusion was such a pleasant one that it was
painlessly infectious.

"I'd like to speak to Her Majesty, Colonel Fairfax," Malone said.

"Her Majesty," Colonel Fairfax said with regret, "is asleep, sir. I
understand that she has had rather a trying time, of late."

"Then I must ask you to wake her," Malone said. "I don't want to
disturb her any more than you do, Colonel, but this is important."

"Her Majesty's rest," Colonel Fairfax said gently, "is also important,
Sir Kenneth."

"This is more important," Malone said. "I know how you feel, but it's
necessary to wake her."

The screen blanked out.

Malone sighed and began to sing softly to himself while he waited:

"The soldiers of the Queen are linked in friendly tether--
And if she's off her bean, we'll all go nuts together..."

Her Majesty appeared at this point, dressed in a silken robe bearing
her crest and initials (E. R., rather than R. T., of course), and
wearing a silken Mother Hubbard cap on her head. "Oh, dear," she said
instantly. "Are you still worried about them?"

"The flashes?" Malone said. "That's right. You tuned in on my mind
right away, didn't you?"

"As soon as I got your message," she said. "I like your little song,
at least, I think I do."

Malone blushed faintly. "Sorry," he said.

"Oh, don't be, Sir Kenneth," Her Majesty said. "After all, I do allow
my subjects a good deal of liberty; it is theirs to make use of." She
smiled at him. "Actually, I should have told you, Sir Kenneth. But it
seemed so natural that I--that I forgot it."

_Oh, no,_ Malone thought.

"I'm afraid so," Her Majesty said. "When I told you about the
interference, your mind quite automatically began to build what I
think of as a--as a defense against it. A shield, so to speak."

_Me?_ Malone thought.

"Most certainly," Her Majesty said. "You know, Sir Kenneth, you have a
very strong mind."

"Oh, I don't know," Malone said aloud. "Sometimes I don't feel so
bright."

"I'm not talking about intelligence," Her Majesty said. "The two
properties are interconnected, of course, but they are not identical.
After all ... well, never mind. But you have strength of will, Sir
Kenneth, and strength of purpose. As a matter of fact, you have been
building your strength in the last few days."

"Really?" Malone said, surprised.

"It's become more and more difficult," Her Majesty said, "to see into
the depths of your mind, during the past few days. The surface of your
mind is as easy to read as ever, but it's hard to see what's going on
in the depths."

"I'm not doing it deliberately," Malone said.

"In any case," Her Majesty said, "this process has been going on ever
since you knew that telepathy was possible, two years ago. But in the
past forty-eight hours matters have accelerated tremendously."

"That sounds good," Malone said. "Does it mean these mind-changers
I've been thinking about can't get through to me?"

"What mind-changers?" the Queen said. "Oh. I see." She paused. "Well,
I can't be positive about this, Sir Kenneth; it's all so new, you
know. All I can tell you is that there haven't been any flashes of
telepathic energy in your mind in the last forty-eight hours."

"Well," Malone said doubtfully, "that's something. And I am sorry I
had to wake you, Your Majesty."

"Oh, that's perfectly all right," she said. "I know you're working
hard to restore order to the realm, and it is the duty of any
Sovereign to give such aid as she can to her Royal subjects."

Malone cleared his throat. "I trust," he said, "Your Majesty will ever
find me a faithful servant."

Her Majesty smiled. "I'm sure I shall," she said. "Good night, Sir
Kenneth."

"Good night," he said, and flipped off. At once, the phone chimed
again.

He flipped the switch on. "Malone here," he said.

Boyd's face appeared on the screen. "Ken," he said fervently, "I am
very glad you're still in town."

"Thanks," Malone said politely. "But what about Mike Sand? Any
information?"

"Plenty," Boyd said. "I damn near didn't believe it."

"What do you mean, you didn't believe it?" Malone said. "Isn't the
information any good?"

"It's good, all right," Boyd said. "It's great. He practically talked
his head off to me. Gave me all his books, including secret sets. And
I've put him under arrest as a material witness--at his own request."

"It sounds," Malone said, "as if Mike Sand has had a sudden and
surprising change of heart."

"Doesn't it, though," Boyd said. "We can crack the ITU wide open now,
and I mean really wide open."

"Same pattern?" Malone said.

"Of course it is," Boyd said. "What does it sound like? Same pattern."

"Good," Malone said. "Get on up here. I'll talk to you later."

He cut off in a hurry, leaned back in his chair and started to think.
At first, he thought of a cigar. Boyd, he figured, couldn't be back in
the office for some time, and nobody else would come in. He locked the
door, drew out the cigar-laden box he kept in his desk in New York,
and lit up with great satisfaction.

When the cloud of smoke around his head was dense enough to cut with a
knife, he went back to more serious subjects. He didn't have to worry
too much about his mind being spied on; if Her Majesty couldn't read
his deepest thoughts, and the mind-changers weren't throwing any bolts
of static in his direction, he was safe.

Now, then, he told himself--and sneezed.

He shook his head, cursed slightly, and went on.

Now, then...

There was an organization, spread all over the Western world, and with
secret branches, evidently, in the Soviet Union. The organization had
to be an old one, because it had to have trained telepaths of such a
high degree of efficiency that they could evade Her Majesty's probing
without her even being aware of the evasion. And training took time.

There was something else to consider, too. In order to organize to
such a degree that they could wreak the efficient, complete havoc they
were wreaking, the organization couldn't be completely secret; there
are always leaks, always suspicious events, and a secret society that
covered all of those up would have no time for anything else.

So the organization had to be a known one, a known group, masquerading
as something else.

So far, everything made sense. Malone took another deep, grateful puff
on the cigar, and frowned. Where, he wondered, did he go from here?

He reached for a pencil and a piece of paper. He headed the paper:
_Organization._ Then he started putting down what he knew about it,
and what he'd figured out.

     1. Large
     2. Old
     3. Disguised

It sounded just a little like Frankenstein's Monster, so far. But what
else did he know about it?

After a second's thought, he murmured: "Nothing," and took another
puff.

But that wasn't quite true.

He knew one more thing about the organization. He knew they'd probably
be immune to the confusion everybody else was suffering from. The
organization would be--had to be--efficient. It would be composed of
intelligent, superbly cooperative people, who could work together as a
unit without in the least impairing their own individuality.

He reached for the list again, put down:

     4. Efficient

And looked at it. Now it didn't remind him quite so much of the
Monster. But it didn't look familiar, either. Who did he know, he
thought, who was large, old, disguised and efficient?

It sounded like an improbable combination. He set the list down again,
clearing off some of the papers the PRS had sent him to make room for
it.

Then he stopped.

The papers the PRS had sent him...

And he'd gotten them so quickly, so efficiently...

They were a large organization...

And an old one...

He tossed the cigar in the general direction of the ashtray, grabbed
the phone and jabbed at buttons.

The girl who answered the phone looked familiar. She did not look very
old, but she was large and she had to be disguised, Malone thought.
Nobody could naturally have that many teeth.

"Psychical Research Society," she said. "Oh, Mr. Malone, good
evening."

"Sir Lewis," Malone said. "Sir Lewis Carter. President. I want to talk
to him. Hurry."

"Sir Lewis?" the girl said slowly. "Oh, I'm sorry, Mr. Malone, but the
office is closed now for the day. And Sir Lewis has gone already. It's
after six o'clock, Mr. Malone, and the office is closed."

"Home number," Malone said desperately. "I've got to."

"Well, I can do that, Mr. Malone," she said, "but it wouldn't do you
any good, really. Because he went away on his vacation, and when he
goes on his vacation he never tells us where. You know? He won't be
