Half a dozen officials hastened up to escort the party to the vehicle
awaiting Kinton. Klaft succeeded in quieting the lesser members of the
delegation so that Kinton was able to learn a few facts about the new
arrival. The crash had been several hundred miles away, but someone had
thought of the hospital in this city which was known to have a doctor
rating as an expert in human physiology. The survivor--only one occupant
of the wreck, alive or dead, had been discovered--had accordingly been
flown here.

With a clanging of bells, the little convoy of ground cars drew up in
front of the hospital. A way was made through the chittering crowd
around the entrance. Within a few minutes, Kinton found himself looking
down at a pallet upon which lay another Terran.

A man! he thought, then curled a lip wrily at the sudden, unexpected
pang of disappointment. Well, he hadn't realized until then what he was
really hoping for!

       *       *       *       *       *

The spaceman had been cleaned up and bandaged by the native medicos.
Kinton saw that his left thigh was probably broken. Other dressings
suggested cracked ribs and lacerations on the head and shoulders. The
man was dark-haired but pale of skin, with a jutting chin and a nose
that had been flattened in some earlier mishap. The flaring set of his
ears somehow emphasized an overall leanness. Even in sleep, his mouth
was thin and hard.

"Thrown across the controls after his belt broke loose?" Kinton guessed.

"I bow to your wisdom, George," said the plump Tepoktan doctor who
appeared to be in charge.

Kinton could not remember him, but everyone on the planet addressed the
Terran by the sound they fondly thought to be his first name.

"This is Doctor Chuxolkhee," murmured Klaft.

Kinton made the accepted gesture of greeting with one hand and said,
"You seem to have treated him very expertly."

Chuxolkhee ruffled the scales around his neck with pleasure.

"I have studied Terran physiology," he admitted complacently. "From your
records and drawings, of course, George, for I have not yet had the good
fortune to visit you."

"We must arrange a visit soon," said Kinton. "Klaft will--"

He broke off at the sound from the patient.

"A Terran!" mumbled the injured man.

He shook his head dazedly, tried to sit up, and subsided with a groan.

_Why, he looked scared when he saw me_, thought Kinton.

"You're all right now," he said soothingly. "It's all over and you're in
good hands. I gather there were no other survivors of the crash?"

The man stared curiously. Kinton realized that his own language
sputtered clumsily from his lips after ten years. He tried again.

"My name is George Kinton. I don't blame you if I'm hard to understand.
You see, I've been here ten years without ever having another Terran to
speak to."

The spaceman considered that for a few breaths, then seemed to relax.

"Al Birken," he introduced himself laconically. "Ten years?"

"A little over," confirmed Kinton. "It's extremely unusual that anything
gets through to the surface, let alone a spaceship. What happened to
you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Birken's stare was suspicious.

"Then you ain't heard about the new colonies? Naw--you musta come here
when all the planets were open."

"We had a small settlement on the second planet," Kinton told him. "You
mean there are new Terran colonies?"

"Yeah. Jet-hoppers spreadin' all over the other five. None of the
land-hungry poops figured a way to set down here, though, or they'd be
creepin' around this planet too."

"How did you happen to do it? Run out of fuel?"

The other eyed him for a few seconds before dropping his gaze. Kinton
was struck with sudden doubt. The outposts of civilization were followed
by less desirable developments as a general rule--prisons, for instance.
He resolved to be wary of the visitor.

"Ya might say I was explorin'," Birken replied at last. "That's why I
come alone. Didn't want nobody else hurt if I didn't make it. Say, how
bad am I banged up?"

Kinton realized guiltily that the man should be resting. He had lost
track of the moments he had wasted in talk while the others with him
stood attentively about.

He questioned the doctor briefly and relayed the information that
Birken's leg was broken but that the other injuries were not serious.

