
Now then, this second arm--more accurately, a collar--forms a ring
of warm water around a section of cool, tranquil, motionless ocean
called the Sargasso Sea.  This is an actual lake in the open Atlantic,
and the great current's waters take at least three years to circle it.

Properly speaking, the Sargasso Sea covers every submerged part
of Atlantis.  Certain authors have even held that the many weeds
strewn over this sea were torn loose from the prairies of that
ancient continent.  But it's more likely that these grasses, algae,
and fucus plants were carried off from the beaches of Europe and America,
then taken as far as this zone by the Gulf Stream.  This is one
of the reasons why Christopher Columbus assumed the existence
of a New World.  When the ships of that bold investigator arrived
in the Sargasso Sea, they had great difficulty navigating in the midst
of these weeds, which, much to their crews' dismay, slowed them down
to a halt; and they wasted three long weeks crossing this sector.

Such was the region our Nautilus was visiting just then:
a genuine prairie, a tightly woven carpet of algae, gulfweed,
and bladder wrack so dense and compact a craft's stempost couldn't
tear through it without difficulty.  Accordingly, not wanting
to entangle his propeller in this weed-choked mass, Captain Nemo
stayed at a depth some meters below the surface of the waves.

The name Sargasso comes from the Spanish word "sargazo,"
meaning gulfweed.  This gulfweed, the swimming gulfweed or
berry carrier, is the chief substance making up this immense shoal.
And here's why these water plants collect in this placid Atlantic basin,
according to the expert on the subject, Commander Maury, author of
The Physical Geography of the Sea.

The explanation he gives seems to entail a set of conditions that
everybody knows:  "Now," Maury says, "if bits of cork or chaff,
or any floating substance, be put into a basin, and a circular motion
be given to the water, all the light substances will be found crowding
together near the center of the pool, where there is the least motion.
Just such a basin is the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf Stream,
and the Sargasso Sea is the center of the whirl."

I share Maury's view, and I was able to study the phenomenon in this
exclusive setting where ships rarely go.  Above us, huddled among
the brown weeds, there floated objects originating from all over:
tree trunks ripped from the Rocky Mountains or the Andes and sent
floating down the Amazon or the Mississippi, numerous pieces
of wreckage, remnants of keels or undersides, bulwarks staved
in and so weighed down with seashells and barnacles, they couldn't
rise to the surface of the ocean.  And the passing years will someday
bear out Maury's other view that by collecting in this way over
the centuries, these substances will be turned to stone by the action
of the waters and will then form inexhaustible coalfields.
Valuable reserves prepared by farseeing nature for that time when man
will have exhausted his mines on the continents.

In the midst of this hopelessly tangled fabric of weeds and fucus plants,
I noted some delightful pink-colored, star-shaped alcyon coral,
sea anemone trailing the long tresses of their tentacles,
some green, red, and blue jellyfish, and especially those big
rhizostome jellyfish that Cuvier described, whose bluish parasols
are trimmed with violet festoons.

We spent the whole day of February 22 in the Sargasso Sea, where fish
that dote on marine plants and crustaceans find plenty to eat.
The next day the ocean resumed its usual appearance.

From this moment on, for nineteen days from February 23 to March 12,
the Nautilus stayed in the middle of the Atlantic, hustling us
along at a constant speed of 100 leagues every twenty-four hours.
It was obvious that Captain Nemo wanted to carry out his underwater
program, and I had no doubt that he intended, after doubling Cape Horn,
to return to the Pacific South Seas.

So Ned Land had good reason to worry.  In these wide seas empty
of islands, it was no longer feasible to jump ship.  Nor did we
have any way to counter Captain Nemo's whims.  We had no choice
but to acquiesce; but if we couldn't attain our end through force
or cunning, I liked to think we might achieve it through persuasion.
Once this voyage was over, might not Captain Nemo consent to set
us free in return for our promise never to reveal his existence?
Our word of honor, which we sincerely would have kept.
However, this delicate question would have to be negotiated with
the captain.  But how would he receive our demands for freedom?
At the very outset and in no uncertain terms, hadn't he declared
that the secret of his life required that we be permanently imprisoned
on board the Nautilus?  Wouldn't he see my four-month silence
as a tacit acceptance of this situation?  Would my returning to this
subject arouse suspicions that could jeopardize our escape plans,
if we had promising circumstances for trying again later on?
I weighed all these considerations, turned them over in my mind,
submitted them to Conseil, but he was as baffled as I was.
In short, although I'm not easily discouraged, I realized that my
chances of ever seeing my fellow men again were shrinking by the day,
especially at a time when Captain Nemo was recklessly racing toward
the south Atlantic!

During those nineteen days just mentioned, no unique incidents
distinguished our voyage.  I saw little of the captain.
He was at work.  In the library I often found books he had left open,
especially books on natural history.  He had thumbed through my work
on the great ocean depths, and the margins were covered with his notes,
which sometimes contradicted my theories and formulations.
But the captain remained content with this method of refining my work,
and he rarely discussed it with me.  Sometimes I heard melancholy
sounds reverberating from the organ, which he played very expressively,
but only at night in the midst of the most secretive darkness,
while the Nautilus slumbered in the wilderness of the ocean.

During this part of our voyage, we navigated on the surface of the waves
for entire days.  The sea was nearly deserted.  A few sailing ships,
laden for the East Indies, were heading toward the Cape of
Good Hope.  One day we were chased by the longboats of a whaling vessel,
which undoubtedly viewed us as some enormous baleen whale of great value.
But Captain Nemo didn't want these gallant gentlemen wasting their
time and energy, so he ended the hunt by diving beneath the waters.
This incident seemed to fascinate Ned Land intensely.
I'm sure the Canadian was sorry that these fishermen couldn't
harpoon our sheet-iron cetacean and mortally wound it.

During this period the fish Conseil and I observed differed little
from those we had already studied in other latitudes.  Chief among
them were specimens of that dreadful cartilaginous genus that's
divided into three subgenera numbering at least thirty-two species:
striped sharks five meters long, the head squat and wider than
the body, the caudal fin curved, the back with seven big, black,
parallel lines running lengthwise; then perlon sharks, ash gray,
pierced with seven gill openings, furnished with a single dorsal
fin placed almost exactly in the middle of the body.

Some big dogfish also passed by, a voracious species of shark if there
ever was one.  With some justice, fishermen's yarns aren't to be trusted,
but here's what a few of them relate.  Inside the corpse of one
of these animals there were found a buffalo head and a whole calf;
in another, two tuna and a sailor in uniform; in yet another,
a soldier with his saber; in another, finally, a horse with its rider.
In candor, none of these sounds like divinely inspired truth.
But the fact remains that not a single dogfish let itself get caught
in the Nautilus's nets, so I can't vouch for their voracity.

Schools of elegant, playful dolphin swam alongside for entire days.
They went in groups of five or six, hunting in packs like wolves
over the countryside; moreover, they're just as voracious as dogfish,
if I can believe a certain Copenhagen professor who says that from one
dolphin's stomach, he removed thirteen porpoises and fifteen seals.
True, it was a killer whale, belonging to the biggest known species,
whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-four feet.  The family
Delphinia numbers ten genera, and the dolphins I saw were akin
to the genus Delphinorhynchus, remarkable for an extremely narrow
muzzle four times as long as the cranium.  Measuring three meters,
their bodies were black on top, underneath a pinkish white strewn
with small, very scattered spots.

From these seas I'll also mention some unusual specimens of croakers,
fish from the order Acanthopterygia, family Scienidea.  Some authors--
more artistic than scientific--claim that these fish are
melodious singers, that their voices in unison put on concerts
unmatched by human choristers.  I don't say nay, but to my regret
these croakers didn't serenade us as we passed.

Finally, to conclude, Conseil classified a large number
of flying fish.  Nothing could have made a more unusual sight
than the marvelous timing with which dolphins hunt these fish.
Whatever the range of its flight, however evasive its trajectory
(even up and over the Nautilus), the hapless flying fish always found
a dolphin to welcome it with open mouth.  These were either flying
gurnards or kitelike sea robins, whose lips glowed in the dark,
at night scrawling fiery streaks in the air before plunging into
the murky waters like so many shooting stars.

Our navigating continued under these conditions until March 13.
That day the Nautilus was put to work in some depth-sounding
experiments that fascinated me deeply.

By then we had fared nearly 13,000 leagues from our starting point
in the Pacific high seas.  Our position fix placed us in latitude
45 degrees 37' south and longitude 37 degrees 53' west.  These were
the same waterways where Captain Denham, aboard the Herald,
payed out 14,000 meters of sounding line without finding bottom.
It was here too that Lieutenant Parker, aboard the American
frigate Congress, was unable to reach the underwater soil
at 15,149 meters.

Captain Nemo decided to take his Nautilus down to the lowest
depths in order to double-check these different soundings.
I got ready to record the results of this experiment.
The panels in the lounge opened, and maneuvers began for reaching
those strata so prodigiously far removed.

It was apparently considered out of the question to dive by filling
the ballast tanks.  Perhaps they wouldn't sufficiently increase
the Nautilus's specific gravity.  Moreover, in order to come back up,
it would be necessary to expel the excess water, and our pumps
might not have been strong enough to overcome the outside pressure.

Captain Nemo decided to make for the ocean floor by submerging on
an appropriately gradual diagonal with the help of his side fins,
which were set at a 45 degrees angle to the Nautilus's waterline.
Then the propeller was brought to its maximum speed, and its four
blades churned the waves with indescribable violence.

Under this powerful thrust the Nautilus's hull quivered like a
resonating chord, and the ship sank steadily under the waters.
Stationed in the lounge, the captain and I watched the needle
swerving swiftly over the pressure gauge.  Soon we had gone below
the livable zone where most fish reside.  Some of these animals
can thrive only at the surface of seas or rivers, but a minority
can dwell at fairly great depths.  Among the latter I observed
a species of dogfish called the cow shark that's equipped with six
respiratory slits, the telescope fish with its enormous eyes,
the armored gurnard with gray thoracic fins plus black pectoral
fins and a breastplate protected by pale red slabs of bone,
then finally the grenadier, living at a depth of 1,200 meters,
by that point tolerating a pressure of 120 atmospheres.

I asked Captain Nemo if he had observed any fish at
more considerable depths.

"Fish?  Rarely!" he answered me.  "But given the current state
of marine science, who are we to presume, what do we really know
of these depths?"

"Just this, captain.  In going toward the ocean's lower strata,
we know that vegetable life disappears more quickly than animal life.
We know that moving creatures can still be encountered where water
plants no longer grow.  We know that oysters and pilgrim scallops live
in 2,000 meters of water, and that Admiral McClintock, England's hero of
the polar seas, pulled in a live sea star from a depth of 2,500 meters.
We know that the crew of the Royal Navy's Bulldog fished up a starfish
from 2,620 fathoms, hence from a depth of more than one vertical league.
Would you still say, Captain Nemo, that we really know nothing?"

"No, professor," the captain replied, "I wouldn't be so discourteous.
Yet I'll ask you to explain how these creatures can live at such depths?"

"I explain it on two grounds," I replied.  "In the first place,
because vertical currents, which are caused by differences in the
water's salinity and density, can produce enough motion to sustain
the rudimentary lifestyles of sea lilies and starfish."

"True," the captain put in.

"In the second place, because oxygen is the basis of life, and we
know that the amount of oxygen dissolved in salt water increases
rather than decreases with depth, that the pressure in these lower
strata helps to concentrate their oxygen content."

"Oho!  We know that, do we?"  Captain Nemo replied in a tone
of mild surprise.  "Well, professor, we have good reason to know
it because it's the truth.  I might add, in fact, that the air
bladders of fish contain more nitrogen than oxygen when these animals
are caught at the surface of the water, and conversely, more oxygen
than nitrogen when they're pulled up from the lower depths.
Which bears out your formulation.  But let's continue our observations."

My eyes flew back to the pressure gauge.  The instrument indicated
a depth of 6,000 meters.  Our submergence had been going on for an hour.
The Nautilus slid downward on its slanting fins, still sinking.
These deserted waters were wonderfully clear, with a transparency
impossible to convey.  An hour later we were at 13,000 meters--
about three and a quarter vertical leagues--and the ocean floor
was nowhere in sight.

However, at 14,000 meters I saw blackish peaks rising in the midst
of the waters.  But these summits could have belonged to mountains
as high or even higher than the Himalayas or Mt.  Blanc, and the extent
of these depths remained incalculable.

Despite the powerful pressures it was undergoing, the Nautilus sank
still deeper.  I could feel its sheet-iron plates trembling down to
their riveted joins; metal bars arched; bulkheads groaned; the lounge
windows seemed to be warping inward under the water's pressure.
And this whole sturdy mechanism would surely have given way, if, as its
captain had said, it weren't capable of resisting like a solid block.

While grazing these rocky slopes lost under the waters, I still
spotted some seashells, tube worms, lively annelid worms from
the genus Spirorbis, and certain starfish specimens.

But soon these last representatives of animal life vanished,
and three vertical leagues down, the Nautilus passed below the limits
of underwater existence just as an air balloon rises above the
breathable zones in the sky.  We reached a depth of 16,000 meters--
four vertical leagues--and by then the Nautilus's plating was
tolerating a pressure of 1,600 atmospheres, in other words,
1,600 kilograms per each square centimeter on its surface!

"What an experience!"  I exclaimed.  "Traveling these deep
regions where no man has ever ventured before!  Look, captain!
Look at these magnificent rocks, these uninhabited caves,
these last global haunts where life is no longer possible!
What unheard-of scenery, and why are we reduced to preserving it
only as a memory?"

"Would you like," Captain Nemo asked me, "to bring back more than
just a memory?"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that nothing could be easier than taking a photograph
of this underwater region!"

Before I had time to express the surprise this new proposition caused me,
a camera was carried into the lounge at Captain Nemo's request.
The liquid setting, electrically lit, unfolded with perfect
clarity through the wide-open panels.  No shadows, no blurs,
thanks to our artificial light.  Not even sunshine could have
been better for our purposes.  With the thrust of its propeller
curbed by the slant of its fins, the Nautilus stood still.
The camera was aimed at the scenery on the ocean floor, and in a few
seconds we had a perfect negative.

I attach a print of the positive.  In it you can view these primordial
rocks that have never seen the light of day, this nether granite
that forms the powerful foundation of our globe, the deep caves
cut into the stony mass, the outlines of incomparable distinctness
whose far edges stand out in black as if from the brush of certain
Flemish painters.  In the distance is a mountainous horizon, a wondrously
undulating line that makes up the background of this landscape.
The general effect of these smooth rocks is indescribable:
black, polished, without moss or other blemish, carved into
strange shapes, sitting firmly on a carpet of sand that sparkled
beneath our streams of electric light.

Meanwhile, his photographic operations over, Captain Nemo told me:

"Let's go back up, professor.  We mustn't push our luck and expose
the Nautilus too long to these pressures."

"Let's go back up!"  I replied.

"Hold on tight."

Before I had time to realize why the captain made this recommendation,
I was hurled to the carpet.

Its fins set vertically, its propeller thrown in gear at
the captain's signal, the Nautilus rose with lightning speed,
shooting upward like an air balloon into the sky.  Vibrating resonantly,
it knifed through the watery mass.  Not a single detail was visible.
In four minutes it had cleared the four vertical leagues separating it
from the surface of the ocean, and after emerging like a flying fish,
it fell back into the sea, making the waves leap to prodigious heights.







CHAPTER 12

Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales


DURING THE NIGHT of March 13-14, the Nautilus resumed its
southward heading.  Once it was abreast of Cape Horn, I thought it
would strike west of the cape, make for Pacific seas, and complete
its tour of the world.  It did nothing of the sort and kept moving
toward the southernmost regions.  So where was it bound?  The pole?
That was insanity.  I was beginning to think that the captain's
recklessness more than justified Ned Land's worst fears.

For a good while the Canadian had said nothing more to me about
his escape plans.  He had become less sociable, almost sullen.
I could see how heavily this protracted imprisonment was weighing on him.
I could feel the anger building in him.  Whenever he encountered
the captain, his eyes would flicker with dark fire, and I was
in constant dread that his natural vehemence would cause him
to do something rash.

That day, March 14, he and Conseil managed to find me in my stateroom.
I asked them the purpose of their visit.

"To put a simple question to you, sir," the Canadian answered me.

"Go on, Ned."

"How many men do you think are on board the Nautilus?"

"I'm unable to say, my friend."

"It seems to me," Ned Land went on, "that it wouldn't take much
of a crew to run a ship like this one."

"Correct," I replied.  "Under existing conditions some ten men
at the most should be enough to operate it."

"All right," the Canadian said, "then why should there be any
more than that?"

"Why?"  I answered.

I stared at Ned Land, whose motives were easy to guess.

"Because," I said, "if I can trust my hunches, if I truly understand
the captain's way of life, his Nautilus isn't simply a ship.
It's meant to be a refuge for people like its commander, people who
have severed all ties with the shore."

"Perhaps," Conseil said, "but in a nutshell, the Nautilus can hold only
a certain number of men, so couldn't master estimate their maximum?"

"How, Conseil?"

"By calculating it.  Master is familiar with the ship's capacity,
hence the amount of air it contains; on the other hand,
master knows how much air each man consumes in the act of breathing,
and he can compare this data with the fact that the Nautilus must
rise to the surface every twenty-four hours . . ."

Conseil didn't finish his sentence, but I could easily see what
he was driving at.

"I follow you," I said.  "But while they're simple to do,
such calculations can give only a very uncertain figure."

"No problem," the Canadian went on insistently.

"Then here's how to calculate it," I replied.  "In one hour
each man consumes the oxygen contained in 100 liters of air,
hence during twenty-four hours the oxygen contained in 2,400 liters.
Therefore, we must look for the multiple of 2,400 liters of air
that gives us the amount found in the Nautilus."

"Precisely," Conseil said.

"Now then," I went on, "the Nautilus's capacity is 1,500 metric tons,
and that of a ton is 1,000 liters, so the Nautilus holds 1,500,000
liters of air, which, divided by 2,400 . . ."

I did a quick pencil calculation.

". . . gives us the quotient of 625.  Which is tantamount to saying
that the air contained in the Nautilus would be exactly enough
for 625 men over twenty-four hours."

"625!"  Ned repeated.

"But rest assured," I added, "that between passengers, seamen,
or officers, we don't total one-tenth of that figure."

"Which is still too many for three men!"  Conseil muttered.

"So, my poor Ned, I can only counsel patience."

"And," Conseil replied, "even more than patience, resignation."

Conseil had said the true word.

"Even so," he went on, "Captain Nemo can't go south forever!
He'll surely have to stop, if only at the Ice Bank, and he'll
return to the seas of civilization!  Then it will be time to resume
Ned Land's plans."

The Canadian shook his head, passed his hand over his brow,
made no reply, and left us.

"With master's permission, I'll make an observation to him,"
Conseil then told me.  "Our poor Ned broods about all
the things he can't have.  He's haunted by his former life.
He seems to miss everything that's denied us.  He's obsessed by his
old memories and it's breaking his heart.  We must understand him.
What does he have to occupy him here?  Nothing.  He isn't a scientist
like master, and he doesn't share our enthusiasm for the sea's wonders.
He would risk anything just to enter a tavern in his own country!"

To be sure, the monotony of life on board must have seemed unbearable
to the Canadian, who was accustomed to freedom and activity.
It was a rare event that could excite him.  That day, however,
a development occurred that reminded him of his happy years
as a harpooner.

Near eleven o'clock in the morning, while on the surface of
the ocean, the Nautilus fell in with a herd of baleen whales.
This encounter didn't surprise me, because I knew these animals
were being hunted so relentlessly that they took refuge in the ocean
basins of the high latitudes.

In the maritime world and in the realm of geographic exploration,
whales have played a major role.  This is the animal that first
dragged the Basques in its wake, then Asturian Spaniards, Englishmen,
and Dutchmen, emboldening them against the ocean's perils,
and leading them to the ends of the earth.  Baleen whales like
to frequent the southernmost and northernmost seas.  Old legends
even claim that these cetaceans led fishermen to within a mere
seven leagues of the North Pole.  Although this feat is fictitious,
it will someday come true, because it's likely that by hunting
whales in the Arctic or Antarctic regions, man will finally reach
this unknown spot on the globe.

We were seated on the platform next to a tranquil sea.  The month
of March, since it's the equivalent of October in these latitudes,
was giving us some fine autumn days.  It was the Canadian--
on this topic he was never mistaken--who sighted a baleen whale
on the eastern horizon.  If you looked carefully, you could see
its blackish back alternately rise and fall above the waves,
five miles from the Nautilus.

"Wow!"  Ned Land exclaimed.  "If I were on board a whaler,
there's an encounter that would be great fun!  That's one big animal!
Look how high its blowholes are spouting all that air and steam!
Damnation!  Why am I chained to this hunk of sheet iron!"

"Why, Ned!"  I replied.  "You still aren't over your old fishing urges?"

"How could a whale fisherman forget his old trade, sir?  Who could
ever get tired of such exciting hunting?"

"You've never fished these seas, Ned?"

"Never, sir.  Just the northernmost seas, equally in the Bering Strait
and the Davis Strait."

"So the southern right whale is still unknown to you.
Until now it's the bowhead whale you've hunted, and it won't risk
going past the warm waters of the equator."

"Oh, professor, what are you feeding me?" the Canadian answered
in a tolerably skeptical tone.

"I'm feeding you the facts."

"By thunder!  In '65, just two and a half years ago, I to whom you speak,
I myself stepped onto the carcass of a whale near Greenland,
and its flank still carried the marked harpoon of a whaling ship
from the Bering Sea.  Now I ask you, after it had been wounded
west of America, how could this animal be killed in the east,
unless it had cleared the equator and doubled Cape Horn or the Cape
of Good Hope?"

"I agree with our friend Ned," Conseil said, "and I'm waiting
to hear how master will reply to him."

"Master will reply, my friends, that baleen whales are localized,
according to species, within certain seas that they never leave.
And if one of these animals went from the Bering Strait
to the Davis Strait, it's quite simply because there's some
passageway from the one sea to the other, either along the coasts
of Canada or Siberia."

"You expect us to fall for that?" the Canadian asked, tipping me a wink.

"If master says so," Conseil replied.

"Which means," the Canadian went on, "since I've never fished
these waterways, I don't know the whales that frequent them?"

"That's what I've been telling you, Ned."

"All the more reason to get to know them," Conseil answered.

"Look!  Look!" the Canadian exclaimed, his voice full of excitement.
"It's approaching!  It's coming toward us!  It's thumbing its nose at me!
It knows I can't do a blessed thing to it!"

Ned stamped his foot.  Brandishing an imaginary harpoon,
his hands positively trembled.

"These cetaceans," he asked, "are they as big as the ones in
the northernmost seas?"

"Pretty nearly, Ned."

"Because I've seen big baleen whales, sir, whales measuring up
to 100 feet long!  I've even heard that those rorqual whales off
the Aleutian Islands sometimes get over 150 feet."

"That strikes me as exaggerated," I replied.  "Those animals are
only members of the genus Balaenoptera furnished with dorsal fins,
and like sperm whales, they're generally smaller than the bowhead whale."

"Oh!" exclaimed the Canadian, whose eyes hadn't left the ocean.
"It's getting closer, it's coming into the Nautilus's waters!"

Then, going on with his conversation:

"You talk about sperm whales," he said, "as if they were
little beasts!  But there are stories of gigantic sperm whales.
They're shrewd cetaceans.  I hear that some will cover themselves
with algae and fucus plants.  People mistake them for islets.
They pitch camp on top, make themselves at home, light a fire--"

"Build houses," Conseil said.

"Yes, funny man," Ned Land replied.  "Then one fine day the animal
dives and drags all its occupants down into the depths."

"Like in the voyages of Sinbad the Sailor," I answered, laughing.
"Oh, Mr. Land, you're addicted to tall tales!  What sperm whales
you're handing us!  I hope you don't really believe in them!"

"Mr. Naturalist," the Canadian replied in all seriousness, "when it
comes to whales, you can believe anything!  (Look at that one move!
Look at it stealing away!) People claim these animals can circle
around the world in just fifteen days."

"I don't say nay."

"But what you undoubtedly don't know, Professor Aronnax, is that at
the beginning of the world, whales traveled even quicker."

"Oh really, Ned!  And why so?"

"Because in those days their tails moved side to side,
like those on fish, in other words, their tails were straight up,
thrashing the water from left to right, right to left.
But spotting that they swam too fast, our Creator twisted their tails,
and ever since they've been thrashing the waves up and down,
at the expense of their speed."

"Fine, Ned," I said, then resurrected one of the Canadian's expressions.
"You expect us to fall for that?"

"Not too terribly," Ned Land replied, "and no more than if I told you
there are whales that are 300 feet long and weigh 1,000,000 pounds."

"That's indeed considerable," I said.  "But you must admit that
certain cetaceans do grow to significant size, since they're said
to supply as much as 120 metric tons of oil."

"That I've seen," the Canadian said.

"I can easily believe it, Ned, just as I can believe that certain
baleen whales equal 100 elephants in bulk.  Imagine the impact
of such a mass if it were launched at full speed!"

"Is it true," Conseil asked, "that they can sink ships?"

"Ships?  I doubt it," I replied.  "However, they say that in 1820,
right in these southern seas, a baleen whale rushed at the Essex
and pushed it backward at a speed of four meters per second.
Its stern was flooded, and the Essex went down fast."

Ned looked at me with a bantering expression.

"Speaking for myself," he said, "I once got walloped by a whale's tail--
in my longboat, needless to say.  My companions and I were launched
to an altitude of six meters.  But next to the professor's whale,
mine was just a baby."

"Do these animals live a long time?"  Conseil asked.

"A thousand years," the Canadian replied without hesitation.

"And how, Ned," I asked, "do you know that's so?"

"Because people say so."

"And why do people say so?"

