"It was a profitable evening," he said to Hunter. "I can start planning
in detail now--after a little beer, that is."

_He'll go to sleep after he drinks his beer_, Hunter thought, _and there
will never be any plan unless I--_

Soft footsteps came up the path behind them. It was Princess Lyla.

"I want to apologize," she said, "I just told Val ... Mr. Boran the same
thing."

Her face was a pale oval in the starlight, her eyes dark shadows. "I'm
sorry my husband mentioned the New Jardeen incident."

"That's all right, Lyla," Rockford said. "No harm was done."

"He's an ex-military man, and I guess it's his nature to be more
forthright than tactful."

"You certainly can't condemn him for that," Rockford said. "In fact,
he's an extraordinary teller of entertaining stories. It was a most
enjoyable evening."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And, in a way, it was," Rockford said when she was gone and they were
in the cabin. He was seated in the softest chair, a can of beer in his
hand, as usual.

Hunter thought of the way she had looked in the starlight and said, "Why
did she let that windbag sit at the head of the table and ruin the
meeting that she had arranged?"

"He'll soon be her husband--I suppose she feels she should be loyal to
him."

"But--"

"But what?"

"Nothing. It's none of my business."

"Oh?" Rockford smiled in a way Hunter did not like. "You think so, eh?"

Hunter changed the subject. "Are you going to start talking to Boran to
undo the damage Narf and Sonig have done?"

"It would be a waste of time, my boy. Val Boran's mind is already made
up."

"Then what are you going to do?"

"Drink six cans of beer and go to sleep."

"I thought you had a plan."

"I have, a most excellent plan."

"What is it?"

"You'd scream like a banshee if you knew. You'll learn--if you manage to
live that long."

Rockford was sound asleep an hour later, snoring gently. Hunter sat
thinking, hearing the steady murmur of a voice coming from Val Boran's
cabin. Sonig's voice--using every means of persuasion he could think of,
at the moment capitalizing on the New Jardeen incident and Boran's
withheld grief over the sister he had lost.

And the Terran Republic's representative was sprawled fat and mindless
in a fog of beer fumes.

Hunter hesitated no longer. The fate of Earth and the Terran Republic
hung in the balance and time was desperately limited--if there was now
any time at all.

He took paper and pen and began the urgent message to Supreme Command,
headed, TOP EMERGENCY. It would be sent via Hyperspace Communications
from the city and would span the hundred light-years within seconds.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was up before Rockford the next morning, and went out into the bright
sunlight. He looked hopefully for Alonzo, not wanting to be seen mailing
the letter in person. Rockford, despite his drunken stupors, could be
shrewdly observant and he might deduce the contents of the letter before
Supreme Command ever received it.

He was some distance from the cabin when he heard the pound of padded
feet behind him.

"Rootenant," Alonzo had the grin of a genial canine idiot. "Do you want
me to mair your retter to your dear ore mother?"

"Yes, I have the letter right here."

"O.K. I got to hurry, because the mair hericopter reaves right away. I
charge six fig cookies or three candy bars or--"

"Here--take it and run--and try not to slobber all over it."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were served breakfast in the cabin. Afterward, Rockford went for a
brief talk with Princess Lyla. He came back and settled down in the
easy-chair, his pipe in his hand.

"Your morning's duty won't be at all unpleasant," he said. "The
obnoxious and repulsive things will begin to happen to you later. Maybe
this afternoon."

"What do you mean?"

"This morning you will go for a walk with Princess Lyla and discuss
changing the Vestan Space Guard into a force along Terran Space Patrol
lines. Narf is still in bed, by the way."

Rockford added, "I'll give you a bit of sage advice, for your own
good--try not to fall in love with her."

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

Hunter and Princess Lyla sat together on the high hill, their backs
against the red trunk of a cloud tree. On the mountain's slope to their
right lay the dark and junglelike Tiger Forest--he wondered if it was
true that the savage tree tigers never left its borders--while the
toylike cabins of the camp were below them. The mountain's slope dropped
on down to the deserts, beyond which were other mountains, far away and
translucent azure.

"It was George who suggested we come up here," she said. "He knows I do
that often when the responsibilities of being queen of a world--I'm such
an ordinary and untalented person--become too much for me. I always feel
better when I sit up here and look down on the mountains and deserts."

"Yes," he said politely.

"A ruling princess can be so alone," she said. "That's why I appreciate
George's friendship so much--it's never because of any ulterior motive
but because he likes me."

_I'm going to use her, and you, to get what I want._

He looked at her, at the lines of sadness on the face that was too old
for its years, felt the way she was so grateful to Rockford for what was
only a cold-blooded pretense of friendship, and the dislike for Rockford
increased. He could not force himself to speak civilly of Rockford so he
changed the subject:

"I understand you wanted to talk to me about the Space Guard?"

"Yes. Even a neutral world can't feel safe these days and George
suggested that."

"I'll be glad to help all I can. Of course, the change will require
time."

"I can understand that. They say you Space Patrol officers begin
training at sixteen, after passing almost impossible qualification
tests."

"The tests can seem extremely difficult to a farm boy from Kansas. I--"

"Kansas?" Her eyes lighted with interest. "My grandmother was from
Kansas! She used to tell me about the green plains of grain in the
spring, and how different they were from the deserts of Vesta...."

It was almost noon when he took her hand and helped her to her feet,
realizing guiltily that they had talked all morning without ever getting
back to the cold, dry facts of military efficiency.

"It was nice to talk up here this morning," she said. She looked down at
the cabins and the shadow fell again across her face. "But nothing down
there has been changed by it, has it?"

He held to her hand longer than was necessary as they went down the
steep part of the hill. She did not seem to mind.

When they reached her cabin she said, "It's still a little while until
lunch--time enough for you to give me a rough outline of the Space Guard
change."

Everything inside the cabin was feminine. None of Narf's possessions
were visible. There was a heavy door leading into Narf's half of the
cabin, with a massive lock. Hunter wondered if it was left unlocked at
night, thought of Narf's sour face and leering little eyes, and found
the thought repulsive.

The answer to his conjecture came with the entrance of a servant as they
seated themselves.

"By your leave, your highness," the servant said, bowing, "I came to
make Lord Narf a key for that inner door."

"A key?" There was alarm in her tone. "But we're not married--not yet!"

A puzzled expression came to the man's face. "Lord Narf told me, your
highness, that you had ordered the duplicate key made and given to him
before evening. I found I could not do this without first borrowing your
key for a pattern."

There was a frightened look in her eyes as they went to the door and
back to the servant. "_No_ ... don't try to make a key!"

"Yes, your highness." The servant bowed and turned away.

A familiar gravelly voice spoke from behind them:

"Ah ... an unscheduled little meeting, I see!"

It was Narf, anger on his face, already within the doorway as the
servant went out it.

"We were going to talk about the Space Guard," Lyla said in an
emotionless tone. "Lieutenant Hunter has promised to show how Space
Patrol methods will improve it and--"

"By a coincidence, Sonig and I were discussing military matters only a
few minutes ago," Narf said. He looked at Hunter. "I'm afraid that Sonig
and I agree that the Terran Space Guard is quite out of date, now.
_The_ fighting force of the galaxy is the Verdam's Peoples Guards."

Narf spoke to Lyla, "You may go ahead and talk with this lieutenant if
you wish to, but it's a waste of time. I'm arranging to have Sonig send
Peoples Guards officers here to supervise the rebuilding of the Space
