and the reaction will stop. Not enough and the reaction will build up to
an explosion. Neither of these extremes is wanted in an atomic pile.
What is needed is a happy balance where you are soaking up just as many
neutrons as are being generated all the time. This will give you a
constant temperature inside the reactor. The net neutron reproduction
constant is then 1. This balance of neutron generation and absorption is
the k-factor of the reactor. Ideally 1.0000000.

"That's the ideal, though, the impossible to attain in a dynamic system
like a reactor. All you need is a few more neutrons around, giving you a
k-factor of 1.00000001 and you are headed for trouble. Each extra
neutron produces two and your production rate soars geometrically
towards bang. On the other hand, a k-factor of 0.999999999 is just as
bad. Your reaction is spiraling down in the other direction. To control
a pile you watch your k-factor and make constant adjustments."

"All this I follow," Costa said, "but where's the connection with
Societics?"

"We'll get to that--just as soon as you realize and admit that a minute
difference of degree can produce a marked difference of kind. You might
say that a single, impossibly tiny, neutron is the difference between an
atom bomb and a slowly cooling pile of inert uranium isotopes. Does that
make sense?"

"I'm staggering, but still with you."

"Good. Then try to go along with the analogy that a human society is
like an atomic pile. At one extreme you will have a dying, decadent
culture--the remains of a highly mechanized society--living off its
capital, using up resources it can't replace because of a lost
technology. When the last machine breaks and the final food synthesizer
collapses the people will die. This is the cooled down atomic pile. At
the other extreme is complete and violent anarchy. Every man thinking
only of himself, killing and destroying anything that gets in his
way--the atomic explosion. Midway between the two is a vital, active,
producing society.

"This is a generalization--and you must look at it that way. In reality
society is infinitely complex, and the ramifications and possibilities
are endless. It can do a lot more things than fizzle or go boom.
Pressure of population, war or persecution patterns can cause waves of
immigration. Plant and animal species can be wiped out by momentary
needs or fashions. Remember the fate of the passenger pigeon and the
American bison.

"All the pressures, cross-relationships, hungers, needs, hatreds,
desires of people are reflected in their interrelationships. One man
standing by himself tells us nothing. But as soon as he says something,
passes on information in an altered form, or merely expresses an
attitude--he becomes a reference point. He can be marked, measured and
entered on a graph. His actions can be grouped with others and the
action of the group measured. Man--and his society--then becomes a
systems problem that can be fed into a computer. We've cut the Gordian
knot of the three-L's and are on our way towards a solution."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Stop!" Costa said, raising his hand. "I was with you as far as the
3L's. What are they? A private code?"

"Not a code--abbreviation. Linear Logic Language, the pitfall of all the
old researchers. All of them, historians, sociologists, political
analysts, anthropologists, were licked before they started. They had to
know all about A and B before they could find C. Facts to them were
always hooked up in a series. Whereas in truth they had to be analyzed
as a complex circuit complete with elements like positive and negative
feedback, and crossover switching. With the whole thing being stirred up
constantly by continual homeostasis correction. It's little wonder they
did do badly."

"You can't really say that," Adao Costa protested. "I'll admit that
Societics has carried the art tremendously far ahead. But there were
many basics that had already been discovered."

[Illustration]

"If you are postulating a linear progression from the old social
sciences--forget it," Neel said. "There is the same relationship here
that alchemy holds to physics. The old boys with their frog guts and
awful offal knew a bit about things like distilling and smelting. But
there was no real order to their knowledge, and it was all an
unconsidered by-product of their single goal, the whole nonsense of
transmutation."

They passed a lounge, and Adao waved Neel in after him, dropping into a
chair. He rummaged through his pockets for a cigarette, organizing his
thoughts. "I'm still with you," he said. "But how do we work this back
to the k-factor?"

"Simple," Neel told him. "Once you've gotten rid of the 3L's and their
false conclusions. Remember that politics in the old days was all We are
angels and They are devils. This was literally believed. In the history
of mankind there has yet to be a war that wasn't backed by the official
clergy on each side. And each declared that God was on their side. Which
leaves You Know Who as prime supporter of the enemy. This theory is no
more valid than the one that a single man can lead a country into war,
followed by the inference that a well-timed assassination can save the
peace."

"That doesn't sound too unreasonable," Costa said.

"Of course not. All of the old ideas sound good. They have a
simple-minded simplicity that anyone can understand. That doesn't make
them true. Kill a war-minded dictator and nothing changes. The
violence-orientated society, the factors that produced it, the military
party that represents it--none of these are changed. The k-factor
remains the same."

"There's that word again. Do I get a definition yet?"

Neel smiled. "Of course. The k-factor is one of the many factors that
interrelate in a society. Abstractly it is no more important than the
other odd thousand we work with. But in practice it is the only one we
try to alter."

"The k-factor is the war factor," Adao Costa said. All the humor was
gone now.

"That's a good enough name for it," Neel said, grinding out his
half-smoked cigarette. "If a society has a positive k-factor, even a
slight one that stays positive, then you are going to have a war. Our
planetary operators have two jobs. First to gather and interpret data.
Secondly to keep the k-factor negative."

They were both on their feet now, moved by the same emotion.

"And Himmel has a positive one that stays positive," Costa said. Neel
Sidorak nodded agreement. "Then let's get into the ship and get going,"
he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a fast trip and a faster landing. The UN cruiser cut its engines
and dropped like a rock in free fall. Night rain washed the ports and
the computer cut in the maximum permissible blast for the minimum time
that would reduce their speed to zero at zero altitude. Deceleration sat
on their chests and squeezed their bones to rubber. Something crunched
heavily under their stern at the exact instant the drive cut out. Costa
was unbelted and out the door while Neel was still feeling his insides
shiver back into shape.

The unloading had an organized rhythm that rejected Neel. He finally
realized he could help best by standing back out of the way while the
crewmen grav-lifted the heavy cases out through the cargo port, into the
blackness of the rain-lashed woods. Adao Costa supervised this and
seemed to know what he was doing. A signal rating wearing earphones
stood to one side of the lock chanting numbers that sounded like
detector fixes. There was apparently enough time to unload
everything--but none to spare. Things got close towards the end.

Neel was suddenly bustled out into the rain and the last two crates were
literally thrown out after him. He plowed through the mud to the edge of
the clearing and had just enough time to cover his face before the
take-off blast burst out like a new sun.
