narrative which I found on my desk begins.

Even had I not come as straight and swift as the beam of light that made
my path, a glance about would have told me to what part of the universe
I had fared. No earthly landscape could have been more familiar. I stood
on the high coast of Kepler Land where it trends southward. A brisk
westerly wind was blowing and the waves of the ocean of De La Bue were
thundering at my feet, while the broad blue waters of Christie Bay
stretched away to the southwest. Against the northern horizon, rising
out of the ocean like a summer thunder-head, for which at first I
mistook it, towered the far-distant, snowy summit of Mount Hall.

Even had the configuration of land and sea been less familiar, I should
none the less have known that I stood on the planet whose ruddy hue is
at once the admiration and puzzle of astronomers. Its explanation I now
recognized in the tint of the atmosphere, a coloring comparable to the
haze of Indian summer, except that its hue was a faint rose instead
of purple. Like the Indian summer haze, it was impalpable, and without
impeding the view bathed all objects near and far in a glamour not to be
described. As the gaze turned upward, however, the deep blue of space
so far overcame the roseate tint that one might fancy he were still on
Earth.

As I looked about me I saw many men, women, and children. They were in
no respect dissimilar, so far as I could see, to the men, women, and
children of the Earth, save for something almost childlike in the
untroubled serenity of their faces, unfurrowed as they were by any trace
of care, of fear, or of anxiety. This extraordinary youthful-ness
of aspect made it difficult, indeed, save by careful scrutiny, to
distinguish the young from the middle-aged, maturity from advanced
years. Time seemed to have no tooth on Mars.

I was gazing about me, admiring this crimson-lighted world, and these
people who appeared to hold happiness by a tenure so much firmer than
men's, when I heard the words, "You are welcome," and, turning, saw that
I had been accosted by a man with the stature and bearing of middle
age, though his countenance, like the other faces which I had noted,
wonderfully combined the strength of a man's with the serenity of a
child's. I thanked him, and said,--

"You do not seem surprised to see me, though I certainly am to find
myself here."

"Assuredly not," he answered. "I knew, of course, that I was to meet
you to-day. And not only that, but I may say I am already in a sense
acquainted with you, through a mutual friend, Professor Edgerly. He was
here last month, and I met him at that time. We talked of you and your
interest in our planet. I told him I expected you."

"Edgerly!" I exclaimed. "It is strange that he has said nothing of this
to me. I meet him every day."

But I was reminded that it was in a dream that Edgerly, like myself,
had visited Mars, and on awaking had recalled nothing of his experience,
just as I should recall nothing of mine. When will man learn to
interrogate the dream soul of the marvels it sees in its wanderings?
Then he will no longer need to improve his telescopes to find out the
secrets of the universe.

"Do your people visit the Earth in the same manner?" I asked my
companion.

"Certainly," he replied; "but there we find no one able to recognize us
and converse with us as I am conversing with you, although myself in
the waking state. You, as yet, lack the knowledge we possess of the
spiritual side of the human nature which we share with you."

"That knowledge must have enabled you to learn much more of the Earth
than we know of you," I said.

"Indeed it has," he replied. "From visitors such as you, of whom we
entertain a concourse constantly, we have acquired familiarity with your
civilization, your history, your manners, and even your literature and
languages. Have you not noticed that I am talking with you in English,
which is certainly not a tongue indigenous to this planet?"

"Among so many wonders I scarcely observed that," I answered.

"For ages," pursued my companion, "we have been waiting for you to
improve your telescopes so as to approximate the power of ours, after
which communication between the planets would be easily established. The
progress which you make is, however, so slow that we expect to wait ages
yet."

"Indeed, I fear you will have to," I replied. "Our opticians already
talk of having reached the limits of their art."

"Do not imagine that I spoke in any spirit of petulance," my companion
resumed. "The slowness of your progress is not so remarkable to us
as that you make any at all, burdened as you are by a disability so
crushing that if we were in your place I fear we should sit down in
utter despair."

"To what disability do you refer?" I asked. "You seem to be men like
us."

"And so we are," was the reply, "save in one particular, but there the
difference is tremendous. Endowed otherwise like us, you are destitute
of the faculty of foresight, without which we should think our other
faculties well-nigh valueless."

"Foresight!" I repeated. "Certainly you cannot mean that it is given you
to know the future?"

"It is given not only to us," was the answer, "but, so far as we know,
to all other intelligent beings of the universe except yourselves. Our
positive knowledge extends only to our system of moons and planets
