from Security Service," the captain said shortly. "You won't be seeing
him again. But we have a cargo for your colony. You may send these
people over to the ship to start unloading now, if you wish--" his eye
swept the circle of windburned faces--"while Nathan and I discuss
certain matters with you here."

Nobody moved for a moment. Then Pete nodded to Mario. "Take the boys out
to unload, Jack. We'll see you back here in an hour or so."

"Pete, are you sure--"

"Don't worry. Take Mel and Hank along to lend a hand." Pete turned back
to Captain Varga. "Suppose we go inside to more comfortable quarters,"
he said. "We're always glad to have word from Earth."

They passed through a dark, smelly corridor into Pete's personal
quarters. For a colony house, if wasn't bad--good plastic chairs, a
hand-made rug on the floor, even one of Mary Turner's paintings on the
wall, and several of the weird, stylized carvings the Dusties had done
for Pete. But the place smelled of tar and sweat, and Captain Varga's
nose wrinkled in distaste. Nathan drew out a large silk handkerchief and
wiped his pink hands, touching his nose daintily.

The Dustie hopped into the room ahead of them and settled into the
biggest, most comfortable chair. Pete snapped his fingers sharply, and
the brown creature jumped down again like a naughty child and climbed up
on Pete's knee. The captain glanced at the chair with disgust and sat
down in another. "Do you actually let those horrid creatures have the
run of your house?" he asked.

"Why not?" Pete said. "We have the run of their planet. They're quite
harmless, really. And quite clean."

The captain sniffed. "Nasty things. Might find a use for the furs,
though. They look quite soft."

"We don't kill Dusties," said Pete coolly. "They're friendly, and
intelligent too, in a childish sort of way." He looked at the captain
and Nathan, and decided not to put on the coffee pot. "Now what's the
trouble?"

"No trouble at all," the captain said, "except the trouble you choose to
make. You have your year's _taaro_ ready for shipping?"

"Of course."

The captain took out a small pencil on a chain and began to twirl it.
"How much, to be exact?"

"Twenty thousand, Earth weight."

"Tons?"

Pete shook his head. "Hundredweight."

The captain raised his eyebrows. "I see. And there are--" he consulted
the papers in his hand--"roughly two hundred and twenty colonists here
on Baron IV. Is that right?"

"That's right."

"Seventy-four men, eighty-one women, and fifty-nine children, to be
exact?"

"I'd have to look it up. Margaret Singman had twins the other night."

"Well, don't be ridiculous," snapped the captain. "On a planet the size
of Baron IV, with seventy-four men, you should be producing a dozen
times the _taaro_ you stated. We'll consider that your quota for a
starter, at least. You have ample seed, according to my records. I
should think, with the proper equipment--"

"Now wait a minute," Pete said softly. "We're fighting a climate here,
captain. You should know that. We have only a two-planting season, and
the 'proper equipment,' as you call it, doesn't operate too well out
here. It has a way of clogging up with dust in the summer, and rusting
in the winter."

"Really," said Captain Varga. "As I was saying, with the proper
equipment, you could cultivate a great deal more land than you seem to
be using. This would give you the necessary heavier yield. Wouldn't you
say so, Nathan?"

The little nervous man nodded. "Certainly, captain. With the proper
organization of labor."

"That's nonsense," Pete said, suddenly angry. "Nobody can get that kind
of yield from this planet. The ground won't give it, and the men won't
grow it."

The captain gave him a long look. "Really?" he said. "I think you're
wrong. I think the men will grow it."

Pete stood up slowly. "What are you trying to say? This business about
quotas and organization of labor--"

"You didn't read our credentials as we instructed you, Farnam. Mr.
Nathan is the official governor of the colony on Baron IV, as of now.
You'll find him most co-operative, I'm sure, but he's answerable
directly to me in all matters. My job is administration of the entire
Baron system. Clear enough?"

Pete's eyes were dark. "I think you'd better draw me a picture," he said
tightly. "A very clear picture."

"Very well. Baron IV is not paying for its upkeep. _Taaro_, after all,
is not the most necessary of crops in the universe. It has value, but
not very much value, all things considered. If the production of _taaro_
here is not increased sharply, it may be necessary to close down the
colony altogether."

"You're a liar," said Pete shortly. "The Colonization Board makes no
